ITW 2004, San Antonio, Texas, October 24 - 29.2004 
Results on Punctured LDPC Codes 
Hossein Pishro-Nik, and Farmarz Fekri 
Schwl of Electrical and Computer Engincering 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, GA 30332-0250 
Phone: (404)6674920 
{hossein. fekri}@ece.gatech.edu 
Abstract-In this paper we study some fundamental pmpcrties 
of punctured LDPC codes. We first pmvc that for any ensemble 
of LDPC codes, there exists a puncturing threshold p'. We then 
find lower hounds on the achievable rates of punctured codes 
over general MBIOS channels. Thcsc bound? are satisfied hy 
using only one encoder and decoder far all rates. We then pmve 
that for any rates RI and R2 satisfying 0 < RI < Rz < 1, there 
exists an ensemble of LDPC cudes with the following pmperty. 
The ensemble can he punctured fmm rate RI to Rz resulting in 
asymptotically good codes for all rates RI 5 R 5 Rz. Specifically, 
this implies that rates arbitrarily close to one are achievable via 
puncturing. We also show that punctured LDPC codes are as 
goud as ordinary LDPC codes. For BEC and arbitrary positive 
numbers RI < Rz < I, we pmve the existence of the sequences 
of punctured LDPC codes that are capacity achieving for all rates 
RL 5 R 5 RI. Based on the abnve observations, we then pmpace 
a method to design good punctured LDPC codes over a broad 
rage of rates. The mcthud is very simple and does not suffer 
from the performance degxdation at high rates. Finally, we show 
that punctured codes might be useful for pmof of the existence 
of capacity-achieving LDPC codes over memoryless binary-input 
output-symmetric channels. 
I. INTROUUCTION 
Puncturing is one of the most common methods to construct 
rate-compatible codes. In this method, to change the rate of 
a code to a higher rate, we puncture (delete) a subset of hits 
in the codeword. In this paper, we study some fundamental 
properties of punctured LDPC codes. We discuss issues such 
as puncturing capacity, achieving arbitrary rates, optimality 
of punctured LDPC codes, and capacity-achieving codes with 
compatible rates. We dcrive lower bounds on the achievable 
rates of punctured codes over memoryless binary-input output- 
symmetric (MBIOS) channels. We explicitly construct rate- 
compatible LDPC ensembles that satisfy the bounds simul- 
taneously for all rates. We then consider the design of rate- 
compAtible LDPC codes. In [ I ]  and [Z], authors studied the 
design of punctured LDPC codes. They observed degradation 
in performance at high rates. Here, we propose a method tu 
design good punctured LDPC codes over a broad range of 
rates that avoids this degradation. The method is very simple 
and does not need any optimization process. Additionally, it is 
also applicable to finite-length LDPC codes. Finally, we show 
the possible application of punctured LDPC codes for proving 
the existence of capacity achieving sequences fur MBIOS 
channels. The proofs we omitted due to space limitations. Pxt 
of the results x e  proved in [3]. 
'This work WLI 
supponed by Naaonal Science Foundation undcr g a m y  
FMPM309M and ANI-01 17840. 
Throughout the paper we assume the following terminology. 
By a graph we mean a simple graph, i.e., a graph with no loops 
( edges joining a vertex to itselt) and no multiple edges (several 
edges joining the same two vertices). For a random variable 
X ,  we show its distribution by FX(x). If the random variable 
has a well-defined density function(i.e. if it is absolutely 
continuous), we represent the density function by f,y(x). 
Similar to [4], we define P,(Fx) =Pr[X < O}+iPr(X = O}. 
11. PUNCTURED LDPC CODES 
We consider the following scheme. We take an LDPC 
code of rate Rp = k171. where k and n are the length of 
the information blocks and the codewords, respectively. To 
generate a code with a new rate, we puncture a subset of 
bits in the codeword and send the unpunctured bits to the 
receiver. It is assumed that the decoder knows the position 01 
punctured bits in the codeword. To start the decoding, we need 
to compute log likelihood ratios (LLR's) in the decoder. The 
LLR's for the punctured bits are zero. 
Ha and McLaughlin studied optimd puncturing of LDPC 
codes [I] and [Z]. They studied two methods for puncturing 
LDPC codes. In the first method, the authors chose the 
punctured bits randomly (i.e.. if the puncturing fraction is p, 
they chose a subset of the bits in the codeword with cardinality 
pn at random and puncture the bits in the subset). This method 
is called random puncturing. In the second method, the inten- 
tional puncturing, they optimized the puncturing dismbution. 
The authors set up the intentional puncturing as follows. 
First, variable nodes of thr. bipartite graph were grouped in 
accordance with their degrees. Then, they randomly punctured 
a fraction ~j of the nodes in Gj, where G, is the set of variable 
nodes of degree j .  Let define 
where A; is the fraction of degree-j variable nodes in the 
graph. Thus iP we let 9 = { $ j  : j = 2,3, ..., dv,,,,,n}, 
an intentional puncturing distribution fur a code from (A,p) 
ensemble can be represented by the pair ( @ : p )  in which p 
shows the puncturing fraction and '3 determines the puncturing 
stmcture. A valid puncturing pattern is obtained when we 
have p$j 5 A;. 
for j = 2,3, ...id,,,,,. 
It is worth noting 
that asymptotically random puncturing is a special case of 
intentional puncturing, as stated in the following fact. 
Fact I :  A randomly punctured ensemble of LDPC codes 
with a puncturing fractiun p has the same threshold as the 
0-7803-8720- 1/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE 
215 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:53:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
intentionally puncturcd code with puncturing distribution b, = 
A;. 
for j = 2, :3> ..., dvTn ,.-. 
Thus, whenever we we concerned with asymptolic prop- 
erties, we only give the result for intentional puncturing. As 
we mentioned in LS] a punctured LDPC code can be modeled 
as Figure 1. In this figure the punctured hits we transmitted 
through a channel with zero capacity. The actual channel is 
an MBIOS channel with the panmeter 0. When 8 decreases 
(i.c., when the channel improves) we increase the puncturing 
fraction. Thus we can consider the puncturing process as a 
change in the channel not in the code rate. 
Encoder 0 
...~~ 
........................... 
~~ 
i 
that P,(Fz,,) > 0 and a randomly chosen code from the 
ensemhle can he used to achieve arbitrary small error rate over 
Ce for all 0 5 O1. On the other hand, if we need P,(Fz,,) - 
0 for achieving arbitrarily small error rate, the ensemble is said 
to be xxymptotically bad. For a punctured ensemhle (A, p, @, p )  
We also define the following sequence. 
Theorem 1: (Puncturing threshold of LDPC codes) Con- 
sider the ensemble of LDPC codes defined by the pair (A, p )  
that are intentionally punctured by the puncturing pattern 
( a , p ) .  Assume a randomly chosen code from the punctured 
ensemble is used over the channel CO, with 0 > 0,,,i.,. Let p t h  
be supremum value of the puncturing fraction p such that in 
(4). we have 
lim x~ I 
0. 
(5) 
I-m 
If p > p t h .  then the decoding error probability is bounded 
away from zcro independent of the communication channel. 
Fig. I. 
A model that desctibss puncturing over a binary channel 
111. PUNCTURING THRESHOLD OF LDPC CODES 
In this section we compute the puncturing threshold p' of 
LDPC code ensembles. Consider an MBIOS channel with 
parameter 8, where 8 E [8mi,,,0maz] and B,i,,,0,,,,, 
E 
R U [-CO, +m}. For example, for the BIAWGN channel, 8 
can be considered as the variance a of the noise. Let C be a 
class of channels with parameter 8. Thus, my channel CO in 
C in is uniquely determined by its variable 8. A channel in C 
with parameter Bo is called CO,. 
The capacity of the channel 
CO, is shown by coo. For simplicity, we assume that CO is a 
continuous function of 8. Similar to [6], we consider physically 
degraded channels. For clarity of rxposition we assume that if 
0t < 82r 
then CO, is physically degraded with respect to CO,. 
For the channel CO,, assuming the all-one code word has been 
sent, we define the nndom variable ZO, as 
where X and Y are the input and output of the channel, 
respectively. Assume that if B1 < 02. then CO, is physically 
degraded with respect to CO,. For simplicity, we assume 
that P,(Fz,) is a continuous function of 0 and we have 
lim P,(Fz,) = 0. Equivalently we can say that ils 8 tends 
8-Om,. 
to &in, 
ZO tends to infinity in probability [4] and thus the 
probubility density function of ZO, fi,, converges to A, 
161, [4]. Furthermore, we may assume that if 0 > @,,,in, 
then P,(Fz,) > 0. Note that almost all practical MBIOS 
channels such as BIAWCN channel, BSC, and BEC satisfy 
these properties. 
We say an ensemble of LDPC codes of positive rate R is 
asymptotically good if there exists a 81 E [S,,,, 
0,,,] 
such 
On the other hand if p < pth. then there exists a 8' > Omin 
such that if the channel parameter 8 is smaller than O ' ,  then 
lini Pe(F[) = 0. 
(6) 
The above result shows that pth is the threshold of punctured 
LDPC codes. Using Theorem 1, we can find the puncturing 
threshold of randomly and intentionally punctured LDPC code 
ensembles. The cut off rate of the code R t h  is obtained by 
I-C.2 
where Rp is the rate of the parent code. For example, since the 
(3,6) regular ensemble has puncturing threshold (for regular 
codes the random and intentional puncturing are the same) 
p t h  = ,4294. it has the cut off n t e  R t h  = ,8763. Thus using 
the (3,6) regular ensemble as the parent code ensemble, we 
cannot obtain the ntes higher than ,8763. 
IV. ACHIEVING ARBITRARY RATES VIA PUNCTURING 
In [I], authors evaluated the performance of several punc- 
tured LDPC codes and optimized the puncturing pattern to get 
the best performance. However, their simulations show that 
for high rates the performance of LDPC codes degrades and 
we need to pay a considerable penalty for using punctured 
codes. This phenomenon can be completely explained by the 
threshold effect of punctured codes discussed in the previous 
section. 
In [I], authors used three ensembles of LDPC codes for 
puncturing. The cut off rates of these ensembles are shown in 
Table I. 
From Table I, we can easily explain the degradation in 
the performance of the above ensembles at high rates. By 
examining the simulation results in [I], we observe that all 
of the above ensembles show considerable degradation for the 
rates above 35. The degradation seems to have a very high 
216 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:53:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I 
THH Cur ow nmis UI' SOME LVPC comi ENSEMHI.I:S ( n m m M  
PUNCTU~IN~;) 
Enscmblr 
Cut Off Rates 
EEEl 
x4, P4 
,9463 
slope lor the rates above .9. This is because at these rates we 
are approaching the cut off rate. 
Using the results of the previous section, by a suitable 
choice of the ensemble, rates arbitrarily close to I can be 
obtained via puncturing. In fact, this is achieved by using good 
codes for the BEC as the parent code and randomly puncturing 
them (of course intentional puncturing works, ar well). Since 
capacity achieving sequenccs of LDPC codes over the BEC 
are known [7],[8], [9] and [IO], we can find codes with cut 
oft rates arbitrarily close to 1. Moreover, the piuent code can 
have any rate. Thus we have the following theorem. 
Theorem 2: For any rates RI and Rz that 0 < R1 < Rz < 
I, there exists an ensemble of LDPC codes with the following 
property. The ensemble can he punctured from rate Rl to R2 
resulting in asymptotically gwd codes for all rates RI 5 R 5 
R2. 
x2. PZ 
A B .  m 
. Y ~ O I  
v. LOWER BOUND ON THE PERFORMANCE OF 
PUNCTURED LDPC COVES 
Theorem 2 assures that we can have a punctured LDPC 
codes that is asymptotically good (in the sense defined in this 
paper) on arbitrary sct of rates; However, it does not give any 
clue how close to capacity the pcrfurmance of such code will 
be. Here we givc a lower bound on the achievable rates as the 
channel parameter changes. 
Theorem 3: For any 6 > 0 and MBIOS channel CO 
parameterized by 0 E [Ornin,OmWz], and R1,Rz E (0, I ) ,  
R, < R,, there exists an ensemble (X,p) of LDPC codes 
with the following properties. The ensemble can he punctured 
in a rate-compatible way to produce all rates R E [R1, Rz]. 
Moreover, for all R E [RI, Rz] it can be used to reliably 
transmit data over CO, satisfying 
(8) 
where Zo,, is defined in (2). 
Note that for any fixed rate, we can conclude the existence of 
an ordinaq LDPC code ensemble that satisfies the above lower 
bound from [ I  I]; however, the importance of Theonm 3 is in 
the fact that we can have only one code that is simultaneously 
satisties the bound for all rates. Figure 2 shows the ratio of 
the achievable rate and the channel capacity for BSC. Figure 3 
shows the gap From the capacity for BIAWGN channel. As we 
see the gap is always less than I.6dB. The bound of Theorem 
3 is interesting because it gives an analytical result; however, 
in practice we can find punctured LDPC codcs that have better 
performance. 
R > 1 - E[e(-zon/z)] - 6, 
VI. OPTIMALITY OP PUNCTURED LDPC CODES 
In this section we show that by using punctured codes 
we do not lose performance. In other words, we show that 
Fig. ?. 
The ratio of lha achievable mrc and the CaQXiIY for an ensemble of 
puncrured LVPC coder OYCC BSC. 
''si/--1 
/.a 
....................... 
.... 
........ 
............. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
I ,  
. . .  
_ , j  ........ ~ 
........... 
...................... 
f
I
 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . .  
, 
............ : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . .  
81, 
E 
o,s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
,
'
#
 ' 
~ 
, 1 
. . . . . . .  
........ 
............ 
o s  
.. .: 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0,s 
I 
>.I 
2 
25 
1 
I5 
1 
Wu-idYul-l, 
Fig. 3. The gap from the capacity for an ensemble of punctured LVPC coder 
over BIAWGN channel. 
for any LDPC ensemble of rate RI > 0 and any number 
Rz satisfying Rz < RI < 1, there exists an ensemble of 
punctured LDPC code of rate RI and parent rate RZ with the 
same performancc We also propose a method to construct the 
punctured code with the same performance as a given code. 
Although these punctured codes have the same asymptotic 
performance as the unpunctured ones, they can have better 
finite-length performance. 
7leorem 4: For any ensemble (A, p )  of LDPC codes of rate 
RI > 0, and any number Rn satisfying Rz < Rl < I, there 
exists an ensemble of punctured LDPC code of rate RI with 
parent rate Rz having the same threshold under the belief 
propa&ation algorithm. 
Theorem 4 implies that if we design the codes properly, 
punctured codes are as good as ordinary LDPC codes. It 
also shows how to construct a punctured code with the same 
performance as the UnpuncNred code. However, unlike the 
bound of Theorem 3 that is proved for one ensemble of LDPC 
codes that achicves the bound simultaneously for all rates, 
Theorem 4 is valid Sor fixed rates RI and Rx. 
217 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:53:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
.. 
VII. PUNCTURING OVER THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL 
to be a good code for BEC. By this choice, we expect to 
Fur the erasure channel stronger results can be obtained. For 
example, using only one encoder and decoder we can achieve 
the capacity of BEC on arbitrary set of rates. 
Theorem 5: Let T C_ (0, I) with inf R > 0 and 6 be 
any positive constant. Then, there exists an ensemble (A, p )  
of LDPC codes with the following property. The ensemble 
(X,p) can be punctured randomly to get an ensemble of the 
arbitrary rate R E T such that 
(9) 
Here, cfi = 1 - tth(R) and eth(R) is the threshold of the 
punctured ensemble of rate R under the standard iterative 
RET 
V R E T ;  R I (1 - 6 ) c ~ .  
get good performance at the highest rates. However, as it is 
discussed in [I’ll, with a little care, the code that is optimized 
over BEC is also optimal over other MBlOS channels. Thus 
we expect to get good performance even at very low rates. In 
fact, our experience shows that the most destructive element 
for punctured codes is the threshold effect. If the gap between 
the highest rate and the cut off rate is not enough, large 
performance degadation occurs at high rates. Thus, in order 
to design a rate-compatible code, we choose a good code over 
the BEC having the same rate as the lowest required rate. 
However, we need to he careful about thc stability condition. 
As it is proved in 1131, capacity-achieving sequences of LDPC 
codes over the BEC satisfy the stability condition with almost 
...-., .... ...., 
~ . ~ . ~ ~  
~~~~~. 
~ 
~~~~~~~ 
~~ 
~~~~~~~ 
~~ 
capacity achieving if it is punctured to a higher rate. Thus, we 
can design only one encoder and decoder and obtain mbitnry 
many rates. Moreover, the code is capacity achieving for all 
the desired rates over the BEC. 
assure ti,at xZpi(l) 
not be too close to the inverse 
of 
the code threshold for the BEC. This restriction will result in 
a small rate 
In order to examine the above methodoloev we chose a mod 
which is 
negligible, 
VIII. DESIGN OF GOOD PUNCTURED LDPC CODES 
In this section we discuss the design of good ratc-compatible 
LDPC codes using puncturing. As it was shown in the previous 
section, design of punctured LDPC codes over the BEC is very 
simple. We just need to use a good degree distribution for the 
parent code and the punctured code performs very well for 
all higher rates. On the other hand, it is not obvious how to 
design good puncturing schemes for other channels . 
We first note that if the desired range of rates is short, then 
we can choose a good code for the smallest rate and randomly 
puncture it to get codes of higher rates. Simulations show 
that this simple structure is practically efficient. Our empirical 
results show that increasing the code rate by an amount 
less than forty percent is usually obtained by a very small 
performance loss. As an example, the diagrams in [I], suggest 
that when the increase in the rate is less than forty percent, the 
performance loss is less than .ZdB for the BIAWGN channel. 
This is true even when we use random puncturing. Thus, we 
may focus on the cases that a broad range of rates is needed, 
specifically when rates close to one are needed. 
A necessary condition is to choose a code with high enough 
puncturing threshold. That is, if R, and Rp are the highest 
desired rate and the parent code rate, respectively, and pth 
is the puncturing threshold of the parent code, we must have 
pth > 1 - &. Here we propose a technique that works well 
in practice. 
As we mentioned previously a punctured code can he 
viewed as Figure 1. Hence, we can consider the puncturing 
process as variation in the channel not in the code rate. 
From the previous section we know that the highest rate that 
we need plays an important role in the performance of the 
punctured code. When the puncturing fraction is maximum, 
the channel is close to a BEC. For the random puncturing, 
the resulting binary erasure channel is assumed to be uniform 
but for the intentional puncturing, the BEC is assumed to he 
non-uniform. A simple method is to choose the parent code 
-. 
~ 
ensemble of half-rate LDPC codes in [I41 with the following 
degree distribution 
A,(z) = 0.24982 + ,24722’ 
+.14811z5 + , 0 0 3 3 ~ ~  
+ .3517~”, 
(IO) 
P S ( 4  = 2’ 
The ensemble has the cut off rate of R, = ,9797. We generate 
an LDPC code of length IO5 from this ensemble. To compxe 
our results with [I], 
we measured the gap to Shannon limit 
of this code at the hit error rate of IOW4. Figure 4 shows the 
simulation results for this code when it is randomly punctured 
to generate the rates at the range of .5 to .9l. We note that 
for all rates the gap from the capacity is less than .7dB. To 
compare the performance of this code to the codes given in 
[l], we examine the performance of two half-rates codes in 
[I] 
that are punctured to higher rates. We note that both codes 
show about 1.8dB gap from the capacity at rate .91. Even with 
optimized intentional puncturing the codes have IdB gap to 
capacity at this rate. We also note that our code has a smaller 
length than those in [I]. In summary, we gain more than 1dB 
at high rates; however, this improvement is achieved in return 
of a loss of at most .2dB at low rates. Thus, the proposed 
schemes seems to be useful for this example. 
Thus in the above method, we do not need optimization 
for puncturing, we can reduce the degradation at higher rates 
and do the puncturing in a rate-compatible way. An important 
property of the above scheme is that it is extendable to finite- 
length codes. Using the recent breakthrough in the design and 
analysis of finite-length LDPC codes over the BEC [IS], [161, 
and [17] we can find good LDPC codes over the BEC and 
design efficient punctured LDPC codes. 
IX. CAPACITY ACHIEVING SEQUENCES FOR MBlOS 
CHANNELS USING PUNCTURED CODES 
It has been conjectured that for any MBIOS channel there 
exists a sequence of capacity achieving LDPC codes with 
218 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:53:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
7 
.
.
 
.
.
 
.
.
.
 
,I ..... ; .  . .  
.................... 
.
.
 
Fig. 4. 
length 10' chosen fmm the cnrrmble (AS, ps) at the bit mor rate of 
The gap fmm capmi~i for P randomly punctured LDPC code of 
iterative decoding, see for example [4]. Although this has been 
one of the most impomnt open problems in coding theory, 
it has been proven only for the BEC. In this section we 
show that punctured LDPC codes may be helpful to verify 
the conjecture. We show that if the conjecture is proved for 
the rates approaching zero, then it will he valid for all rates. 
Consider the class of MHOS channels parameterized by a 
parameter I3 with capacity cg. If the threshold of an ensemble 
of codes under the message passing decoding is Oth. we say 
that the capacity of the ensemble is eoth. We say that a 
sequence of degree dismhutions {(A",P,,)}:=~ 
with rate R is 
capacity achieving if for any positive constant 6, there exists 
an integer iV such that if n > N ,  then R 2 (1 - b)cg,,,. 
Here cgthm is the capacity of the ensemble (A,,p,,). We now 
suggest the following resemch problem. 
Research Problem /: For any class of MBlOS chan- 
nels, there exists a sequence of degree, distributions 
I ( L ( R ) , P , ( R ) ) } Z ~  
such that 
R 
lim--1 
R-0 c(R) 
where c(R) is the capacity of the ensemble (An(R),pn(R)), 
when n tends to infinity. 
The following theorem states that if the above research 
problem is proved, then capacity achieving LDPC codes of 
all rates exist. The important point is that it might be easier 
to prove the existence of the capacity achieving sequences 
for the case where the rate of the code is approaching zero. 
This is because, for this case, the channel is approaching a 
channel with zero capacity and all different MBIOS channels 
may become somewhat similar. For example, one approach 
to solving the research problem could be using the capacity 
achieving sequences for the BEC as their rates appraaches 
zero. 
Theorem 6: If the statement of Rewach Problem I is true, 
then there exists a capacity achieving sequence of LDPC codes 
for any MBlOS channel. 
X. CONCLUSION 
We studied some fundamental propelries of punctured 
LDPC codes. The threshold effect and the optimality of 
punctured LDPC codes were discussed. We showed that for 
any ensemble of LDPC codes, there exists a cut off rate 
which is the maximum achievable rate using puncturing. We 
derived lower bounds on the achievable ram of puncmred 
LDPC codes over MBIOS channels. We explicitly consmcted 
codes that satisfy the bounds simultaneously for all rates. 
We proved the existence of asymptotically good punctured 
LDPC codes for an arbitrary range of rates. For the binary 
erasure channel, we find that using only one encoder and 
decoder, we can achieve the capacity of the channel over 
an arbitrary set of rates. We also proposed a simple method 
for designing rate-compatible LDPC codes that has several 
advantages over the previous methods. First, it reduces the 
performance degradation at high rates. Second, it is applicable 
to finite-length codes. Third, there is no need lor optimizing 
the puncturing pattem. Forth. the puncturing can he done in a 
rate-compatible way. Finally, we showed that punctured LDPC 
codes might he useful to solve an important open research 
problem that is the capacity achieving property of LDPC codes 
over MBIOS channels under the message passing decoding 
algorithms. 
REFERENCES 
[I] J. Ha md S. McLaughlin. "Optimal punctuting of low-densiry panty- 
[2l 1. Ha and S. W. Mclaughlin. "Opumd punctuting distnbutiona for m e -  
check code,,'' 
In Pmc. IEEE ICC, 2003. 
compatible low-densiry parity-check codes:' in 20013 I 
Swnpusium on Infr,nnaninn Theory, Yobhnmn, Japan. 2003. 
[3l H. Pishro-Nik and F. F e b .  'Rssulb on punctured low-density panty- 
check codes and impmved iterative decoding techniques:' submitted to 
IEEE Trans. Inform Theory, 2003. 
[4] T. J.Richardron, M. A. Shukmllahi, and R. L. Urbanke. "Design of 
capacity-appmachillg irregular low-densily puity-chrck codes," If.'& 
Tmm. 1nfiu-m 7hrory. vol. 47, pp. 619437. ?WI. 
[SI H. Pishm-Nik, N. Rahnavwd, and F. F e e ,  "Non-uniform emr comc- 
tion uaing low-densiry pariry-chcck codes," submitted to IEEE Trans. 
Inform. Theory. May 2003. 
[6] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbimke, 'The ~ ~ p a ~ i r y  
of low-denairy parity- 
check codes under message-passing dcwding:' 
1.WK Tram. lnfom. 
Theory, "01. 47. pp. 599418, 2001. 
171 M. Luby, M. Miaenmachrr, M. Shokrollahi. and D. 
Spielman, "Efficient 
emure comcting cader," WEE Tmn-i. 1"fiinn. Throv, vol. 47. pp. 569- 
[U] M. A. Sholuollahi, "New sequences of linear time emure codes 
appmzhing the channel capaciry"MECC, pp. 65-76, 1999. 
191 M. A. Shokmllahi, 'Capacity-achieving sequences," in /MA W>lume.I in 
Maihemnric.7 and ir.7 Applicoiioons, vol. 123, pp. 153-166, 2000. 
[IO1 P, Oswald and M. A. Sholimllahi, "Capacity-achieving sequences for the 
emure channel:' IEE.5 Tram. InJoon Theory, vol. 48, pp. 3017-3028. 
2002. 
Ill] A. Khandekar. Cmph-bossd Code.7 ondllrmrivr Decoding. PhD thesis. 
sw. 2001. 
California lnstimle of Technology, 2002. 
[I?] 
S. Y. Chung, O n  lhe eanrrn~crion ofsome capacity-oppmoching coding 
schemes. PhD thesis, Marsachusetts Institute of Technology. 2000. 
Cl31 M. A. Shokmllahi, Codes. Sy.smnr and Graphical Models, ch. Capacity- 
achieving seoucnces. DO. 153-166. Socin~er ZWI. 
~. 
[I41 h n p : l f l t h ~ w ~ w . e p H , ~ ~ ~ s ~ ~ M d p ~ ~ ~ ~ .  
[IS] C. Di. D. Proirtti. 1. E. Teluwr, T. Richadson. and R. Urbanke. "Finite- 
length malysis of low-density puity-check codes on the binary araure 
channel," IEEE Tmns. lafi,nn. Throv. vol. 48, pp. 1570 -1579, 2U02. 
[I61 T. R i c h d o n ,  A. Shokmllahi, and R. Uhanke, "Wnile-length analysis 
of low-density pariry-check enrrmbles for the binary ensure channel," in 
ZW2 IKEE lnlermiioul S,mporium an 1nfim"on Theory, Lousannr. 
Swirzrrland. ZOO?. 
1171 T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, "Fi"ite-Img~ density evolution 
and the distibuiian of the number of iterations for the binary enwre 
channel," Available at ht~:lilthcwww.epH.ch/rese31-chndpcopV. 
219 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:53:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
