PROC 241h INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON MICROELECTRONICS (MIEL2004). VOL 2, NI%SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO, 16-19 MAY 2004

Design and Implementation of a Parameterizable LDPC Decoder IP Core
G. Murphy, E. M. Popovici, R. Bresnan, W. P. Marnane and P. Fitzpatrick

Ahsrvocl - This paper presents a design methodology that
quickly enables rhe design and implementation of a fully parallel log-domain LDPC decodcr based on any parity check matrix. A simulation method to perform an analysis of an arbitrary LDPC code is presented and then extended to predict the actual perfonnance of the final hardware implementation. The design trade-offs due to parameterizahle terms such as message resolution and approximation of the log functions are discussed. Finally using the presented design methodology an IP core is generated (using a randomly chosen parity check matrix H). Rcsults for this IP core are presented for an ASIC implementation using a 0.35pm CMOS technology.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes were first developed by Gallager [ I ] in the 1960s and though the performance of these types of codes was quite remarkable they were to remain largely unnoticed for the next few decades. The reason generally given for their neglect was that in the 1960s a practical hardware implementation would have seemed unrealistically complex [2]. However since the rediscovery of LDPC codes in the 1990s there has been a lot of research aimed at finding and creating good LDPC codes. LDPC codes have even been designed with a Bit-Error Rate (BER) performance that is within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit [3].
In terms of hardware implementations LDPC codes look set to challenge Turbo codes as the coding scheme of choice for the future. This is due to the fact that an LDPC decoder is an order of magnitude less complex that a Turbo decoder with a similar BER performance and i t is inherently parallel in nature [2]. There is also no need for complex interleaving as the interleaver is distributed in the code. These factors make LDPC codes ideally suited to communication applications that require a fast, low power, high performance encoderldecoder solution.
The purpose of this paper is to present a design methodology to quickly and efficiently implement a fully parallel log domain LDPC decoder IP core given any arbitrary parity check matrix H. Section I1 provides a general overview of LDPC codes and decoders as well as
G. Murphy and E. M. Popovici are with the Department of Microelectronics Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland. E-mail: g.c.murphy@student.ucc.ie,e.popovici@ucc.ie
R. Bresnan and W. P. Mamane are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland. E-mail: richardb@rennes.ucc.ie.I.marnane@ucc.ie
P. Fiizpatrick is with the Department of Mathematics, University College Cork, Ireland. E-mail: p.fitzpatrick@ucc.ie

introducing the terminology and notation used throughout this paper. Section I11 discusses a software simulation method developed to analyse the performance of an arbitraly LDPC code. This is then extended to include effects such as quantization, number representation, number of iterations, channel type, message size and log function approximations. It is shown that this provides a vely close approximation of the actual behaviour of a hardware implementation. The software simulation forms the basis of the rapid design flow outlined in the rest of the paper. Section 1V introduces the generic calculation nodes that form the hardware building blocks of any given decoder. Following on from the software simulation it is shown that these nodes can be easily parameterized in terms of the number of IiO buses, the message resolution and 0 approximations. Section V outlines how these nodes can be easily and quickly combined based on a given parity check matrix H matrix to form the required LDPC decoder IP core. The design trade-offs due to the parameterization terms are discussed, with particular attention paid to the decoder area versus BER perfonnance trade-off. Section VI presents some results of using this methodology to implement an LDPC decoder on an ASIC technology using a 0.35pm CMOS process. This paper is primarily concerned with LDPC codes defined over the binary field.
11. LDPC CODES
LDPC or Gallager codes are linear block codes defined by a sparse parity check matrix H. It is the
sparseness of the ‘1’s in N that gives the code its low-
density name. Broadly speaking there are two distinct types of LDPC codes, regular and irregular. Regular codes have a fixed number of ones per row (dc)and per column (&). Whereas irregular codes are allowed to have varying row and column weights. From a performance point of view irregular codes are generally viewed as superior to similar sized regular codes. Traditionally it has been stated that irregular codes are much more difficult to design and implement in hardware [2]. However by using the design methodology proposed in this paper it can be seen that there is practically no difference in the effort required to create an irregular LDPC decoder as apposed to a regular one.
A . LDPC Encoding
Since LDPC codes are linear block codes, they can be expressed as the set of solutions to:

0~7803-8166-1/04/817.000 2004 IEEE

74 7

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

cHT = O

(1)

In order to generate a valid codeword from a data word a suitable mapping scheme ( U c) must he used

4s

Message passed from bit node i to check node j.

qs

Message passed from check node j to bit node i.

sgn(,..) The sign ofthe message.

Is2

Noise variance of the channel.

c = uog, + u l g , + ...+ uk&,g,-,
Or in vector-matrix notation:

(2)

Log Domain Algorithm
y * Step 1. Initial probabilities assigned to bit nodes: L(qu1= U c , )=

(5)

c=uG

(3)

However in order to generate valid codewords and consequently be a genuine mapping scheme G must satisfy:

Step 2. Uudate check nodes:

GH' = O

(4)

Though hardware encoder implementations are outside the scope of this paper this brief overview shows a similar dependence on the H matrix and hence the techniques described in this paper can also be applied to the design and implementation of an LDPC encoder. Refer to [4] for a more detailed examination of encoding issues and encoder architectures.

Step 3. Update bit nodes:

B. Log Domain Decoditig Algorithm The log domain decoding algorithm is another form of the belief propagation or sum product algorithms. The algorithm is simply presented here without derivation or detailed explanation. For a more in-depth understanding of the origins of this algorithm refer to Gallagers original paper [I]. Any H matrix (hence any LDPC code) can be represented by a bi-partite graph. This is achieved by mapping the rows of the matrix to the parent or check nodes of the graph, and similarly the columns are mapped to the child or bit nodes. (Fig. 1.) The '1's of the H matrix form the edges of the graph. These edges can be thought of as the actual hardware connections between the calculation nodes in a decoder implementation.
CheckNodrr

Sfeo4a. Soft decision:

Step 46. Hard decision: (9)

The algorithm repeats steps 2-4 for a fixed number of iterations or until:

cH' = O

(10)

C. Hardware Implications of the Log Domain Algorithm

Bit Nodor
Fig. I . Bi-Partite Graph representation of a H matrix

The advantage of using the log domain version of the decoding algorithm is that it removes many of the hardware intensive multiplication terms. In fact the only remaining multip1.icatiou (Equation 11) is easily implemented using XOR gates (i.e. 1 bit multiplication.)

This visual representation is in fact very similar to the layout of a fully parallel decoder and is a useful aid to understanding the flow of information during the various iterations of the algorithm which are presented below.

Notation wed:

L( ...) Log-likelihood ratio.

Y

Codeword received from channel.

c

Initialised codeword.

However this is accomplished at the cost of introducing into the algorithm the 0 and W ' functions, where:

748

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

During an iteration of the decoding algorithm the number of times this complex function needs to be evaluated is directly proportional to the number edges of the bi-partite graph (the number of '1's in the H matrix) (Eq. 6). This means that for realistic implementations it becomes necessary to use approximations of the 0 function (Fig. 2) in order to reduce the area and complexity of the design.

issues such as quantisation, sign extension, saturation, finite number resolution, number representation, sleeping nodes [ 5 ] and Q approximations. It was discovered that the simulation software matched the predicted results of VHDL simulation, but was many orders of magnitude quicker in execution. More importantly it became trivial to test different H matrices, change the message resolution of the decoder or to experiment with any number of different constraints. It was also found that any virtual decoder could be parameterized in terms of the interconnect map, the message resolution (bus width of the connections between the nodes) and the bit resolution of the 0 approximations.

IV. CALCULATINOONDES

Fig. 2. 5 Bit approximationof 0 function.
The hit resolution of these approximations is one of the three parameterization factors in this design methodology, and has a major impact on the area versus BER performance of the final decoder. However as shall he shown later the choice of bit resolution is closely tied to another design parameter: the overall message resolution of the decoder.

The virtual bit and check nodes used in the simulation software laid the foundation for their hardware equivalent. Through the use of generics in VHDL it was possible to create two calculation nodes (bit and check) that could be used as the building blocks of any decoder. It was found that the generic hit node was completely parameterizable based on the overall message resolution (N) and the
number of 110 connections 6 ) due to its position in the
interconnect map. (Fig. 3)

111. SIMULATIOMNETHODOLOGY

A number of statistical and graph based methods exist to analyze and predict the ideal performance of an arbitrary rainily of LDPC codes andor to determine if an individual code is good. These methods generally rely on analyzing the distribution of the '1's in the Hmatrix in terms of girth, average girth, minimum distance etc., and deciding based on these factors whether one code is better than another. However in terms of accurately predicting the actual BER performance of a hardware implementation these results are not very helpful as they neglect to factor in how a decoder would actually be implemented. In an effort to improve the accuracy of BER prediction, simulation software was written in C that mimicked the behaviour of the check and bit node update algorithms. However rather than simply evaluating the algorithm virtual bit and check nodes were created. It was found that it was relatively easy to analyse H matrices, and generate an interconnect map that could quickly connect these bit and check nodes to creale a full virtual decoder for a given H matrix. The interconnect map technique would later be used to create the actual hardware interconnect of the various decoder implementations.
The first version of the simulation software therefore consisted of an idealised virtual decoder with BER predictions that matched those o f the statistical methods. However constraints could now he placed on individual calculation nodes mimicking real hardware

I

I

Fig. 3. Simplifiedbit node: parameterizable in N and j .

Similarly the generic check node could be completely parameterized in terms of the overall message resolution
(N), the number of 110 connections (i) due to its position in the interconnect map and the resolution of the 0 approximation (L) (Fig. 4)

Fig. 4. Simplifiedcheck node: pararneterizablein N, L and i.

749

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The bit resolution of the 0.'approximation appears in Fig. 4. to be highly dependent on both the L and i of the check node. However in practice this is not the case as the Q(x) functions drop off to zero very quickly as x gets larger.
.Hence as i increases, d tends to evaluate to zero more
often and the extra bit resolution is in effect wasted. This
- results in a large area penalty for very little performance
gain. Instead the bit resolution of the d ( x ) approximation
is related directly to conversion of x from size L N. (If
x exceeds the allowed 2L - 1 the result of d is forced to
zero). Due to the large number check nodes (hence 0 and 0 ~fu'nctions) in a parallel LDPC decoder even a single bit reduction in resolution can have a significant impact on the overall area of the design.
V. FULLLOGDOMAINDECODER

function are in the range 0 to 3.75 using a magnitude representation.
TABLE I
IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

I Block Leneth

I 282 I

Q Resolution (L) (Magnitude)
Core + 110 Area
Row Utilisation Clock Frequency

4 Bit
25 mm' 60%
100 MHz

The generic bit and check nodes described above were written in VHDL. The code for these calculation nodes remains unchanged during this design methodology regardless of any changes to the H matrix or the N and L values. The simulation software described earlier was adapted to generate VHDL code. The interconnect map techniques used in simulation to connect the virtual bit and check nodes were expanded in order to generate the glue logic to connect the different calculation nodes. This same map also instantiated the nodes by passing the i and j arguments via VHDL generics. In effect it created the complex interconnect buses between the nodes and scaled them based on the number of edges they were connected too. The simulation software was further modified to automate the entire design phase, so that the end result was a software tool that could be used to quickly model and test a real hardware LDPC decoder and then generate the VHDL for the decoder simply by plugging in a H matrix and selecting values for N and L. An optional VHDL wrapper for the IP core was also generated complete with control logic and serial to parallel logic to reduce the I10 pin count.
VI. IMPLEMENTATIORNESULTS
A proof of concept ASIC was designed and implemented using this design methodology. The ASIC was targeted to a 4 metal layer 0.35um CMOS technology: The synthesis and layout tools used were Syhopsys' Design Compiler and Cadence's Silicon Ensemble. VHDL Simulations were carried out using Synopsys' Scirocco software.
An arbitrary H matrix was chosen with the only constraint being a relatively small block length in order to keep fabrication costs down. The optimal resolution for this code in terms of the performance versus area trade-off was found to be 4 bits for both the message and 0 approximation. This means that the a range of possible values for the 2's complement representation of the messages is -4 to 3.5, and the possible results of the 0

In Table I the results of this design methodology for a 282 bit code length decoder are presented. The gate count for this decoder implementation including all the accompanying control and wrapper logic was 245k gates.
VII. CONCLUSION
By using optimised versions of the calculation nodes in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 and the design methodology proposed in this paper, the design and implementation of a fully parallel LDPC log domain decoder for any arbitrary H matrix comes down to the choice of N and L values. A software method to quickly design, model and generate a fully parallel LDPC decoder was presented, along with the result of a proof of concept synthesis on an ASIC technology.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by a Research Innovation Fund from Enterprise Ireland.
REFERENCES
. _ 111R.G. Gallaeer. Low-Densin,Porin,-C/,eck Codes.. PhD Thesis. MIT PREk,'1963. 121 David J.C. MacKay, Good Error-Correcting Codes hosed on
Verv Suarse Matrices. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theow. Volume 1.
45;Jan 1999.
[3] S.Y. Chung, D.Fomey, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke. On
t/ie Desian ofLox,-Densin, PoritpCheck Codes within 0.0045 dB b/& 6 a n n o n Limit~lEEECommunication Letters, Vol. 5 , No. 2, Feb. 2001 [4] G. Murphy, E. Popovici and W. Mamane,. De,~ignTrode-oflc /or Iniplenienturion o/ LDPC Encoders. ISSC2003, pp5065 I 1 July 2003. [ 5 ] R. Bresnan, W. P. Mamane and M. Sala. An Eflciei?~Low Density Parip Check Decode,: Submitted to the 2004 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT). Dec. 2003.

750

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

