3566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2004

Enforcing Maximum-Transition-Run Code Constraints and Low-Density Parity-Check Decoding
Richard M. Todd and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We present a novel algorithm for imposing the maximum-transition-run (MTR) code constraint in the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over a partial response channel. This algorithm provides a gain of about 0.2 dB. We also develop log and max-log versions of the MTR enforcer, similar to the well-known “log-MAP” (maximum a posteriori) and “max-log-MAP” variants of the LDPC decoder, that have performance equivalent to that of the original version.
Index Terms—Constrained codes, iterative soft-decision decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, maximum-transition-run (MTR) codes, run-length-limited (RLL) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, there has been a great deal of interest in the use of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] over various partial-response (PR) channels, such as the ones used in magnetic recording systems [2]. Such systems employ soft decision decoders for both the LDPC code and for the PR channel itself (usually a Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) decoder [3]) working in tandem, typically with feedback between the two decoders (so-called “turbo equalization” [4]).
Practical magnetic recording systems employ some sort of run-length-limited (RLL) or maximum-transition-run (MTR) code to impose restrictions on the kinds of sequences of transitions that are present in the data written on the magnetic medium. Restrictions are imposed in order to make the synchronization circuitry work better, and to avoid certain error-prone sequences [5]. Such a constrained code, like any other code, imposes a certain amount of redundancy in its output. However, in decoders for magnetic recording systems, such as the system from [2] (shown in Fig. 1), the BCJR and LDPC decoders do not take advantage of the redundancy introduced by the MTR constraint. It would be helpful if one could add an additional decoder to take advantage of this extra redundancy present in our channel inputs. This paper explains how we can add an extra decoder module, employing what we call the MTR enforcement algorithm, to gain some extra performance. This is somewhat like what Fan et al. did in [6] and [7], where a modified BCJR algorithm was used to enforce the run-length constraint; in the following, we develop a different (and more parallelizable) algorithm for enforcing the run-length constraint.
Manuscript received July 6, 2004; revised July 27, 2004. R. M. Todd is at 820 Annie Court, Norman, OK 73069 USA (e-mail: rmtodd@amonduul.ecn.ou.edu). J. R. Cruz is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019-0631 USA (e-mail: jcruz@ou.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2004.835673

II. SYSTEM MODEL
Fig. 2 shows a diagram of a magnetic recording system with our MTR enforcer added into the system. The enforcer, like the BCJR and LDPC decoder, is a soft-input/soft-output decoder, i.e., its inputs and outputs are log-likelihood values. Each decoder takes as input the sum of the extrinsic information from the other two decoders. The flow of the log-likelihood values proceeds as follows.
1) We sum the extrinsic information log-likelihood values from the LDPC decoder and MTR enforcer and feed the sum as input to the BCJR decoder. (On the initial run, we take the extrinsic information to be zero.)
2) The BCJR decoder creates an output set of log-likelihood values, and we compute the extrinsic information from the BCJR decoder as usual, by subtracting the BCJR input from the BCJR output. (Note that on the first iteration this is just the BCJR output, as the BCJR log-likelihood inputs are all zeros.)
3) We sum the extrinsic informations from the BCJR decoder and MTR enforcer and feed the sum into the LDPC decoder.
4) The LDPC decoder creates an output log-likelihood vector, and we compute the LDPC extrinsic information by subtracting the LDPC input from the LDPC output.
5) We sum the extrinsic information from the BCJR and LDPC decoders to get the input to the MTR enforcer.
6) The MTR enforcer iterates one or more times on this log-likelihood vector, and we subtract the input from the output to get, as usual, the MTR enforcer’s extrinsic information.
7) The extrinsic information from the BCJR, LDPC, and MTR enforcer algorithms are added to get a total log-likelihood . The resulting are hard-decoded and the result checked to see if it is a valid LDPC and MTR codeword. If it is, the process is terminated.
8) Otherwise, we go back to Step 1 and the process begins again until the limit on the number of iterations of turbo equalization is reached.
The sequence of decoders presented above is admittedly somewhat arbitrary. We argue that intuitively the LDPC decoder should come before the MTR enforcer because the LDPC code is a more powerful code and thus more likely to be able to correct errors. The MTR constraint is relatively loose compared to the constraints of the LDPC parity-check matrix, or in other words, valid LDPC codewords are more sparse in the set of all possible codewords than words satisfying the MTR constraint. Hence, it seems to us that the MTR enforcer is more likely to be in error than the LDPC decoder (more likely to decode to the wrong MTR codeword) and, thus, should only see the data

0018-9464/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TODD AND CRUZ: ENFORCING MTR CODE CONSTRAINTS AND LDPC DECODING

3567

Fig. 1. Diagram of system for magnetic recording with precoder, MTR code, and LDPC code.

Fig. 2. Diagram of system for magnetic recording with precoder, MTR code, LDPC code, and MTR enforcer.

after the LDPC decoder has had a chance to correct as many bits input to the MTR enforcer, , may be longer than the orig-

errors as possible. Also, in practice, we found that putting the inal LDPC codeword length, , due to the extra bits stuffed

MTR enforcer before the LDPC decoder did not give as good in-between parity bits by the MTR adjuster [2] to ensure that

performance.

the LDPC codeword does not violate the MTR constraints.) The

MTR enforcer also requires as input a window size parameter

III. DETAILS OF THE MTR ENFORCER ALGORITHM

The details of the MTR enforcer algorithm depend on the par-

ticular MTR code in use. In this paper, we use the MTR code

given in [5]; this code is a rate

code designed for the

MEEPR4

channel, and the code

, a nonnegative integer, which as we shall see below specifies

the size of the window around each bit in which we enforce the

MTR constraints.

First, the

are converted to a priori probabilities

in the obvious way

satisfies the MTR

code constraint, which means that at

most three ones can occur in a row, and at most 11 zeros can

occur in a row. The MTR enforcer is basically a Bayesian al-

gorithm that computes a posteriori log-likelihood ratios given

(1)

the MTR constraints that the codeword must obey. For the code

from [5], this constraint means that we can never have a se-

quence of four or more one bits in a row, nor can we have 12 or

more zero bits. Let us call these two constraints the “One Con-

straint” and the “Zero Constraint,” respectively. In general, for

an MTR

code, the Zero Constraint forbids sequences of

Next, we define the a posteriori probabilities

as the

probabilities of bit being zero or one given that the Zero Con-

straint and One Constraint are true over a window of length

centered around bit (call this condition )

or more zeros in a row and the One Constraint similarly

forbids sequences of

or more ones.

An iteration of the MTR enforcer takes in a priori log-likeli-

and

hood values

(where

) and produces

a posteriori outputs

as follows. (Note that the number of

and

(2)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2004

where is the usual normalizing constant such that (3)

TABLE I
S W SIZE OF ALLOWABLE PATTERN SET AS A FUNCTION OF

Now, define as the set of all words of length

that

satisfy the One Constraint and Zero Constraint

satisfies Zero/One Constraints (4)

Hence, the probabilities

can be computed as a sum

over all the possible words

whose

middle bit (the th bit) is zero or one, respectively

where

(5)
(Note that this derivation assumes that the bits in our codeword are independent, which is not strictly true, but as in the case of the LDPC decoder, we have to make this assumption in order to get any sort of usable algorithm.)
We can rearrange (5) to factor out the terms to get
(6)
To simplify the notation a bit, let us define
(7)
and hence (8)
From this, we can compute the a posteriori log-likelihoods

if

if

(11)

if

Given this new, extended definition of , we can proceed to

compute

as in (9) for all .

It is worth noting that the choice of window size parameter

affects both the run time of the algorithm as well as how

well the One and Zero Constraints are enforced. The execu-

tion time scales as

, approximately

, where

is the code rate of the MTR code, so obviously the

desire is there to keep small. (The values of versus for

can be found in Table I.) However, for sufficiently

small, the algorithm fails to enforce the Zero Constraint and One

Constraint at all. For values of

, the window length

is less than

, so the Zero Constraint does not

exclude any possible sequences from our set and hence the

algorithm does not actually enforce this constraint. Similarly,

for values of

, the One Constraint is not enforced.

For

, neither constraint is satisfied, no

sequences are excluded from our set

, and the

MTR enforcer produces output likelihoods identical to its in-

puts. For the case of the

code from [5], this means

that the MTR enforcer enforces the One Constraint if

and the Zero Constraint if

.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Here we present simulation results for a system such as the

one in Fig. 2 with a Lorentzian channel and varying numbers

(9)

of iterations of the MTR enforcement algorithm. Let us describe here the parameters for the simulation. The magnetic

The above formula for the a posteriori MTR enforcer log-

likelihood values is, strictly speaking, only defined for values of

for which we can fit a window of size

around inside

our codeword. This implies that

.

For the bits at the ends of our codeword, where is outside

this interval, we have to define a little differently, letting

the window of values over which we compute our products

slide so that it is not necessarily centered on . To be precise, the

extension of (7) to cover all goes as follows:

recording channel is Lorentzian with channel density

.

We used the regular rate 0.90 LDPC code from [2], along with

the rate

MTR code from [5]. The Lorentzian channel is

equalized to the MEEPR4

response with a three-pole analog filter and an 11-tap digital

filter, using the equalizer model in [8]. We also used the

precoder, as specified in [5]. Note that the total number of

bits input into the channel for each sector is 4721 once the ex-

pansion due to the MTR code, the LDPC parity bits, and the

extra added bits to keep the overall MTR constraint satisfied

are taken into account [2]. Thus, the code rate of the entire

(10) system is

. We used five iterations of

turbo equalization and an iteration limit of 30 on the LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TODD AND CRUZ: ENFORCING MTR CODE CONSTRAINTS AND LDPC DECODING

3569

Fig. 3. Performance of system with varying number of iterations of MTR Fig. 4. Performance of system with MTR enforcement with different window

enforcement.

sizes.

decoder, with a variable number of iterations of the MTR

enforcement algorithm. The signal-to-noise ratio is defined as

SNR

, where is the variance of the noise at the

Lorentzian channel output (i.e., not the noise at the output of

the MEEPR4 equalizer).

Fig. 3 shows the performance of the system with the number

of iterations of MTR enforcement being

and ,

respectively, and with

.(

was selected because

this window size allows the MTR enforcer to enforce the One

Constraint a full length of

bits before and after the cur-

rent bit.) The results in Fig. 3 show that

improves the

performance by approximately 0.2 dB, but higher values of

provide no improvement and seem to actually make the per-

formance worse. This is not necessarily surprising, since one

iteration of the algorithm suffices to compute the a posteriori

log-likelihoods from the a priori log-likelihoods; repeating this

procedure by feeding these a posteriori log-likelihood values

back into the MTR enforcer will produce new outputs that are

not the true a posteriori log-likelihood values and should not

necessarily be expected to be useful for decoding purposes.

Let us now examine the effect of various window sizes on

the MTR enforcer. Fig. 4 shows the performance of the system

with MTR enforcer with one MTR enforcer iteration

and window sizes

and . (Note that, as mentioned

previously,

and

are equivalent to no MTR

enforcer being present at all.) We can see that

and

give better performance than

, but probably not enough

to justify the increased CPU usage. Curiously enough,

performs almost identically, and in fact very slightly better, than

, which is unexpected.

max-log-MAP, which like the log-MAP LDPC decoder works

entirely in the log domain. In a similar fashion, one can con-

struct variants of our MTR enforcer that work entirely in the log

domain. It should be noted, however, that unlike the LDPC en-

coder, the version of the MTR enforcer presented in Section III

is already partially in the log domain, as (9) involves computing

a delta to the input log-likelihood

from the probabilities

of surrounding bits . We now explain the derivation of

the log and max-log versions of the MTR enforcer below.

Consider (10) for defining the , which we repeat here

(12)

where

is, as before, defined in (11). Substituting (1) for

deriving the probabilities from input log-likelihood values

into the above gives

(13)

where is defined as
(14)
As the denominator of (13) does not depend on the test codeword in our sum, we can pull the denominator out of the sum as follows:

V. VARIATIONS ON THE ALGORITHM

It is well known [9] that in addition to the original LDPC

decoding algorithm [1], there exists a version that works en-

(15)

tirely in the log domain (i.e., with log-likelihoods instead of

probabilities

), sometimes called the log-maximum

a posteriori (log-MAP) algorithm. There also exists a more ef- Note that the denominator does not depend on , and hence is

ficient approximation to the log-MAP LDPC decoder, called the same whether we are computing

or ; since the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 2004

Fig. 5. Performance of system with varying number of iterations of MTR Fig. 6. Performance of system with MTR enforcement (log version) with

enforcement (log version).

different window sizes.

only appear in (9) as a difference in the logs, we can freely replace the in (9) with

(16)

without changing the

.

Let us now define the log-sum-exponential operator ( ),

the log-domain equivalent of the sum of probabilities in the

probability domain, as an (associative, commutative) operator

on two or more values as follows:

(17)

Fig. 7. Performance of system with varying number of iterations of MTR enforcement (max-log version).

We may now express the logs of the , called , as

(18)

We have thus derived the log version of the MTR enforcer,

which works as follows: for all , compute

via (18)

above, then compute

as

(19)

The max-log version of the MTR enforcer can be derived from

the log version with the added idea that we can approximate

the

operation by a simple operation, hence approxi-

mating the

by

(20) Fig. 8. Performance of system with MTR enforcement (max-log version) with
different window sizes.

and computing

from these approximate

as before. in Figs. 7 and 8. The systems simulated are identical to those

Simulation results for the log version of the MTR enforcer al- used for Figs. 3 and 4 in Section IV except for the difference in

gorithm are shown in Figs. 5 and 6 and for the max-log version which variant of the MTR enforcer algorithm is used. As can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TODD AND CRUZ: ENFORCING MTR CODE CONSTRAINTS AND LDPC DECODING

3571

seen, the log version and original version of the algorithm have basically identical performance. This is not surprising, as the log version is mathematically equivalent to the original version, so any differences in performance in practice would be due only to numerical errors which would be more likely to occur in the original (nonlog) version, as it deals with very small numbers (the s) instead of logs of those numbers. In practice, this appears not to have been a problem, and so the two algorithms perform identically. What is perhaps more interesting is that the max-log version also gives the same performance; this indicates that the approximation done in (20) does not noticeably impair performance. Since all three variants of the algorithm seem to perform equally well, in practice one should choose the variant that is least computationally expensive, i.e., the max-log version.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel algorithm, and two variant versions of this algorithm, for imposing the MTR code constraint in the decoding of LDPC codes over an MEEPR4 channel. Gains of 0.2 dB over comparable systems without MTR constraint enforcement were shown.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the OU Supercomputing Center for Education and Research (OSCER) for the use of their computer facilities for research.

REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[2] H. Song, R. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, “Applications of low-density paritycheck codes to magnetic recording channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 918–923, May 2001.
[3] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[4] W. E. Ryan, L. L. McPheters, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Combined turbo coding and turbo equalization for PR4-equalized Lorentzian channels,” in Proc. Conf. Inform. Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, 1998, pp. 489–494.
[5] T. Nishiya, K. Tsukano, T. Hirai, S. Mita, and T. Nara, “Rate 16=17 maximum transition run (3;11) code on an EEPRML channel with an errorcorrecting postprocessor,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 35, pp. 4378–4385, Sept. 1999.
[6] J. L. Fan and J. M. Cioffi, “Constrained coding techniques for soft iterative decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., vol. 1b, 1999, pp. 631–637.
[7] J. L. Fan, Constrained Coding and Soft Iterative Decoding. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2001.
[8] D. Krueger, “Generalized partial response (GPR) system design for digital magnetic recording,” CSPLab., Univ. Oklahoma, Norman, Tech. Rep., 1995.
[9] Z. Wu, Coding and Iterative Detection for Magnetic Recording Channels. Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer, 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

