1840

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Over Finite-State Binary Markov Channels
Javier Garcia-Frias, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We propose a modified algorithm for decoding of lowdensity parity-check codes over finite-state binary Markov channels. The proposed approach clearly outperforms systems in which the channel statistics are not exploited in the decoding, even when the channel parameters are not known a priori at the decoder.
Index Terms—Baum–Welch algorithm, finite-state binary Markov channels, Gilbert–Elliot channels, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

M ANY practical digital communications channels exhibit statistical dependencies among errors. The error

pattern of the discrete channel (modulator-real channel-de-

modulator) can be modeled using finite-state binary Markov

channels [hidden Markov models (HMMs)]. Such channels

are characterized by a set of states ,

, the

matrix of transition probabilities among states (

,

with the probability of transition from state to state ,

i.e.,

,

,

), and the list giving

the bit-error probability (BEP) to associate with each state

(

, with

the probability of getting the output

in state , i.e.,

,

,

).

It is intuitive that the presence of memory in Markov chan-

nels leads to increased capacity, , relative to the capacity of

memoryless channels, , with the same stationary BEP [1],

[2]. In practice, many communications systems make use of a

channel interleaver to distribute the errors so that codes designed

for a memoryless channel can be used. While the application

of interleaving does not change the capacity of the channel,

the achievable performance of a decoder which assumes that

the channel is memoryless is limited by

. Exploiting the

higher capacity of Markov channels, in practice, has proven to

be challenging. In general [3], even if the parameters of the

Markov channel are known to the receiver, maximum-likelihood

strategies are too complex to implement. Both [1] and [2] use de-

cision-feedback decoders which perform recursive state estima-

tions that are used in the decoding process. However, since the

state estimate at a given time is obtained based on hard-decision

estimates of the previous transmitted symbols, these schemes

are vulnerable to error propagation, and they can not be reliably

Paper approved by E. Ayanoglu, the Editor for Communication Theory and Coding Application of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 14, 2002; revised January 29, 2004. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation CAREER/PECASE Award CCR-0093215. This paper was presented in part at the International Symposium on Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 2001.
The author is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716 USA (e-mail: jgarcia@ee.udel.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.836568

Fig. 1. Bipartite graph representing an LDPC code over a finite-state binary Markov channel. fc g, fe g, and fs g represent the check, the error pattern, and the HMM nodes. The figure shows different types of messages that are
propagated in the decoding process through the graph.

used when the quality of the channel degrades. In [4] and [5],

we proposed modifications for the decoding of turbo codes that

exploit the structure of the Markov channel and allow commu-

nications at rates greater than

. However, those methods

are either more complex or achieve worse performance than the

ones proposed in this letter.

In this letter, we propose the modification of the mes-

sage-passing decoding algorithm to exploit the structure of

finite-state binary Markov channels in low-density parity-check

(LDPC) codes [6]. Decoding modifications to exploit the struc-

ture of these channels in LDPC codes were proposed first in

[7] and [8]. Additional work for discrete and continued-valued

Markov channels was presented in [9]. The work in [7] is

based on producing hard estimates of the error pattern. The

method proposed here (partially presented in [8]) considers

soft estimates, which leads to performance improvements over

the scheme in [7]. Furthermore, it clearly outperforms standard

LDPC decoding in which the channel statistics are not exploited

in the decoding, and allows communications at rates greater

than

and close to .

II. DECODER MODIFICATIONS FOR FINITE-STATE BINARY MARKOV CHANNELS
The possibility of incorporating Markov channels in the decoding of codes defined over general graph schemes is suggested in [10] (see also [11] for a more general framework), although no results are presented there. As shown in Fig. 1, the basic idea is to “link” the error-pattern nodes of the LDPC code with the HMM. The whole structure can then be considered as a Bayesian network, and decoding can be performed by proceeding with the message-passing algorithm (belief propagation [12]). The introduction of the HMM produces an increase in the number of cycles in the network. However, as we will see in Section IV, these additional cycles do not seem to strongly affect the performance of the decoding algorithm. Notice that

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

1841

due to the structure of LDPC codes, the use of a channel

interleaver is unnecessary.

Following the notation in [13], we denote the set of indexes

of the error-pattern nodes that participate in check node as

.

represents the

set of indexes of the check nodes that participate in error-pattern

node ,

. The set

with element

being excluded is denoted by

. As shown in

Fig. 1, without counting the message passing among the HMM

nodes, we can distinguish four different types of messages prop-

agated through the network: 1) ,

, the message

propagated from check node to error-pattern node ; 2) ,

, the message propagated from error-pattern node

to HMM node ; 3) ,

, the message prop-

agated from HMM node to error-pattern node ; 4) ,

, the message propagated from error-pattern node

to check node . The steps in which the proposed algorithm

is different from the standard one are detailed below.

1) Message passing from the error-pattern nodes to the

HMM nodes

For any

, calculate

,

, where is a normalization

factor such that

.

2) Message passing from the HMM nodes to the error-pat-

tern nodes

In order to derive the equations, we consider the trellis

for a finite-state binary Markov channel. The starting

and ending states associated with a particular edge

are represented by

and

, respectively, and

the error pattern corresponding to is denoted by .

The trellis has two parallel branches between states (one

associated with the error pattern

, and the

other with the error pattern

). Each one of the

branches in the trellis will have an associated a priori

probability , which is obtained from the parameters

of the HMM as

.

The resulting equations that implement the be-

lief-propagation algorithm over the HMM (for-

ward/backward recursions, with the difference that the

“observation sequence” is now a random vector defined

by the probabilities ,

,

)1 are

given by

(1)

value of is not used in (3). However, in order to

make decisions, we also need to calculate

,

, where is a normalization factor such that

.

3) Message passing from the the error-pattern nodes to the

check nodes

The messages propagated from the error-pattern

nodes to the check nodes will combine the messages

proceeding from the HMM with the messages orig-

inated in the check nodes. Specifically, for every

pair existing in the code graph, we calculate

,

, where is a

normalization factor such that

.

III. JOINT CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND DECODING

Although in the previous section we have assumed that the

parameters of the binary Markov channel are known a priori

by the decoder, it is also possible to successfully perform de-

coding when the parameters describing the Markov channel are

unknown. The idea is to apply a Baum–Welch-like re-estima-

tion procedure [14] each time that the messages are propagated

through the HMM (step 2 in Section II). In this way, each it-

eration in LDPC decoding also results in an iteration on the

parameter estimation, and no training sequence is needed. As

opposed to other approaches (e.g., [7]), parameter estimation is

performed from scratch for each block, using only the informa-

tion contained in the received block (i.e., no information from

previous blocks is kept). This guarantees the robustness of the

proposed approach if the channel parameters change from block

to block.

In order to derive the estimation algorithm, we will assume

that the channel is characterized by an HMM

and

we can, therefore, calculate the value of for each branch in the

corresponding trellis. After any given iteration, the probability

of going through branch in the trellis section of the HMM

can be calculated as

(4)

Since branch is determined by the initial state , final

state , and its associated error pattern , we can express

the probability of the branch as the joint probability of ,

, and

; i.e.,

.

Therefore, by using the same approach as in the Baum–Welch

algorithm [14], the joint probability

for the

HMM representing the channel can be expressed as

(2) (5)

(3)

where

.

The product of this probability and the number of trellis tran-

where is a normalization factor such that

sitions represents, as in the Baum–Welch algorithm, the ex-

. Notice that, as in any belief-propagation scheme, the pected number of transitions from state to state generating

1The work in [7] uses a hard estimate of the error pattern, which is made avail-
able by step 1 (e.g., fg g 2 f0; 1g). This constraint leads to some performance
degradation.

the error pattern . From this joint probability, it is easy to calculate the expected number of transitions from state to state
, the expected number of times error pattern

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1842
is generated in state number of times in state

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004
, and the expected (6)

(7) (8)

The resulting equations to calculate the re-estimated model , which will be used in the next iteration of the
LDPC decoder, are given by

Fig. 2. Performance for a rate-1/2 (3,6) regular LDPC code over the Gilbert–Elliot channel with parameters P = 0:5, g = 0:1092, b = 0:0308, and a variable P resulting in stationary BEP . The curve for the case requiring
estimation overlaps with the curve obtained when the channel parameters are perfectly known at the decoder site. For this channel, the  giving a capacity C = 1=2 is  = 0:137. For a memoryless channel, capacity C = 1=2 occurs for  = 0:11.

(9)

(10)

with , .

,

,,

, and

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Although the decoder modifications to incorporate channel

statistics can be applied to general finite-state Markov channels

with states, for simplicity, we consider the special case of

Gilbert–Elliot channels

. A Gilbert–Elliot channel con-

Fig. 3. Performance for a rate-1/2 (3,6) regular LDPC code over the Gilbert–Elliot channel with parameters P = 0:5, g = 0:0156, b = 0:0044, and a variable P resulting in stationary BEP . The curve for the case requiring
estimation overlaps with the curve obtained when the channel parameters are perfectly known at the decoder site. For this channel, the  giving a capacity C = 1=2 is  = 0:154. For a memoryless channel, capacity C = 1=2 occurs for  = 0:11.

tains a “good” state in which the BEP is , and a “bad” state

with BEP . The transition probability of going from the good

state to the bad state is denoted by , and represents the prob-

ability of going from the bad state to the good state.

In order to assess the performance of the proposed method,

we consider the two Gilbert–Elliot channels studied in [4]. For

the first channel, the transition probabilities are

and

. The transition probabilities

of the second channel are chosen so that the ratio is the

same as in the channel above, but with

(i.e., longer

error burst lengths than for the first channel). In both cases, the

BEP in the bad state is fixed to

. The performance of

the system is studied as a function of the value of , the BEP

in the good state. Notice that since all the other parameters are

parameter used in Figs. 2 and 3.2 We use a rate-1/2 (3,6) regular

LDPC code with

coded bits. For rate-1/2 codes,

the BEP corresponding to the capacity of a binary symmetric

channel (BSC) is

. Therefore, if the memory of the

channel is ignored, it is impossible to send reliable information

through any of these channels when the stationary BEP is higher

than 0.11.

Fig. 2 shows, for the first channel

and the pro-

posed decoding method, the decoded bit-error rate (BER) as a

function of the stationary BEP . After simulating 2000 blocks,

no errors are found for values of

. The average number

of iterations for

is slightly less than 18. Notice that

fixed, there is a one-to-one correspondence between and the 2For the two Gilbert–Elliot channels considered in this section, the lowest

stationary BEP,

, which is the value of  is achieved when P = 0, and corresponds to  = 0:11.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

1843

convergence is achieved at values of higher than the mem-

oryless limit and close to the theoretical limit for this channel

(which corresponds to a value

[1]). For comparison

purposes, the performance when the HMM is not considered in

decoding is also shown in the figure. In this case, the residual

BER for

(which corresponds to a value of

and is, therefore, the smaller value of that can be obtained

by decreasing and keeping the rest of the channel param-

eters fixed) is BER

. The same LDPC code applied

over a BSC achieves a BER around

for values of BEP

slightly less than 0.085, which gives an idea of the improvement

obtained with the approach presented in this letter. Although

more decoding iterations are required, we obtain the same per-

formance when the parameters of the HMM are not known a

priori, and are jointly estimated with the decoding process (the

curve for the case requiring estimation overlaps with the curve

obtained when the channel parameters are perfectly known at

the decoder site). In this case, we assume in our simulations

that the lack of information holds for all blocks. No pilot sym-

bols are used, and the initial HMM is defined by the parameters

,

,

, and

.

As we can see in Fig. 3, for the second channel

convergence is also achieved at values of higher than the mem-

oryless limit. The theoretical limit for this channel corresponds

to a value

. After simulating 2000 blocks, no errors are

found for values of

. In contrast with Fig. 2, in Fig. 3,

the degradation in performance as increases is smoother. This

is related to the higher variance in the stationary BEP for dif-

ferent realizations of the channel with

. For the case

in which the channel parameters are not known a priori, no loss

in performance is observed when the method proposed in Sec-

tion III is applied, and the initial model is the same as in Fig. 2.

Again, the curve for the case requiring estimation overlaps with

the curve obtained when the channel parameters are perfectly

known at the decoder site.

Notice that the residual block (frame)-error rate (FER) can

be easily obtained from Figs. 2 and 3 by applying the formula

BER = FER

, where is the average number of errors

for the blocks in error and

is the block length. In

the range of interest of Fig. 2,

(greater

values of result in a FER ),

, which

results in a FER curve shifted around one order of magnitude

with respect to the BER curve presented in Fig. 2. Similarly, for

in Fig. 3 (greater values of result in a FER

),

, which again leads to a FER curve

shifted around one order of magnitude with respect to the BER

in Fig. 3.

It is interesting to compare the performance of LDPC and

turbo codes when they are used over finite-state binary Markov

channels. The best schemes in turbo codes make use of su-

pertrellises jointly describing the Markov channel and each of

the constituent encoders [4]. In order to obtain the best pos-

sible performance, the encoder structure (i.e., the number of

constituent encoders and the puncturing pattern) has to be ad-

justed to the channel parameters. Simplified approaches that do

not need to adjust the encoder to the channel and consider the

Markov channel as another constituent decoder block (more in

the spirit of this letter) were proposed in [5]. The results obtained in this letter for LDPC codes outperform the simplified methods for turbo codes described in [5] when those turbo schemes are applied to the channels described here, and are very close to results obtained with turbo schemes using supertrellis approaches (which have a much higher complexity in the decoder). A very important advantage of LDPC codes is that a fixed encoder can achieve good performance for different Markov channels.
V. CONCLUSION
We have introduced a modified message-passing algorithm for the decoding of LDPC codes over finite-state binary Markov channels. This approach clearly outperforms systems in which the channel statistics are not exploited in the decoder, and allows reliable communications at rates which are above the capacity of a memoryless channel with the same stationary BEP as the Markov channel. This holds even in the case in which the channel parameters are not known a priori in the decoder, since the parameters can be estimated jointly with the decoding process. The proposed approach can also be applied to irregular codes, which is expected to lead to further performance improvements.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Mushkin and I. Bar-David, “Capacity and coding for the Gilbert–Elliott channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 35, pp. 1277–1290, Nov. 1989.
[2] A. J. Goldsmith and P. P. Varaiya, “Capacity, mutual information, and coding for finite-state Markov channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 868–886, May 1996.
[3] A. Lapidoth and P. Narayan, “Reliable communication under channel uncertainty,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 2148–2177, Oct. 1998.
[4] J. Garcia-Frias and J. D. Villasenor, “Turbo decoding of Gilbert–Elliot channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 357–363, Mar. 2002.
[5] J. Garcia-Frias and J. Villasenor, “Low-complexity turbo decoding for binary Markov channels,” in Proc. Vehicular Technology Conf., vol. 2, May 2000, pp. 840–843.
[6] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[7] T. Wadayama, “An iterative decoding algorithm of low density parity check codes for hidden Markov noise channels,” in Int. Symp. Information Theory, Applications, Nov. 2000, [CD-ROM].
[8] J. Garcia-Frias, “Decoding of low-density parity-check codes over finitestate binary Markov channels,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, June 2001, p. 72.
[9] E. A. Ratzer. Low-density parity-check codes on Markov channels. presented at 2nd IMA Conf. Mathematics in Communications. [CD-ROM]
[10] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Univ. Linkoping, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[11] A. P. Worthen and W. E. Stark, “Unified design of iterative receivers using factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 843–849, Feb. 2001.
[12] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[13] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[14] L. R. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications on speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, pp. 257–285, Feb. 1989.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

