IEEE 6th CAS Symp. on Emerging Technologies:Mobile and Wireless Comm. Shanghai, China, May 31-June 2,2004

Low Complexity Decoding Algorithm of Parallel Concatenated LDPC code

Jin Li
SouthEast University, NCRL Nanjing, 210096,P.R.China
Email: lijin@seu,edu.cn

Xiaohu You

Yun Hee Kim

SouthEast University, NCRL Mobile Telecommunications Research Lab

Nanjing, 210096,P.R.China ETRI, 161 Gajeong-dong Yuseong-gu

Email: xhyu@seuxdu.Cn

Daejeon, 305-350, Korea

Abstract-PCGC (Parallel Concatenated Gallager Code) is a new class of concatenated codes based on component LDPC codes. The decoder of it uses modified BP (Belief Propagation) algorithm in component LDPC decoder. But this conventional decoding algorithm has high complexity and is not suitable for implementation in hardware. So in this paper we propose a new decoding algorithm of PCGC, which has good performance and low complexity. And it is feasible to be implemented in hardware.
Keywords LDPC, PCGC, BP, Min -Sum, decoding algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
S .mce the Turbo code [ l ] has been invented, parallel concatenation code structure has become one of the hottest topics in code theory too. Ideas from Gallager’s LDPC codes [2] and the parallel concatenation code structure in Turbo code, people can construct a new class of concatenated codes based on component LDPC codes, named PCGC [3], [4]. The decoder of PCGC uses modified BP [5] algorithm, which can be called PCGC-BP algorithm, in component LDPC decoder. PCGC-BP algorithm has the best performance but also high complexity. And it is not suitable for implementation in hardware. So in this paper, we will present a new decoding algorithm of PCGC, which has nearly the same performance as BP algorithm but much lower complexity. And it is especially suitable for implementation in hardware.
This paper is organized as follows. Firstly, we simply introduce PCGC and conventional PCGC-BP decoding algorithm. Then in section 111we will present a new decoding algorithm of PCGC. And the simulation results are presented in section IV. Finally,the conclusionsare drawn in sectionV.
11. CONVENTTONALBDPECODINOGF PCGC
PCGC is formed by the parallel concatenation of two LDPC encoders connected directly without an inter-leaver. The needlessness of inter-leaver is due to the perfect inner inter-leaver property of LDPC code. This reduces the
This work WBS supported by the Eleetmnics and Telecommunications Research lnstihlte (ETRI).

complexity of PCGC encoder and decoder.
Fig. 1. The decoder of PCGC. As show in Figure 1, the iterative PCGC decoder consists of two component decoders serially concatenated. The component LDPC decoders compute the a posteri,ori probability using the BP algorithm with modifications to accommodate the “a prior? information available from the other component decoder. The decoding algorithm of PCGC follows the scenario of turbo decoding, with the exception of the inter-leaver that is absent between the component decoders. A super iteration isc defmed as the process of exchanging information between the two component decoders. In each super iteration, each component decoder performs a number of local iferalions before passing any information to the other component decoder. The process of exchanging information between the component decoders continues until both decoders convergeto valid codeword, or a maximumnumber ofsuper iferafionis reached. In the latter case the output of the higher MCW (Mean Column Weight) component decoder is declared as the best estimate of the transmitted ’ sequence. With the properly chosen of component LDPC codes, PCGC can achieve better performance than LDPC code of equal code length [3], [4].
111. PROPOSEDMIN-SUhlDECODINOGF PCGC The conventional PCGC decoder usesmodified BP decoding algorithm in component LDPC decoder. This algorithm has too many multiplication operations and is not suitablefor implementation in hardware. So we consider replacing it with modified BP algorithm in log domain, which can be called PCGC-Log-BP algorithm. And the main questions to be resolved are bow to compute “apriori“ information in log domain and how to use the new “aprior?’ information in component decoder. Because “a prior?’ information will be used in initialization step, so we obtain the initialization step of

289 0-7803-7938-1/04 /$20.00 ?2004 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:14:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PCGC-Log-BP algorithm based on the initialization step of PCGC-BP' algorithm firstly.

fi'=

1.
-2 z,

I€ nc

I+ exp(-) 2

0-

Lmn=In- 1-Tmn
'+',,

So we use the idea in [6]to remove these multiplication

operations. At first we simplify equation (9) as follows.

n

l-exP(Zmn 11

(3)

Where SZI is the set of information bits, Qc is the set of parity check bits. And ZI is output of channel.
Equations (1) - (3) are the initialization step of PCGC-BP
algorithm, and the equation (4) is the LLR (Log Likelihood Ratio)to be computed in initializationstep of PCGC-Log-BP algorithm. Based on equations (1)-(4), we can obtain the initialization step of PCGC-Log-BP algorithm as follows.

characteristic of function p(x) = ln(-)ex+1 [16]. And then ex-1
we substitute equation (13) into equation (10), and obtain
Lmn = In-1-Tl m n 1+Tmn

Becausethe simplificationin equation (12) causes inaccurateness, so we introducea normalized factor JJ and we obtain

(7) From equation(6),we can know the "apriori" probability in PCGC-Log-BP algorithm should be ' n ( ~ e ( ' ~ = + ' ) / ~ e ( ' l = - ' ) ) .So we can obtain it in component decoder through
& Where is the LLR to be passed in PCGC-Log-BP
algorithm. From [6] we know that there still exists a lot of
multiplication operations in PCGC-Log-BP algorithm because of the following computations.
(9)

L,, = In--l---T-mn
l+Tmn

=

-I? s i g n ( - z m n l )x
n'

p

x

min{lzmn911(15 )

Base on the equation (15) we obtain a near decoding

algorithm that has much lower complexity. It can be called

Normalized PCGC-Min-Sum algorithm. It has no

multiplication operation. And because it just compare:^ the

value of LLR come fiom the initialization step,, it c m be

implemented without S N R (Signal Noise Ratio) &mation.

So the PCGC-Min-Sum algorithm is more suitable for

implementation in hardware than PCGC-BP algorithm.

In next section, we will study the effect of factor JJ on the

performance of Normalized PCGC-Min-Sum algorithm

through simulation.

Iv. SIMULATION RESULTS
In our simulation,the block size of PCGC was 1920.The code length of each componentLDPC code was 1280, and the code rates ofthe two componentLDPC codes were a11 0.5. So the code rate of PCGC was 0.333. The MCW (Mean Column Weight) of the component LDPC was 2 and 2.667 respectively. In PCGC decoder, the maximum number of super iteration was 15, and the maximum number of local

290

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:14:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

iteration in component LDPC decoder was 25. We used AWGN channel in our simulations.
As shown in figure 2 and figure 3, we compared the performance difference between PCGC-BP algorithm, PC(3C-Log-BPalgorithmand PCGC-Min-Sum algorithm
with different P .We also plotted the performance curve of
LDPC code that has the same code length and code rate with PCGC.
In figure 2, we compared the block error rate. We can see
that the performance of PCGC-Min-Sum depends mainly on
the normalized factor P . With properly choosing factor P ,
the performance difference between PCGC-BP and PCGC-Min-Sum is less than 0.2dB.

and code rate equals to 0.333, we can use normalized PCGC-Min-Sumalgorithm to achieve good performance and low complexity, and the best choice of the normalized factor P is 0.9.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed a new decoding algorithm of PCGC that has a little performance loss but lower complexity. The proposed algorithm only needs add operation and compare operation. So it is very suitable for implementation in hardware. Through simulation we can know that the performance difference between PCGC-BP algorithm and PCGC-Min-Sum algorithm can be small if the normalized factor is properly chosen.

l10“ 0 5

o 1.5 EMNo (dB) 4 2 5

3i 5

Fig. 2. Block error rate of PCGC decoded with different algorithm, and the performance of corresponding LDPC
code.

-A- PCGC-Log-BP PCGCMinSum p=O 7 L PCGC-MinSum p=O 8 -0 PCGC-MinSum p=O 9

REFERENCES
[ l ] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimasjshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes(l),” Proc., IEEE Int. Conf. On Commun., pp.1064-1070, May 1993.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.IT-8, pp.21-28, Jan. 1962.
[3] H.Behairy, S.-C. Chang, “Parallel Concatenated Gallager codes,” Electron. Lett., vo1.36, no.24, pp.2025-2026, NOV.2000.
[4] Hatim Behairy and Shih-Chun Chang, “Parallel concatenated Callager codes for CDMA applications,” in Proc.2001 IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM’Ol), San Antonio, TX, pp.1002-1006, Nov.2001.
[ 5 ] D. J. C . Mackay, and R. M. Neal, ‘Wear Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vo1.32, no.18, pp.1645-1646, 1996.
[6] J. H. Chen, M. Fossorier, “Near Optimal Universal Belief Propagation Based Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. On Commun., vo1.50, no.3,pp.406-414, March, 2002.

log ’

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

EMNo (dB)

Fig. 3. Bit error rate of PCGC decoded with different algorithm, and the performance of corresponding LDPC
code. In figure 3, we compare the BER (Bit Error Rate). And we can see that the BER of PCGC-Min-Sum and PCGC-BP algorithm are nearly the same if the factor P is properly chosen. We can draw a conclusion from the figures above that when we decoding PCGC code of code length equals to 1920

29 1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:14:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

