IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

165

A Modified Weighted Bit-Flipping Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Juntan Zhang and Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, a modified weighted bit-flipping decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes is proposed. Improvement in performance is observed by considering both the check constraint messages and the intrinsic message for each bit.
Index Terms—Belief propagation algorithm, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, weighted bit-flipping (WBF).

II. STANDARD WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHM The standard WBF algorithm [2] first computes for
(1)

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], decoded by iterative massage-passing algorithms can achieve

excellent performance. LDPC codes can be decoded by

hard-decision, soft-decision or hybrid decoding schemes.

Among these algorithms, weighted bit-flipping (WBF) [2]

offers a good tradeoff between performance, complexity and

speed and has been investigated further in [3]. The main advan-

tage of WBF is the fact that at each iteration, weighted sums

of the same values are computed. Hence these sums can be

preprocessed so that the speed advantages of BF are preserved.

A regular binary

LDPC code has a trans-

mitted block length , an information block length and a

parity check matrix with ones in each column and ones

in each row. It has been shown that carefully designed irregular

LDPC codes with variable column or row weights can improve

performance further. Assume

is the parity check

matrix of an LDPC code . We denote the set of bits that

participate in check by

. Similarly,

we denote the set of checks in which bit participates as

.

Suppose a binary

LDPC code is used for error con-

trol over an AWGN channel. Assume BPSK signaling, which

maps a codeword

into a transmitted se-

quence

, according to

,

for

. Let the received real value sequence is

, with

, where for

, ’s are statistically independent Gaussian

random variables. Let the corresponding binary hard decision

sequence be

.

Manuscript received August 7, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. K. Narayanan. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR0098029.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: juntan@spectra.eng. hawaii.edu; marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.825737

Next the WBF decoding is carried out as follows.

Step 1) For ponent
Step 2) For

, compute the syndrome comfrom .
, compute:

(2)

Step 3) Flip the bit for

.

Steps 1)–3) are repeated until all the parity check equations are satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

III. MODIFIED WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHM

For the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, a

simple measure of the reliability of a received symbol is its

magnitude, . The larger the magnitude is, the larger the

reliability of the corresponding hard-decision digit is. For

,

given in (1) can be viewed as a

measure of the reliability of the syndrome component com-

puted with ’s,

. Therefore for

, the

larger is, the less likely the hard decision is. In the view of

iterative decoding, is a kind of check-based message about

because it comes from the check constraints, while the inte-

rior bit-based message about bit is . Thus if we consider

both the check-based and bit-based messages for each position

, (2) should be revised as

(3)

The sum in (3) indicates to what extent should change its

value based on the information provided by checks while the

second item indicates to what extent should maintain its ini-

tial value, based on the information provided by itself. There-

fore the total value of the right side of (3) indicates to what

extent should change its value, based on both check and bit

information.

Intuitively, for different codes with different column weights

and thereby different cardinalities

, or for different

values of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the weight of the

bit messages should not be the same. With considering a

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:34:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

166

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

TABLE I
 IMPACT OF COLUMN WEIGHT ON THE OPTIMAL FOR MODIFIED WBF DECODING PG-LDPC CODES, AT SNR = 4:0 dB

Fig. 1. The impact of weighting factor  in modified WBF algorithm on the
BER for decoding the (273 191) Gallager code with column weight 3.
weighting factor for the bit message, (3) can be further revised as
(4)

The weighting factor is a real number and

. When

, the modified WBF becomes the standard WBF. For a

given LDPC code, the optimal at a given SNR may be defined

as the value for which the modified WBF algorithm generates

the smallest BER for decoding that LDPC code at that SNR. The

optimal value of at each SNR for a given LDPC code can be

determined through simulation.

Fig. 2. Average number of iterations of the standard WBF and the modified
WBF with  = 1:8, after 200 iterations for decoding the (1 057 813) PG-LDPC
code.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Impact of SNR on the Optimal Value of
For a given LDPC code with given column weight, at a given SNR, the performances of the modified WBF with different weighting factors are different. The effect of on the BER of the (273 191) Gallager code [4] with column weight 3 is shown in Fig. 1. The maximum number of iterations is chosen to be 100. Based on the above definition, it can be seen that the optimal value of decreases slowly as the SNR increases. It is also observed that at low SNRs, the error rate is not very sensitive to the value of . The same trends apply to other LDPC codes with different column weights.

B. Impact of Column Weight on the Optimal Value of

At a given SNR, the optimal of the modified WBF algorithm for decoding different LDPC codes may vary with the corresponding column weights. The optimal values of at
for decoding PG-LDPC codes [2] are given in Table I. It is observed that the optimal value of increases with the column weight, regardless of the increase in code length. This latter fact was confirmed by several simulation results. For example, at a given SNR, the optimal of the (273 191) Gallager code with column weight 3 is the same as that of the (7,3) PG-LDPC code with column weight 3.

Fig. 3. Word error rate (dashed) and bit error rate (solid) of the standard
WBF and modified WBF with  = 1:4 for iterative decoding of the (273 191)
PG-LDPC code with column weight 17.
C. Computational Complexity of Modified WBF From the above description, one can find that compared to the
standard WBF, the modified WBF algorithm needs one more

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:34:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: A MODIFIED WBF DECODING OF LDPC CODES

167

(273 191) PG-LDPC code with column weight 17 and the (273 191) Gallager code with column weight 3 are depicted in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. The maximum number of iterations in each simulation is set to 100. At each SNR value, at least 100 codeword errors are detected. It is observed that the modified WBF provides similar improvements to that of the bootstrap weighted bit-flipping (BWBF) [3] over conventional WBF.

V. CONCLUSION

Fig. 4. Word error rate (dashed) and bit error rate (solid) of the standard
WBF and modified WBF with  = 0:4 for iterative decoding of the (273 191)
Gallager code with column weight 3.
addition operation for each bit. Note that the multiplication operation can be processed before iterative decoding. As for the average number of iterations, for decoding LDPC codes of relatively short length, there is no noticeable difference between the standard WBF and the modified WBF algorithms. However for codes of longer length that generally converge slower than short ones, the modified WBF needs less iterations than the standard WBF. Fig. 2 depicts the average number of iterations of the standard WBF and the modified WBF with optimal , for decoding the (1 057 813) PG-LDPC code. The maximum number of iterations is set to 200. At SNR’s of practical interest, the modified WBF with optimal requires about 1/2 iterations, compared to the standard WBF.
D. Performance of Modified WBF With Optimal
Simulation results of the standard WBF and modified WBF algorithm with optimal weighting factors for decoding the

In this letter, a modified WBF method is proposed, in which both check and bit messages are included to measure the reliability of each bit, while only the check information is considered in the standard WBF algorithm. Our simulation results show that the modified WBF can achieve a good performance-complexity tradeoff. One drawback of the modified WBF is that the optimal weighting factor is SNR-dependent. However, our simulations show that for a given LDPC code, keeping constant at any SNR (chosen as the optimal at BER 10 ) does not cause measurable degradation in performance. Therefore the modified WBF can be viewed as code-dependent but SNR-independent.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank one reviewer for his constructive comments, and suggesting the study of in particular.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] A. Nouh and A. H. Banihashemi, “Bootstrap decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett, vol. 6, pp. 391–393, Sept. 2002.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:34:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

