IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 7, JULY 2004

443

A Trellis-Based Method for Removing Cycles From Bipartite Graphs and Construction of Low Density
Parity Check Codes
L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This letter presents a trellis-based iterative method for removing short cycles from bipartite graphs. This method can be used to improve the performance of low density parity check (LDPC) codes or to construct new LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Bipartite graphs, girth, low density parity check (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
T HE performance of a low density parity check (LDPC) code [1] with iterative decoding depends on a number of important code structural properties collectively. One such property is the girth which is defined as the length of the shortest cycle in the code’s Tanner graph [2]. A code with girth is free of cycles of lengths less than in its Tanner graph. For codes with large girth, iterative decoding, such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA), converges close to maximum-likelihood decoding (MLD) [1]–[4]. The cycles that affect the code performance the most are cycles of lengths 4. For codes with these short cycles, iterative decoding becomes correlated after two iterations and decoding either does not converge or converges slowly. Therefore, these short cycles must be avoided in code construction. Many methods for constructing LDPC codes without cycles of length 4 have been proposed. Some of these methods give very good LDPC codes. However, construction of codes with girth 8 or larger is much harder. This paper is concerned with constructing bipartite graphs and LDPC codes with large girths.

II. A TRELLIS-BASED CYCLE REMOVAL METHOD

Consider a simple connected bipartite graph

[5]

with two disjoint vertex sets

and

. Let be the girth of . Since every

cycle in a bipartite graph has even length and there are no

multiple edges between any vertex in and any vertex in ,

the girth must be even and at least 4. Form a trellis of

sections with

levels of nodes, labeled 0 to [6]. For

, the nodes at the th level of are the vertices

Manuscript received November 1, 203. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. M. Fossorier. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR0117891 and Grant ECS-0121469, and by NASA under Grant NAG 5-12789.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: squash@ece.ucdavis.edu; yytai@ece.ucdavis.edu; leichen@ece.ucdavis.edu; shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu; ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.832776

in ; and the nodes at the

th level of are the vertices

in . Two nodes and in two consecutive levels of are

connected by a branch ( , ) if and only if there is an edge in

which is incident with vertices and . Every section of

is simply a representation of the bipartite graph . Therefore,

is a repetition of

times, and every section is the mirror

image of its preceding section.

The nodes at the zeroth level of the trellis are called the

initial nodes and the nodes at the th level of are called the

terminal nodes. The initial nodes and the terminal nodes of

are identical and they are the vertices of . For

,

an elementary -path of is defined as a sequence of

connected branches starting from the initial node at the ze-

roth level of and ending at the terminal node in the th

level of such that the following constraints are satisfied: 1) if

( , ) is a branch in the sequence, then ( , ) can not be a

branch in the sequence and vice versa and 2) every branch in the

sequence appears once and only once. Then every elementary

-path represents a cycle of length in and every cycle

of length in is represented by an elementary -path in

. For any elementary -path, if we remove the last branch

that connects a node at the

th level of to the ter-

minal node at the th level of , we break those cycles of

length in that have ( , ) as an edge. Based on this,

we can develop a procedure to process and to identify all the

elementary -paths. Once all the elementary -paths are

identified, we remove their last branches systematically to break

all the cycles of length in . Since branches in the last sec-

tion of are removed to break the cycles of length in ,

the last section of at the end of branch removal process gives

a new bipartite graph with a girth at least

.

To identify the elementary -paths for all , we process the

trellis level by level. Suppose we have processed the trellis

up to the level- with

. For every node (or )

at the th level, we list all the partial elementary paths of length

that originate from the initial node at the zeroth level and

enter (or ), denoted

. We extend each partial

elementary path on the list

to the

th level

of through every branch diverging from (or ) that does

not appear in any partial elementary path on

be-

fore (or ). For each node (or ) at the

th level

of , we again form a list

of all the partial

elementary paths of length

that originate from the initial

node and enter (or ). At the

th level of with

, a partial elementary path originating from the

initial node at the zeroth level of and entering at a node

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

444

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 7, JULY 2004

in the

th level of can not be extended to the node

at the th level through the branch ( , ). Otherwise, it cre-

ates a cycle of length less than . However does not con-

tain cycles of length shorter than . Continue the above ex-

tend-and-list process until the

th level of is reached.

For each node at the

th level, all the partial elementary

paths that originate from and enter are extended through

the branch ( , ), if exists, to the terminal node at the th

level of . This last extension gives the list

of

all the elementary -paths of length . This completes the

identification of all the elementary -paths. The union of all

the

lists at the th level of forms a table with

all the elementary -paths of the -section trellis of the

bipartite graph , denoted

and called the elemen-

tary path table of .

The elementary paths of give all the cycles of length

of . The next step is to break all the cycles of length in

by removing the last branches of some or all the elementary

-paths in

. Start from the terminal node at

the th level that has the largest degree. Let be a node at the

th level that has the largest degree and is connected to

the terminal node of the largest degree. Remove the branch

( , ) from the last section of . Removal of ( , ) breaks all

the elementary -paths in with ( , ) as the last branch

and hence breaks all the cycles of length in with as the

starting and ending vertices that contain the edge ( , ) of .

The degrees of and are reduced by 1. Removing the branch

( , ) from also breaks all the other elementary -paths

in that have ( , ) as a branch. These elementary - and

-paths are then eliminated from

. Removal of

the branch ( , ) results in a new last section of . We repeat

the above branch removal process until all the elementary paths

are removed from the table

. As a result, we break

all the cycles of length in . Then the last section of gives

a new bipartite graph with girth at least

.

Applying the above cycle removal process to , we can con-

struct a new bipartite graph with girth at least

.

We can continue this process until we obtain a bipartite graph

with a desired girth or the degrees of some nodes in (or in )

become too small.

III. CODE CONSTRUCTION

The trellis-based cycle removal process can be used either to

construct LDPC codes or to improve the performance of existing

codes by increasing their girths. We start with a bipartite graph

with girth , where is either the Tanner graph of an

existing LDPC code or a chosen bipartite graph. Apply the

cycle removal process repeatedly. For

, at the end of the

th application of the cycle removal process, we obtain a new

bipartite graph with girth

. From we form

an

parity check matrix

whose columns

correspond to the vertices in and whose rows correspond to

the vertices in , where

if and only if and are

connected by an edge in . Then the null space of gives an

LDPC code of length . With as the Tanner graph of an

LDPC code, the nodes in are called the variable nodes and the

nodes in are called the check nodes. Compute the performance

of with the SPA decoding. Compare the performance of

with that of . If performs better than , we continue

the cycle removal process; otherwise, we stop the cycle removal

process and

becomes the end code.

In general, if cycle removal results in too many variable nodes

of degree 2, the performance of the resultant LDPC code starts

to degrade and high error floor appears. A general guideline is

to stop the cycle removal process when the number of variable

nodes with degree 2 is greater than the number of parity bits of

the code to be constructed. In the following, we use two exam-

ples to demonstrate how the performance of an LDPC code is

affected by increasing its girth. These examples also show that

good LDPC code can be constructed from poor codes by in-

creasing their girths. In performance computation [bit error rate

(BER), and frame error rate (FER)], we assume BPSK transmis-

sion over an AWGN channel using the SPA decoding.

Example 1: Let be a 255 510 matrix over

which consists of two 255 255 circulants, and . For

each of these 2 circulants, both column and row weights are

8. Hence is a sparse regular matrix with column and row

weights 8 and 16, repectively. An

circulant is charac-

terized by a polynomial

of degree

or less over

. The vector

representation of this polynomial is

which is simply the first row of the circulant . Then and

its

cyclic shifts form the circulant . The polynomial

is called the characteristic polynomial of . The charac-

teristic polynomials of and are

and

, re-

spectively. These two characteristic polynomials are arbitrarily

chosen to show that cycle removal can give good LDPC codes.

The Tanner graph of has 510 variable nodes and 255

check nodes. The degree of each variable node is 8 and the de-

gree of each check node is 16. contains 3060 cycles of length

4 and hence its girth is 4. The null space of gives a (510, 256)

LDPC code with rate 0.502, whose performance is shown in

Fig. 1. Applying the cycle removal process to , we obtain

a new bipartite graph which is free of cycles of length 4

but has 38 619 cycles of length 6. Hence the girth of is 6.

From we construct a 255 510 incidence matrix which

has 45 columns of weight five, 341 columns of weight 6, and

124 columns of weight 7. The null space of gives a rate-1/2

(510, 255) LDPC code whose performance is also shown

in Fig. 1. We see that outperforms . We apply the cycle

removal process to . This results in a bipartite graph of

girth 8 which contains 8736 cycles of length 8. Let be the

incidence matrix of . has 17 columns of weight 2, 247

columns of weight 3, 231 columns of weight 4, and 15 columns

of weight 5. The null space of gives another rate-1/2 (510,

255) LDPC code whose performance is again included in

Fig. 1. We see that significantly outperforms and . If

we apply the cycle removal process to , we obtain a bipartite

graph with girth 10. Let be the incidence matrix of .

It has 248 columns of weight 2, 257 columns of weight 3, and 5

columns of weight 4. The null space of also gives a rate-1/2

(510, 255) LDPC code . From Fig. 1 we see that performs

slightly better than above the BER of 3 10 but below this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAN et al.: REMOVING CYCLES FROM BIPARTITE GRAPHS AND CONSTRUCTION OF LDPC CODES

445

in Fig. 2. At the BER of , it performs 3.4 dB away from the Shannon limit. Starting from and applying the cycle removal process repeatedly, we obtain three bipartite graphs , , and with girths 6, 8, and 10, respectively. The null spaces of their incidence matrices , and give three rate-1/2 (4088, 2044) LDPC codes, , , and , respectively. The performances of these three codes with the SPA decoding are also shown in Fig. 2. We see that the performance is improved as the girth increases. with girth 10 significantly outperforms all the other 3 codes. At the BER of 10 , it performs only 1.6 dB from the Shannon limit. For length 4088, is a very good LDPC code.

Fig. 1. Performances of the codes given in Example 1.

IV. CONCLUSION
This letter presents a trellis-based method to remove short cycles from a bipartite graph. This method can be used either to improve the performance of an existing LDPC code or to construct new LDPC codes from bipartite graphs. The method is effective for bipartite graphs with nodes up to 8000 and maximum degree 16. If the size of a bipartite graph is too large, a divide-and-conquer approach can be used to process the graph. We would like to point out that there is another method, known as PEG [9], for constructing Tanner graphs with large girths. This method is an opposite to the trellis-based method. Given the number of variable nodes, the number of check nodes, and the variable-node degree sequence, PEG constructs a bipartite graph by progressively establishing edges between variable and check nodes. Edges are added to the graph one at a time until a connected bipartite graph with the desired variable-node degree sequence is obtained. Each edge is added with as small an impact on the girth as possible. Both methods are equally efficient. However, the trellis-based method is more systematic.

Fig. 2. Performances of the codes given in Example 2.

bit error rate outperforms . So we stop the cycle removal

process and is our end code.

Example 2: The incidence vectors of the 2-flats in the two-di-

mensional Euclidean geometry

over

[7], [8]

not passing through the origin give a 511 511 circulant

with column and row weights 64. The bipartite graph represen-

tation of contains 3 605 616 cycles of length 4. We can de-

compose this circulant into a 4 8 array of 511 511 circu-

lants, each with column and row weights 2 [8]. is a 2048

4088 sparse matrix with column and row weights 8 and 16, re-

spectively. The Tanner graph of has girth 4 and contains

13 286 cycles of length 4. The null space of gives a (4088,

2046) code with rate 0.5009, whose performance is shown

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–547, Sept 1981.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] D. B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996.
[6] S. Lin, T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier, Trellises and TrellisBased Decoding Algorithms for Linear Block Codes. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1998.
[7] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004.
[8] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near Shannon limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, July 2004, to be published.
[9] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

