1038

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2004

Near-Shannon-Limit Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Lei Chen, Jun Xu, Ivana Djurdjevic, and Shu Lin

Abstract—This letter presents two classes of quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity-check codes that perform close to the Shannon limit.
Index Terms—Circulants, decomposition, descendants, quasicyclic.
I. INTRODUCTION
Q UASI-CYCLIC (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have an encoding advantage over other types of LDPC codes. They can be efficiently encoded using simple feedback-shift registers with complexity linearly proportional to the number of parity bits for serial encoding, and to the code length for parallel encoding [1]–[3]. Well-designed QC-LDPC codes perform as well as computer-generated random LDPC codes, regular [4] or irregular [5], in terms of bit-error performance, word-error performance, and error floor, collectively. This letter is concerned with construction of QC-LDPC codes. Contributions include: 1) a general algebraic method for constructing QC-LDPC codes based on array decomposition of circulants; 2) a class of QC-LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs [6] have girth at least 6; 3) structurally compatible QC-LDPC codes that can be decoded with a single decoder; and 4) a class of broad-sense QC-LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs contain cycles of length 4. Simulation results show that the constructed QC-LDPC codes perform close to the Shannon limit with iterative decoding using the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [4], [5], [7]. These codes perform equally well compared with equivalent computer-generated random LDPC codes.
II. GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OF QC-LDPC CODES
A circulant is a square matrix in which each row is the cyclic shift (one place to the right) of the row above it, and the first row is the cyclic shift of the last row. For such a circulant, a column is a downward cyclic shift of the column on its left, and the first column is the downward cyclic shift of the last column. The row and column weights of a circulant are the same. For a circulant, the set of columns (reading top-down) is the same as the set of rows (reading from right to left). A QC-LDPC code is given by the null space of an array of sparse circulants of the same
Paper approved by W. E. Ryan, the Editor for Modulation, Coding, and Equalization of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received May 9, 2003; revised December 17, 2003. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0096191, Grant CCR-0117891, and Grant ECS-0121469, and in part by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant NAG 5-12789. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, December 1–5, 2003.
The authors are with Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: leichen@ece.ucdavis.edu; junxu@ece.ucdavis.edu; idjurdje@ece.ucdavis.edu; shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.831353

size. If no two rows (or two columns) of have more than one

1-component in common, then the Tanner graph of is free of

cycles of length 4, and hence, has girth at least 6 [6], [7]. Such a

constraint on rows and columns is called the row-column (RC)

constraint. If all the columns of have constant weight and

all the rows have constant weight, then is said to be regular;

otherwise, it is said to be irregular.

Consider an

circulant with column (or row) weight

. Since the column and row weights of a circulant are the

same, for simplicity, we say that has weight . can be

decomposed into an array of

circulants. For

, let

be a set of positive integers, such that

. Let be the first column of . Split into

columns of the same length ,

, with the 1-com-

ponents of distributed among these new columns, such that

for

, the th 1-components of are put in . For

each new column , form an

circulant by cyclically

shifting downward times. This results in

circulants,

, with weights,

, respectively. These cir-

culants are called the descendants of . The above column split-

ting and cyclically shifting process decomposes into a row

of

circulants,

. This decomposi-

tion is called a column decomposition of , and is called the

column-splitting factor.

Let

, let

be a

set of nonnegative integers such that

.

Each circulant in can be decomposed into circulants

with weights

, respectively. This is achieved by

splitting the first row of into rows of length , denoted

, where contains the th 1-components

of . For

, cyclically shifting each row to

the right times, we obtain

circulants,

,

which are descendants of . Decomposition of results in a

matrix with

as submatrices arranged

in a column. We call the row decomposition of , and

the row-splitting factor. In row splitting, we allow

. If

, is an

zero matrix and is regarded as a

circulant. If each of is replaced by its row decomposition

, we obtain a array of

circulants

... . . . ...

(1)

which is called an array decomposition of .

In decomposing , the 1-entries of are distributed among

the circulants in . If is a sparse circulant, is a sparser

matrix, since it is larger than . If satisfies the RC constraint,

we can readily see that also satisfies the RC constraint. In

this case, the null space of gives a QC-LDPC code of

length

whose Tanner graph is free of cycles of length 4,

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2004

1039

and hence, has girth at least 6. The rate of is at least

.

If all the circulants in have the same weight , then the row

and column weights of are and , respectively. In this

case, is a regular QC-LDPC code with minimum distance at

least

[2], [7]. If decomposition of results in an array

with multiple column weights or multiple row weights, then the

null space of gives an irregular QC-LDPC code.

III. CLASS OF QC-LDPC CODES WITH GIRTH AT LEAST 6

Circulants that satisfy the RC constraint can be constructed

from Euclidean and projective geometries, as described in [7].

Consider the -dimensional Euclidean geometry

over

, where is a power of a prime [1], [2], [8]. This

geometry consists of points and lines. A point is simply an

-tuple over

. Therefore,

consists of

points, and the all-zero -tuple is called the origin of the

geometry. A line in

is simply a one-dimensional

(1-D) subspace of the vector space of all the -tuples

over

, or a coset of . Hence,

consists of

lines, each line consisting of points.

Two lines are either disjoint (i.e., no point in common), or they

intersect at one and only one point (i.e., one point in common).

A line that contains the origin is said to pass through the origin.

Let

be the subgeometry of

, obtained by

removing the origin and all the lines passing through the origin.

Then

consists of

nonorigin points and

lines not passing through

the origin of

. It is known that

, as an exten-

sion field of

, is a realization of

. Let be a

primitive element of

. Then

represent

the nonorigin points of

. The incidence vector of

a line in

is defined as an -tuple over

,

vv

v , whose components correspond to the

nonorigin points of

, where v if and only if

is a point on , and v , otherwise. The weight of is .

For

, let be the vector obtained by cyclically

shifting places to the right. For and ,

. It can be shown that is the incidence vector of another

line in

[9]. Furthermore, for

and ,

[9]. This says that and its

cyclic shifts give

incidence vectors of different lines in

. A vector

with this property is said to be primitive. The incidence vector of

any line in

is primitive. As a result of this primitive

property, the incidence vectors of the lines in

can

be partitioned into

cyclic classes,

denoted

, each consisting of incidence vectors.

The incidence vectors in a cyclic class can be obtained by

cyclically shifting any vector in the class times.

For each cyclic class , form an

circulant with

the vectors in as its rows. This results in a class of

circulants,

. The weight of each circu-

lant is , which is small, compared with the size of the circulant

for

. Hence, each circulant in is a sparse

matrix. Since the set of columns of a circulant is the same as

the set of rows, the columns of each circulant are also in-

cidence vectors of lines in

. It follows from the

structural properties of lines in

that no two rows (or

two columns) either from the same circulant or from two different circulants in can have more than one 1-component in common. This implies that: 1) each circulant in satisfies the RC constraint; and 2) any two circulants in either arranged in a row or a column also satisfy the RC constraint, called the pairwise RC constraint.

The circulants in can be used for constructing QC-LDPC

codes. For

, take circulants,

, and

form a matrix

. For a proper choice of row-

and column-splitting factors and , we decompose each circu-

lant in into a array of

circulants. Replacing

each in by its array decomposition , we obtain a

array of

circulants. Since the circulants in satisfy

the pairwise RC constraint, we can readily see that satis-

fies the RC constraint. The null space of gives a QC-LDPC

code of length

with rate at least

, whose

Tanner graph is free of cycles of length 4, and hence, has girth

at least 6. If all the circulants in have weight , then

has constant column weight and constant row weight .

Then is a regular QC-LDPC code with minimum distance

at least

. If the weight distribution of the circulants in

results in varying column and row weights, is an ir-

regular QC-LDPC code. The above construction gives a class

of QC-LDPC codes with various lengths, rates, and minimum

distances, whose Tanner graphs have girth at least 6.

In the following, we use two examples to demonstrate the

construction of QC-LDPC codes based on the decomposition

of circulants derived from Euclidean geometries. In computing

the performance of the codes decoded with the SPA, we assume

binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) transmission over an additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

Example 1: Consider the 3-D Euclidean geometry

over

. Its subgeometry

consists

of 511 nonorigin points and 4599 lines not passing through

the origin of

; each line consists of eight points. The

incidence vectors of the lines in

can be partitioned

into nine cyclic classes. From these nine cyclic classes, we can

form nine 511 511 circulants,

, each with weight

8. Suppose we take eight of these circulants and arrange them in

a row

. Choose the row- and column-splitting

factors

. Decompose each in into a 2 2

array of 511 511 circulants, each circulant has weight 2.

Replacing each in by its array decomposition , we

obtain a 2 16 array

of 511 511 circulants of weight

2. Hence,

is a 1022 8176 sparse matrix with column

and row weights 4 and 32. The null space of

gives a

(8176,7156) regular QC-LDPC code with rate 0.8752 and

minimum distance at least 5, whose Tanner graph has girth at

least 6.

The performance of this code decoded with the SPA is shown

in Fig. 1. At the bit-error rate (BER) of , it performs only

1 dB from the Shannon limit, and has no error floor down

to the BER of . For comparison, the performance of an

equivalent computer-generated random MacKay (CGRM) code

(the parity-check matrix has column weight 4 and average row

weight 32) is also included in Fig. 1. We see that the perfor-

mance curves of the QC-LDPC code and its equivalent CGRM

code are on top of each other in the range simulated. Also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1040

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2004

Fig. 1. Error performance of the (8176,7156) regular QC-LDPC code.

Fig. 2. Error performance of the (8176,6132) irregular QC-LDPC code.

included in Fig. 1 is the performance of a longer (10272,8988)

irregular code of rate 0.875, designed based on optimized vari-

able- and check-node degree distributions of its Tanner graph

[5] tailored for finite length 10272. We see that the irregular

code outperforms the shorter QC-LDPC code above the BER

of

within 0.23 dB. However, the irregular code has an

error floor below the BER of , and its performance curve

crosses that of the QC-LDPC code at the BER of

.

Below the BER of

, the QC-LDPC code outperforms

the irregular code. The QC-LDPC code also has a better

word-error performance. This code has been recommended by

NASA-Goddard Space Flight Center for high-speed satellite

communications.

Example 2: This example demonstrates the construction

of an irregular QC-LDPC code. We use the same geometry

given in Example 1 for code construction. We set

and

. Decompose each circulant in given in

Example 1 into a 4 2 array of 511 511 circulants, each

with weight 1. Each circulant in is a circulant permutation

matrix. Replacing each in by its array decomposition

, we obtain a 4 16 array of 511 511 circulants.

consists of 16 columns of permutation matrices, each column

consists of four permutation matrices. Next, we construct a new

parity-check matrix as follows: 1) replacing the third and

fourth permutation matrices of the first column, the first and

fourth permutation matrices of the second column, and the first

and second permutation matrices of third column of the array

by zero matrices; and 2) replacing the fourth permutation

matrix of the fourth column and the first permutation matrix of

the fifth column of by zero matrices. Then has 1533

columns of weight two, 1022 columns of weight three, 5621

columns of weight four, 1022 rows of weight 13, and 1022

rows of weight 15. The null space of gives a (8176, 6132)

irregular QC-LDPC code with rate 0.75. The performance of

this code with the SPA decoding is shown in Fig. 2. At the BER

of , it performs only 1 dB from the Shannon limit. It has

no error floor all the way down to the BER of . This is a

very good LDPC code of rate 3/4 and length 8176.

Table I gives a list of QC-LDPC codes of various lengths and rates constructed based on various geometries. QC-LDPC codes can also be constructed from circulants derived from projective geometries. Their construction is exactly the same as the construction from Euclidean geometries. The 14th and 15th codes given in Table I are QC-LDPC codes constructed based on projective geometries.

IV. STRUCTURALLY COMPATIBLE QC-LDPC CODES

Given a

array of circulants, it is possible to con-

struct a family of structurally compatible QC-LDPC codes with

different lengths, rates, minimum distances, and error perfor-

mances. The codes in the family can be decoded with one de-

coder.

Consider the QC-LDPC code generated by the array

given by (1). A codeword in can be

divided into sections,

. Each section consists

of code bits. Then,

. For

, let

be the following set of codewords in :

is a linear subcode of and can be decoded with the

same circuit for decoding the supercode . To form the check

sums for decoding

, only the first columns of circulants

of are needed. If we delete the rightmost

sections from each codeword in

, we obtain a shortened

LDPC code of length

, denoted

, which is

also a QC-LDPC code. The parity-check matrix of this short-

ened code is

. We see that to decode the

shortened code

, the parity-check sums computed based

on

are exactly the same as those for decoding

computed based on . For

, we can con-

struct a family of structurally compatible shortened QC-LDPC

codes of various lengths and rates. All the codes in the family

can be decoded with the same circuit for the mother code .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2004

1041

TABLE I LIST OF QC-LDPC CODES: 1) SHANNON GAP = DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SHANNON LIMIT AND CODE PERFORMANCE AT A CERTAIN BER;
2) NS = NARROW SENSE; 3) BS = BROAD SENSE; 4) R = REGULAR; 5) IR = IRREGULAR

Fig. 3. Error performances of a family of five QC-LDPC codes.
Example 3: Consider the (8176,7156) code given in Example 1, which is the null space of a 2 16 array of 511 511 circulants of weight 2. Choose 4, 6, 8, 10, and 16, we obtain a family of five QC-LDPC codes which are (2044,1024), (3066,2046), (4088,3068), (5110,4090), and (8176,7156) codes with rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, and 7/8. Their bit-error performances with SPA decoding are shown in Fig. 3. All these codes can be decoded with the same circuit.
V. BROAD-SENSE QC-LDPC CODES
So far, we have been concerned with constructing QC-LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices satisfy the RC constraint. We call these codes narrow-sense QC-LDPC codes. If this constraint is removed, we can construct larger classes of QC-LDPC codes. These QC-LDPC codes are called broad-

sense QC-LDPC codes. In this section, we present a class of

broad-sense QC-LDPC codes whose construction is based on

the decomposition of circulants derived from 2-D hyperplanes

(called 2-flats) from an Euclidean geometry.

A 2-flat of an -dimensional Euclidean geometry

with

is simply a 2-D subspace of the vector space

of all the -tuples over

, or a coset of . A 2-flat

consists of points. The subgeometry

consists of

2-flats that do

not pass through the origin. If two 2-flats are not disjoint, then

they intersect either at a point or on a line. If they intersect on

a line, they have points in common. The incidence vector of a

2-flat in

is an -tuple over

defined in exactly

the same manner as the incidence vector of a line in

,

where

. The incidence vector of any 2-flat is prim-

itive [9]. The incidence vectors of all the 2-flats in

can be partitioned into

cyclic classes, each class consisting of incidence

vectors. From these cyclic classes, we can construct

circulants,

, each having weight . For

,

is small, compared with

, and hence, each circulant

is a sparse matrix. It follows from the structural properties of

2-flats that there are two rows (or two columns) in that have

1-components in common. These circulants,

con-

structed from the 2-flats in

, are sparse matrices,

however, they do not satisfy the RC constraint. QC-LDPC codes

can be constructed based on a set of these circulants. These

QC-LDPC codes are called broad-sense QC-LDPC codes. The

Tanner graph of such a code does contain cycles of length 4,

and their number depends on the row- and column-splitting fac-

tors. Many examples show that these codes perform surprisingly

well, even though they contain many cycles of length 4. One ex-

ample is given below.

Example 4: Again consider the subgeometry

given in Example 1. This subgeometry consists of 511 2-flats.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2004

Fig. 4. Error performance of the (8176,7156) broad-sense QC-LDPC code.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we have presented a general algebraic method for constructing QC-LDPC codes based on circulant decomposition. Based on this general method, two classes of QC-LDPC codes have been constructed, based on the circulants derived from Euclidean geometries. Simulation results show that the constructed QC-LDPC codes perform close to the Shannon limit and compare favorably against computer-generated random LDPC codes, besides their encoding advantage. Furthermore, they have a lower error floor and better word-error performance than random irregular LDPC codes. In practical applications where a low error floor is required, they should be seriously considered as strong competitors to random irregular LDPC codes. Circulant decomposition can be applied to circulants constructed by other methods besides finite geometries. Also in this letter, we have demonstrated that cycles of length 4 do not necessarily prevent an LDPC code from attaining good error performance with iterative decoding.

The incidence vectors of these 2-flats from a single 511 511

circulant of weight 64. The Tanner graph of this circulant

constains 3 605 616 cycles of length 4! Suppose we choose

the column- and row-splitting factors

and

,

respectively. Decompose into a 2 16 array of 511 511

circulants, each having weight 2. Then is a 1022 8176

matrix with column and row weights 4 and 32, respectively. The

null space of gives a (8176,7156) broad-sense QC-LDPC

code with rate 0.8752, which has the same parameters and rate

as the code given in Example 1. The Tanner graph of this code

contains 9198 cycles of length 4. We see that decomposition

of drastically reduces the number of cycles of length 4.

The performance of this code is shown in Fig. 4. At the BER

of , it performs only 1 dB from the Shannon limit. This

broad-sense QC-LDPC code performs as well as the cycle-4

free (8176,7156) QC-LDPC code given in Example 1.

Some other good broad-sense QC-LDPC codes are given in

Table I.

REFERENCES
[1] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon, Jr., Error Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[2] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[3] Z. W. Li, L. Chen, S. Lin, W. Fong, and P. S. Yeh, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., submitted for publication.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[5] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[8] I. Blake and R. Mullin, The Mathematical Theory of Coding. New York: Academic Press, 1975.
[9] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

