IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 7, JULY 2004

455

Threshold of LDPC-Coded BICM for Rayleigh Fading
Huaning Niu, Manyuan Shen, and James A. Ritcey, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We analyze the threshold and convergence of LDPC coded bit interleaved coded modulation over Rayleigh fading channels. We compute the system threshold using the discretized density evolution and the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart, and verify its effectiveness by simulation. Simulated detector output pdf is used to compute the variable node EXIT curve. It is shown that the convergence SNR observed from the transfer curves matches the density evolution threshold perfectly, and the EXIT chart actually provides a more computational efficient approach to estimate the threshold. An irregular code design example using the EXIT chart is given.
Index Terms—Density evolution, extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart, fading channels.
I. INTRODUCTION
B IT-INTERLEAVED coded modulation (BICM) is a bandwidth-efficient coding technique that has proven to be a very powerful approach for fading channels when state-of-the-art codes like low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are employed. As the error performance of LDPC coded
-ary BICM communication system rarely admit exact expressions, the system threshold emerges as a useful parameter for iterative decoding.
An asymptotic analysis of iterative decoding by tracking the probability density function (pdf) of the extrinsic information messages was proposed by Richardson and Urbanke [1], who also coined the term “density evolution” (DE). General concentration theorem is proved for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with -ary modulation where the equivalent binary-input component channels are not necessarily symmetric [2]. In this letter, we extend the DE approach to the threshold computation of LDPC-coded BICM over Rayleigh fading channels. Furthermore, we visualize its convergence behavior using the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart [3], where simulated detector output pdf is used to draw the variable node transfer curve. We found that the EXIT chart analysis provides a more computational efficient approach for threshold computation and irregular codes design.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

The information bit sequence is first encoded by a LDPC en-

coder to a codeword sequence

, where is

the th bit of the th symbol. The coded sequence is mapped

to a sequence of symbols chosen from an -ary constellation

, where

. The received discrete-time baseband signal

can be written as

(1)

where is the zero mean complex Gaussian distributed fading

coefficient with

and is a complex white

Gaussian noise sample with the variance per dimension of

.

The rest of the presentation follows the notation of [4]. Let

be the subset of all the signals

whose label has the value

in position . The BICM capacity, with perfect CSI

and uniform inputs, is given by [4]

(2)

We consider the Gray labeled BICM scheme without iterative demodulation and decoding, i.e., the decoding metrics are computed once, followed by the standard iterative sum–product decoding.

III. CAPACITY COMPUTATION

A. Density Evolution for LDPC-Coded BICM

We first compute the pdf of initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) at the output of the BICM demodulator. For a memoryless channel, we can drop the symbol time subscript . The LLR for bit position is

(3)

where

, for

. Clearly, is

a random variable dependent on transmitted bit and channel

. The pdf of the input LLR given that is transmitted can be

computed as

(4)

Manuscript received November 19, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Dr. M. Fossorier. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant ITR-0086032 and Grant CCR-0073391.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA (e-mail: hniu@ee.washington.edu; mshen@ee.washington.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.832748

where

is the conditional pdf of the th bit’s

LLR. For geometrically nonsymmetric constellations such

as 16QAM, i.i.d. channel adapter or coset codes can be

adopted to force the symmetry of the binary-input equiva-

lent channel [2]. Therefore the unconditional pdf is given as

.

The discretized DE developed in [5] is adopted to compute

the threshold. The evolution of the probability mass function

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

456

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 7, JULY 2004

TABLE I THRESHOLD (E =N (dB) COMPUTATION OF LDPC CODED GRAY LABELED
BICM OVER RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNELS

detection and variable node decoding curve, allowing to design

codes optimized for joint iterative detection and decoding. Here

Fig. 1. Comparison of thresholds and simulation results for rate 1=2 (3, 6) regular LDPC codes with Gray labeled 8PSK and 16QAM modulation with perfect CSI on Rayleigh fading channels.

we present the EXIT chart based on the exact message pdf which gives more accurate results.
We assume that the a priori information (i.e., the extrinsic in-

formation from the previous iteration) passed between the vari-

(pmf) at the variable node can be done effectively using the FFT. The evolution at the function node needs the “tanh” computation, which can be done using a pre-computed table. The table build-up is the key step for making discretized density evolution computationally efficient. For -ary modulation and high code rate, the dynamic range is quite large, especially for Rayleigh fading channels. In practice, we trade the quantization level for computation efficiency.

able nodes and check nodes is modeled as independent, symmetric Gaussian random variables. This assumption is verified by noting that the system threshold observed from the EXIT chart matches exactly with the ones computed by the DE. To measure the information transfer behavior of the check nodes, we follow [3] to compute the mutual information to quantify the a priori message and the extrinsic information . Specifically, is calculated using a symmetric Gaussian pdf. The extrinsic information at the check nodes can be obtained using

B. Capacity Thresholds

table lookup with Gaussian distributed input, which is simply

Simulations are conducted to verify the accuracy of the thresholds. The LDPC code under consideration is randomly generated regular (3, 6) code with a maximum of 200 iterations. Fig. 1 compares the simulation results of a LDPC code with block length 5 K, 10 K, and 50 K respectively, for both 8PSK and 16QAM modulations. The gap between the threshold and

one pass of the DE at the check nodes. The transfer characteristic at the variable node can be defined similarly. More precisely, the a prior information from the check nodes is set to be symmetric Gaussian pdf, the message from the channel demodulator is determined by Monte Carlo simulation. The extrinsic information at the variable nodes is computed by the FFT.

the simulation result decreases from 0.8 dB to 0.2 dB as the

block size increases from 5 K to 50 K.

We present thresholds for regular LDPC codes in the code

ensembles of

, where

and varies to achieve

a variable code rate

. Table I tabulates the

codes and their respective thresholds

for QPSK, 8PSK

and 16QAM. The corresponding BICM capacity computed by

(2) is also listed for comparison. These results provide useful

guidelines for selecting the optimal combination of code rate

and modulation order for wireless systems.

B. Convergence Results

The EXIT chart not only illustrates the convergence behavior,

but can also provides an estimate of the convergence threshold

for different code ensembles. As an example, we consider the

LDPC coded Gray labeled 8PSK system. Similar results are

found for 16QAM. In Fig. 2 we plot the transfer chart for the

same (3, 6) code under different channel SNR

. The

convergence threshold observed from the EXIT chart at

dB matches perfectly with the threshold computed by DE.

We also observe from this figure that as the mutual informa-

IV. CONVERGENCE ANALYSIS USING EXIT CHART A. EXIT Chart for LDPC Coded BICM

tion transfer curves of the variable nodes shift higher when the channel SNR increases, the transfer characteristic remains the same for the check nodes, i.e., the check node curve only relates

EXIT chart analysis for LDPC codes has recently been pro- to a particular check degree distribution. This can be easily un-

posed in [6]. The transfer function for variable nodes is com- derstood since the channel input is only related to the variable

puted under the assumption of AWGN channels and BPSK mod- nodes. This observation greatly improves the speed for the de-

ulation. The transfer function for check nodes is computed from coding threshold computation, as we just need to compute the

the variable nodes’ transfer function using the duality property transfer curve for the variable nodes, which can be effectively

approximation [6]. Polynomial fitting is used to obtain a joint computed by an FFT.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NIU et al.: THRESHOLD OF LDPC-CODED BICM FOR RAYLEIGH FADING

457

node degrees in the code design. Following the notation in [7],

let be the number of different variable node degree, and de-

note these degrees by , where

. Let be

variable degree distribution, i.e., the fraction of variable nodes

having degrees . Note that must satisfy

and

, where is the code rate. Let be

the fraction of edges involved with the variable nodes having

degree , we have

. The effective

variable node transfer curve is a weighted sum of different vari-

able transfer curves given by [6]

(5)

Fig. 2. EXIT chart for LDPC coded 8PSK with different channel SNR [E =N (dB)].

The detailed optimization algorithm was presented in [7]. A

simple design example with

is shown in Fig. 3.

The variable degree distribution is also listed in the figure.

The convergence threshold is 5.56 dB, compared to the capacity

of 5.15 dB. It should be noted that using larger value could im-

prove the threshold marginally. The code design using the EXIT

chart is much faster than DE since the check node curve is need

to be computed only once. A randomly generated irregular code

with block size 50 K is simulated and a BER of is reached

at 6.1 dB. Compared with (3, 6) regular codes with the same

block size, there is a 0.7 dB performance improvement.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we focused on threshold computation and convergence analysis of LDPC coded -ary modulation over fading channels using the discretized DE and the EXIT chart. We found that the EXIT chart can actually estimate the threshold more efficiently than the DE since only the transfer characteristic of the variable nodes need to be computed for different channel SNR. A simple irregular LDPC code design example for BICM over fading channels was provided. The results presented in this letter provide useful guildlines for LDPC coded adaptive modulation design using either regular or irregular codes.

Fig. 3. EXIT chart for irregular code design with 8PSK over Rayleigh fading channels.
C. Irregular Code Design Example The EXIT chart can be used for irregular code design [7].
We provide a design example considering only check regular codes, i.e., all check nodes have the same degree . Since we have seen that the check node curve is related to the check node degree distribution only, we only need to specify the variable

REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-cheek codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[2] J. Hou, P. Siegel, L. Milstein, and H. Pfister, “Capacity-approaching bandwidth-efficient coded modulation schemes based on low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 2141–2155, Sept. 2003.
[3] S. ten Brink, “Convergence bahavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[4] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, May 1998.
[5] S. Chung, G. Forney, and T. J. Richardson, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[6] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection, in IEEE Trans. Commun., June 2002. Submitted.
[7] M. Tuechler and J. Hagenauer, “EXIT charts of irregular codes,” in 2002 Conf. on Inf. Sci. and Syst., Princeton, 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

