Field Programmable Gate Array Implementation of a Generalized Decoder for Structured Low-Density Parity Check Codes

Lingyan Sun, B.V.K Vijaya Kumar Curnegie Mellon University,Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
lsun. k u m u r @ e c e . c m u . e d u

Abstract
This paper describes a generalized decoder implementation for structured low-densiy p a r i y check (LDPCJ codes. The decoder features low logic consumption, efJicient memory management, and full parameterization f o r reconfiguration. The goal is to provide a unified solution for fast evaluation of a broad class of structured LDPC codes utilizing the properties offield programmable gate arrays (FPGA): high speed and reconfigurability. As a f u / / v
reconjigurable core, it is read? to be used in different
applications to lower the design to market time. The throughput and resource consumptions are evnlunted.
1. Introduction
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, due to their near-Shannon limit performance under iterative soft decoding have received significant attention [I]. Their inherently parallel decoding scheme and lowcomplexity computation kemel make them a serious competitor to Turbo codes, whose decoders are sequential in nature and the complexity increases exponentially with the code constraint length.
Though the LDPC decoding scheme is straightforward. its VLSI implementation remains a big challenge. Directly mapping the algorithm to hardware for full parallelization will make routing extremely complicated as in [2-31. On the other hand, a fully serial decoder gives very low throughput and large latency because it ignores the parallel nature of the algorithm. Partially parallel implementation can alleviate the routing bottleneck and provide a good tradeoff between complexity and speed.
In partially parallel LDPC decoder implementation. memory elements are normally used as relays for message routing. The main challenge in the partially parallel LDPC decoder design is in managing these memory elements. For efficient memory management,

good mapping from algorithm to hardware and partition between serial and parallel implementation is required. To achieve good throughput with reasonable decoder size, structured (in contrast to random) LDPC codes are constructed and used to reduce the implementation complexity whle achieving performance similar to that of random codes. However. different code smctures result in different mapping methods and thus different memory management schemes. Therefore, unlike other error correction codes (ECC) such as convolutional codes and Reed-Solomon codes, the decoder of a LDPC code depends not only on code parameters (e.g., block length and code rate), but also on the type of the LDPC code. Recently. work has been reported on the implementation of LDPC decoders [4-71. However, each of these decoders can work for only one specific type of structured LDPC code. Such code-specific design makes the application of LDPC code unfavorable in term of design period and cost.
For many applications such as data storage and optical networks, the performance of LDPC code in the very low bit error rate (BER) region remains of major concern. For example, for data storage system, 10." kind of bit error rates is required and for optical networks, the BER required is around 10.''. Due to the lack of tools for code performance analysis at very low BER region (mainly due to the difficulty in finding the code distance spectrum and the suh-optimal nature of the decoding scheme). code evaluations usually rely on simulations. For 10." kind of BER. assuming independence between samples. at least 10" samples are required in a Monte-Carlo simulation providing confidence levels greater than YO% [SI. Conventional C simulations cannot handle that many samples. FPGA with its programmability and high speed can be used for high-throughput evaluation of different LDPC codes and good codes can be selected based on thc evaluation results. For evaluation of different LDPC codes, designing a different decoder for different

0-7803-8652-3/04/$20.00 0 2004 IEEE

17

ICFPT 2004

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:13:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LDPC codes is not a practical solution considering the design load and time. A generalized decoder with a simple method of reconfiguration is better.
In this paper, we describe a fully reconfigurable, efficient, partially parallel decoder implementation for different structured LDPC codes. The decoder does not cover all possible choices of LDPC codes. It is extremely difficult if not impossible to design a single decoder for all possible LDPC codes with reasonable throughput and resource consumption. The decoder is general in the sense that there is only a small constraint on the parity check matrix of LDPC code. Many of the current existing structured LDPC codes are compatible with the decoder and many new codes can he developed and evaluated through the decoder.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of LDPC codes and section 3 describes the LDPC code decoder, possible implementation architectures and issues. The design details of the generalized LDPC decoder are presented in Section 4 and Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. Low Density Parity Check Codes
Introduced in 1960 by Gallager [9], the LDPC codes were largely ignored until middle 1990s. when they were rediscovered [IO].
LDPC codes define a set of codes on graph [ I I]. Fig.1 shows an example of the Tanner graph representation of the LDPC codes. We use circles to represent bit nodes and squares to represent check nodes. Each check node sets the parity check constraint on the set of hit nodes that it connects to. The parity check matrix of LDPC code is the adjacent matrix of Tanner graph. It is of sizeMxN , where M is the number of parity checks and N is the block size.

irregular code. For most applications, the block length of code used is less than couple of thousand of bits. Regular codes are attractive because of their low decoding complexity. Any random matrix can he used as the parity check matrix to achieve Shannon limit performance on average, but the random location of ones makes the interconnections nontrivial. Structured codes can he designed to overcome the problem by adding more constraints on the parity check matrix. To illustrate the idea, we introduce some well-known quasi cyclic codes: disjoint difference set (DDS) based code and array-based code.
2.1. Disjoint Difference Set-based and Arraybased LDPC Codes
A large family of high-rate LDPC codes can be constructed based on the well-studied disjoint difference sets (DDS) in combinatorics, which includes the finite-geometry LDPC codes rediscovered in [I21 and the Steiner-type LDPC codes [13]. Fig 2 shows an example DDS LDPC code parity check matrix. It consists of three cyclic sub matrixes HI. H2 and H3. The cyclic structure lowers the complexity for message routing and makes the decoder design easier.
Fig.2 DDS-LDPC Code Parity Check Matrix Example The parity check matrix of an array code [I41 is
defined by three parameters: the column weight j , the row weight k and a prime number p that represents the
a size of the sub matrices in the parity check matrix. The
parity matrix H is given as Eq. 1, with I and given in Eq. 2.

Fig. I Tanner Graph and Parity Check Matrix
An LDPC code is fully defined by the parity check matrix H. The density of ones in the H matrix is very low, hence the name low-density parity check (LDPC) code. Based on the structure of the parity check matrix, LDPC codes can be divided into different categories. If each column of H has same weight j , i.e., j ones, and each row of H has same weight k. the LDPC code is
called a 0, k ) regular code. Otherwise, it is defined as

I; a,-, 1 .. .. .. .. .. ..

8,

'. ,, ,, ,, ,_ p > l , - l l

a Matrix denotes a circular shift of I and various a powers of represent different amounts of shift. The

good performance of array-based LDPC codes in

additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, their minimum distance properties and ways to improve their

performance are presented in [15]. For the same reason as in DDS LDPC codes, the array-based code

decoder is of low complexity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:13:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

j -:;: :
I = .. .. .. .. ..

OO..Ol
lO..OO
.. .. .. .. ..

for i = 1 to M (2)

0 0 .. 0 1 p x ~ 0 0 .. 1 0 .xn

c. Step 2. Bit node calculation

1 ci for i = Ito N , pp, = r,j,qu= pp, -

(5)

<,dlb,l

Go to step 1 for next iteration

Fig3 Decoding on Graph
As we can see, the computation in the decoder is fairly simple, which means low logic consumption. The calculations are independent between hit nodes or check nodes for each iteration and are therefore suitable for parallel implementation. The main obstacle for full parallelism is the complicated interconnection, which makes condensed chip layout impossible. The problem can be alleviated through reducing the parallelism (partially parallel or serial) and using storage elements to store the intermediate messages passed along the edges of the graph. Now the problem becomes how to reduce the complexity incurred by the extra storage elements and their control logic. Compared to registers, RAMS are preferred as storage elements for smaller size and lower power consumption. For random codes, the edges on the graph are picked randomly, which causes nontrivial memory addressing problem for a partially parallel decoder. Good code structures can simplify the data accessing. To illustrate the decoding problem, we describe some possible implementation architectures in the following.
3.1. Fully Parallel Implementation
The fully parallel implementation makes full use of the parallel nature of the decoding algorithm. Each bit node and check node on the Tanner graph (Fig.1) are instantiated as a process element (PE) and the decoder is a physical Tanner graph. For detail of such an implementation. readers are referred to [2-3], where a 1024-bit rate- 112 1Gbps LDPC decoder is implemented on 0.16um CMOS process with 5 metal layers. The main problem in this architecture is the complicated routing, which dominates the chip area.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:13:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3.2. Fully Serial Implementation
In contrast to the fully parallel implementation, fully serial implementation gives up the parallel decoding nature and processes hit nodes and check nodes one by one for low logic consumption, low power consumption and easy wiring. The throughput per iteration will he up hounded by OSfJj, with f, the system clock. It is usually not acceptable for many applications.
3.3. Partial Parallel Implementation

A good partition between parallel and serial operation can provide the benefit of serial implementation (low logic consumption and simple wiring) and parallel implementation (good throughput). This results in partially parallel implementation. In this architecture, a small section of the hit nodes and check nodes on the Tanner graph are instantiated to he the PES and do the calculation for the other hit nodes and check nodes. At each time instant, the PESare working in parallel. For the set of hit nodes or check nodes that one particular PE is representing, calculations are done serially.
Different architectures can he used for partially parallel implementation depending on how the messages are controlled during decoding. One possible approach is through the network on a chip (NOC) approach, where PES are connected through switches and messages are routed through package addressing as shown in Fig. 4a. Issues such as dead locks need to he addressed. The main problem in this architecture is the addressing overhead and large switches for code with large block size.

._ ............................
IOPE
i' Switch i

... .............................

i

CheckNodes i

~ @Bit Nodes

Fig. 4 Partially Parallel Decoder (a. Network on a chip, b. Shared memory)

Another possible architecture is to route message through shared memory. Bit nodes and check nodes are all connected to a shared memory and get the data from memory during decoding as Fig.4b.

I l"oo"OOl""O

0, ,0000000l0

Ho. Ha,, .. H,.,, i n n i o ~ n o o i n o

H=

H,,o H,, .. H,.,-, o o i i o o o o o o o i

........

00" I 1 I ,U00 I,

H,.,." H,.,, .. H,->*-, I o o o I o I I o I I n

,, , I,

" 0 t k II I O 0

o. I o o I I U I I ii n I .

20 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:13:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

number of sub matrixes in the Y direction, s , ~X s, the
size of sub-matrix, the weight distribution and the locations of ones in the sub-matrices. For example in Fig. 5 , the sub matrix is of size 4x4. There are three
sub-matrices in the X direction and two in the Y direction. The weight of the first three in the X
direction is two, zero and one respectively. The locations of ones are random.
4.2. Decoder Architecture
The decoder takes the output of the channel detector as the input and outputs the improved log likelihood ratio (LLR). The architecture follows the partially parallel implementation through shared memory (Fig. 4b). Fig. 6 shows more details of the decoder architecture. It consists of an input memory (IMEM), a bit node calculation unit (BCU), a check sum unit (CSU), a check node calculation unit (CCU), an edge memory (EMEM), a reconfigurahle interconnection and an address controller (AC). For real time processing, an input buffer is required. As the buffer size depends on the particular situation, it is not described here.

are stored. In address I , the LLRs for bit node 1 , s,+2. 2X(sr+l)+l till (niljX(s,+l)+l are stored, and so on. Each time fetching the data. n,Xdw bits are accessed for decoding. The addressing of input memory is controlled by one address line with width nw to get data from address 0 to sr
The edge memory consists of en blocks. The expression for en is given in Eq. 6, where d; is the edge chromatic number of the bipartite graph associated with the ilh sub-matrix. Each block is of size dwXmax(s.r+l, &+I). The memory blocks can be divided into n,Xn, groups. Each group consists of di memory blocks and stores messages for one sub-matrix (if di is zero, there is no memory block for this sub-matrix). Given a submatrix, a mapping from location of ones in a parity check matrix to the location of edge memory can he established. The mapping basically belongs to edge coloring problem. The edge chromatic number of any graph must he at least d, the largest vertex degree of the graph [I61 and at most d+l[17]. The bipartite graphs of the ilh sub-matrix in most existing codes can be colored using max(wxi,wyi) colors where wx; is row weight and wyi is the column weight of the ilh sub-matrix. For bit node calculation, data are fetched and stored from address 0 to s., However, for check node calculations, address controller controls the data access in the sequence according to the structure of the code. There is one address line for each memory block.
'x!,,X,J.-l
en = d,
i=O

n, *dw bits

n, X ny groups
A

Fig. 6 Decoder Top Level Architecture
4.3. Input Memory and Edge Memory
The input memory consists of N x d w bits. N is the code block size and for good performance, N should he as large as possible. However. constraints of practical system such as low latency and low resource consumption usually require N to be small or of certain value. For data storage system, N is around 4000. dw is the data width which should be kept as small as possible without losing too much accuracy. Usually six hits is enough for decoding. N and dw of the decoder can be easily changed according to requirements. The data in the input memory are aligned in array format. The depth of the memory is s.,+l. In address 0, the LLRs for hit nodes 0, s,+l, 2X(s.,+l) till (nr-l)X(s,,+lj

0 I 2

sr

(4

(bj

Fig.7 Input Memory (a) and Edge Memory (b)

4.4. BCU, CCU and CSU

BCU has ti, PES. Each PE is responsible for s,+l bit nodes in the bipartite graph. When the calculation starts. bit nodes get data from the input memory and edge memory. Each bit node sums the data coming from input memory and all the edges except the one it is returning messages to and returns in total j messages

21
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:13:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

back to h e edge memory. Meanwhile, the summation of all the messages gives the output LLR for the current iteration. Fig. 8 shows the circuit for one PE for the case of j=3. Data read from edge memory are represented as eo, el, e , and lois the data read from input memory. Data sent back to edge memory are
represented as e'(),e',, and e', .
Fig.8 PE of BNU (j=3)

(a) Amplitude calculation

S"

5.0

51

5'1

52

S? 5'1
(a) Sign calculation Fig.9 PE of CCU (k=4) There are n? PES in the CCU. Each PE is responsible for s,+l check nodes. The function of PE is to take the k messages from the edge memory, find out the sign and amplitude value according to Eq. 4 and retum k values back to the memory. The core of the PE consists of array of comparators. multiplexers and XORs. Fig. 9 shows the circuit when k is 4. no to aiare the amplitude values and so to s3 are the sign values. The returned amplitude values are a'" to n ; and sign values are s*" to s'+ For simplicity. no registers are shown. The CSU gets the sign of the output LLR from the BCU at the end of each iteration with n, hits in each

.

do

d, ... dn~.l

'0 I

dtXr+l ". d?,,-I

(7)

M<= .................................,...,...

-dC".lW", d<j>,.l,x,#~&.".-.I

4.6. Address Controller
The address controller controls the data fetching and saving sequence for the CNU. Different codes will have different addressing sequences according to matrix structure and the mapping from H matrix to edge memory. Three architectures are provided for different situations. The simplest architecture is for Quasi-cyclic codes, for which initial addresses are sufficient for all the subsequent memory access. Another architecture is for the situation when the next address can be calculated based on the current address through some arithmetic functions. This is a more

22
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:13:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

general case compared to the first situation. The third architecture can he used if the next location has no relation with current or previous location. Basically, we store the location sequence for data accessing in memory. The address location memory is of enXaw bits with nw as the address width. Different architectures can he selected to work with different codes for efficiency.

4.1. Implementation

The decoder is written in VHDL and tested on

Xilinx Vertex I1 XC2V6000. Modelsim SE5.7a is used

for simulation and Xilinx ISE5.1 is used for synthesis,

mapping, placement and routing. Testing all possible

combinations of the decoder parameter set is not

possible. However, each module of the decoder is

simulated and verified by setting different parameters.

And the performance of the whole decoder is verified

by instantiating it to some existing codes and comparing the results with a C simulator.

The in-circuit verification is done through the PCI

port that runs at 33MHz. PC generates data that are

corrupted by AWGN and sends the noisy data through

the PCI port to the FPGA. LDPC decoder gets the data from PC through a simple PCI core and sends the

decoded result to the PC through the PCI port. An

oscillator on the FPGA hoard generates the decoder

reference clock with frequency of 133 MHz. A

different frequency can he generated through FPGA for

the decoder.

The throughput of the circuit is estimated according

to Eq. 8. It depends on fc, the clock frequency, N, the

block length and s . ~and sn the sub matrix size. For high

throughput. an H matrix with small sub matrixes is

favorable. The size of the memory depends on the

block length and code structure (Eq.9). For an array-

based LDPC code with block length of 4617 hits, rate

819 and j=3 (some of the suh-matrices are discarded to get the code), 2.7Ghpsliteration can be achieved on

FPGA at clock frequency of 200MHz (maximum clock

rate 2 I IMHz) and a memory size of 1 1Xk bits (using

six bit LLR) is needed. For a DDS LDPC code with

block length 4923, rate 8/9 and j=3, 0.9 Gbpshteration

can be achieved at clock frequency of 200 MHz and it

"%,.\ also needs about 118k bits memory.

TP,,, =

+s,, bps per iteration

(8)

,.

MS=(N+eriXtnm(sx. s J ) + l ) Xdw bits

(9)

Table 1 shows the influence of the code block

length on the clock rate and slice consumption. We use

DDS code as example and fix the code rate to 8/9.

column weight to 3 while varying the block length. Table 2 shows the influence of the code rate on the clock rate and slice consumption. We use DDS code with block length 4923 and column weight 3.

Memory (kbits) 24

118 2882 11817

Memory (kbits) 118

118

118

To compare with C simulation, we calculate the C simulation throughput. C simulation is based on block processing. For each block of data and for one iteration, we need at least N operations to generate the data. There are N hit nodes. Each bit node needs at least j operations to generate the posterior probability, and j more operations calculate and send the message along the j graph edges connected to it. There are M check nodes. For each check node. at least k operations are needed to find out the minimum value and k more operations to calculate and pass the message along the kedges connected to the check nodes. N operations are

23
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:13:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

required to find out the syndrome and N operations for error calculation in the final output. We assume 3 clock cycles for each operation (actually many need more), and& as the PC clock frequency, we get Eq.10 for PC simulation throughput. For the same array-based LDPC code and DDS LDPC code evaluated before and 2GHz computer, it gives 47.6 Mbps per iteration. For high column weight, the speed achievement is even significant.
4.8. Code Evaluation
There are several steps to follow for code evaluation. The input is a code satisfying the constraints on code for the decoder as described earlier. A C program will do the preprocessing to calculate the block length, number of sub-matrices in the X direction, the number of sub-matrices in the Y direction, the size, weight distribution and location of ones in the sub-matrices. An edge-coloring program can map the location of ones for each sub-matrix into d memory blocks. There is one VHDL file to pass all the parameter to the decoder. Synthesis, mapping, placement and routing start from here on to generate the hit files for FPGA. After downloading the hit file to the FPGA, data are injected to the decoder through the PCI port. As the speed of the PCI is 33MHz with 32 bits. we can send at most 32ldw samples at each clock cycle. At low SNR region, the PCI speed is compatible with decoder as more than 10 iterations are needed to get right output, which drop the throughput of the decoder to Mbps region. For high S N R region, an AWGN generator and an error analyzer is built to alleviate the bottleneck of PCI interface. The output will be sent back through the PCI port and performance of code is evaluated by checking the BER, frame error rate (FER) or error statistics.
5. Conclusion
This paper describes an efficient, fully reconfigurable decoder implementation for structured LDPC codes by going through the problem definition, design detail description and the decoder speed and size evaluation. The decoder is designed with care in the tradeoff between throughput. flexibility and resource consumption. It can accommodate a broad class of LDPC code with good throughput and low logic consumption. Our future work will he:

Evaluate the performance of existing codes at
high SNR region using FPGA.
Design good codes through the combination
of theory and FPGA evaluation.
6. References
[I] A. Bennatan. D. Burshtein, “On the Application of LDPC Codes to Arbitrarv Discrete-Memorvless Channels.”
IEEE Transacrions on ln/&nation Theon, Gal. 50. p a p 417
- 438, March 2004. [21 C. Howland. A. Blanksby. “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check codes.” The 2WI IEEE International Synposium on Circuits and Swems, vol. 4. page 742 - 745,2001. [3] C. Howland. A. Blanksby. “690-mW I-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-l/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Joumal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37,page 404412AJ002. I41 S. Olcer. “Decoder architecture for array-code-based LDPC codes.“ IEEE Globai Telecommunications Conference, voi. 4. page 2046 - ZOSO,D ~ C2.003. [51 Sungwook Kim, G.E. Sobelman, Jaekyun Moon, “Parallel VLSl architectures for a class of LDPC codes,” IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and System. vol. 2. page 11-93-11-96. May 2002. [6] Tong Zhang. K.K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3. 6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems. page 127 - 132, Oct. 2002. [7] M.M. Mansour. N.R. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSl decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” Proceedings of the 2002 lntemarional Ssmnposirrm on Low Power Electronics and Design. Page 284 ~ 289.2002. [SI M. Jeruchim. “Techniques for Estimating the Bit Error Rate in the Simulation of Digital Communication Systems.” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 2. page 153- 170.Jan 1984. [9] R. G. Gallager. Low-Density Parity Check Codes, MIT Press. Cambridge. MA, 1963. [IO] D. I. C . Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices.” Crytograph? and Coding. 5’’’ IMA Corference. 1995. [ I I] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Grapks.“ PhD thesis, Linkoping University, Sweden. [I21 Y. Kou, S.Lin. M.P.C. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes: construction based on tinite geometries.” IEEE Global Telecominiinicarions Conference. vol. 2. page 825 829.2000. [I31 S. I. Johnson. and S. R. Weller. “Constructionof low density parity check codes from Kirkman triple systems.” IEEE Globecorn2WI. San Antonio. TX. Nov. 2001. [I41 I. Fan, “Array codes as Low-Density Parity Check Codes.” 2nd Inremational Synposinm on Turbo Codes and Related Topics (Brest. France). Sep. 2000. 1151 H. Sone. “Iterative soft detection and decoding for data
[ 161 S. Skiena. hnplerrienting Discrete Matherriaticst Conibinarorics and Graph Tlreon with Mathemntica. Reading. MA Addison-Wesley. page 216. 1990. 1171 V.G. Vizing. “On an Estimate ofthe Chromatic Class of ap-Graph,” [Russian] Diskret. Anali: 3. 23-30. 1964.

24
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:13:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

