2106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

A More Accurate One-Dimensional Analysis and Design of Irregular LDPC Codes
Masoud Ardakani, Student Member, IEEE, and Frank R. Kschischang, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We introduce a new one-dimensional (1-D) analysis of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes on additive white Gaussian noise channels which is significantly more accurate than similar 1-D methods. Our method assumes a Gaussian distribution in message-passing decoding only for messages from variable nodes to check nodes. Compared to existing work, which makes a Gaussian assumption both for messages from check nodes and from variable nodes, our method offers a significantly more accurate estimate of convergence behavior and threshold of convergence. Similar to previous work, the problem of designing irregular LDPC codes reduces to a linear programming problem. However, our method allows irregular code design in a wider range of rates without any limit on the maximum variable-node degree. We use our method
to design irregular LDPC codes with rates greater than 1 4 that
perform within a few hundredths of a decibel from the Shannon limit. The designed codes perform almost as well as codes designed by density evolution.
Index Terms—Degree distribution, density evolution, extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, Gaussian assumption, irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE design of irregular codes defined on graphs and determination of the convergence threshold of a given ensemble of codes for different decoding algorithms have been of great interest, e.g., [1]–[8]. The rediscovery of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes (first introduced by Gallager [9]) by MacKay et al. [10], [11], drew attention to the analysis and design of these codes. We now know that LDPC codes are capable of approaching the capacity of many channels [5], [12] under message-passing decoding and, in fact, they can achieve the capacity of the binary erasure channel [13], [14].
The problem of analysis of LDPC codes is addressed by Richardson et al. in [4] and a density-evolution algorithm is proposed to find the convergence behavior of LDPC codes under various decoding schemes. Using density evolution, given the initial probability density function (pdf) of the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages, one can compute the pdf of LLR messages at any iteration, assuming a code of very long block length. As a result, one can test whether, for a given channel condition, the decoder converges to zero error probability or not. This allows for the design of irregular LDPC codes which
Paper approved by S. G. Wilson, the Editor for Multicarrier Modulation of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 19, 2003; revised May 29, 2004. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2002.
The authors are with the Edward S. Rogers, Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada (e-mail: masoud@comm.utoronto.ca; frank@comm.utoronto.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.838718

perform very close to the Shannon limit using density evolution as a probe [5], [12], i.e., finding the convergence threshold of different irregular codes by density evolution and choosing the best one.
Density evolution may be unattractive for a few reasons. Finding a good degree sequence using density evolution requires intensive computations and/or a long search, since the optimization problem is not convex [5]; furthermore, it does not provide any insight in the design process, and it is intractable for some of the codes defined on graphs.
Another approach for finding convergence behavior of iterative decoders is to use extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, e.g., [7], [8], [15], and [16]. Although this method is not as accurate as density evolution, its lower computational complexity and its reasonably good accuracy make it attractive. EXIT charts provide a one-dimensional (1-D) analysis, which allows one to visualize the convergence behavior of the decoder, and can reduce the irregular code optimization to a linear program [1] which is both faster and more insightful than density-evolution-based approaches. Moreover, this approach is applicable to many of the codes defined on graphs associated with iterative decoders.
There have been a number of approaches to 1-D analysis of LDPC codes [1], [15], [17]–[19], all of them based on the observation that the pdf of the decoder’s LLR messages is approximately Gaussian. This approximation is quite accurate for messages sent from variable nodes, but less so for messages sent from check nodes. In this paper, we introduce a significantly more accurate 1-D analysis for LDPC codes. The key point is that, unlike previous approaches, we do not make the assumption that the check-to-variable messages have a Gaussian distribution. In other words, we assume a Gaussian distribution only for the channel messages and the messages from variable nodes, which in a real situation have a density very close to a Gaussian distribution. Under this assumption, we work with the “true” pdf of the messages sent from check nodes.
Previous work using a Gaussian approximation (GA) has serious limitations on the maximum node degree and also on the rate of the code. For example, in [1], the authors indicate that their analysis and design works for codes with a rate between 0.5 and 0.9, whose maximum variable-node degree is not greater than 10. Such a limitation on the maximum node degree prevents design of capacity-approaching degree distributions. In this paper, however, there is no limit on node degrees. In addition, it works for a wider range of code rates, with an effective design for codes with a rate greater than .
The contributions of this paper are as follows: 1) We introduce a more accurate EXIT chart analysis of LDPC decoders

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARDAKANI AND KSCHISCHANG: A MORE ACCURATE ONE-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

2107

by relaxing some of the Gaussian assumptions on the LLR messages. 2) We compare different measures for making a GA, and show that using the mutual information as the metric for making the GA provides the most accurate results (similar result with the work of ten Brink for turbo codes [8]). 3) Within the framework of our approximation, we formulate the problem of designing irregular LDPC codes as a linear program.
This paper is presented as follows. In Section II, we propose our method for including a Gaussian assumption on messages. In Section III, we introduce EXIT charts. In Section IV, we use EXIT charts in the analysis of LDPC codes. The behavior of an iterative decoder for a regular LDPC code is investigated in this section. In Section V, we generalize the discussion to the irregular case. In Section VI, we address the problem of designing good irregular codes, and present a group of codes to verify the capabilities of our method. We conclude this paper in Section VII.

II. GAUSSIAN ASSUMPTION ON MESSAGES

0 Fig. 1. Output density of a degree-six check node, fed with symmetric
Gaussian density of 1 dB, is compared with the symmetric Gaussian density of the same mean.

In [5], it has been shown that starting with a symmetric

pdf, i.e., a pdf that satisfies

, and using

sum–product decoding, the pdf of LLR messages in the decoder

remains symmetric.

A Gaussian pdf with mean and variance is symmetric if

and only if

. As a result, a symmetric Gaussian density

can be expressed by a single parameter. Interestingly, the density

In the LDPC decoder, there are three types of messages: the

channel messages, the message from variable nodes to check

nodes, and the messages from check nodes to variable nodes.

We first study the channel messages. Each received symbol at

the output of the channel, given transmission of the all-

channel word, is

, so its conditional pdf is

of LLR intrinsic messages for a Gaussian channel is symmetric,

and hence, under sum–product decoding, remains symmetric.

Wiberg [20] noticed that the pdf of extrinsic LLR messages in where is the variance of the Gaussian noise. The LLR value an iterative decoder can be approximated by a Gaussian distri- corresponding to is bution. As a result, under a Gaussian assumption, a 1-D analysis

of iterative decoders, i.e., tracking the evolution of a single pa-

rameter, becomes possible. In [1], based on a Gaussian assump-

tion on all messages in the iterative decoder and the symmetry

(1)

property, a 1-D analysis of LDPC codes has been carried out.

In [18] and [19], again based on the symmetry property and a which is a Gaussian random variable with

Gaussian assumption on all messages, together with an approx-

imation on the input–output characteristics of check nodes, a

(2)

1-D analysis and design of LDPC codes and repeat-accumulate codes has been conducted.
In this section, we introduce our new way of including the Gaussian assumption on the messages that we refer to as the “semi-Gaussian” approximation.

Since the variance is twice the mean, the channel LLR messages

have a symmetric Gaussian density.

For a symmetric Gaussian density with mean and variance

, we define the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) as

.

For a Gaussian channel with noise variance , we define SNR

A. Semi-Gaussian versus All-Gaussian Approximation

as . It can be easily verified that the SNR of the channel

LLR messages, i.e.,

is the same as the channel SNR.

We consider an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) Now we consider the variable-to-check and check-to-variable

channel, whose input is a random variable from alphabet messages. At the first iteration the decoder receives only channel

. We assume that the transmitter uses an LDPC code messages, but as soon as the messages pass through the check

and the receiver decodes using the sum–product algorithm. nodes, they lose their Gaussianity. Fig. 1 shows the output den-

We also assume that the information bit “0” is mapped to

sity of a check node of degree six when the input has a sym-

on the channel, and that the all-zero codeword is transmitted metric Gaussian density at SNR

dB. This

(equivalent to the all- channel word). Notice that since shows that the pdf of the check-to-variable LLR messages can

the channel is symmetric and sum–product decoding satisfies be very different from a Gaussian density. Notice that the mag-

the check-node symmetry and variable-node symmetry condi- nitude of the output LLR message at a check node is less than

tions of [5], the decoder’s performance is independent of the the magnitude of all the incoming messages to that node, i.e.,

transmitted codeword.

a check node acts as a soft “min” in magnitude, making the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

density skewed toward the origin, hence, non-Gaussian. At the

output of the variable nodes, however, it can be observed that

the density is well approximated by a symmetric Gaussian, even

when the inputs are highly non-Gaussian. This can be explained

by the central limit theorem, since the update rule at a variable

node is summation of incoming messages. As a result, for higher

degree variable nodes, we expect even less error while making

a Gaussian assumption.

A Gaussian assumption at the output of check nodes has two

main problems. First, it is accurate only for check nodes of low

degree at high SNR. This hinders analysis and design of low-rate

codes, which are required to work at low SNR, and codes with a

high check-node degree (very-high-rate codes). Second, it puts a Fig. 2. Depth-one tree for a (3, 6) regular LDPC code. limit on the maximum variable-node degree. To see why, assume

that the mean of messages at the output of check nodes is , and the mean of messages from the channel is . Then the mean at the output of a degree variable node will be
. As a result, the message-error probability at the output of this variable node, assuming a symmetric Gaussian density, will be

messages at the input of the iteration and compute the pdf of messages at the output. This can be done by Monte Carlo simulation or “one-step” density evolution. Then we approximate the output pdf with a symmetric Gaussian.
The complexity of this analysis is significantly less than other methods based on density evolution. In density-evolution-based

(3)
From (3), it follows that an error of in approximation of causes an error of in the approximation of error probability at the output of a degree- variable node, which can be computed as

methods, we need the output density of one iteration in order to analyze the next iteration, making analysis of later iterations impossible without first analyzing the early iterations. However, a Gaussian assumption allows us to start from any stage of decoding. Using our method, one can do the analysis for only a few points of the EXIT chart and interpolate a curve on those

points. Depending on the required accuracy, one may change (4) the number of analyzed points. Close to capacity of the channel,

this saves us a lot in complexity, since density evolution requires According to (4), in later iterations, when is much larger than a large number of iterations to determine convergence.
, the higher the degree of the variable node, the lower the

error in prediction of , because the exponential term dominates the other term. However, in early iterations, when is

III. EXIT CHARTS AND ITERATIVE DECODERS

dominant, the error in prediction of increases almost linearly When the check and variable message updates are analyzed

with . In particular, at the first iteration when

is together, one iteration of LDPC decoding can be viewed as a

linear with

. This puts a limit on the maximum variable black box that, in each iteration, uses two sources of knowl-

degree allowed. In fact, as noted in [1], the previous method can edge about the transmitted codeword: the information from the

be employed for designing irregular LDPC codes only with vari- channel (the intrinsic information) and the information from the

able degrees less than or equal to 10.

previous iteration (the extrinsic information). From these two

The above facts have motivated us to remove the Gaussian as- sources of information, the decoding algorithm attempts to get

sumption at the output of check nodes. In other work, the anal- a better knowledge about the transmitted codeword, using this

ysis proceeds in two steps: check-node analysis, which provides knowledge as the extrinsic information for the next iteration.

the input–output behavior of the decoder at the check nodes, Now suppose is some measure of knowledge about the

and variable-node analysis, which provides the input–output be- transmitted codeword symbols, e.g., SNR, probability of error,

havior of the decoder at the variable nodes. At each step, the den- mutual information,1 and so on. In this setting, an EXIT chart

sities are forced to be Gaussian. To avoid a Gaussian assumption based on is a curve with two axes: and , and a pa-

on the output of check nodes, we consider one whole iteration at rameter , which is the information from the channel. Any

once. That is to say, we study the input–output behavior of the point of this curve shows that if the knowledge from the pre-

decoder from the input of the iteration (messages from variable vious iteration is , using this together with the channel in-

nodes to check nodes) to the output of that iteration (messages formation , the information at the output of this iteration

from variable nodes to check nodes). Fig. 2 illustrates the idea. would be . Hence, this curve can be viewed as a func-

In every iteration, we assume that the input and the output mes- tion

, where depends on the code and

sages shown in Fig. 2, which are outputs of variable nodes, are the decoding scheme as well. For a fixed code, fixed decoding

symmetric Gaussian. We call our method the “semi-Gaussian,” scheme, and fixed

is a function of just or simply

in contrast with the “all-Gaussian” methods that assume all the

.

messages are Gaussian. To analyze one iteration, we consider the depth-one tree of de-
coding, as shown in Fig. 2. We start with Gaussian-distributed

1By mutual information, we mean the mutual information between a random variable representing a transmitted bit and another one representing a message that carries a belief about the transmitted bit.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARDAKANI AND KSCHISCHANG: A MORE ACCURATE ONE-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

2109

Notice that is a function of (and only ), so it can be computed once and tabulated.
For turbo codes, in [15] and [16], some SNR-based measures are used to include the Gaussian assumption, while in [23], a combination of SNR and mutual information measures is used, and in [7] a pure mutual information measure is used. A comparison among different measures can be found in [8], which shows that for turbo codes, a GA based on matching mutual information predicts the behavior of iterative decoders more accurately than SNR-based GAs.
The choice of EXIT chart measure also has a direct effect on the process of designing irregular LDPC codes, as will be discussed in Section VI.

IV. ANALYSIS OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

Our goal in this section is to find the EXIT chart of an itera-

tive sum–product decoder for regular LDPC codes. Fig. 2 shows

Fig. 3. EXIT chart, based on single-iteration analysis, comparing the predicted a depth-one tree factor graph for a regular LDPC code. Consid-

and actual decoding trajectories for a regular (3, 6) code of length 200 000.

ering for the messages from the previous iteration and

for the channel message, under a Gaussian assumption, each of

Such an EXIT chart can be presented by plotting both and its inverse . Presenting both and on the same graph has the advantage of making the visualization of the decoder’s behavior easier, as the output from one iteration transfers to the input of the next. Fig. 3, which is an EXIT chart based on message-error probability, shows the concept. Each arrow in Fig. 3 represents one iteration of decoding.
Many of the characteristics of decoding, such as the number of required iterations for a given target and the threshold of convergence, can be predicted from EXIT charts. Note that if the “decoding tunnel” of an EXIT chart is closed, convergence does not occur. This makes it possible to predict the convergence threshold. The convergence threshold is the worst channel con-

and can be translated to corresponding Gaussian densi-

ties. Now, using density evolution, one can compute the output

pdf, whose measure can be computed. As a result, for a

given and

after one iteration is computed.

Define

as the function which takes a pdf and

returns its measure, and define

as the function which

maps

to a symmetric Gaussian density ,

such that

. Now for a regular LDPC code with

variable-node degree and check-node degree , we define

as the mapping that takes an input pdf

and the channel condition and returns the output pdf after

one iteration of density evolution on the depth-one tree of

decoding. We can formulate our analysis as

dition, measured by , for which the tunnel is open.

It is worth mentioning that in the literature (e.g., [7], [8], [18],

(6)

[19], [21], [22]) the term “EXIT chart” usually refers to taking as mutual information, represented in versus axes.
In this paper, however, by an EXIT chart, we mean any 1-D representation of the decoder’s behavior. Of course, the metric chosen for making the GA affects the accuracy of the approximation. However, once an approximation is made, any parameter of the approximating density can be used to represent that density. Thus, for example, an EXIT chart can be computed by matching a symmetric Gaussian density to the true density based on a mutual information measure, but that EXIT chart may be plotted using, say, the probability of error of that Gaussian density.
Notice that one measure of a symmetric Gaussian density can be translated to another measure using explicit relations that they have with each other. For example, (3) allows translation of the mean of a symmetric Gaussian density to its error rate. Translation to mutual information requires a mapping function , which maps standard deviation of a symmetric Gaussian density to its mutual information. It has been shown in [7] that

Using (6), for a fixed , a point of the

curve is

achieved. We can repeat this for as many points as we wish and

interpolate between points to form our EXIT chart.

Fig. 3 shows our result for a regular (3, 6) code. It compares

the actual results with the predicted trajectory using our method.

One can see that there is very close agreement between our pre-

diction and the actual results. The measure for making the GA

is error probability. The EXIT chart is also represented based on

error probability.

Table I shows the error in approximating the threshold of

some regular codes using some different 1-D methods. The all-

Gaussian column shows the error of the method of [1], while in

all other columns, the Gaussian assumption is included only for

the output of the variable nodes. The difference between these

columns is that they use different measures for including the

GA. A comparison among different measures shows that using

mutual information as our measure of approximation gives rise

to the most accurate results, in agreement with the results ob-

tained in [8] for turbo codes.

For computation of the approximated threshold using an

(5)

EXIT chart analysis, we need to vary the SNR and find the minimum value of SNR for which the EXIT chart is still open.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

TABLE I ERROR IN APPROXIMATION OF THRESHOLD USING DIFFERENT 1-D METHODS

interested in large values for . Table II shows that a Gaussian assumption at the output of check nodes can result in large errors when channel SNR is low and/or variable degree is high. The semi-Gaussian method, on the other hand, shows negligible error in all cases.

V. ANALYSIS OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

An irregular LDPC code is usually described by the fraction of

edges incident to variable nodes and check nodes of different de-

grees. Following the notation used in [3], we specify an ensemble

of irregular LDPC codes by its variable and check edge-degree

TABLE II ERROR IN APPROXIMATION OF MESSAGE-ERROR
RATE AFTER THE FIRST ITERATION

distributions

and

, where is the frac-

tion of edges connected to variable nodes of degree , and is

the fraction of edges connected to check nodes of degree . In the

remainder of this paper, by a variable/check-degree distribution,

we mean a variable/check edge-degree distribution.

A single depth-one tree cannot be defined for irregular codes.

If the check-degree distribution is fixed, each variable degree

gives rise to its own depth-one tree. Irregularity in the check

nodes is taken into account in these depth-one trees. For any

fixed check-degree distribution, we refer to the depth-one tree

associated with a degree variable node as “degree depth-one

tree.”

For reasons similar to the case of regular codes, we assume

that, at the output of any depth-one tree, the pdf of LLR mes-

sages is well approximated with a symmetric Gaussian. As a

result, the pdf of LLR messages at the input of check nodes can

be approximated as a mixture of symmetric Gaussian densities.

The weights of this mixture are determined by the variable-de-

gree distribution. This pdf can be expressed as This can effectively be done through a binary search. To find the

exact threshold, we perform a similar binary search, however,

(7)

for each SNR, we use discretized density evolution [12] to

verify convergence. As shown in [12], an 11-b discretization of messages will result in an approximation of threshold accurate to the third decimal digit. A 12-b discretization would be accurate to the fourth decimal point. In Table I, we have used

where is the mean of messages at the output of a degree

variable node, and

represents a Gaussian distribution

with mean and variance . It is also clear that

11-b discretization. Later in Table IV, where we need more

(8)

accuracy, we use 12-b discretization.

According to Table I, a 1-D analysis can predict the threshold where

is the mean of messages at the output of check

of convergence within 0.01 dB of the true value. For variable nodes and is the mean of intrinsic messages.

degrees greater than three, the error is in the order of a few According to (7) and (8), for a Gaussian mixture with a given

thousandths of a decibel. The data in this table suggests that the degree distribution

and fixed channel condi-

all-Gaussian method approximates the threshold of convergence tion, every can be translated to a unique mixed symmetric

with an acceptable accuracy. However, an accurate prediction Gaussian density. In other words, given , the set of possible

of the threshold of convergence cannot indicate the accuracy of mixed symmetric Gaussian densities at the input of the iteration

a method completely. As we discussed earlier, the all-Gaussian is 1-D, i.e., can be expressed by one parameter. This makes it pos-

method shows significant error when the variable degree is large sible to define a one-to-one relation from the set of real numbers

and when the SNR is low (early iterations).

to the set of pdfs, which relates each to its equivalent mixed

Table II compares the error in the approximation of mes- Gaussian density. Since other metrics are strictly increasing or

sage-error probability after first iteration in a depth-one tree of decreasing with , this one-to-one relation can be defined for

decoding using all-Gaussian and semi-Gaussian methods. We them, as well. For instance, error probability is strictly decreasing

have chosen the first iteration because the all-Gaussian method with , hence, any value of error probability can be mapped

shows more errors at the first iteration, when the mean of mes- to its equivalent , and so to its equivalent input pdf.

sages is minimum. For the semi-Gaussian method, we have used This one-to-one correspondence allows one to translate every

mutual information to approximate the density. The values of

to a unique input pdf to the iteration. The input pdf together

and in this table are typical values used for irregular codes. with one iteration of density evolution, on a degree depth-one

For regular codes, is always greater than , and we are not tree, gives the output pdf for a degree- variable node. This pdf

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARDAKANI AND KSCHISCHANG: A MORE ACCURATE ONE-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

2111

can be well approximated by a symmetric Gaussian density and

can be presented by

.

A formulation similar to the case of regular codes can be made

here. Define

as the function which maps

to a mixed symmetric Gaussian density , with variable-de-

gree distribution , such that

. Now for a degree-

depth-one tree of decoding with check-node degree distribution

, we define

as the mapping that takes an input

pdf and the channel condition and returns the output pdf

after one iteration of density evolution on the depth-one tree of

decoding. We can formulate our analysis as

(9)

Repeating the same thing for all variable degrees present in

the code, we can find

at the output of all variable-node

degrees. Now, our task is to compute for the mixture of all

variable nodes. This task depends on the choice of . For some

choices of , such as error probability, this is always simplified

to a linear combination of

weighted by the variable-de-

gree distribution. This is because using Bayes’ rule, can be

computed as

0Fig. 4. EXIT charts for different variable degrees on an AWGN channel at 1:91 dB when d = 6.

degree

error degree

(10)

where

is the already-computed message error rate at the

output of the degree- variable node. By computing , one

point of the EXIT chart of the irregular code is computed.

A similar formulation can be used for the mean of the mes-

sages [1]. It has been shown in [22] that when the messages have

a symmetric pdf, mutual information combines linearly to form

the overall mutual information.

In this paper, for analysis of the irregular case, we are most

interested to represent the results in a

axis. This is be-

cause it simplifies the analysis of the irregular case to the above-

mentioned linear combination, and is more insightful than other

parameters. Notice that in the phase of approximation, any other

measure can be used. In the remainder of this paper, by an EXIT

chart, we mean a versus EXIT chart, unless otherwise

stated.

According to (10), the EXIT chart for an irregular code is a

linear combination of EXIT charts for different variable degrees.

As a result, we have a set of 1-D elementary curves whose linear

combination explains the convergence behavior of the irregular

code. Fig. 4 shows an example of these elementary curves.

A comparison between the predicted convergence behavior

and the actual result, once using the semi-Gaussian and once

using the all-Gaussian method, has been depicted in Fig. 5. As

expected, the all-Gaussian method shows significantly larger

error in early iterations. The semi-Gaussian method, however,

is in close agreement with the actual results.

Fig. 5. Actual convergence behavior of an irregular code compared with the predicted trajectory using the semi-Gaussian and the all-Gaussian methods.

[1], [5], [12]. In this paper, EXIT charts are designed (shaped)

to guarantee good performance of the code. EXIT charts are

even used in the design of good turbo codes. For example, [21]

presents a rate- turbo code which approaches the Shannon

limit to within 0.1 dB.

In our 1-D framework, the design problem is simplified to a

linear program. Fixing the check-degree distribution, we refer

to the EXIT chart of a code whose variable nodes are all of

degree by , and we call it an “elementary” EXIT chart.

This name has been chosen as opposed to the EXIT chart for an

irregular code, which is a mixture of elementary EXIT charts.

According to (10), the EXIT chart of an irregular code with the

variable-degree distribution

, can be written

as

VI. DESIGN OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
Design of irregular LDPC codes which can outperform reg- This fact simplifies the problem of designing an irregular code ular codes was first considered in [3]. Different methods for de- to the problem of shaping an EXIT chart out of a group of elesigning irregular LDPC codes have been introduced and used mentary EXIT charts. We wish to maximize the rate of the code
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

while having the EXIT chart of the irregular code satisfy the

condition that

for all

, where is the ini-

tial message-error rate at the decoder. Being below for all

guarantees convergence to zero message-error rate for an infi-

nite block-length code.

The design rate of the code is

,

and hence, for a fixed check-degree distribution, the design

problem can be formulated as the following linear program:

maximize

subject to

and

TABLE III
0 IRREGULAR CODES DESIGNED BY SEMI-GAUSSIAN METHOD FOR GAUSSIAN CHANNEL WITH SNR = 1:91 dB

In the above formulation, we have assumed that the elemen-

tary EXIT charts are given. In practice, to find these curves, we

need to know the degree distribution of the code. We need the

degree distribution to associate every input to its equivalent

input pdf. In other words, prior to the design, the degree distribu-

tion is not known, and as a result, we cannot find the elementary

EXIT charts to solve the linear program above.

To solve this problem, we suggest a recursive solution. At first

we assume that the input message to the iteration, Fig. 2, has a

single symmetric Gaussian density instead of a Gaussian mix-

ture. Using this assumption, we can map every message-error

rate at the input of the iteration to a unique input pdf, and so find

curves for different . It is interesting that even with this

assumption, the error in approximating the threshold of conver-

gence, based on our observations, is less than 0.3 dB, and the

codes which are designed have a convergence threshold of at

most 0.4 dB worse than those designed by density evolution.

One reason for this is that when the input of a check node is

mixture of symmetric Gaussians, due to the computation at the Fig. 6. Illustrating the improved accuracy of elementary exit charts based on check node, its output is dominated by the Gaussian in the mix- a Gaussian mixture, compared with a single Gaussian.

ture having the smallest mean.

After finding the appropriate degree distribution based on a single Gaussian assumption, we use this degree distribution for finding the correct elementary EXIT charts based on a Gaussian mixture assumption. Now we use the corrected curves to design an irregular code. In this level of design, the designed degree distribution is close to the used degree distribution in finding the elementary EXIT charts. Therefore, analyzing this code with its

4. Use this degree sequence for mapping to the appropriate input densities (a Gaussian mixture).
5. Find the EXIT charts for different variable degrees. 6. Find a linear combination with an open EXIT chart that
maximizes the rate and meets all the required design criterion.

actual degree distribution shows a minor error. One can continue these recursions for higher accuracy. However, in our ex- A. Examples and Simulation Results

amples, after one iteration of design, the designed threshold and As an example, we consider designing an irregular code with

the exact threshold differed less than 0.01 dB. So we propose the the maximum possible rate for a channel at SNR

following design algorithm.

dB. We also want the code to have regular check degree

and use no variable degree greater than 30. These restrictions

Algorithm

constrain the decoding complexity to a practically acceptable

1. Map every to the associated symmetric Gaussian density level. As noticed in previous work [1], [5], the check side of the

(a single Gaussian).

best codes designed using density evolution is either regular or

2. Find the EXIT charts for different variable degrees.

concentrated around one degree. Usually, we choose the average

3. Find a linear combination with an open EXIT chart that

check-node degree and we build this average using only two

maximizes the rate and meets all the required design

check degrees. Chung et al. provide guidelines for choosing the

criterion.

average check degree [1].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARDAKANI AND KSCHISCHANG: A MORE ACCURATE ONE-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
TABLE IV LIST OF IRREGULAR CODES DESIGNED BY SEMI-GAUSSIAN METHOD

2113

For this example, by studying the elementary EXIT charts number of used degrees to 10, favoring results which use fewer

for different values of check-node degree, it can be seen that check/variable degrees. For check nodes, there has been no in-

the check-node degree must be six. Now, using the curves in tention to make it regular, but as long as it has been possible to

Fig. 4, which are computed based on a single Gaussian assump- design a code with a regular check side with a performance loss

tion at the input of check nodes, we design a code using linear less than 0.01 dB, we have favored a regular structure. Interest-

programming. The designed variable-degree sequence is pre- ingly, all the codes have a regular structure at the check side. In

sented in Table III. Having the degree distribution of this code, the design of each code, we have maximized the code rate for a

we find the exact elementary EXIT charts for each variable de- given channel SNR.

gree. Fig. 6 compares the exact curves with the approximated Table IV suggests that for code rates less than 0.25, the

curves under a single Gaussian assumption. Using exact curves, method shows noticeable inaccuracy. However, for a wide

we repeat the design and achieve a new degree sequence. Since range of rates, it is quite successful. For rates greater than 0.85,

the curves used in the design are based on another degree se- getting close to capacity requires high-degree check nodes. To

quence, we have compared the actual curves for this final design show that our method can actually handle high-rate codes, we

with the curves which are, in fact, used for this design in Fig. 6. designed a rate-0.9497 code, which uses check nodes of degree

This figure shows that the approximation at this level of design 120 but no variable node of degree greater than 40. The vari-

is highly accurate.

able-degree sequence for this code is

According to Table III, the designed code has a gap of about

0.14 dB from the Shannon limit. The best codes designed using

. The threshold of this

density evolution with maximum variable degree of 30 have a code is at

, which means it has a gap of only

gap of about 0.09 dB from the Shannon limit when the rate of 0.0340 dB from the Shannon limit. We have not tried our

the code is 0.5 [5]. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, method for rates greater than 0.95, however, our other results

there is no published rate-1/3 code designed by density evolu- suggest that the method should work fine for even higher rates.

tion. So, a more fair comparison is not possible here. Neverthe-

less, this comparison shows that our 1-D approach does about as well as methods based on density evolution under any practical

VII. CONCLUSION

measure.

We have proposed a more accurate 1-D analysis for LDPC

We have used our design method to design a number of irreg- codes over the AWGN channel which is based on a Gaussian

ular codes with a variety of rates. The results are presented in assumption at the output of variable nodes. We eliminate a

Table IV. In the design of the presented codes, we have had some Gaussian assumption at the output of check nodes, making our

additional constraints, which makes the designed codes more analysis significantly more accurate than previous approaches.

practical for implementation. We have avoided any variable or Compared to the previous work on 1-D analysis of LDPC

check node with degrees higher than 40. We have limited the codes, our method not only offers better precision, but it can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

also be used over a wider range of rates, channel SNRs, and maximum variable degrees.
We compared different measures for including the Gaussian assumption and showed that the mutual information measure allows us to analyze the convergence behavior of LDPC codes very accurately and predict the convergence threshold within a few thousandths of a decibel from the actual threshold.
We used EXIT charts based on message-error rate to design irregular LDPC codes. Our 1-D analysis gives a deep insight to each level of design, and the designed code performs as well as codes designed using methods based on density evolution. Since our analysis is not based on simplicity of check nodes, we believe it can be used for designing other codes defined on graphs, such as irregular turbo codes [6], repeat-accumulate codes [24], concatenated tree codes [25], or when more complicated check codes are employed in an LDPC structure.

REFERENCES

[1] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-

product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian

approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb.

2001.

[2] M. G. Luby and M. Mitzenmacher, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.

[3] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman,

“Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.

[4] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of

capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[5] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density

parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[6] B. J. Frey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Irregular turbo codes,” in Proc. 37th

Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, Computing, Allerton House,

IL, 1999, pp. 241–248.

[7] S. ten Brink, “Iterative decoding trajectories of parallel concatenated

codes,” in Proc. 3rd IEE/ITG Conf. Source, Channel Coding, Munich,

Germany, Jan. 2000, pp. 75–80.

[8]

, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concate-

nated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.

[9] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[10] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance

of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp.

1645–1646, Aug. 1996.

[11] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[12] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke,

“On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of

the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[13] A. Shokrollahi, “New sequence of linear time erasure codes approaching

the channel capacity,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Applied Algebra, Algebraic Al-

gorithms, Error-Correcting Codes. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1999,

Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 65–67.

[14]

, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” IMA Vol. Math., Applicat., vol.

123, pp. 153–166, 2000.

[15] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Low complexity turbo-like

codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Brest,

France, 2000, pp. 73–80.

[16] H. El Gamal and A. R. Hammons, “Analyzing the turbo decoder using

the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp.

671–686, Feb. 2001.

[17] F. Lehmann and G. M. Maggio, “An approximate analytical model of the message passing decoder of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, July 2002, p. 31.
[18] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[19] S. ten Brink and G. Kramer, “Design of repeat-accumulate codes for iterative detection and decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 51, pp. 2764–2772, Nov. 2003.
[20] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[21] S. ten Brink, “Rate one-half code for approaching the Shannon limit by 0.1 dB,” IEEE Electron. Lett., vol. 36, pp. 1293–1294, July 2000.
[22] M. Tuechler and J. Hagenauer, “EXIT charts and irregular codes,” in Proc. Conf. Information Sciences, Systems, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002, pp. 748–753.
[23] M. Peleg, I. Sason, S. Shamai, and A. Elia, “On interleaved differentially encoded convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2572–2582, Nov. 1999.
[24] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Brest, France, 2000, pp. 1–8.
[25] L. Ping and K. Y. Wu, “Concatenated tree codes: A low-complexity high-performance approach,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 791–799, Feb. 2001.
Masoud Ardakani (S’01) received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1994, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1997. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
From 1997 to 1999, he was with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Research Center, Isfahan, Iran. His research interests are in the general area of digital communications, error-control coding, especially codes defined on graphs associated with iterative decoding, and MIMO systems. Mr. Ardakani was the recipient of a number of scholarships and awards including the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Scholarship while at the University of Toronto.
Frank R. Kschischang (S’83–M’91–SM’00) received the B.A.Sc. degree (with honors) from the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, in 1985 and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1988 and 1991, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
He is a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Canada Research Chair in Communication Algorithms at the University of Toronto, where he has been a faculty member since 1991. During 1997–1998, he spent a sabbatical year as a Visiting Scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge. His research interests are focused on the area of coding techniques, primarily on soft-decision decoding algorithms, trellis structure of codes, codes defined on graphs, and iterative decoders. He has taught graduate courses in coding theory, information theory, and data transmission. Dr. Kschischang was the recipient of the Ontario Premier’s Research Excellence Award. From October 1997 to October 2000, he served as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY. He also served as technical program co-chair for the 2004 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory held in Chicago, IL.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

