29.5 
Synthesizing Interconnect-Efficient Low Density 
Parity Check Codes 
Marghoob Mohiyuddin 
Amit Prakash 
The University of Texas at Austin 
The University of Texas at Austin 
Adnan Aziz 
The University of Texas at Austin 
ABSTRACT 
Error correcting codes are widely used in communication 
and storage applications. Codec complexity has usually 
been measured with a software implementation in mind. 
A recent hardware implementation of a Low Density Par- 
ity Check code (LDPC) indicates that interconnect com- 
plexity dominates the VLSI cost. We describe a heuris- 
tic interconnect-aware synthesis algorithm which generates 
LDPC codes that use an order of magnitude less wiring with 
little or no loss of coding efficiency. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors: B.6.3 Automatic 
Synthesis, E.4 Error Control Codes, G.2.2 Graph Algorithms 
General Terms: Algorithms, Performance, Design. 
Keywords: Error correcting codes, low-density parity-check 
codes, routing congestion. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Error correcting codes are widely used in communication 
and storage applications, e.g., Turbo codes in 802.16a and 
Reed-Solomon codes in DVDs. Information theorists have 
studies these codes for decades. However, their measure of 
codec complexity has been more appropriate for software im- 
plementation than hardware implementation, e.g., the num- 
ber of states in the FSM performing decoding, rather than 
the gate count, or wire length. 
It is becoming clearer that there are significant advantages 
to using custom hardware for codecs. One benefit naturally 
is raw performance. More subtle, however, is the benefit in 
reduced power. This is particularly true for coding schemes 
which can use the parallelism offered by hardware: by us- 
ing more devices, we can reduce frequency, and therefore 
scale voltage, thereby achieving the same throughput for 
. 
- 
- .  
less power [4]. 
Turbo codes [Z] and Low Density Parity Check codes (LD- 
PCs) 151 are two leadinr families of error correcting codes- 
, . .  
~ 
I 
both come very close to achieving the bounds predicted by 
Shannon theory. Of these two families, Turbo codes are 
Wayne Wolf 
Princeton University 
hard to parallelize [lo], and hence, benefit less from hard- 
ware implementation. LDPCs however have recently begun 
to gain attention because they are parallelizable, and VLSI 
technology has gotten to the point where LDPCs over fairly 
large code word sizes can be implemented in hardware. 
With the selection of LDPC codes for the satellite digital 
broadcasting standard (DVB-SZ), efficient VLSI implemeu- 
tation of these codes has become all the more important. 
Existing algorithms for building such codes do not take into 
account the VLSI cost [9], specially the wiring complexity 
of the decoder. In a recently published implementation of 
an LDPC decoder hardware, interconnect completely dom- 
inates the lavout 111. 
2. LDPC CODE IMPLEMENTATION 
Low Density Parity Check codes were introduced by Gal- 
lager [5]. They are a natural extension of the parity bit 
commonly used for single bit error detection. Given m mes- 
sage hits, an LDPC encoder constructs a code word of length 
c (> m) bits. The coding scheme is associated with p possi- 
bly overlapping subsets of the code bits such that the parity 
of each subset in any codeword is 0. These subsets are de- 
scribed by a p x c matrix X = [hi,], such that hij = l iff the 
i-th subset has bit j in it. The H matrix is called the parity 
check matrix of the code; it is sparse, hence the name 'low 
density'. 
The H matrix defines the set of possible codewords. If all 
messages are equally likely, then the error correction capa- 
bility of a code is only dependent on the set of codewords; 
specifically it is independent of the actual mapping of mes- 
sages to codewords. Hence the parity check matrix defines 
the error correcting capability of an LDPC code. 
The parity check matrix can be visualized as representing 
a bipartite graph G = (V,E), referred to as the Tanner 
graph of the code, with p + c vertices V = {1,2, ..., p , p  + 
1, ..., p + c }  . The first p vertices ({ 1,2, ... , p } )  correspond to 
p parity checks and are called check nodes. Tht: remaining 
c vertices ( { p +  1, ...,p+ c}) are called code nodes (they can 
be thought of BS representing the c bits of the codeword 
that was-transmitted). A code node is connected to a check 
node if the bit corresponding to it participates in the parity 
check corresponding to the check node. w e  shall refer to the 
Tanner graph of an LDPC code simply as an LDPC graph. 
Message passing [5] is an iterative decoding algorithm for 
decoding LDPC codes, M~~~~~~~ are passed between code 
nodes and check nodes 
the edges connecting them, 
These messages are an estimate of the transmitted code bit 
and a measure of reliability of these estimates. 
~ ~ r m i & ~  
to make digital or hard 
of all or 
of this work for 
penonal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy othewise, to 
republish, to post on sewen or to redistribute to lists, requires prioripecific 
permission andor a fee. 
DAC 2004, June 7-1 I, 2004, San Diego, California, USA. 
copyright zoo4 ACM 1-581 
13-s28-~/04/0006 
... $5.00. 
488 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:43:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Until recently, the major focus of research had been the 
software implementation of LDPC decoders. With the in- 
creasing demand for high throughput decoders, the complex- 
ity of hardware implementation of LDPC encoder/decoder 
has been gaining attention. 
In the first published implementation of a practical LDPC 
decoder hardware, Blanskby et al. [I] describe a high through- 
put LDPC decoder implementation. Each node in the LDPC 
graph is implemented as a separate functional unit. The in- 
terconnects between the units describe the connectivity of 
the nodes. They report that routing congestion was the de- 
termining factor in the area of the chip (50% utilization). 
Furthermore, they also mention that because of the large 
number of long nets, most of the power dissipation is due to 
the switching activity of the wires. 
It becomes important to consider the issues related to 
hardware implementation when designing LDPC codes, to 
make them practical. 
Current approaches to handling hardware related issues 
have been limited to generating LDPC codes from special 
families of graphs (e.g., Ramanujam graphs) [6, 71 which im- 
poses constraints on the code parameters. Another approach 
uses simulated annealing (81 to generate LDPC graphs sat- 
isfvina certain conditions. 
(b) 
Figure 1: A Tanner graph and its layout. 
"
1
 
Campeliot et al. [3] describe the bit-filling method to gen- 
erate LDPC graphs given 
on the degree of the 
nodes and the girth (length of the smallest cycle in a bipar. 
tite graph). 
our 
main contribution is an algorithm to generate LDPC 
codes with a bound on the 'height' of the VLSI layout of the 
decoder for the code. This limits routing congestion with 
little or no loss in the effectiveness of the code, we corn- 
longer wires and therefore, greater interconnect capacitance, 
implying more power consumption. Therefore, congestion 
becomes an important issue as the block size of the code in- 
creases.These are exactly the problems with the VLSI design 
Of B'anksby et al. [l]. 
In summary, VLSI layout issues need to be incorporated in 
the design of the code. Our algorithm addresses this issue 
Dare the Derformance of the generated codes with different 
by generating codes with a constraint on their maximum 
- 
constraints on the 'height' of the decoder and examine the 
performance-area tradeoffs in the code design. In this con- 
text, we also compare the performance of the codes designed 
using the bit-filling algorithm [3] with the ones generated by 
our algorithm. 
3. ALGORITHM AND ANALYSIS 
3.1 Minimizing Cuts 
We introduce the notion of a cut for the Tanner araph of 
- .  
an LDPC code. 
Consider the example shown in Figure l(a). The layout 
in Fiaure l[h) rewesents a routinc channel with nets to he 
~ 
, ,  . 
- 
routed hetween the terminals on both sides of the channel. 
The objective is to minimize the vertical height of the chan- 
nel (which is the number of horizontal tracks required). A 
vertical line defines a cut (we shall refer to this as a verti- 
cal cut) on the edges of the graph. The maximum number 
of edges crossing any vertical cut (dashed vertical lines in 
Figure l(b)) is a lower bound on the height of the channel, 
since the different edges crossing any cut have to be routed 
on different horizontal tracks. For the example shown in 
Figure l(b), the maximum vertical cut-size is 9, hence a fea- 
sible layout would require at least 9 horizontal tracks. The 
layout shown uses exactly 9 horizontal tracks. 
For the Tanner graph of an arbitrary LDPC code with e 
edges, the expected size of the maximum cut would be at 
least $, since the edge connectivities are not constrained. 
Thus, the height of the channel and, consequently, the area 
of the layout is expected to be large. A larger height means 
cut-size. 
3.2 Our Algorithm: Intuition 
It has been shown in [5] that the girth of an LDPC graph 
affects its error correcting properties. A larger girth is desir- 
able for a better performance. Therefore, it is important to 
incorporate the girth constraints into the LDPC code gen- 
eration process. 
The bit-filling algorithm [3] assumes a given number of 
check nodes. Code nodes and the corresponding edges are 
added to the graph until some (e.g., girth) constraints are 
violated. All the edges of a code node are added one after 
another during the algorithm. Our algorithm assumes a 
given number of code nodes and check nodes. At a high 
level, it consists of multiple passes. In a single pass, at most 
a single edge is added to,& check node. Intuitively, since we 
want all the cut-sizes to be constrained the same way, all 
the nodes should be treated in the same way. Therefore, we 
proceed in a breadth first manner instead of the depth first 
manner of bit-filling. Edges are added between a code node 
and a check node only if the constraints are not violated. 
Thus, in a single pass, at most p edges would be added (with 
at most 1 edge added to a code node or check node). A single 
pass can be thought of generating a 1-1 mapping from the 
check nodes to the code nodes. The mapping generated in 
a single pass is constrained by the maximum cut-size. The 
number of passes is determined by the maximum degree of 
the check nodes or the average degree of the check nodes. 
In our implementation, the number of passes is governed by 
the average degree of the check nodes. 
489 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:43:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3.3 Our Algorithm Formalized 
3.3.1 Objective 
Generate an LDPC graph with the following parameters: 
number of code nodes c, number of (parity) check nodes 
p ,  average degree of (parity) check nodes do,,, minimum 
girth of the graph g, and maximum cut-size of the mapping 
generated in a single pass is cutmaz. 
3.3.2 Preliminaries 
1. U = {ul, uz, . . . ,un} is the set of check nodes. 
V = {VI, v2, . . . , vc} is the set of code nodes. 
2. pos, denotes the column number of node U 
3. dist(u,u) denotes the number of edges in the shortest 
path from node U to node v. 
4. For U E U ,  Checks, is the set of nodes adjacent to U. 
5. For v E V ,  we denote by No the set of code nodes 
which are at distance exactly 2 from v. 
6. As in [3], for a check node u, 
is the set of code nodes at distance 2 from some 
code node in Checks,. N: is the set of code nodes 
at distance 2 from some code node,in e, 
hence at 
distance 4 from some code node in Checks,. By a 
similar argument, N: is the set of nodes at distance 
2i - 2 from some code node in Checks,. Hence N: is 
the set of nodes at distance 2i 
~ 
1 from check node U. 
7. For u E U, I, is the largest continuous block of column 
numbers, such that posu E I, and cuti < cut (for a 
given value of cut) for all i E I,. 
3.3.3 Main Algorithm 
We recall the ideas in the bit-filling algorithm [3]. If 
the current graph does not violate the girth constraints, 
then edge (U, U) can he added, without violating the girth 
constraint of g, if and only if dist(u,u) 2 g - 1. Since 
dist(u, U) 2 g - 1, the edge (U, 
U) would create a cycle of 
length at least g (or no cycle if there was no path from u to 
v previously). 
The set Ni contains code nodes at distance 2i - 1 from 
check node U. Therefore, the set of code nodes at distance 
at most g - 2 from U would be N,' = 
We maintain N,' 
for each check node U ,  and Nu for each 
code node v. 
We have assumed that the layout consists of c columns, 
with one code node per column (U, placed on column i). The 
check nodes are placed uniformly on the c columns (assume 
U ,  placed on column [$I). 
Consider a single pass of the algorithm. During a sin- 
gle pass, the cut-size for each column is maintained. The 
cut-sizes during a pass are initialized to 0. The cut-size 
constraint cut is initialized to initcut. Each check node is 
considered one hy one. A check node u of minimum de- 
gree is selected randomly (Step 6). If the girth constraint is 
not considered, then an edge ( u , ~ )  
can he added if it does 
r=i N:. 
1: N,' - 0 , ~  
E U, Nu -0," E V ,  
e c p .  d,,,, 
num-edges + 0 
2: while numxdyes < e and numiter < maziter do 
3: 
A c U, cut< - 0 , l  5 i 5 c 
4: 
cut + initcut 
5: while A # 0 do 
6: 
7: 
A-A-{U} 
8: 
9: 
ComputeI,,S={"EVIpos,EI,) 
10: 
C = S - N c  
11: 
i f C Z 0 t h e n  
12: 
13: 
Update Nz, 
Checks,, N, 
1 4  
15: 
16: 
~ 1 7  
else if cut < cutm.. 
then 
18: 
cut + min(Zcut,cut,,,) 
19: 
Repeat Steps 9-16 
20: 
end if 
21: 
end if 
22: 
end while 
23: end while 
Select U E A {using some heuristic} 
if N; # V then 
Select II E C {using same heuristic} 
Update, for all v' E V ,  Nu, 
num-edges + num-edges + 1 
Update cut, for all i 
Algorithm 1: LDPC Code Generation 
not increase the cut-size of the columns that the edge tra- 
verses. Edge (.,U) 
would violate the cut-size constraint if 
pas, 
I, (since I, is maximum, cutj = cut for a column j 
on the boundary of I%). Therefore, the set S of code nodes 
which can be made neighbors of U (without considering the 
girth constraint) is S = { U  E V 1 pos, E I"}. The set of 
code nodes that can be added as neighbors of U, without 
violating the girth and the cut constraints, would then be 
C = S - N:. Choose a code node U of minimum degree ran- 
domly from C (Step 13) and add the edge (.,U). 
Update 
the cut-sizes, N;, Nu, for all U' E Checks,, and Nu. If C 
turns out to he empty because of the cut constraint, then 
the cut-size constraint cut is increased (until cut,,,.,), 
and 
S and C are recomputed. If no edges can be added to U in 
the current pass, due to the maximum cut constraint or the 
girth constraint, it is not considered further in the current 
pass. 
Updating the set Nu is easy since v now shares check node 
U with code nodes in Checks,. Hence, N, = N, U Checks,. 
Similarly, for all v' in Checks,, Nu, = N,r U{v}. 
Update the set N: by first computing the set M' of code 
nodes at distance at most g - 2 from v (set M' is {v} and 
then compute Mi = UUrEM,-, 
Nu,, let M' = Ui& M', 
this is exactly similar to the definition of NL). Change N: 
r=L 
to N: UM'. 
The number of nasses is determined bv the total number 
of edges to be added. So, the objective is to generate an 
LDPC graph with e = d,,, 
. p edges. 
For Steps 6 and 13, we select a node of minimum d e  
gree randomly. This can be extended to the node selection 
heuristic in the bit-filling algorithm [3]. 
3.3.4 Complexity Analysis 
Steps 3-4 take O(c) time. Steps 9-10 take O(c) time. 
For Steps 13-16, M' can be computed in O(c) time; other 
updates also take O(c) time. Steps 17-19 are a repetition 
of Steps 9-16, they require O(c) time. Inner loop runs p 
times. Outer loop runs 5 maz-iter times. Time complexity 
is, therefore, O(maaiter. p .  c). For our implementation, 
490 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:43:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
I 
' \ '  
E"I1dBj 
Figure 2: A comparison of LDPC codes with pa- 
rameters ~ ~ 1 0 2 4 ,  
p=512, g=6, d,,,=& 
Max is the 
maximum cut-size constraint for each pass. Final is 
the maximum cut-size of t h e  generated graph. In 
randomized bit-filling, nodes are picked at random 
from the set of candidate nodes. 
maxiter = O(davg), therefore time taken = O(d,,,pc) = 
O(ep) = O ( p 2 )  (since e = O ( p ) ) .  
4. RESULTS 
Message passing decoding was used with 64 iterations of 
decoding for each block. BPSK mapping was used for trans- 
mitting codewords (0 + +1,1 - -1). LDPC codes being 
linear codes, we only need to transmit the all zeros codeword 
and try decoding it for simulation studies. This is because 
the Gaussian noise added to the transmitted codeword is in- 
dependent of the transmitted codeword. The best codes out 
of 5 randomly generated codes, were used for the results. 
For comparison with Blanksby et al.'s [l] code, we gener- 
ated rate112 codes with c=1024, p=512, g=6 and d,,,=6.5 
and 8. Higher values of g have been mentioned in the figures, 
whenever increasing g resulted in an improvement. The sim- 
ulations were done for an additive white Gaussian channel 
with varying signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), where the SNR is 
defined as the ratio of the signal power (which is normalized 
to 1) to the variance of the Gaussian noise. 
Figure 2 illustrates the change in performance of codes 
generated as cut,,, 
is varied. Observe that except for very 
small cut,,, 
(in this case 
~ 
16 and 32) the performance 
of codes degrades only marginally as cut,,, 
is decreased. 
Therefore, our algorithm is able to find good LDPC codes 
with small maximum cut-size. Note that the code with final 
maximum cut-size = 605 (generated by our algorithm) has 
performance same as that of the code with final maximum 
cut-size = 2063, about 75% reduction in the maximum cut- 
size (without loss in performance). The height of the layout 
as well as the area is directly proportional to the cut-size. 
Figure 3 compares the performance of codes generated 
with different parameters. We used the data points for 
Blanksby et al.'s code [l]. For the same block error rate, 
the difference in SNR is less than 0.7 db. This means that 
using our codes, the increase in transmitter power would be 
less than 17%, while the area of the decoder reduces to a 
quarter, which is desirable in many applications. 
We did interconnect layout for the decoder of the gen- 
Y W Y .  
0 
2 
3 
1 
5 
"OldBj 
Figure 3: A comparison of LDPC codes with pa- 
rameters ~ ~ 1 0 2 4 ,  
p=512, d,,,=6.5. 
Unless stated 
otherwise, g=6. 
erated codes in 0 . 1 8 ~  
technology. For two codes with c = 
1024,p = 512,g = 6, d,,, 
= 8, and varying cut,,, 
we com- 
puted the height and width of the channel layout (assuming 
single bit messages). With cutmor = 256, the width, height 
and area are 3.56 mm, 1.31 mm and 4.66 mm2 respectively. 
For cut,,, 
= 64, the width, height and area are 3.56 mm, 
0.36 mm and 1.27 mm2 respectively. This is a 75% reduction 
in channel layout area with little performance degradation. 
Furthermore, reducing the wire lengths would decrease the 
power consumption of the chip. 
Blanksby et al.'s 111 approach to building codes is based 
more on extensive simulations for a large number of ran- 
domly generated LDPC codes. Our algorithm, in compar- 
ison, adopts a constructive approach to generating layout- 
aware LDPC codes. 
. 
5. REFERENCES 
[I] A. J .  Blanksby and C. J. Howland. A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 
1024-b. Rate-1/2 Low-Density Paritv-Check Decoder. IEEE 
J .  Sol&State 
CiGircuits, 37404412, Mar. 2002. 
Wiley and Sons, Aug.,l999. 
LDPC Codes Using Bit-Filling. In IEEE Int. Conf. 
Communications, pages 55-59, June 2001. 
[4] A. P. Chandrakasan, S. Sheng, and R. W. Brodersen. 
Low-Power CMOS Digital Design. IEEE J. Solid-State 
Circuits, 27473464, Apr. 1992. 
[5] R. G. Gallager. Low-Density Panty-Check Codes. PhD 
thesis, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 1962. 
[6] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag. ArchitecturtAware 
Low-Density Parity-Check codes. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits 
and Systems, May 2003. 
Methodology for High Performance Programmable Decoder 
Cores for AA-LDPC Codes. IEEE Workshop on Signal 
Processing Systems, Aug. 2003. 
Implementation. In IEEE Int. Symp. I n f o m .  Theory, page 
463, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 2002. 
[9] E. Yeo, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam. Iterative Decoder 
Architectures. IEEE Communications Magazine, Aug. 
2003. 
[lo] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam. VLSI 
Architectures for Iterative Decoders in Magnetic Recording 
Channels. IEEE %ns. 
Magnetics, 37748-755, Jan. 2001. 
[2] M. Bossert. Channel Coding fov Telecommzmicatiom. John 
131 J. Campeliot, D. S. Modha, and S. Rajagopalan. Designing 
[7] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag. A Novel Design 
[E] J. Thorpe. Design of LDPC Graphs for Hardware 
49 1 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:43:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
