294

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 10, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2004

Block-Circulant Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Optical Communication Systems
Olgica Milenkovic, Member, IEEE, Ivan B. Djordjevic, and Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A novel family of structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with block-circulant parity-check matrices that consist of permutation blocks is proposed. The codes from this family are based on new combinatorial objects termed cycle-invariant difference sets, and they have low storage requirements, fast encoding algorithms, and girth of at least six. Most importantly, they tend to outperform many other known structured LDPCs of comparable rate and length.
Index Terms—Cycle-invariant difference sets, forward error correction, low-density parity-check codes, optical communications.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE role of forward error correction (FEC) in maintaining acceptable transmission quality is becoming increasingly important as the capacity of dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM) long-haul transmission systems grows. FEC can improve the performance of optical communications systems without introducing major changes to optical materials and devices and without major paradigm shifts in hardware such as converting to all-optical networks. This characteristic is especially important as the physical properties of optical networks are being pushed to their limits. The FEC proposed in this paper can readily be adapted to follow any shift in system implementation.
In state-of-the-art optical communication systems, two FEC standards are currently in use, both based on Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghen (BCH) codes [1]. For example, “in-band” FEC used in SONET/SDH framing is a 3-[4359, 4320] shortened BCH code (ITU-T G.707 standard). “Outband” FEC coding is accomplished by using interleaved Reed–Solomon (RS) [255, 238] codes, as specified in the digital wrapper of the ITU G.709 standard. The FEC used in submarine systems is based on a Reed–Solomon code with parameters [255, 239], as specified by the ITU-T G.975 standard [2]. For optical communication systems with bit rates exceeding 10 Gb/s, more powerful FEC codes with large coding gains and high code rates are desirable. Two such schemes have been proposed
Manuscript received September 2, 2003; revised January 18, 2004. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant ITR 0325979.
O. Milenkovic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303 USA (e-mail: milenkov@colorado.edu).
I. B. Djordjevic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85719 USA and the Faculty of Computing, Engineering and Mathematical Sciences, University of the West of England, Bristol, U.K. (e-mail: ivan@ece.arizona.edu; icadj@yahoo.com).
B. Vasic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85719 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSTQE.2004.827832

recently: Ait Sab et al. [3] proposed a concatenated scheme

with two RS codes, and Pyndiah [4] and Ait Sab et al. [5]

proposed block turbo codes.

Recently, the authors showed in [6]–[8] that the error-cor-

recting capability of turbo codes can be surpassed by low-den-

sity parity-check (LDPC) codes; at the same time, the hardware

complexity of LDPC codes tends to be significantly smaller than

that corresponding to turbo codes [9]. LDPC codes are usually

designed in a pseudorandom fashion [10], but this leads to en-

coders/decoders with complexity exceeding practical limits im-

posed on high-speed optical communication systems. A more

attractive approach that we propose in this paper is to design

block-circulant LDPC codes with permutation blocks based on

a new class of combinatorial objects; these structures allow for

small storage requirements, as well as for performing encoding

and decoding via fast and simple circuits. Such high-speed FEC

architectures are of crucial importance in optical communica-

tions, and there has been a great deal of activity in this area. For

example, Agere Systems (see Azadet et al. [11]) reported an op-

tical networking interface device with four parallel RS codecs,

each operating at 2.5 Gb/s. Additionally, Agere Systems [12],

[13] and Flarion [14] researchers developed codecs employing

LDPC designs that seem to be a combination of structured and

random-like components.

The main result of this paper is a novel class of LDPC

codes based on a combinatorial structure referred to as an

-fold cycle-invariant difference set (CIDS). The parity-check

matrices of the proposed codes are block-circulants with

permutation blocks. Both the minimum distance and the girth

of the corresponding bipartite graph [8] are at least six. By

carefully designing the cycle-invariant difference set, and by

appropriately permuting the elements in some block-rows,

code graphs with

( an odd prime) variable

nodes can be made to have girth at least 2 2. As the authors

demonstrated by extensive computer simulations in [8], codes

with high girth tend to perform very well, since a larger number

of message-passing iterations can be performed before extrinsic

information of nodes in the graph becomes correlated. Due

to the block-circulant structure of the parity-check matrix,

encoding can be performed very efficiently. Additionally,

the min-sum decoding algorithm employed for soft-decision

decoding of these codes requires a number of binary logic

operations at least one order of magnitude smaller than that

corresponding to hard-decision decoding of RS or turbo codes

[4], [5] with comparable performance. For more details on

min-sum algorithm complexity, the reader is referred to [17,

Appendix B] and [20]–[22].

1077-260X/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: BLOCK-CIRCULANT LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

295

The performance of the codes proposed in this paper is assessed in a very realistic simulation environment, outlined in Section III, that includes impairments originating from amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise, pulse distortions due to fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion, crosstalk effects, and intersymbol interference. For more details on the transmission system model, the reader is referred to our previous work [17], [18]. Since the coding gain of these LDPC codes is much higher than the gain of RS or turbo codes, they are excellent candidates for use in long-haul optical transmission systems.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II our novel family of LDPC codes is described. In Section III the system model used for obtaining the simulation results is briefly described. The bit error rate (BER) results are given in Section IV, and Section V contains the concluding remarks.

II. CIDS BASED LDPC CODES

The codes proposed in this paper are based on the theory

of generalized difference sets, more precisely on 1-fold

CIDSs, introduced by the authors in [15].

A general

difference set over an additive Abelian

group of order is a set

of distinct ele-

ments from , such that each nonzero element from can be

represented as

in at most ways. Codes based on dif-

ference sets with

have short cycles, and therefore we will

restrict our attention to the case

. The constraint

implies that every element of the group can be represented at

most once as the difference of two distinct elements from the

difference set. For the sake of simplicity, we will henceforth call

general difference sets by difference sets.

Let denote the additive group of integers modulo

and let the elements of a general difference set over

be arranged in a given order. Furthermore, let denote

the cyclic shift operator that shifts a sequence cyclically

positions to the right. If for

, the ordered sets

mod (where subtraction is performed

component-wise) are themselves difference sets, we say that

is an ( 1)-fold CIDS.

For example, consider and the ordered difference set

. For this set,

mod is itself a difference set. Since

is in fact a twofold CIDS over . On the other hand, the

difference set {0,1,3,9} over gives rise to three different

sets, namely,

and

, none of which is a difference set. Therefore,

{0,1,3,9} is a trivial (one-fold) CIDS over .

The parity-check matrix of the proposed regular LDPC codes

can now be described as follows.

Let be an

block-circulant matrix with

permutation blocks determined as different powers of the basic

permutation matrix of order . In other words, let

where

are nonnegative integers and where is an

basic circulant permutation matrix

The row and column weights of the code described by (1) are

and , respectively, and the girth of the corresponding Tanner

graph is at most equal to six. The last claim can be proved by

simply observing the following three facts: first, two permuta-

tion matrices on the diagonals of the first two block-rows are

the same. For example, the blocks at position (1, 1) and (2, 2)

of the parity-check matrix are both . The last two permuta-

tion blocks within the first two rows are and , respec-

tively, and they additionally appear as blocks at position (3,

1) and (3, 2), closing up a cycle of length six. In order to en-

sure that codes constructed in this way have no cycles of length

four in their corresponding bipartite graphs, and that they have

good minimum distance, the exponents of the basic permuta-

tion matrix must be chosen with care. For example, it can be

shown that if

, and

, then the LDPC code spec-

ified by of the form given by (1) has girth equal to six and

minimum distance of at least four.

In general, the code generated by (1) is an intersection of

quasi-circulant (quasicyclic) codes of order . A quasi-circulant

code of order is a code with the property that any cyclic shift

of a codeword in positions represents another codeword. The

intersection of a class of codes represents the set of codewords

contained in all codes belonging to . Quasi-circulant codes are

well known in classical coding theory literature, and they can be

efficiently encoded in linear time.

We will give two examples illustrating possible encoding

strategies for codes specified by (1).

Example 1: The generator matrix of a code from the

block-circulant class can sometimes be obtained directly

from the parity check matrix by solving a simple set of linear

equations. One such illustrative example for and with

parameters

, and

, is shown as

Here, denotes the identity matrix and

. It can be

observed that he generator matrix is also a block-circulant

matrix with permutation blocks. This implies that encoding is

very straightforward to accomplish.

Example 2: Let

, and for the sake of simplicity

write

. Additionally, let a codeword be

parsed into subwords of length each, i.e.,

(1)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

296

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 10, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2004

Then encoding can be performed by setting desired information sequence, and by rewriting

to the For

and , a primitive element of the field GF

as with minimal polynomial

, the difference set obtained

from the construction given by (4) is

(2)

where

For

and , a primitive element of GF with minimal

polynomial

, the CIDS set described by (3)

contains the following elements:

Observe that the matrix on the left-hand side of (2) is block-

Toeplitz with circulant (permutation) blocks. Inverses of such

matrices can be computed very efficiently.

If, on the other hand, the set of exponents

is

an ( 1)-fold CIDS, then both the minimum distance and the

girth of the corresponding code is at least six. Furthermore, the

construction for CIDS sets to be described shortly also allows

for constructing codes with girths eight, ten, or values exceeding

ten, although for this purpose the permutation blocks of the ma-

trix (1) have to be permuted in a certain manner. We will illus-

trate these ideas in Example 5.

Let be a primitive element of the finite field GF (where

is an odd prime). Then the set of integers specified by

The advantage of using the 1 instead of the 1 method is that a larger family of codes can be constructed. The disadvantage lies in the fact that the construction over a field of smaller order usually produces more cycles of short length in the code graph [15].
Example 4: The following sets, obtained by deleting a proper subset of elements from [constructed according to (4) and Example 3] and subsequently rearranging it, are CIDSs:

GF

(3)

is a -fold CIDS mod 1 [15]. The length of a CIDS code de-

scribed by this set is

1), which can be very large even for

small prime values of . If one uses the following construction

instead:

GF

(4)

where a primitive element GF , the resulting code length

is

1), but the set is not a CIDS. By erasing a carefully

chosen subset of elements from and, if necessary, permuting

the order of the elements, one can obtain CIDS set of cardinality

usually larger than described by (3).

We will refer to the constructions described above as the Bose

construction, due to the fact that Bose was the first researcher

to use finite field methods to construct ordinary difference sets.

Example 3: Let

and let be a primitive element of

the field GF with minimal polynomial

. Then,

the set

is a difference set modulo

.

Example 5: A code with girth eight can be constructed by choosing the exponents of the permutation matrices to be rearranged subsets of CIDS sets. For example, a code of rate
, length 4320, and girth of eight can be constructed by using 12 block-columns (i.e., 12 permutation matrices within a block-row) and three block-rows (i.e., three permutation matrices within a block-column) with exponents
Based on Tanner’s bound for the minimum distance of a code, we have the equation shown at the bottom of the page, where
denotes the girth of the code graph and denotes the column weight of the parity-check matrix, it follows that the code with girth eight also has minimum distance of at least six. Unfortunately, the encoding problem for this construction becomes significantly more complex because of the fact that the matrix to be inverted during this process is no longer block-Toeplitz.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: BLOCK-CIRCULANT LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

297

Some of the sets described above will be used to evaluate the performance of structured LDPC based on (1) and its modifications over optical communication systems. The last element of the first set of Example 3 will be omitted in order to design a code length of 4608, rather than 4896.
Remark: Since the parity check matrix of the codes investigated in this paper consists of permutation matrices, it is fairly straightforward to determine the number of cycles of a given length in the Tanner graph of the code. By referring to the results in [23], one can, for example, see that for the GF} construction without subset removal, there are 59 block-cycles of length six in the code. This results in exactly six-cycles. By slightly modifying the construction of the parity check matrix as given by (1) into

it is possible to obtain a code-graph with girth six, but with a

significantly smaller number of cycles; for the aforementioned

example, the number of cycles becomes only

.

For the code construction utilizing the modified difference

sets constructed over GF , the number of cycles of length

six also tends to be small. For the third set in Example 4, the

number of six-cycles is only

.

III. SYSTEM MODEL DESCRIPTION
A wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) system is considered.The continuous-wave laser signals at different wavelengths are modulated by using independently encoded electrical streams and a Mach–Zehnder (MZ) modulator, WDM multiplexed and transmitted over the same fiber. The utilized carrier-suppressed return-to-zero (CSRZ) modulator is composed of a laser diode, two MZ intensity modulators (the first serving as modulator, the second as non-RZ to RZ converter), a pseudorandom bit sequence generator, and an LDPC encoder. The optical signal at the receiver side is split into separate channels by using an optical demultiplexer. Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs) and dispersion compensating fibers (DCF) are deployed periodically to compensate the loss and accumulated dispersion of the standard single-mode fiber (SMF). The direct detection receiver observed is composed of a WDM demultiplexer, a PIN photodiode, an electrical filter, and a sampler followed by a decoder. An EDFA is used as a preamplifier.
The propagation of a signal through the transmission media is modeled by the nonlinear Schrödinger equation [16] solved using the split-step Fourier method, as described in [16].
For more details on the transmission system model implemented, the reader is referred to our previous paper [17], and corresponding derivations may be found in [18].
In optical communication systems, it is customary to use the Q-factor [19] as a figure of merit, rather than the signal-to-noise ratio, and in this paper we will follow this convention.

Fig. 1. BER performance of CIDS-based LDPC codes at 40 Gb/s with six iterations of the min-sum algorithm.

IV. PERFORMANCE OF CIDS-BASED LDPC CODES

Figs. 1 and 2 plot the BER obtained from Monte Carlo simulations with six iterations for CIDS-based LDPC [4608, 3744]

codes with

a) code rate

(redundancy of 23%) employing

three block-rows in (1); b) CIDS-based LDPC [4608, 3456] with code rate 0.75 (re-
dundancy of 33%) with four block-rows; c) modified CIDS-based codes of length 4320 and 3960 and
girth six and eight, respectively.

A WDM system with 40-Gb/s bit rate per channel and a channel spacing of 100 GHz is considered. It is assumed that the observed channel is located at 1552.524 nm (193.1 THz)

and that there exists a nonnegligible interaction with six neighboring channels. The influence of optical and electrical filters is taken into account as well. The transmission system considered has a dispersion map composed of an SMF section (of length 80 km), followed by an EDFA to compensate for

the fiber losses in the SMF section, and a DCF section to

compensate for both GVD and second-order GVD, as well

as another EDFA to compensate for the fiber losses in the

DCF section. Eight SMF-DCF sections are considered, and the

Q-factor is additionally decreased by noise loading.

Although of smaller redundancy, the LDPC [4608, 3744] per-

forms comparably or better than the turbo block code BCH [128,

113, 6] [5] of redundancy 28%. The LDPC [4608, 3456] of

redundancy 33% has about a 1-dB larger coding gain then the

described turbo block code. The expected coding gain of the

LDPC [4608, 3456] code at BER

is about 10 dB. When

a code obtained from the modified Bose construction is em-

ployed, the coding gain larger exceeds 11 dB at 10 , which is

the best result reported so far. Notice that the complexity of the

min-sum algorithm is significantly lower than the complexity

of the turbo-decoding algorithm, since the only operations performed are addition and calculating the minimum. Since the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

298

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN QUANTUM ELECTRONICS, VOL. 10, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2004

Fig. 2. BER performance of CIDS-based LDPC codes at 40 Gb/s with six iterations of the min-sum algorithm.

code rate influence is included in Q-factor calculation, the reported coding gain is equivalent to the net effective coding gain of an additive white Gaussian noise channel.
V. CONCLUSION
We proposed a novel class of FEC regular LDPC codes suitable for a long-haul optical transmission system based on cycleinvariant difference sets. The codes have a simple construction, fast-encoding and low-complexity decoding algorithms, high girth, large minimum distance, and excellent BER performance. Since the simulation results show that these block-circulant LPDC codes perform very well in the presence of ASE noise, fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion, and intersymbol interference, and significantly outperform previously proposed FEC schemes utilizing turbo codes, we are confident in proposing their use for high-speed long-haul optical transmission.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to express their gratitude to V. S. Rao for helping them obtain the simulation results for two curves shown in Fig. 1.
REFERENCES
[1] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: North Holland, 1977.
[2] “Forward error correction for submarine systems,” ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector, Tech. Rec. G.975, 1996.
[3] O. A. Sab et al., “Concatenated forward error correction schemes for long-haul DWDM optical transmission systems,” in ECOC, 1999, pp. II–290.
[4] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near optimum decoding of product codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, pp. 1003–1010, 1998.
[5] O. A. Sab and V. Lemarie, “Block turbo code performances for long-haul DWDM optical transmission systems,” in OFC, vol. 3, 2001, pp. 280–282.
[6] B. Vasic and I. B. Djordjevic, “Low-density parity check codes for long haul optical communications systems,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 14, pp. 1208–1210, 2002.

[7] I. B. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “Projective geometry low-density parity-

check codes for ultra-long haul WDM high-speed transmission,” IEEE

Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 15, pp. 784–786, 2003.

[8] B. Vasic, I. B. Djordjevic, and R. Kostuk, “Low-density parity check

codes and iterative decoding for long haul optical communication sys-

tems,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 21, pp. 438–446, 2003.

[9] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT

Press, 1963.

[10] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 399–431, 1999.

[11] K. Azadet et al., “Equalization and FEC techniques for optical trans-

ceivers,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 317–327,

2002.

[12] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “A 220 mW 1 Gb/s 1024-bit rate-1/2 low

density parity check code decoder,” in IEEE Conf. Custom Integrated

Circuits, 2001, pp. 293–296.

[13]

, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check

codes,” in ISCAS 2001, vol. 4, 2001, pp. 742–745.

[14] Vector LDPC Technology [Online]. Available: http://www.flarion.com/

products/products_vector.html

[15] O. Milenkovic, K. Prakash, and B. Vasic, “Regular and irregular low

density parity check codes for iterative decoding based on cycle-in-

variant difference sets,” in Proc. 41st Allerton Conf. Communications,

Control and Computing, Allerton, IL, Oct. 2003.

[16] G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics. San Diego, CA: Academic,

2001.

[17] I. B. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “Affine geometry LDPC codes in ultra-

long-haul optical transmission systems,” in 6th Int. Conf. Telecommuni-

cations in Modern Satellite, Cable and Broadcasting Service (TELSIKS

2003), vol. 1, 2003, pp. 75–78.

[18]

, “An advanced direct detection receiver model,” J. Opt. Commun.,

vol. 25, pp. 6–9, 2004.

[19] N. S. Bergano and C. R. Davidson, “Circulating loop transmission ex-

periments for the study long-transmission systems using erbium-doped

fiber amplifiers,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 13, pp. 879–888, May

1995.

[20] E. Yeo, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “Iterative decoder architec-

tures,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 41, pp. 132–140, Aug. 2003.

[21] H. Xiao-Yu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient

implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC

codes,” in Proc. GLOBECOM, vol. 2, Nov. 2001, pp. 1036–1036.

[22] K. Azadet, E. F. Haratsch, H. Kim, F. Saibi, J. H. Saunders, M. Shaffer,

L. Song, and Y. Meng-Lin, “Equalization and FEC techniques for optical

transceivers,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 317–327, Mar.

2002.

[23] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd

Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000,

pp. 543–546.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: BLOCK-CIRCULANT LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

299

Olgica Milenkovic (M’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nis, Yugoslavia, in 1994 and 1997, respectively, and the M.S. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in 2002.
She joined the Faculty of the University of Colorado, Boulder, in 2002. Her research interests include coding theory, analysis of algorithms, combinatorial mathematics, and probability theory.
Ivan B. Djordjevic received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nish, Serbia.
From 1994 to 1996, he was with the University of Nish. From 1996 to 2000, he was with the State Telecommunications Company (Serbia Telecom), District Office for Networks, Nish. He was involved in digital transmission systems commissioning and acceptance, design, maintenance, installation, and connection. From 2000 to 2001, he was with the National Technical University of Athens, Greece; and with TyCom US Inc. (now TyCo Telecommunications). He was involved in modeling and simulation of DWMD systems. During 2002 and 2003, he was with the University of Arizona, Tucson; University of Bristol, U.K.; and University of the West of England, Bristol, working on forward error correction and iterative decoding for optical transmission, optical CDMA, high-speed transmission, and optical switches. He is now with the University of Arizona, on leave with the University of the West of England. He is the author of more than 35 international journal articles and more than 45 international conference papers. His research interests include DWDM fiber-optic communication systems and networks, FEC for optical communications, optical CDMA, optical packet switching, coding theory, coherent optical communications, and statistical communication theory.

Bane Vasic (SM’02) received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nish, Serbia.
From 1996 to 1997, he was a Visiting Scientist at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Kodak Research, Rochester, NY, where he was involved in research in optical storage channels. From 1998 to 2000, he was with Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies. He was involved in research in coding schemes and architectures for high-speed applications, and research in iterative decoding and low-density parity check codes, as well as development of codes and detectors for Lucent (now Agere) chips. Presently, he is a Faculty Member of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona. He has authored more than 25 journal articles, more than 50 conference articles, more than half a dozen book chapters, and one book. He was Coorganizer of the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) Workshops on Optical/Magnetic Recording and Optical Transmission, and Theoretical Advances in Information Recording, 2004. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, communication theory, and digital communications and recording. Dr. Vasic is a member of the Editorial Board of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS. He was Technical Program Chair, IEEE Communication Theory Workshop, 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

