IEEE 6th CAS Symp. on Emerging Technologies: Mobile and WirelessCon" Shanghai, China, May 31-June 2,ZM)4

Performance of Generalized Soft-Output Demapper for LDPC-CFMT System over
Frequency Selective Fading Channel *

Qiang LI, Guangguo BI, Peng DU
National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory Southeast University, Nanjing, P. R. China, 210096

Absrmcl- In this paper, ne proposed the LDPC coded FMT systems and showed that the LDPC codes are effective to improve the bit error rate of FMT in frequency Jclective fading channel. When the LDPC codes are used for the FMT systemsin mobile communications, especially in high hit rate applications, high bandwidth elciency is required, and thus the high-order modulation is preferred. In this paper, we also propose a new soft decision metric generation method, which obviates the need of the noise variance estimation, for M-PSIVM-QAM modulation over frequency selective fading channel. Computer simulation indicates that there is no performance loss with our new metric, but the complexity of implementation is reduced.
Krywordp LDPC,FMT,Frequency-selective fading channel
I. INTRODUCTION
Multicarrier Modulation (MCM) systems have been extensively studied and used in high-hit-rate data transmission qplications. The main advantage of MCM is that it allows transmission over high frequencyselective channels at a low receiver implementation cost because costly equalizers needed in the single-carrier systems are dramatically simplified. A spectrally shaped channel usually destroys the orthogonality between suhchannels so that they cannot he fully separated at the receiver and causes both interchannel interference (ICI) and intersymbol interference (ISI). This paper pursuits a recent Multicarrier Modulation (MCM) approach, specially give the name of Filtered Multitone (FMT) [ 1-31, pioneered by Cheruhini, Eleftheriou, and Olcer of IBM. FMT uses excess bandwidth in the frequency domain to reduce or eliminate interchannel interference.
Recently, lowdensity parity<heck (LDPC)[4, 51 codes have attracted much attention particularly in the field of
coding theory. LDPC codes were proposed by Gallager in
1962. AAer that, the field nearly lay dormant nearly for next 30 years. Interest in LDPC codes was rekindled by the discovery of turbo codes. The performance of LDPC codes is very close to the Shannon limit with practical decoding complexity like Turbo codes. Recently, LDPC codes have attracted much attention in the field o f coding theory because of its excellent performance. In this paper, we proposed LDPC coded FMT (LDPCCFMT) systems, and investigated its BER perfomnce on the frequency-selective fading channel.
* Supported by 863 program ofChina under Grant 2001AA123015

Due to the rapidly growing demand for high data rate mobile and personal communication systems, spectral efficiency is of primary concem in the design of wireless communication systems. Consequently, high order spectrally efficient modulation technique such as M-PSKiM-QAM becomes an attractive choice for many wireless communication system designs. The bit error rate performance of M-PSWM-QAM with hard decision decoding has been extensively studied over both wired and wireless channels [6-8]. QAM demodulation together with soR decision decoding of parallekoncatenated codes is studied m [9] under the assumption of perfect channel knowledge while in [IO] the effects of imperfect channel estimation on the performance of soft decoding turbo codes are investigated. In [Ill, a simplified version of soft information generation method was proposed for Binary Interleaved Coded Modulation (BICM). However, noise variance knowledge is necessary for all above methods. In this paper, a new simplified soft decision metric for M-PSWM-QAM without noise variance knowledge is derived, and the effects of noise variance on the performance of soft decoding Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes are investigated. Unlike the conventional soft decision metric,
the new one depends on the relative magnitude of the
modulation symbols within the constellation rather than noise variance of channel output. Moreover, by recognizing that the obtained sofl metric is expressed as the distance difference in Euclidian space, we further generalize the obtained results top-norm.
From the conmuter sirmlation, we see that the new metric performs as well as that proposed in [Ill, hut with lower complexity. Also from the simulation, we conclude that LDPC codes are effective to improve the BER performance of system on the frequency-selective fading channel.
11. LDPC CODED FMT
In a multipath environment, some subcarriers of FMT may be completely lost because of deep fades. Hence, in this case, it is necessary to use some error correction codes to improve the BER performance. Fig.1 shows the proposed LDPCCFMT system model. At the transmitter, information hits are encoded at the LDPC encoder and mapped into symbols, after that the serial symbol stream is converted into a set of N parallel substreams. A hank of N handpass
filters(P,(t), called synthesis filter bank, is employed to
construct the subchannel signals. Then individual subchannel

0-7803-7938-1/04 /$20.00 0 2004 IEEE

437

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:58:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

signals are summed and transmitted over frequency selective fading channel. At the receiver, the subchannel signals are extracted from channel output signal by a bank of N bandpass
filters f,,( t ) named analysis filter bank. After that, each
subchannel signal is sampled and equalized, and the bit soft
information is obtained from equalizer output. After parallel to serial conversion these sot? information outputs to LDPC decoder. Decoder output bits are the estimates of originally
transmtted information bits.

If channel is ideal, i.e. h(t)=S(t) and sampling

subchannel signal at I = k T , then

v, I

:\(

k

T) I

=X

:I."

(.8),

where assuming that the Pulse energy iS unity, i.e.
* j.*P(t)P*(l)dt = I ' and that different translates Of pulse
arcorthogonal, i.e. j-zp(t-mT)q'(f -kT)df = O ( k ).

H

~ in prac~tical app~lications~, the ~ is ~seldom,

ideal. Thus, subchannel equalization is necessary becauise

there always has some intersymbol interference in the eac:h

subchannel. Nevertheless, the length of equalizer is reduced

as the symbol period is increased by afactor of ( N + v )

compared with its single carrier counterpart.

hT X,
Fig.1 LDPCCFMT communicalion system model

Various authors have studied the discrete-time implementations of FMT system by use of Fast Fourisr Transform (FFT) and multirate signal processing techniques. For detailed information,interest readers may refer to 12,121.
111. PROPOSED SOFT DECISION METRIC

The original modulated continuous-timewaveform is

c+e N-l
4 0 = Cx",,V"-(tm Q .

(I)

=,- "4

where m is symbol index. In FMT approaches. each of the
continuous-time basis functions iS a modulated version of a

single low-pass function

rp"(t)=rp(t)expCI~(N+V)nt/(~). (2)

with the frequency response ~m~ of lowpass function

q(r) satisfying

Q(W)=O if I U ~ Z Z / T .

(3)

Thus, the frequency response @.(m) of synthesis filter

P"(0 is

@"(CO) =@(a,-21m(N +V)I(TN)).

(4).

The frequency response Fm(m)of analysis filter fn(t) is selected as the complex conjugate of corresponding synthesis filter, i.e.

Fn( 0 )= Q; ( 0 )

(5)

Therefore,

Q 4( 0 ) H ( O ) F k(w)=0 ( k +.n)

(6)

provided that maximum Doppler frequency shift of the
channel is less than guard band of width 2nv /(No.Thus,

there are no intersubchannel interferences, and channel i q u l s e response's usual destruction of subchannel

orthogonality that was basically presented in other multicarrier partition method is avoided. Thus, the received

signal in the ith subchannel, when noise component excluded,

can be represented as

to.

Y i ( 0 = CXi.,,V,(t -mT)* W * f ; ( t ) (7)
m-

Noise at the output of subchannel equalizer can be

approximated as additive white Gaussian noise if residual IS1

in the equalizer output is negligible, so equalized ith

~~
subchannel symbols can be written as

r, (k)= x ,,, + n ;(k ).

where ((k) = ,vi, ( k ) + jn'i(,kp) is equivalent zero

mean

white Gaussian noise; ( k ) li,, and

n'l,o ( k ) are two independent zero mean real Gaussian noises with variance U * , thus r , ( n ) ( n = k , k - l ; . . , O )
can be regarded as independently identical distributed complex Gaussian random variables. T o sinplify derivation
notationally, the subchannel index i is omitted in the

followine discussions. I

Bit soft information (bit LLR) is defined as (he ratios of

two conditional a posterior probabilities

Ab,,,)=

In

P(b, P(b,,

, ,

j

=
=

I 0

II

r
r

(
(

n ) ,n
n), n

= =

k,k k,k

--

I I

, ...,O)
,... ,O)

($9

where p(bki =mIr(n),n=k,k-l;..,O) denotes the
conditional probability bk,j= m ( m =0,I) , given equalizer output outputs r ( n ) ( n = k , k - l ; . . , O ) . b,,i
represents jth bit in the kth symbol X,= f ( ~ . , , b k , z , . . ; b , , ~ ) . . where K = log M ,M is constellation size, f is a function which maps K channel encoder output bits ci (i =1,2,...,K) into one M-PSWM-QAM, symbol
S t {s,.s2'-.,s2x}.

By assuming that the transmitted M-PSWM-QAM symbols are equally probable, after some mathematical manipulation, the bit softinformation can be expressed as

438 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:58:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

!(]I2 where

denotes 2-norm

Suboptimal simplified LLR can be obtained by the

logsum
=ma

azpjp,rowxhimichatiiosntig~htnas'loenxgp{azjs}t=hemsuma I..ihn(elexfpt{-hzja}n)d

side is dominated by he largest component, as typically

occurs in channels bith high Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR).

Thus,

A 6-path equally spaced and exponentially faded mult ipath
channel with maximum delay of IO p was employed. Each
subchannel was equalized by a Minimum Mean Square Error
- Decision Feedback Equalizer (MMSBDFE). The
square-root raised cosine pulse with rolloff factor a = 0.15
was chosen as low-pass function of F M t basis. Other, parameters for FMT transceiver were as follows: N = 16, v =
4, bT=I MHz.

Further simplification is possible if noise variance related term I/& is neglectable, which justified by the fact that
scaling factor 11& doesn't influence the sign of LLR value, but the magnitude of LLR that, in turn, influences the reliability of obtained LLR. More specifically, At high SNR, the magnitude of the term in the bracket itself is reliable enough to represent LLR of bit bw. At low SNR, it is probable that all the LLRs are unreliable, and that the inaccuracy of the term in the bracket is larger than that induced by dropping scaling factor I/& since I/& is close to unity. Therefore, it is reasonable almost in all situations to drop the scaling factor I/&, and simplify (11) further. Thus,

Fig.2 the influence of noise variance estimation on the I6QAM LDPC-CFMT system performance

An important property that makes (12) much more deshble than (I I ) is that it is unnecessary to estimate noise variance of equalizer output for channel decoding, which is highly desirable in practice.
IV.SIMULATION RESULTS
The results, obtained by computer simulations, are given in term of BER versus EdNo m dB,where Eb is the energy per
information bit, and No is power spectral density of AWGN
noise at channel output. In order to evaluate the performance of LDPGCFMT system'and verify the proposed soft decision metric on the frequency selective fading channels, LDPC coded 16QAM and 64QAM are enployed.
A LDPC code (1080, 540) of rate 112 is used, whose paritycheck matrix is created at random with column weight (the number of ones per column) 3 and overlap between any two columns no greater than 1. Paritycheck matrix generated by this method eliminates rings of length 4, which could significantly degrade the performance of decoding algorithm [5]. This code was decoded by using the iterative algorithm proposed in [ 5 ] in log domain. The maximum number of decoding iteration was set to 5.

Fig2 shows the effects of noise variance estimation on the performance of LDPC coded I6QAM FMT system with different ps. From this Figure, we can observe that the performance difference between LDPGCFMT system with and without noise variance estimation is negligible and that the noise variance related term in (11) could be safely dropped without degrading the system BER performance. Moreover, the BER performance is improved withp a bit less than 2 in spite of relatively small gains, and deteriorated with larger p. Thus, we can conclude that p=2 is a better choice in practice for the sake of both good performance and easy implementation.
Fig.3 presents the BER performance comparison of uncoded and LDPC coded 16QAM164QAM CFMT system. For coded system, no noise variance estimation is performed and soft metric (12) with p=2 is directly utilized. This figure shows that, even for the frequency selective fading channel, LDPC codes can significantly improve the BER performnce of system.
V.CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed LDPC-CFMT for high data rate transmission on the frequency selective fading channel. Furthermore, for soft decoding LDPC codes, we provided a

439
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:58:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

new simplified and generalized method for soft decision metric generation. The performance of LDPC coded I6QAM and 64QAM FMT with this new metric are evaluated on kquency selective fading channel. Computer simulations show that there is no performance loss with our new method when compared with simplified soft decision metric proposed by F. Tosato [ I l l . More importantly, when our new metric is employed, it is unnecessary to estimate noise variance at equalizer output, which is highly desirable in practical implementation. For the reasons of both good performance and simplified implementation, the soft decision metric (12) with p=2 should be employed. Moreover, based on the simulation results, we arrive at the conclusion that LDPC
codes are effective to improve the system BER performance.
1.8
E m (dB) Ftg 3 the comparison of uncoded and LDPC coded 16QAW64QAM CFMT
system

REFERENCES
[ I ] G. Cheiubini, E. EleRheriou. and S. Olcer, "Filtered maitone modulation for VDSL." hoc. IEEE Globemm99. Dec. B99, pp. 1139-1 144.
[2] G. Cheiubini, E. EleRheriou. end S. Olcer, "Filtered muhitone modulationfor very high-speed digital subsciber lines." IEEEI. &/e% Areas Commun.,vol. 20, "0.5, June. 2002, pp. 1016-1028.
[3] G. Chewbini. E. Eleffheriou. S. Oleer, and J. Cioffi. "Filter bank modulation techniques for very high-speed digital subscriberlines," lEEE Comm. Mag.,vol. 38, May. 2000. pp. 98-104.
[4] R. C . Gdlager, "Low density parity check codes," IRE Tmm. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, Jan. 1962, pp. 21-28.
[5] D. 1. C. McKay, "Cmd ermr-wmting codes based on very spars: matrices." IEEE Tram. on In$ m.7heory. vol. 45, Mar. 1999, pp. 399-431.
161 L.Hanw, R Sleek and P. F o m , "A subband coding, BCH d i n x
and I6UAM system for mobile radio speech communication." IEEE Tram. Veh. Techno/.,vol. 39, Nov. 1990, pp. 327-340. [7] M.-S. Alouini. X. Tang, and A. Goldsmith, '"Anadaptive modulation scheme for simutaneow voice and data transmirsion over fading channel5," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 17, May. 1999. pp. 837450. [E] W. T. Webb and R Steele, "Variable rateQAM for mobile radio." IEEE Trans.Commun.,vol. 43, July. 1995, pp. 2223-2230. [9] S.L. Go& A. Glaviues and C. Bemu, "Turbo-des and high spnbal efficiency modulation," Proe. ICC'94, 1994, pp. 649-649. [IO] M. M. Wan& W. M. Xiao. and T. Brown, "Sal? decision metric gcnnation for QAM with channel estimaion ~ m r , "IEEE Tmnr Commun., vol. 50, July. 2002. pp. 1058-1061. [ 1I ] F.Tosat0 and P. Bisaglia, "Simplified saR-mtput b a p p e r for binary interleaved COFDM with applimion to HIPERLAN/2." ICC'02.2002, pp. 664.668. [ 121 I. Berengusr and 1. J. Wasell. "FMTModulation: Receiver Filler Bank Definition for the derivation of an Bficient Implementation." Pmc. IEEE 7th International OFDM-Workshop, Hamburg, Germany, 2W2

440
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:58:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

