IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004

507

Performance of Efficiently Encodable Low-Density Parity-Check Codes in Noise Bursts on the EPR4 Channel
Michael Yang, Student Member, IEEE, and William E. Ryan, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We consider in this paper the possibility of using a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code as the complete error control system in a magnetic recording channel. We compare the performance of selected LDPC codes with two Reed–Solomon (RS) code schemes on an extended partial-response class 4 (EPR4) channel, with particular emphasis on their performance in noise bursts (induced by media defects or thermal asperities). We quantify the performance of LDPC codes in noise bursts via a maximum-burst-length parameter, and we present a simple algorithm for computing this parameter. We find some very promising initial results: the LDPC codes are very robust against large noise bursts (128 bits long or more), and are superior to the RS schemes examined in the measurable error rate region. The extent to which they are superior depends on the particular LDPC scheme involved, and the results provide motivation for further investigation in this area.
Index Terms—EPR4 channel, erasures, error bursts, LDPC codes, noise bursts.
I. INTRODUCTION
A LARGE number of papers have appeared in recent years which propose the possibility of employing in magnetic storage systems the capacity-approaching codes of the recent coding literature, most prominently turbo codes and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]–[4]. Forgetting complexity issues, each of these approaches initially seemed very promising for their record-breaking performance, at least in the regions measurable by computer simulation and for idealized channel models. Further studies led to a more pessimistic viewpoint by investigators, owing not only to the complexity of the schemes, but also to their ability to achieve a bit-error rate of 10 , say, at low to medium signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs).
Both parallel and serial turbo codes suffer from relatively high error rate floors [5], and the ability (or inability) of an outer Reed–Solomon (RS) code system to lower the floor to the 10 specification is not possible to demonstrate via computer simulation, nor is it simple to show via analysis. LDPC codes, on the other hand, possess a typically lower or nonexistent error rate floor. Pessimism toward these latter codes derives from the fact that, first, their encoder can be somewhat complex when the code is designed in a pseudorandom fashion [6]. Second, it has

been argued that an outer RS code system will generally fail to correct the errors remaining at the output of an LDPC decoder since they typically occur in large numbers. Thus, an LDPC-RS concatenated coding system can be expected to fall short of the 10 mark.
In the current paper, we reexamine the LDPC code argument in light of the following. First, the complex encoder problem has been largely solved by a number of researchers, as discussed further in Section IV. Second, the reason that the LDPC code produces a large number of errors when it fails to decode (or, rarely, when it decodes to an incorrect codeword) is because the distance between codewords is so large; that is, because a good LDPC code has a large minimum distance. This should not be considered to be a drawback, although it does appear that way in view of the outer RS code’s inability to correct LDPC-uncorrectable error patterns. Thus, we will examine the performance of an error-control coding system consisting only of a long LDPC code, with the outer RS code removed.
Of course, the role of an outer RS code is not only to “clean up” residual errors left by the inner code, but to correct error bursts due to media defects or thermal asperities.1 Thus, the paper will focus largely on the ability of each of the LDPC codes we consider to perform in the presence of noise bursts. Some work in this area has been considered in [4] and [10], but the results here improve upon those reported earlier, owing to improved channel-state information passing as described below. The efficacy of LDPC codes in noise bursts was recognized by Tanner 20 years ago [11], although he gave no performance results and did not consider partial response signaling. Some work on the performance of LDPC codes in bursts in fading channels has been reported in [12]. Finally, we mention that this idea of replacing the RS code with an LDPC code was also considered in [13]–[15]. However, [13] did not consider noise bursts and [15] did not pass channel state information to the LDPC decoder as we elaborate upon below.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the system model. Section III introduces , the maximum resolvable erasure-burst length for an LDPC code, and presents an algorithm for computing it given the code’s parity-check matrix. Section IV presents details of the two RS

Manuscript received June 12, 2002; revised December 1, 2003. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under grants CCR-9814472 and CCR-99-79310, and by a gift from the National Storage Industry Consortium.
The authors are with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: yangsiz@ece.arizona. edu; ryan@ece.arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2004.824125

1As pointed out by one of the reviewers, electronic countermeasures are available which vastly reduce the burst lengths due to thermal asperities [7]. In one view then, such bursts are not an issue. On the other hand, since LDPC codes are so effective against bursts as shown below, such electronic countermeasures may not be necessary when an LDPC code is employed. In any case, bursts due to media defects will always be an issue.

0018-9464/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:33:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004

Fig. 1. System model. In the RS code case, the soft-in/soft-out (SISO) detector is replaced by a Viterbi detector which receives no CSI.

coding schemes and the six LDPC coding schemes which are compared in this paper. Section V presents the performance metrics against which the various codes are compared and the simulated performance results for these codes. Concluding remarks are contained in Section VI.

both the detector and the decoder eliminates the error rate curve flattening. For the RS case, CSI is used to flag code symbol erasures for the presumed errors-and-erasures decoder.
III. A MEASURE OF A CODE’S BURST NOISE EFFICACY

II. SYSTEM MODEL

The effect of a media defect or an unmitigated thermal as-

perity is a sequence of channel samples received in poor SNR

conditions. This “burst” of low SNR samples may be modeled

by a period of strong noise on the channel which we call a noise

burst. We point out that we prefer the term “noise burst” to “error

burst” (or “burst error”) since, in the context of a soft-decision

LDPC decoder, no hard decisions are made prior to decoding,

and hence no errors exist for the decoder to correct. Of course,

the term error burst makes sense in the context of a RS decoder

which is a hard-decision decoder.

We now give support for the noise burst channel model that

we adopt. We will consider extended partial-response class 4

(EPR4) signaling, modeled by the polynomial

,

in the presence of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with

power spectral density . Fig. 1 presents a diagram of the

full system under study. We recognize that modern magnetic

storage systems employ more sophisticated targets than EPR4.

However, the EPR4 channel combined with noise bursts due to

defects (and perhaps even thermal asperities) provides a suffi-

ciently accurate representation of a magnetic storage channel

for our purposes. In particular, it is not necessary to employ a

longer PR target and colored non-Gaussian noise to demonstrate

the efficacy of LDPC codes in a PR environment with bursts and

that this efficacy relies on proper erasure flagging as described

in the next paragraph.

Note that we will be comparing the performance of LDPC

codes in burst noise with that of RS codes. We will not consider

the performance of the concatenation of the two code types in

accordance with the discussion in the introduction. Note also that

we assume the ability to detect the presence of a noise burst, a

fairly simple matter in practice. In the LDPC code case, the noise

burst detector sends this “channel state information” (CSI) to

both the EPR4 soft-in/soft-out (SISO) detector and the outer code

decoder. This is in contrast to previous works which sent CSI to

only the EPR4 SISO detector, resulting in a dramatic flattening

of the LDPC code error rate curves [4], [10]. CSI is used to set

the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information to zero whenever a

channel sample (for the EPR4 SISO detector) or code bit (for the

LDPC decoder) was received in the presence of a noise burst. As

will be seen in the results section, Section V, sending the CSI to

In the sequel, burst-affected code bits (LDPC) or code sym-

bols (RS) which have been assigned burst CSI flags will be

called erasures. Thus, since we assume an ideal noise burst de-

tector, noise bursts give rise to erasure bursts. We may quantify

a given code’s burst noise efficacy by a single parameter, the

maximum resolvable erasure-burst length, . This param-

eter is defined to be the longest string of erasures that the code’s

decoder is guaranteed to fill in with the correct bit values (or

symbol values for RS codes), no matter where the burst starts in

the codeword. The assumption in this definition is that, outside

of the burst, the bits are noise free. For convenience (so that RS

and LDPC codes may be compared),

will always be spec-

ified in terms of bits.

The case of RS codes is well known: without interleaving, an

RS code employing -bit symbols is capable of filling in

an erasure burst of length

bits. For an RS code

with an interleaving depth of

.

As for LDPC codes, an obvious (brute-force) method to de-

termine for a given code is as follows. Choose an arbitrary

codeword and impose on it an erasure burst of length in an ar-

bitrary location. The largest such for which the decoder suc-

cessfully decodes for all possible burst locations is . (Each

bit in the burst is erased, that is, the log-likelihood (LLR) value

for each such bit is set to zero. The LLR value for each bit out-

side the burst is set to a large value.)

Clearly this algorithm is tedious and time consuming, partic-

ularly since at its core is the full LDPC decoder. An improved

algorithm may be obtained via a closer look at the Tanner graph

representation of the code and the associated message-passing

decoding algorithm [16], [6], [4]. First, note in the top half of

Fig. 2 that an erased bit in a burst can be filled in after one it-

eration if all other bits in the same check equation are outside

of the burst (and thus have large LLR values). Now note in the

bottom half of Fig. 2 that two erased bits in a burst in the same

check equation can be resolved after two iterations if one of the

bits is involved in a second check equation for which it is the

only bit affected by the burst.

Note that, for this case involving two erased bits in a check

equation, after the first iteration the number of unknown bits is

reduced by one. This idea generalizes: erased bits in a burst, in

the same check equation, is reduced to unknown bits in the

next iteration if of the bits were resolvable from other check

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:33:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG AND RYAN: PERFORMANCE OF EFFICIENTLY ENCODABLE LDPC CODES

509

Fig. 3. Depiction of Step 2 of Algorithm 2.

Fig. 2. Depiction of how erasure-burst bits are resolved via message-passing decoding.
equations. This leads us to the following efficient algorithm for finding .

L Algorithm: 1. Choose initial erased burst length l = 2. 2. For all starting positions p of the burst (column of H matrix), consider the submatrix H(p; l) depicted in Fig. 3.
 Find all rows in H(p; l) of weight 1.
Delete the columns in H(p; l) corresponding to the 1’s in the weight-1 rows.
 Repeatedly apply the previous step to the
matrix obtained after column deletion until
all columns have been deleted (burst is
resolvable) or until there exist no rows of
weight 1 in the reduced matrix (burst not
resolvable). 3. If Step 2 succeeds (i.e., all columns of H(p; l) are deleted for all p), set l = l + 1 and repeat Step
0 2; otherwise, set L = l 1 and stop. Note that L
is the maximum l for which the matrix H(p; l) can be eventually deleted for all p.

We have applied this algorithm to each of the LDPC codes

introduced in the next section to obtain the parameter

in

each case. Also, we have found that this algorithm is at least ten

times faster than the brute-force approach (and, of course, they

give the same result).

IV. CODE DESCRIPTIONS
To add some context to the performance evaluation of the various LDPC codes we consider, we will include the performance of two separate Reed–Solomon code schemes. The RS codes and LDPC codes that we consider are described in this section. We consider codes of rate 0.82 and 0.9. The code rate 0.9 is more appropriate for data storage, but we consider some rate-0.82 LDPC codes because some of these codes have been commonly compared in the literature, albeit for the AWGN channel.

RS Codes: We consider two RS code configurations. In both

cases, we assume that the decoder is capable of correcting errors

and erasures, and that each code symbol in a burst is assigned an

erasure flag. In the first configuration, which we denote by RS-I,

we consider a symbol-interleaved (190, 171) code over GF

with an interleave depth of . This particular configuration

can correct an erased burst of length

bits (57 bytes

or 19 interleaver rows). In the second configuration, denoted

by RS-II, we consider a (505, 455) code over GF with no

interleaving

. This code can correct an erased burst of

length

bits. The code rate for both RS-I

and RS-II is 0.9.

MacKay LDPC Code: MacKay [17] has constructed a

(4095, 3358) LDPC code whose code rate is

. The

parity-check matrix has row weights

and (a

mildly irregular code), column weight

, and minimum

distance

[18]. We have found from the

algo-

rithm that

bits. This code has the disadvantage

that encoding is fairly complex as it must be done via either

or the generator matrix , which are very large matrices. (A

fairly low complexity encoding technique which employs the

matrix is presented in [19].)

Euclidean Geometry LDPC Code: In [8] and [9], LDPC

codes are designed using techniques based on finite geometries.

The resulting LDPC codes fall into the cyclic and quasi-cyclic

classes of block codes and lend themselves to simple encoder

implementation via shift-register circuits. Kou et al. [8] have

designed a (4095, 3367) cyclic code based on a two-dimensional

Euclidean geometry (EG) over GF . The parameters for

this code are

and

bits. Because the code is cyclic, encoding is simply

implemented with shift-register circuits. We note also that the

minimum distance is quite large so that this code’s error rate

curve is likely to possess no error rate floor. This code does have

the drawback that the parity-check matrix used in decoding is

instead of

.2 (The matrix is circulant, with

its first row equal to a certain incidence vector [8].) Further, the

values of and are quite large, and the complexity of the

message-passing decoder is proportional to these values.

0 2 2 2It is possible to choose an (n k) n submatrix of the n n circulant to
decode, but our experience has been that there is a loss in performance on the
order of 0.5 dB. An anonymous reviewer has told us that this is possible with
no degradation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:33:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

510

Extended Irregular Repeat-Accumulate (eIRA) LDPC Code: Yang et al. [20], [21] have proposed a class of efficiently encodable irregular LDPC codes which are related to the irregular repeat-accumulate codes of McEliece et al. [22]. The eIRA codes can be designed to have bit-error-rate floors below
and codeword-error-rate floors below [20], [21]. The matrices have a semirandom format

(1)

where is a sparse weight-two columns and matrix given by

random matrix containing no is a full-rank

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004
TABLE I LDPC CODES UNDER CONSIDERATION

(2)

Note that, with in the above form, encoding may be per-

formed directly from the matrix. That is, one may solve for

the parity bits recursively from .

We have constructed two eIRA codes for this work: a

rate-0.82 (4095, 3367) code and a rate-0.9 (4550,4096) code,

for which

and , respectively. For both codes,

the submatrix has column weight

.

Array Codes: Fan has shown that array codes can be viewed

as LDPC codes and thus can be decoded with a message passing

algorithm [23]. The parity-check matrix defining the family of

LDPC array codes used in this paper is a slight modification of

the one used in [23]. In particular, following [24], we employed

the following matrix format:

• Rate-0.9 (4550, 4096) array code: This code was short-

ened from

using the design param-

eters

. This was done by deleting the

last 31 rows and the last 4859 columns of the code’s nom-

inal matrix.

was found to be 299 for this code.

The LDPC codes under consideration are summarized in

Table I together with various parameters describing the codes.

The last column lists the minimum and maximum number of

iterations required in the

algorithm to resolve an erasure

burst of length . We remark that the number of iterations

is constant for the EG code since its matrix is circulant.

V. PERFORMANCE RESULTS
The probability of error for a given coding scheme may be written as

(4)

... ... ... . . .

...

...

...

(3)

where and are two integers such that

, where de-

notes a prime number. is the

identity matrix, is the

null matrix, and is a

permutation matrix repre-

senting a single left- or right-cyclic shift. The upper triangular

nature of guarantees encoding linear in the codeword length

(encoding is essentially the same as for eIRA codes).

A

array code (let

) equals a linear

block code with code rate

. By

removing the appropriate number of rows and columns, the fol-

lowing codes were designed for this study.

• Rate-0.82 (4095, 3367) array code: This code was

shortened from

using the design

parameters

. This was done by

deleting the last 17 rows and the last 18 106 columns of

the code’s nominal matrix. (The simplified encoding

procedure is not affected.)

was found to be 500 for

this code.

where

is the probability of decoder error given that the

codeword is affected by a noise burst of duration bits, is the

probability that a codeword is affected by such a burst, and

is the maximum burst length. Here, the event “ ” could either be

bit error or block (or “frame”) error. The problems with (4) are

that the distribution is generally unknown and it is messy to

work with even if it were known. We can simplify the situation

by employing obvious bounds on

(5)

where

represents the “AWGN-only” situation and

represents the situation in which each codeword is

received with a noise burst of duration bits.3 Thus, we will

present results for both the lower bound

and the upper

bound

. As we will see, with set to 128 bits,

the two bounds are typically less than 0.8 dB apart, so the use

of (4) is in fact unnecessary.

We now present simulation results for the LDPC and RS

codes under the assumptions of Fig. 1. That is, in the compu-

tation of

, a 128-bit erasure burst is imposed on each

3We emphasize that the parameter l refers only to bursts due to media defects or thermal asperities. As pointed out by a reviewer, if l refers only to bursts at the output of the EPR4 Viterbi detector, then the first inequality in (5) will not hold.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:33:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG AND RYAN: PERFORMANCE OF EFFICIENTLY ENCODABLE LDPC CODES

511

codewords, a frame error is the event in which one or more

codewords possesses and uncorrectable error. To keep the plot

uncluttered, we have not plotted the

curves for the

RS-I and RS-II codes. We note that the separation between the

and

LDPC code curves is approximately

0.9 dB for these higher rate codes. More significantly, the

LDPC code curves are more than 1.2 dB superior

to the

RS code curves in the 10 region.

VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 4. Performance of the rate-0.82 LDPC codes of Table I, with and without erasure bursts.

We have shown in this paper the utility of sending burst noise channel state information to both the partial response detector and the decoder. Doing so eliminates the error rate curve flattening due to bursts, as seen by other authors. The simulation results presented have demonstrated that LDPC codes are very effective against noise bursts and, in fact, are superior to RS codes in the regime simulated. We also have presented an algorithm for finding the maximum resolvable erasure-burst length
for a given LDPC code. The results in this paper make the possibility of an error control system based solely on LDPC code very promising. The results also open up new problems. One problem is the design of high rate LDPC codes which possess verifiable low error-rate floors (which has been recognized by other authors). Another important research problem is the design of codes which are optimal in some sense on burst-noise channels (see [25]).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of the rate-0.9 LDPC codes of Table I and the two RS code schemes in erasure bursts.

The authors would like to thank D. MacKay and M. Tanner for suggesting that LDPC codes are likely to perform well in the presence of bursts, S. Lin and Y. Kou for helpful discussions regarding LDPC codes based on finite geometries, and J. Moon and Y.-X. Lee for suggestions on the RS code parameters. They would also like to thank the associate editor, J. Moon, and the anonymous reviewers whose comments improved this paper substantially.
REFERENCES

codeword and CSI is provided to both the EPR4-SISO detector

and the LDPC code decoder. The results we present are frame

error rate conditioned on a length- burst, for

and ,

denoted by

and

, respectively.

Fig. 4 presents the results for the four rate-0.82 LDPC codes

in Table I. We first note that the separation between the

and

curves is approximately 0.6 dB in each case in

the 10 region. We note also that the EG code is inferior to

the other three codes in the simulated region, although the EG

code probably possesses the lowest error-rate floor owing to its

largest minimum distance. Last, we note that, for all four codes,

the

curves possess no flooring or flaring, unlike the

curves in [4] for which no CSI was provided to the LDPC code

decoder.

Fig. 5 presents the frame error rate curves for the two rate-0.9

LDPC codes in Table I and the two RS code schemes described

above. For RS-I, for which an interleaver frame comprises three

[1] W. Ryan, “Performance of high rate turbo codes on a PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel,” in Proc. 1998 Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 1, pp. 422–427.
[2] T. Souvignier, A. Friedmann, M. Öberg, P. Siegel, R. Swanson, and J. Wolf, “Turbo decoding for PR4: Parallel versus serial concatenation,” in Proc. 1999 Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 3, pp. 1638–1642.
[3] L. McPheters, S. McLaughlin, and K. Narayanan, “Precoded PRML, serial concatenation, and iterative (turbo) decoding for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., pt. 1, vol. 35, pp. 2325–2327, Sept. 1999.
[4] J. Fan, E. Kurtas, A. Friedman, and S. McLaughlin, “Low-density paritycheck codes for magnetic recording,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf., Sept. 1999, pp. 1314–1323.
[5] W. Ryan, “Concatenated codes for class IV partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 445–454, Mar. 2001.
[6] D. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[7] K. B. Klaassen and J. C. van Peppen, “Electronic abatement of thermal interference in (G)MR head output signals,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 33, pp. 2611–2616, Sept. 1997.
[8] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:33:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004

[9] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority-logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 931–937, June 2000.
[10] A. Ghrayeb and W. Ryan, “Concatenated code system design for storage channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 709–718, Apr. 2001.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[12] A. P. Worthen and W. E. Stark, “Low-density parity check codes for fading channels with memory,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Sept. 1998, pp. 117–125.
[13] T. Mittelholzer, A. Dholakia, and E. Eleftheriou, “Reduced-complexity decoding of low density parity check codes for generalized partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, pp. 721–728, Mar. 2001.
[14] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Performance of (quasi-) cyclic LDPC codes in noise bursts on EPR4 channel,” in Proc. Int. Global Telecom. Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 2961–2965.
[15] T. Morita, Y. Sato, and T. Sugawara, “ECC-less LDPC coding for magnetic recording channels,” in IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, Sept. 2002, pp. 2304–2306.
[16] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” in IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, Jan. 1962, pp. 21–28.
[17] D. J. C. Mackay, available from http://wol.ra.phy. cam.ac.uk/mackay. [18] D. MacKay and M. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block
length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models: Volume 123 of IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000, pp. 113–130. [19] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001. [20] M. Yang, Y. Li, and W. E. Ryan, “Design of efficiently-encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Champaign, IL, Oct. 2002, pp. 1415–1424. [21] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Lowering the error rate floors of moderatelength high-rate LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2003 Int. Symp. Information Theory, June–July 2003, p. 237. [22] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 4, 2000, pp. 1–8.

[23] J. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[24] E. Eleftheriou and S. Ölçer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. 2002 Int. Conf. Commun., Apr.–May 2002, pp. 1752–1757.
[25] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Design of LDPC codes for two-state fading channel models,” in 5th Int. Symp. Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications, Oct. 2002, pp. 193–197.
Michael Yang (S’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical and communication systems from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, China, in 1993 and 1996 respectively. He is working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department of the University of Arizona, Tucson.
From 1996 to 1999, he worked for the Shenzhen Huawei Technology, Inc. on SDH optical transmission systems. During his Ph.D. studies (1999 to present), he was a Research Assistant in the Digital Communication Systems Laboratory (DCSL) at the University of Arizona. His current research interests include digital communications and signal processing, with emphases on error control coding on graphs and iterative algorithms, and its application to data storage and transmission.
William E. Ryan (S’84–M’88–SM’01) received the B.S.E.E. degree from Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, in 1981, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, in 1984 and 1988, respectively.
He was with The Analytic Sciences Corporation, Ampex Corporation, and Applied Signal Technology prior to his positions in academia. From 1993 to 1998, he was with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department faculty at New Mexico State University, Las Cruces. Since August 1998, he has been with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at the University of Arizona, Tucson, where he is an Associate Professor. His research interests are in coding and signal processing for data transmission and storage.
Dr. Ryan is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS for Coding and Modulation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:33:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

