302

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 5, MAY 2004

Systematic Recursive Construction of LDPC Codes
Nenad Miladinovic, Student Member, IEEE, and Marc Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This letter presents a systematic and recursive method to construct good low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, especially those with high rate. The proposed method uses a parity check matrix of a quasi-cyclic LDPC code with given row and column weights as a core upon which the larger code is recursively constructed with extensive use of pseudorandom permutation matrices. This construction preserves the minimum distance and girth properties of the core matrix and can generate either regular, or irregular LDPC codes. The method provides a unique representation of the code in compact notation.
Index Terms—Block codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, quasi-cyclic codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are now widely recognized as codes that can achieve near Shannon limit performance under belief-propagation decoding [2]–[5]. Methods for constructing good families of LDPC codes can be separated into two main classes: random or pseudorandom constructions and algebraic constructions. Algebraic constructions can further be decomposed into two categories. The first category is based on finite geometries [6], while the second one is based on circulant permutation matrices [7], [8]. Each of these main classes bears its advantages and disadvantages. Random and pseudosrandom constructions draw their strengths from long lengths in conjunction with the Shannon’s noisy channel coding theorem. The drawback of this approach is that their distance is evaluated based on average properties and become loosely bounded as the code length decreases. In particular, high rate codes of medium length with good distance characteristics are hard to obtain this way. The algebraic construction of LDPC codes with finite geometries guarantees better minimum distance properties for medium lengths and the cyclic or quasicyclic structure of the code enables encoding in linear time using shift registers. The downside of this approach is its limited choice of length and rate values. The second category of algebraic code constructions received increased interest recently [7]–[10]. This code construction produces medium length quasicyclic codes with good minimum distance and girth properties, and a simple representation. In [7], [9], an LDPC code is completely specified by the size of an identity matrix and a the set of integers representing circulant permutation matrices. However, the performance of these codes is comparable to that of randomly constructed codes only up to lengths of a few thousand bits. Afterwards, the performance of
Manuscript received September 17, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Dr. K. Narayanan. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant no. CCR-00-98029.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: chelica1@yahoo.com; marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.827431

these codes is worse than that of randomly constructed ones.

In [10] a method to improve the performance of long codes,

constructed using circulant matrices, was proposed. Each cyclic

block of size is substituted with a Kronecker product of a

cyclic block of size and a random permutation matrix of size

, such that

(and

as described).

The construction presented in this work can be viewed as a

generalization to that of [10] but with a different motivation. It

intends to construct good LDPC codes of high rate in a simple

and systematic way, and yet make them as random as possible.

To this end, we combine algebraic and random approaches to

construct good LDPC codes. With respect to [6], [11] the pro-

posed method enables a valid construction for most values of

and . The codes obtained are in many instances less complex

to decode than the broad sense quasicyclic codes [11]. There

are no redundant check sums and no 4-cycles in their represen-

tation. However, these codes are not quasicyclic but can still

be uniquely defined by a sequence of integers. The proposed

method offers a simple and computationally efficient way to

construct good long and high rate codes compared to computer

generated and optimized LDPC codes [12].

II. CODE CONSTRUCTION

The proposed method combines algebraic and pseudorandom

constructions. For given code length , column weight and

row weight , we first factorize as

,

such that

if odd or

if even (based

on [9]),

and is prime for

. Next, we

construct the core matrix, denoted by , which is chosen as

the parity check matrix of one of the shortest LDPC codes with

parameters and , constructed using the method proposed in

[9]1 . Hence, the core matrix is a

matrix. The size of

the circulant matrices used for the construction is

. The

conditions derived in [9] are enforced to obtain a girth

code. The factorization of is now used to recursively increase

the code length. At recursion step

, each “1” in the core

matrix is replaced by a random permutation matrix of size

and each “0” is replaced by the all zero matrix of the same

size. Denote this new matrix of size

as matrix .

Now assume that

has been generated. Then at step

, each “1” in

is replaced by a random permutation

matrix of size

and each “0” is replaced by the all zero

matrix of the same size. The process resumes in this fashion

until all factors have been used.

Since each “1” in the matrix

is replaced by a random

permutation matrix of size

it is desirable to have few rep-

etitions of the same permutation matrix. Therefore it is favorable

to have

. This requirement was empirically imposed as

it keeps the probability of repetition less than

.

1Note that in general, the core matrix could be the parity check matrix of any regular or irregular LDPC code. However, in this letter, we are interested in a structured and systematic construction.

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILADINOVIC AND FOSSORIER: SYSTEMATIC RECURSIVE CONSTRUCTION OF LDPC CODES

303

The simulation results confirmed this choice is sufficient to ob-

tain good randomization at the first recursion step, which is the

most important. In case

, a new factorization should be

obtained by multiplying a couple of terms into a single term so

that,

, and is no longer

a prime. This construction can be performed for most values of

and . However, in case the conditions on or are not

suitable for the particular code parameters considered, a slightly

different value of should be chosen. Two main properties of

the proposed construction method are stated as the following

theorems.

Theorem 1: The proposed method preserves the minimum

distance of the core code.

Proof: Assume that the code is constructed in steps and

that

is the parity check matrix of the code. Assume also

that the minimum distance of the code is and that it is less

than the minimum distance of the core code . Hence, there

exist columns in

that sum to zero. Since each “1”, in

each column, must belong to different permutation matrices it

implies that there are columns in

that sum to zero.

If induction is carried out, we obtain that there are columns

in that sum to zero implying that the minimum distance of

the core code is . This contradicts the fact that

.

Theorem 2: The proposed method preserves the girth of the

core code.

Proof: The proof repeats almost verbatim the previous

proof. The difference is that we consider girth instead of

minimum distance.

LDPC codes constructed using circulant permutation ma-

trices can easily be represented with a set of integers and the

particular code can easily be represented and reproduced. We

would like to provide the same feature for the proposed con-

struction. Therefore we introduce the following recursion that

generates a particular permutation matrix and allows a simple

description of the codes. Define as the size of a permutation

matrix and the index

as the label of a partic-

ular permutation matrix. The procedure

generates a specific set

, which maps to the

corresponding permutation matrix in the following way: is

the position of “1” in the th row of the permutation matrix.

The

is obtained recursively by inserting

digit into the lower order

. The

label of the lower order permutation and the position of

the inserted digit are defined as

and

, respectively. Hence, the function

inserts into the th position

in

. Assuming that

is a particular realization of

, the result

of the function

is the permu-

tation

. The procedure is

obtained by the following.

if else

  Fig. 1. Performance of R 0:77; N 1000 codes.

Using the recursive procedure

for

any

, the

code obtained

with the proposed construction can be uniquely repre-

sented. Given that the matrix

at the recursion step

, is represented by a matrix containing

the positions of “1” in each row, the matrix

is

uniquely defined with the

matrix , whose

entries are integers in the range

. The “1” at

position

in

is replaced by the permutation matrix

. Using this representation, a code

is uniquely defined with

integers for the core

matrix and

integers to

describe all recursions instead of

required

to denote the positions of all “1” in the code parity check

matrix. Note finally that these integers can be generated by any

pseudorandom function to provide them a very compact and

unique representation.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we present simulation results of some codes

constructed with the proposed method and compare them with

competitive codes. We constructed two codes with

and

and

rate

to compare with (1057, 813) (3, 13) and (1057,

813) (4, 18) codes, respectively, both due to MacKay 2 . As sug-

gested by MacKay, high rate codes with

are not ex-

pected to perform well, as they have relatively high error floor.

However, the (1014, 780)(3, 13) code performs better than its

counterpart at the error floor region, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This

improvement is due to the fine balancing of the corresponding

Tanner graph of the (1014, 780) (3, 13) code, with respect to

girth distribution, provided by the pseudo random construction.

Namely, the proposed construction due to its pseudo random na-

ture provides an almost uniform distribution of short cycles. On

the other hand, computer generation of high rate codes tends

to cluster short cycles in order to prevent 4-cycles, especially

for short block lengths. The performance of the corresponding

2[Online.] Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/ data.html
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

304

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 5, MAY 2004

  Fig. 2. Performance of R 0:88; N 3600 codes.

Fig. 4. Performance of some very long and high rate codes.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this work we presented a simple, systematic and recursive construction method for LDPC codes. The proposed codes perform as well as competitors for a wide range of rate and block length values. Furthermore, they perform better than QC LDPC codes for long code lengths as their girth, and consequently minimum distance is no longer upper bounded by a number independent of . Compared to computer generated/optimized codes, this method provides simplicity in construction and representation of the code.

 Fig. 3. Performance of R = 0:75; N 4080 codes.

codes with

, is also depicted in Fig. 1. There are no signs of

error floor and MacKay’s code performs slightly better. As the

block length increases, the performance of the codes obtained

with the proposed construction improves, as illustrated in Figs. 2

and 3. Fig. 3 shows that the proposed code matches the perfor-

mance of both the MacKay code and the QC code proposed in

[11]. Fig. 4 depicts the performance of a few very long and very

high rate LDPC codes constructed with the proposed method.

The shortest code depicted is a (64320, 60 300) (4, 64) code

which performs only 0.46 dB away from the Shannon limit at the

BER 10 and matches the performance of the corresponding

(65520, 61 425) (4, 64) extended EG code [6] that performs 0.42

dB away from the Shannon limit. The next code depicted is a

(82668, 78 684) (4, 83) code that performs 0.45 dB away from

the Shannon limit compared to 0.44 dB for the corresponding

slightly longer (85995, 81 900) (3; 4, 64) extended irregular EG

code [6]. The last code depicted is a (102010, 97 970) (4, 101)

code which performs 0.42 dB away from the Shannon limit at

the BER 10 . No particular efforts were needed to construct

these codes with the proposed method.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 399–431, Feb. 2001.
[4] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[5] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Commun. Theory and Applications, Ambleside, UK, July, 15–20 2001, pp. 365–370.
[8] J. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, 2000.
[9] M. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2003 Int. Symp. on Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, June 29–July 4 2003, p. 150.
[10] T. Okamura, “Designing LDPC codes using cyclic shifts,” in Proc. 2003 Int. Symp. on Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, June 29–July 4 2003, p. 151.
[11] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near Shannon limit quasicyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[12] D. J. C. MacKay and E. A. Ratzer. (2003, Jan.) Gallager codes for high rate applications. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy. cam.ac.uk/mackay/abstracts/highrate.html

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

