IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

1901

Design and Performance of Turbo Gallager Codes
Giulio Colavolpe

Abstract—The most powerful channel-coding schemes, namely, those based on turbo codes and low-density parity-check (LDPC) Gallager codes, have in common the principle of iterative decoding. However, the relative coding structures and decoding algorithms are substantially different. This paper shows that recently proposed novel coding structures bridge the gap between these two schemes. In fact, with properly chosen component convolutional codes, a turbo code can be successfully decoded by means of the decoding algorithm used for LDPC codes, i.e., the belief-propagation algorithm working on the code Tanner graph. These new turbo codes are here nicknamed “turbo Gallager codes.” Besides being interesting from a conceptual viewpoint, these schemes are important on the practical side because they can be decoded in a fully parallel manner. In addition to the encoding complexity advantage of turbo codes, the low decoding complexity allows the design of very efficient channel-coding schemes.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), iterative decoding, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, great attention has been devoted to powerful coding schemes which achieve near-Shannon limit performance with affordable decoding complexity. In 1993, turbo codes were first introduced [1], [2]. A turbo encoder is the parallel concatenation of two simple constituent encoders interconnected through an interleaver. The corresponding decoding process is based on an iterative algorithm in which each component decoder takes advantage of the extrinsic information produced by the other decoder at the previous step. This iterative decoding process usually employs soft-output component decoders based on the algorithm by Bahl et al. (BCJR) [3] or its simplified logarithmic versions [4]. After the invention of turbo codes, this decoding technique was extended to serially concatenated convolutional codes (SCCCs). SCCCs are based on a serial concatenation, through an interleaver, of an outer code and an inner recursive code [5].
The extraordinary success of turbo codes has stimulated the rediscovery of another class of codes exhibiting similar performance and characteristics [6]. These codes, called low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, were first introduced by Gallager [7] in their original regular version. In terms of performance, regular LDPC Gallager codes are only slightly inferior to parallel and serial concatenated convolutional codes. However, in
Paper approved by R. D. Wesel, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received October 11, 2002; revised January 2, 2004, and April 9, 2004. This paper was presented in part at the Third International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, September 2003.
The author is with the Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università di Parma, I-43100 Parma, Italy (e-mail: giulio@unipr.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.836566

their irregular version, they exhibit an impressive performance

outperforming the best known turbo codes [8]–[10].

LDPC codes are linear codes specified by a sparse

parity-check matrix. A

-regular LDPC code, as orig-

inally defined by Gallager, is a binary linear code such that

every code bit participates in exactly parity-check equations,

and every check equation involves exactly code bits. In

other words, the corresponding parity-check matrix has

ones in each column and ones in each row. As originally

suggested by Tanner [11], LDPC codes are well represented by

bipartite graphs in which one set of nodes, the variable nodes,

represents the elements of a codeword, and the other set of

nodes, the check nodes, corresponds to the set of parity-check

constraints which define the code. In the following, we will

denote these bipartite graphs as Tanner graphs. Regular LDPC

codes are such that all nodes of the same type have an equal

number of edges. On the contrary, for irregular LDPC codes,

the node degree of each node in each set is not equal, but chosen

according to an optimized distribution [8]–[10].

As already mentioned, some irregular LDPC codes have

better performance with respect to turbo codes for equal code-

word length. In addition, they have other advantages over turbo

codes. In fact, belief propagation (BP), the iterative decoding

algorithm for LDPC codes which works on the code Tanner

graph, can be fully parallelized and potentially implemented at

high speed. Moreover, in [12], low-complexity decoders that

closely approximate BP in performance have been designed for

these codes, extending the original work in [7]. In the following,

all these decoders, i.e., BP and the low-complexity decoders

described in [12], will be referred to as message-passing de-

coders. On the negative side, one major drawback of LDPC

codes is represented by their high encoding complexity [13].

In this paper, we will describe and analyze two classes of

coding schemes, originally proposed in [14], which can be

easily decoded at high speed by means of message-passing

decoders. The first class is represented by single convolutional

codes with some specific algebraic properties which ensure

that message-passing decoders can operate successfully on the

code Tanner graph. In this case, a message-passing schedule,

specifically tailored for this class of codes, will be described.

Since message-passing decoding algorithms are very simple

and characterized by a decoding complexity which does not

directly depend on the code constraint length, they can be used

to decode convolutional codes with a large constraint length,

and hence, potentially characterized by a large free distance.1

1The decoding complexity of a BCJR or a Viterbi algorithm grows exponentially with the code constraint length, therefore, these algorithms cannot be practically used for codes with a very large free distance.

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

The second class of codes is based on code concatenation. A check node of degree receives and processes the mes-

The resulting coding schemes and the corresponding decoding sages

,

, and sends back to its th

algorithms combine the advantages of turbo codes and LDPC

neighboring variable node the message [7], [12]

codes. In fact, the coding structures are very simply based on the

parallel or serial concatenations of simple convolutional codes

through interleavers, in which the component convolutional

(2)

codes are constrained to have the above-mentioned specific al-

gebraic properties which ensure that message-passing decoders

can work successfully on the Tanner graph of the overall code. In this way, combining the coding structure of parallel or serial concatenated codes and the decoding algorithm for LDPC codes, a new architecture results, which can be effectively implemented with simple coding and decoding operations. In terms of decoding complexity, the proposed schemes represent a valid alternative to classical turbo codes and give a solution to the encoding problem of LDPC codes [13].
The proposed codes are different from low-density convolutional codes proposed in [15] which are time-varying, periodical, binary convolutional codes.

A simplified min-sum version of the updating rule (2) is described in [17]. The decoding algorithm proceeds iteratively until the code parity-check constraints are all verified or a maximum number of iterations is reached.
Although this decoding algorithm is provably optimal for bipartite graphs without cycles [12], in practice, it is necessary to only avoid cycles of length up to four to attain good performance [10]. Other message-passing algorithms can be devised based on different types of messages, possibly taking on values in some finite message alphabet, and different updating rules [12]. All these algorithms can be applied to decode the codes

described in Sections III–V.

A message-passing schedule in a factor graph is the specifica-

II. BACKGROUND: TANNER GRAPHS AND BELIEF PROPAGATION tion of the order in which messages are updated. In general, the

Message-passing decoding algorithms for LDPC codes are based on an iterative exchange of messages along the edges of a code Tanner graph [7], [11], [16]. This graph, which can be drawn by direct inspection of a parity-check matrix of the code, is composed of two classes of nodes: variable nodes cor-

so-called flooding schedule is adopted to decode LDPC codes [18]. In this case, in each iteration, all variable nodes, and subsequently, all check nodes, pass new messages to their neighbors. As can be easily understood, this schedule is well suited for a fully parallel implementation of the decoder.

responding to the code bits, and check nodes corresponding to

the code constraints. Check nodes are connected by edges to

variable nodes on which they depend. A cycle is a closed path in

the graph, and its length is defined as the corresponding number

of path edges. The length of the shortest cycle is the girth of the

graph.

We now review the BP decoding algorithm. Let us denote by

a suitable message propagating on an edge of the code Tanner

graph. This message represents the log-likelihood ratio related

to the code bit corresponding to the variable node from which

the considered edge originates. At the th iteration, we denote

by

a message sent from a variable node to a check

node, and by

a message in the opposite direction. A

variable node of degree receives and processes the messages

,

, and sends back to its th

neighboring check node the message [7], [12]

III. SINGLE CONVOLUTIONAL CODE
In this section, we describe a class of convolutional codes which can be decoded by means of the described message-passing algorithms. We consider a single convolutional code truncated to a block code of a given codeword length. Tailbiting can be used to convert the convolutional code to a block code with no rate loss [19]. As mentioned in the previous section, a message-passing decoding algorithm operating on a code Tanner graph is an effective technique if the graph girth is at least six. In the following, we analyze the conditions that a convolutional code must satisfy in order to have a Tanner graph without cycles of length four.2
The girth of a code Tanner graph can be easily determined by analyzing the corresponding code parity-check matrix. In fact, a bipartite graph has girth of at least six if and only if (iff) the corresponding parity-check matrix has no rectangles, i.e., four

one’s in two separate rows which define the corners of a rec-

(1)

tangle. This property can be easily verified by observing that if a rectangle is present, the row and column indexes of its corners

determine the variable and check nodes connected by a cycle of

length four.

where is the initial message received by the considered vari- The condition for the absence of cycles of length four can

able node as a function of the channel output corresponding to be directly translated into a condition on the code parity-check

the considered code bit. When

, the variable node simply equations. For illustration purposes, rate-

systematic

propagates its initial received message . It may be observed

that the message

in (1) does not depend on the mes-

sage

previously received on the same edge, i.e.,

only extrinsic information is exchanged.

2We emphasize that in this paper, the term “Tanner graph” is used to denote a graph directly derived from the code parity-check matrix and without the explicit representation of hidden (state) variable nodes present in the so-called Wibergtype graphs [17].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COLAVOLPE: DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF TURBO GALLAGER CODES

1903

codes are considered, but the conditions being described can be

easily generalized to rate- convolutional codes.

A rate-

recursive systematic convolutional (RSC)

code is described by a polynomial generator matrix of the form

(3)

where is a

identity matrix, is a unit-delay operator,

and

is a column vector of elements of the form

(4)

where

,

, and

denote the feedfor-

ward and feedback polynomials, respectively. These polyno-

mials may be expressed in the form3

six, a necessary and sufficient condition is that the index differ-

ences

,

and

are all distinct.

In particular, for a rate-1/2 code, the following proposition

holds.

Proposition 2: For a systematic rate-1/2 code:

1) if

and

, the bipartite

graph has no cycles;

2) if

and

, denoting by

and

, the graph has girth four if

, six if

and

or

,

and otherwise the graph has girth eight;

3) if

or

, the graph can have cycles of at

most length six iff all differences

,

are distinct.

(5)

where , , and denote suitable integers which specify the

considered code.

We may also describe a rate-

RSC code by using the

corresponding parity-check equation at discrete time . This

description has an immediate visual impact on the code Tanner

graph. The encoder for the code described by (3) receives, at

discrete time , the information bits

, and

produces, assuming without loss of generality

, a parity

bit given by the following parity-check equation:

For a general rate- convolutional code, possibly punctured, similar conditions may be derived. As an example, for a systematic convolutional code of rate- , in the absence of puncturing, the following proposition holds.
Proposition 3: Considering a systematic convolutional code of rate- as the interlacing of the parity sequences of rate-1/2 subcodes operating on the same information sequence, the condition for the absence of cycles of length four is that the above-mentioned index differences computed on all the rate-1/2 subcodes must be different.
The proofs of these propositions are omitted for the reasons explained in the following Remark 1.
Example 1: Let us consider a rate-1/2 systematic recursive code with generator matrix

(7)

In this case,

and

, and the code is defined by the

(6) following two vectors:

and

. For this

where is the total number of transmitted parity bits and it is

understood that, if the lower limit of a sum is greater than the

upper limit, no terms are summed. Therefore,

,

and

denote the number of information and parity bits in

each parity check, respectively. In order to simplify the no-

code, the described conditions are not satisfied, because . Hence, the Tanner graph has
girth four, as can be easily verified. Example 2: Let us now consider a rate-1/2 systematic recur-
sive code with generator matrix

tation, we collect integers and in the following vec-

(8)

tors:

,

, and

.

The corresponding Tanner graph can be easily built. In fact,

for each discrete-time instant , we have

variable nodes

corresponding to the information bits

and

the parity bit , and a check node representing (6). This check

node will be connected to some variable nodes, according to (6).

For a given number of decoding iterations, the complexity of a

message-passing algorithm working on this graph depends on

the number of edges in the graph, and therefore, on

, and is independent of the code-constraint

length.

Proposition 1: For a systematic rate-

convolutional

code, in order to ensure that the bipartite graph has girth at least

This code is characterized by

,

,

,

and

. According to Proposition 2, the corresponding

Tanner graph has girth eight.

Remark 1: Nonrecursive systematic codes are a special case

of the codes described in this section. In this case, the con-

ditions in Propositions 1 and 3 for the absence of cycles of

length four (or, equivalently, for the absence of rectangles in the

parity-check matrix) define the so-called convolutional self-or-

thogonal codes (CSOCs) [20]–[22]. These codes form a class of

nonrecursive systematic codes adopted for satellite communica-

tions in the 1960s and 1970s since they admit simple decoding

schemes, namely, the so-called hard-input majority-logic de-

coding and soft-input threshold decoding [20], [22]. The condi-

+ 3In the following, we employ the usual symbols and to denote modulo-2 tions in Propositions 1 and 3 were recognized as necessary for

addition.

the applicability of majority logic and threshold decoding [20],

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

[21]. However, this is not surprising, since it can be shown that

threshold decoding coincides with the previously described BP

algorithm when a single iteration is performed. Similarly, it can

be shown that majority-logic decoding is related with the first

iteration of the so-called Gallager B algorithm described in [7]

and [12]. The codes described in this section may be viewed as

a generalization of CSOCs to recursive codes. Proofs of Propo-

sitions 1–3 can be obtained as a straightforward extension of

the proofs in [21] for conventional CSOCs, and are therefore

omitted.

Remark 2: The code description is not unique, nor is the

corresponding code Tanner graph. As a consequence, even if

a given generator matrix does not comply with the conditions

for the absence of cycles of length four, it could be possible to

find an equivalent code description that does. For instance, this

is the case of the code in Example 1. In fact, multiplying numer-

ator and denominator by the common factor , we obtain the

equivalent generator matrix given in (8), whose corresponding

Tanner graph has girth eight. This code and its equivalent de-

scriptions will be reconsidered in the numerical results.

Schedule: When used to decode convolutional codes, mes-

sage-passing algorithms can also adopt a schedule different

from that previously described and usually adopted for LDPC

codes. This schedule, referred to as the wave schedule, is made

possible by the fact that the parity-check matrix of a convolu-

tional code is block triangular, and by the relevant structure of

the code Tanner graph. In fact, at each iteration, after variable

and check nodes up to discrete-time have been processed,

the edges connecting “future” check nodes may be immediately

updated without waiting for the successive iteration. In practice,

each check node is “activated” when it can benefit from the

updating, at the same iteration, of the messages coming from

previous check and variable nodes. This schedule is pictorially

exemplified in Fig. 1, with reference to the Tanner graph of

a rate-1/2 systematic convolutional code with parity-check

equation

. In the figure, three successive

steps of this schedule are shown under the letters (a), (b),

and (c). Although this new schedule allows a speed up of the

convergence process, it is not compatible with a fully parallel

implementation of the decoder. For high-speed communication

systems, the flooding schedule could be preferred.

Fig. 1. Wave schedule. Fig. 2. Overall Tanner graph for a turbo code.

IV. CONCATENATED SCHEMES
In this section, we discuss the concatenation of the convolutional codes previously described. The resulting coding schemes are classical turbo codes or serially concatenated codes, but may be decoded as LDPC codes. For this reason, these new concatenated schemes are nicknamed “turbo Gallager codes” (TGCs). More generally, code networks can be designed by concatenating a few convolutional component codes in mixed parallel and serial configurations [5], [23].
TGC are based on the following two key concepts:
1) at the encoder, the use of recursive CSOCs in code networks as component codes;
2) at the decoder, the use of a message-passing algorithm which works on the Tanner graph of the overall code by adopting the flooding or the wave schedule.

Let us consider the overall Tanner graph of a turbo code.

In Fig. 2, we show, as an example, the graph for a rate-1/3

code. The component codes are rate-1/2 systematic codes with

,

, and, for simplicity, the code termination

is ignored. In the upper part of the graph, the information bits

and the parity bits of the first component code are connected

with the corresponding check nodes. The information bits are

also connected, in a permuted order, with the lower check nodes

related to the second component code having parity bits .

The decoding process can be performed by means of a mes-

sage-passing decoder working on the Tanner graph of the overall

code. In this case, the variable nodes of both codes, and subse-

quently, the check nodes of both codes, are activated simulta-

neously. Alternatively, a “turbo-like” decoder such as that de-

scribed in [2] could be used, in which each soft-output decoder is

based on the message-passing algorithm working on the Tanner

graph of the corresponding component code, and both decoders

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COLAVOLPE: DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF TURBO GALLAGER CODES

1905

iteratively exchange soft information.4 For a given performance,

the convergence speed of a message-passing decoder working

on the Tanner graph of the overall code with the flooding or wave

schedule was observed to be greater than that of the above-men-

tioned turbo-like decoder. In fact, each component decoder of

this turbo-like scheme must perform some inner iterations in

order to pass reliable information to the other decoder. Then,

additional iterations on the overall scheme are necessary.

Note that even if the graphs of each component code have

girth six, the overall Tanner graph may have girth four, de-

pending on the interleaver used. As an example, consider a

turbo code composed of rate-1/2 convolutional codes. In this

case, a sufficient condition to avoid the appearance of cycles

of length four in a parallel concatenation is that informa-

tion symbols which differ for less than

have a distance, after the interleaver, greater than or equal to

. This may be obtained by the use of an

-random interleaver with

[24].

Fig. 3. BER of the convolutional code in Examples 1 and 2, by using the BCJR and the BP algorithm.

Turbo codes based on CSOCs as component codes were pre-

viously proposed in [25], where, however, nonrecursive CSOCs (even) position remain in odd (even) position after the permu-

were adopted, and the decoding scheme was “turbo-like” using tation,5 and that the odd parity bits of the first encoder and the

threshold decoders as soft-output component decoders. The per- even parity bits of the second encoder are punctured. When a bit

formance of this scheme has a twofold limitation: 1) the use is punctured, the corresponding variable node in the graph dis-

of nonrecursive codes prevents the possibility of an interleaver appears, along with the neighboring check nodes and the edges

gain; and 2) the suboptimal threshold decoders further limit the connected to them. As a consequence, by means of simple con-

overall performance. This limitation may be overcome by the siderations on the overall Tanner graph, it can be shown that the

proposed schemes based on recursive codes and a more efficient corresponding degree polynomials are

decoding.

As a design criterion to select the component codes as

well as the type of interleaver, puncturing, and concatenation

(parallel, serial, or mixed), the method of density evolution can

(9)

be used. Density evolution is a tool for jointly analyzing the code and the message-passing decoding algorithm, evaluating the relevant performance when averaged over the ensemble of codes with a common degree distribution of variable and check nodes [10], [12]. This method, which assumes the absence

By properly choosing the integers codes can be obtained. However, if results. As an example, if code is obtained.

and , simple irregular , a regular code
, a (3,6) regular LDPC

of cycles, analyzes the evolution of the probability density functions of the messages propagating in the graph during

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

decoding, with the aim of determining the critical channel parameter (the so-called threshold) which separates the region where reliable transmission is possible from that where it is not [12]. Notice that for TGCs, the condition of absence of cycles for increasing codeword length is not satisfied. Hence, no rigorous claim on the achievable iterative threshold can be made. Nevertheless, density evolution can provide useful information in the code design.
The degree distribution of variable and check nodes, necessary for the application of the density evolution method, can be concisely described by two polynomials and defined in [9] and [10]. For TGCs, these two polynomials depend on the type of concatenation, interleaver, puncturing (if any), and component codes.
Example 3: Let us consider a rate-1/2 turbo code obtained from two identical rate-1/2 RSC codes by means of puncturing. Let us assume that the interleaver is odd–odd, i.e., bits in odd
4This turbo-like scheme corresponds to a particular message-passing schedule in the overall graph. In fact, in this case, messages are exchanged in the upper or in the lower part of the graph alternatively.

Computer simulations are used to assess the performance of

the proposed codes, whether concatenated or not, in terms of

bit-error rate (BER) versus

, being the received signal

energy per information bit, and

the two-sided noise power

spectral density. For TGCs, density evolution is used to select

the component codes. To this purpose, discretized density evo-

lution [10] is considered with 512-level quantization in the range

from 32 to 32.6 Finally, a comparison between the flooding and

the wave schedules in terms of convergence speed is reported.

Single Convolutional Code: The application of the BP al-

gorithm to a single convolutional code is first analyzed, and in

Fig. 3, the code in Examples 1 and 2 is considered (see also Re-

mark 2). In this figure, the performance of the optimal BCJR

algorithm is also given as a benchmark. For the BP algorithm,

computer simulations were performed by using early detection

of convergence, i.e., at each iteration the decoder determines if

5Examples of such an interleaver are described in [2] and [26]. A dithered relative prime (DRP) interleaver [27] can be also odd–odd for particular choices of the dither functions.
6 6We assume that the transmitted code symbols are 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

TABLE I THRESHOLDS FOR A RATE-1/2 TURBO CODE WITH EQUAL COMPONENT CODES, AN ODD–ODD INTERLEAVER AND AN ODD–EVEN PUNCTURING

checks are all satisfied, stopping decoding when they are. When

the BP algorithm is applied to the Tanner graph with girth four Fig. 4. BER of the considered TGCs and comparison with regular LDPC codes
derived from the generator matrix in (7), the performance does for different codeword lengths L.

not approach the optimal one, even for a maximum allowed

number of 50 iterations. On the contrary, on a Tanner graph

with girth greater than four, such as the graph which derives

from the generator matrix in (8) for the same code, the BP al-

gorithm has a performance which is very close to the optimal

one in two to three iterations (the relevant curve in Fig. 3 refers

to ten maximum allowed iterations). In general, when the code

Tanner graph has girth six, we observed in our simulations that

the performance of the BCJR algorithm is always reached. On

the contrary, when the code has girth four, the BER never con-

verges to the optimal performance.

Concatenated Schemes: Code Design Based on Density Evo-

lution: As a tool to perform the code design, the density evo-

lution technique was used. The threshold of the signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR), i.e., the value above which the expected fraction

of incorrect messages approaches zero, assuming absence of

cycles, is computed. As already mentioned, these threshold

values can be used to select the component codes as well as the

type of interleaver, puncturing, and code concatenation. As an

example, let us consider the case of turbo codes, such as those

described in Example 3. In this case, the threshold values are

shown in Table I for different values of

, along with

the corresponding optimal values of and . It can be noted

that an optimal value of exists and corresponds to the couple

(or equivalently,

). Hence,

component codes with these values of and represent the

better choice in this case. The corresponding threshold value

is 0.797 dB, whereas the Shannon limit for binary inputs and

rate-1/2 is 0.187 dB. Lower values of the threshold (0.584

dB) may be obtained by using different component codes, i.e.,

an asymmetric turbo code, in order to make the overall code

more irregular. As a side result, we observed a significant

increase of the threshold values when the component codes

are nonrecursive, according to well-known results for turbo

codes.

As a final comment, we summarize the results we obtained by

applying the threshold analysis to serial concatenated schemes.

We found that lower threshold values are obtained for a recur-

sive inner code according to the results in [5]. As a further de-

gree of freedom which can allow lower threshold values, code

networks obtained by concatenating component codes in mixed

parallel and serial configurations may be considered.

Concatenated Schemes: BER Analysis: In Example 3, we

observed that, with a proper choice of component codes, in-

terleaver type, and puncturing, it is possible to obtain a TGC

which is also a (3,6)-regular LDPC code. In Fig. 4, we compare

the performance of these (3,6)-regular TGCs with that of clas-

sical (3,6)-regular LDPC codes [6], [28] for different codeword

lengths . For the proposed schemes, the component codes have

,

, and we use tailbiting in both

component codes, as described in [29] for recursive codes, in

order to avoid a rate loss due to code termination. Note that

no code search was performed—the component codes are only

chosen following Proposition 3 and simple intuitive considera-

tions. Specifically, as both component codes are punctured, in-

tegers must be all even (or all odd) in order to prevent all of

the check nodes from disappearing. In addition, integers are

chosen small in order to reduce the probability of appearance of

cycles of length four due to the interleaver, whereas larger values

of the integers are chosen in order to allow the propagation

of a message to a wide region of the graph in a few iterations.

For TGCs, different codeword lengths, namely,

496,

2624, and 8000, which correspond to interleaver lengths of 248,

1312, and 4000, respectively, are considered.7 We emphasize the

simplicity in obtaining codes with different codeword lengths.

The component codes remain the same and only the interleaver

size changes. Computer simulations were performed by using

early detection of convergence. The maximum allowed number

of iterations is 400 for TGCs, as well as for (3,6)-regular LDPC

codes of length 504, 2340, and 8000, reported in Fig. 4 as a

comparison [28]. We observe that the considered TGCs perform

slightly better than classical (3,6)-regular LDPC codes, despite

their simpler construction and encoding.

In Fig. 5, we compare the performance of TGCs with that of

the original rate-1/2 turbo code by Berrou and Glavieux (B&G)

7DRP interleavers with M = 8 are used [27].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COLAVOLPE: DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF TURBO GALLAGER CODES

1907

Fig. 5. BER of the considered TGCs and comparison with the original turbo Fig. 6. BER of the considered TGCs in the case of serial concatenation. code by B&G [2].

[2]. Unlike the code considered in Examples 1 and 2 and Re-

mark 2, it can be shown that it is not possible to rearrange the

generator matrix of the component code of the B&G turbo code

in order to obtain a bipartite graph with girth greater than four.

For this reason, we use different component codes for the con-

sidered TGCs. A symmetric TGC, such as that described in Ex-

ample 3, is considered with component codes having

and

, since these values correspond to the lowest threshold.

This code is denoted TGC1 in Fig. 5. The identical component

codes have

and

. We also consider

an asymmetric turbo code, denoted as TGC2 in Fig. 5, which

corresponds to a threshold of 0.584 dB. In this case, one compo-

nent code has

and

, whereas the

second one has

and

. For

these three turbo codes (B&G, TGC1, and TGC2), DRP inter-

leavers with lengths 1024

or 16 000 bits

are

used. For TGC1 and TGC2, the maximum number of iterations

is 200, for interleavers of length 1024, or 800, for interleavers of

Fig. 7. Mean and standard deviation of the number of iterations for the wave and flooding schedules.

length 16 000. However, as shown below, the mean number of iterations really necessary is significantly lower. From Fig. 5, it can be observed that, despite the lower level of decoding complexity, TGC1 exhibits a performance degradation of less than 0.3 dB at a BER of . This performance loss reduces to about 0.15 dB by using TGC2.
A serial code concatenation is considered in Fig. 6, where the performance of an overall code obtained by concatenating

ation of the number of iterations until convergence versus the SNR. The considered TGC code is TGC1 from Fig. 2 with an interleaver length of 1024 bits. We observe that the wave schedule reduces the number of iterations. However, as already mentioned, this schedule is not compatible with a fully parallel decoder implementation—it represents a viable solution for serial implementations.

a systematic outer code with

and

(hence,

this code in nonrecursive), and a systematic recursive inner code

VI. CONCLUSION

with

and

, is shown for different In this paper, we showed that code networks, designed

interleaver lengths. The overall rate of 1/3 is obtained by prop- by concatenating convolutional codes in mixed serial and/or

erly puncturing the inner code. Hence, the codeword length is parallel configuration through interleavers, may be effectively

1.5 times the interleaver length. A density evolution analysis decoded by means of the decoding algorithm used for LDPC

showed that, corresponding to the degree distribution of this Gallager codes and working on the code Tanner graph, provided

code, the threshold is 0.697 dB. From the figure, it can be ob- that the component codes are chosen according to proper

served that by increasing the interleaver length, the performance conditions which guarantee that the graph has girth at least

tends to this limiting value.

six. For RSC codes of rate and

, these conditions

Schedule: Finally, in Fig. 7, we compare the wave and are explicitly given, and their analogy with the conditions

flooding schedules in terms of mean value and standard devi- which define CSOCs were drawn. Hence, the proposed code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

networks combine the simple coding operations of turbo and serial concatenated codes with the fully parallel decoding implementation of LDPC codes. These codes were compared, in terms of BER performance, with classical regular LDPC codes and the original B&G turbo code showing that, despite the lower overall complexity, very powerful schemes may be obtained.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author acknowledges the contribution of Dr. M. Bertinelli for his help in developing part of the computer programs, and that of M. Franceschini for the density evolution results.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near-Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf.

Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

[2] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near-optimum error-correcting coding and

decoding: Turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271,

Oct. 1996.

[3] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear

codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[4] P. Roberston, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “Optimal and sub-optimal

maximum a posteriori algorithms suitable for turbo decoding,” Eur.

Trans. Telecommun., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 119–125, Mar./Apr. 1997.

[5] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concate-

nation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and itera-

tive decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 909–926, May

1998.

[6] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Feb. 1999.

[7] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[8] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Ste-

mann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

47, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.

[9] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of

capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[10] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On

the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the

Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[12] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density

parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[13]

, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.

[14] G. Colavolpe, “Decoding of Concatenated Self-Orthogonal Convolutional Codes on Graphs,” Italian Patent MI2002A001438, June 28, 2002, Int. Patent Applicat. PCT/EP03/06337, Int. Patent WO 2004/004134, June 16, 2003.
[15] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2181–2191, Sept. 1999.
[16] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[17] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[18] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–231, Feb. 1998.
[19] H. H. Ma and J. K. Wolf, “On tail biting convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-34, pp. 104–111, Feb. 1986.
[20] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [21] J. P. Robinson and A. J. Bernstein, “A class of binary recurrent codes
with limited error propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, pp. 106–113, Jan. 1967. [22] G. C. Clark, Jr and J. B. Cain, Error-Correction Coding for Digital Communications, 3rd ed. New York: Plenum, 1988. [23] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Soft-input softoutput modules for the construction and distributed iterative decoding of code networks,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 155–172, Mar./Apr. 1998. [24] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “Turbo codes for PCS applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Seattle, WA, June 1995, pp. 54–59. [25] S. Riedel and Y. V. Svirid, “Iterative (“turbo”) decoding of threshold decodable codes,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 527–534, Sept./Oct. 1995. [26] A. S. Barbulescu and S. S. Pietrobon, “Interleaver design for turbo codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 30, pp. 2107–2108, Dec. 1994. [27] S. Crozier and P. Guinand, “High-performance low-memory interleaver banks for turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf., Atlantic City, NJ, Oct. 2001, pp. 2394–2398. [28] D. J. C. MacKay. Regular LDPC Online Database. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/ [29] P. Ståhl, J. B. Anderson, and R. Johannesson, “A note on tailbiting codes and their feedback encoders,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 529–534, Feb. 2002.
Giulio Colavolpe was born in Cosenza, Italy, in 1969. He received the Dr. Ing. degree (cum laude) in telecommunication engineering from the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, in 1994 and the Ph.D. degree in information technology from the University of Parma, Parma, Italy, in 1998.
Since 1997, he has been with the University of Parma, where he is now an Associate Professor of Telecommunications. In 2000, he was a Visiting Scientist with the Insitut Eurécom, Valbonne, France. His main research interests include digital transmission theory, channel coding, and signal processing. His reesearch activity has led to more than 60 scientific publications in leading international journals and conference proceedings and several industrial patents.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

