On Construction of Rate-Compatible Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

Mohammadreza Yazdani , and Amir H. Banihashemi
Department of Systems and Computer Engineering Carleton University Ottawa, Canada
{ryazdani, ahashemi}@ sce.carleton.ca

Abstract— This paper deals with the problem of devising an efficient framework for constructing rate-compatible low-density parity-check (RC-LDPC) codes. We present a deterministic framework for constructing a family of linear-time encodable RC-LDPC codes from a mother code using puncturing and extending. Application of the proposed construction to a type-II hybrid ARQ scheme with information block length k=1024 and code rates 8/19 to 8/10, using an optimized irregular mother code of rate 8/13, results in a throughput which is only about 0.7dB away from Shannon limit. This outperforms existing similar schemes based on turbo codes and LDPC codes by up to 0.5dB.
Keywords-rate-compatible low-density parity-check (RC-LDPC) codes; LDPC codes; rate-compatible codes; hybrid ARQ schemes; puncturing; extending; iterative coding schemes.
I. INTRODUCTION
In order to address the different error protection requirements of various data sources and the time varying nature of wireless channels we need a flexible channel coding scheme. Hybrid-ARQ protocols are characterized by their capability to adapt to different or changing protection requirements. In particular, the availability of a feedback path on wireless channels enables us to implement type-II hybridARQ protocols on them. These flexible protocols work based on transmitting new parity bits in response to a negative acknowledgment (NACK) from the receiver, which indicates the failure of the last code in correcting the errors in the transmitted packet [1]-[3]. The receiver then combines the newly received parity bits with those previously received to decode a frame belonging to a stronger, lower rate code. With this flexible structure, type-II hybrid ARQ protocols have the ability to adapt their throughput as channel conditions change.
In practice, the heart of a type-II hybrid ARQ protocol is a nested sequence of codes where the parity bits of higher rate codes are embedded in those of lower rate codes. Such a family of codes is called a family of rate-compatible (RC) codes [1]-[4]. One of the main advantages of using RC codes in these protocols is that all the codes in the sequence can be decoded using a single encoder/decoder pair. The receiver decodes each code of the family using the decoder of the lowest rate code and inserting erasure for the parity bits missing in the decoded code.
The performance of an ARQ protocol is evaluated based on

its throughput, defined as the average number of data bits successfully accepted by the receiver for each transmitted bit [5]. The error-correcting capability of employed RC codes is the key parameter concerning the throughput efficiency of type-II hybrid-ARQ schemes. Since 1970’s, RC convolutional and block codes have been designed using puncturing (for a list of references, see [1], [2]). More recently, RC punctured turbo (RCPT) codes [3], [6], and RC low-density parity-check (RC-LDPC) codes [2] were also introduced. Both schemes provide near capacity performance with throughputs about 1dB from the capacity of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. In another related work, Ha and McLaughlin [4] study the problem of finding puncturing distributions for RC-LDPC codes that optimize the threshold over a range of rates. Their results however focus mainly on asymptotic behavior of codes at very large block lengths.
In [2], the authors show that puncturing alone cannot provide a sequence of well-performing LDPC codes with a wide range of rates. The problem with puncturing occurs at higher rates where a large percentage of punctured bits (erasures) paralyzes the iterative soft-decision decoder. To overcome this, both puncturing and extending is used in [2] to create a sequence of RC codes from a regular LDPC code. In this work, we devise RC-LDPC codes that outperform codes constructed in [2] by up to 0.5dB in throughput performance. In our construction, we also use both puncturing and extending. Our work however can be differentiated from that of [2] based on the followings:
1. The structure used for extending the parity-check matrix is different. It provides a more uniform row weight distribution, and a stronger dependency between the columns of the parity-check matrix of the mother code and the newly added columns. These improve the performance of extended codes.
2. The proposed structure for extension is deterministic. This makes the design and implementation of the codes modular and simple.
3. We use an optimized irregular LDPC code, constructed based on progressive edge growth (PEG) [7], [8] as the mother code. Also, at each level of extension, the dependencies between the newly added rows and the newly added columns of the parity-check matrix are

IEEE CommAuuthnoircizaedtiloicnensseSdoucseielimtyited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3ne023,2026 at 11:00:12 U0T-C78fro0m3I-E8E5E3X3p-lo0re/0. 4R/e$st2ric0ti.o0n0s a(pcp)ly2. 004 IEEE

governed by a PEG-constructed sub-matrix hext (and an identity matrix). Both PEG constructions for the mother code and hext are linear-time encodable and are effectively deterministic [7], [8]. The former property makes all the codes in the sequence linear-time encodable. Moreover, using PEG construction for both the mother code and hext improves the girth distribution [7], [8] of the Tanner graphs (TG’s) [9], and thus the performance of RC-LDPC codes. 4. For puncturing the PEG constructed irregular code, we first puncture bit nodes with degree 2. This minimizes the number of erasure messages initially propagated through the TG of the code for iterative decoding, and improves the performance of punctured codes. In the following section, we explain our construction of RCLDPC codes based on a particular example with design parameters similar to examples given in [2], [6]. The approach however is quite general and can be applied, with minor modifications, to different data block lengths, and sequence of rates.
II. CONSTRUCTION OF RC-LDPC CODES
We consider an information block length of k=1024, and code rates 8/10, 8/11, …, 8/19. Our experiments show that good performance for puncturing is achievable for rates up to about 30% higher than the rate of the mother code. We therefore choose 8/13 as the rate of the mother code. As we will see later, the mother code is constructed using PEG construction [7], [8], and has a systematic encoder. To obtain rates 8/14,…,8/19 from the mother code, six levels of extension are required. We use the parity-check structure in Fig. 1 for extension, where at each level, 128 new columns and rows are added to the parity check matrix of the mother code. To have the parity bits of the higher rate codes embedded in those of lower rate codes, the upper right part of the extended parity-check matrices is all zero. The identity matrices at the lower left part are responsible for creating dependencies between the bits of higher rate codes and those of lower rate codes, while hext and identity matrices at the lower right part complement those dependencies, and are also responsible for creating a rather uniform row weight distribution for extended matrices. This appears to improve the performance of extended codes. We also construct hext using PEG construction. This improves the girth distribution of added parity bits, which in turn improves the code and the performance of iterative decoding. It should be also noted that the location of the identity matrices is chosen such that they do not generate any cycle of length 4 in the TG of the extended codes. The only exception is the two side-by-side identity matrices at the lower left part that can create cycles of length 4 among the bits of mother code. The number of such cycles however is generally very small. In our example, only four cycles of length 4 are generated.
To construct good RC-LDPC codes, we need to start from a

1664 columns
0
parity−check matrix of the irregular rate−8/13 LDPC code

768 columns
0

640 rows

128 rows

128

128

128

1 0 ... 0 0... ...1 ... .0.. 0 0 ... 1

1 0 ... 0 .0.. 1... ... 0... 0 0 ... 1

0

1 0 ... 0 ...0 1... ... 0... 0 0 ... 1

1 0 ... 0 .0.. 1... ... ...0 0 0 ... 1

1 0 ... 0 .0.. ...1 ... ...0 0 0 ... 1

1 0 ... 0 ..0. 1... ... 0... 0 0 ... 1

1 0 ... 0 ..0. 1... ... ...0 0 0 ... 1

0

hext

1 0 ... 0 ..0. ..1. ... 0... 0 0 ... 1

hext
1 0 ... 0 ..0. 1... ... 0... 0 0 ... 1

hext

0

0

1 0 ... 0 0... ...1 ... ...0 0 0 ... 1

hext

1 0 ... 0 ..0. 1... ... ...0 0 0 ... 1

hext

1 0 ... 0 ..0. 1... ... 0... 0 0 ... 1

hext

128 128

128 128 128 128 128 128 128 columns

Fig. 1. Extensions of rate-8/13 PEG-constructed LDPC code with k=1024.

mother code with good error correcting performance. Given a symbol node degree distribution, PEG construction is known to generate very good codes with rather uniform check degree distribution [7], [8]. These codes considerably outperform randomly constructed LDPC codes at finite block lengths [7], [8]. In [8], the authors also propose a tedious search algorithm for finding good symbol degree distributions for PEGconstructed LDPC codes. For a rate 1/2 code, they obtain the following optimized distribution
λ(x) = ∑i λi xi = 0.47532x2 + 0.27953x3 + 0.03486x4 (1) + 0.10889x5 + 0.10138x15
in which λi is the fraction of symbol nodes with degree i. In
this work, we use this degree distribution to construct our mother code, as well as matrix hext using PEG construction. Although the distribution is not optimized for the mother code (rate 8/13), it appears to provide good performance across the desired range of rates, which also includes 8/16 = 1/2. In constructing the mother code using PEG construction, we assign the left side of the parity-check matrix in Fig. 1 to systematic bits, while we enforce the lower triangular structure on the right side for parity bits. (The right-most column has weight one, which makes the symbol degree distribution slightly deviate from (1). In practice however, this has a negligible effect on performance.) PEG construction is used to fill out the matrix from right to left, and by starting from lowest weight columns. All degree 2 nodes are thus associated with parity bits. These are the nodes that are randomly punctured, 128 at a time, to generate the rates 8/12, 8/11, and 8/10 from the mother code. Similar to the parity bit part of the parity check matrix of the mother code, hext is also constructed lower-triangular using PEG construction (the column weight distribution for this construction is also (1)). This results in a lower triangular structure for the parity bit part of all the parity check matrices of RC-LDPC codes. This structure allows very efficient linear-time encoding of the codes by computing the

IEEE CommAuuthnoircizaedtiloicnensseSdoucseielimtyited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3ne123,2026 at 11:00:12 U0T-C78fro0m3I-E8E5E3X3p-lo0re/0. 4R/e$st2ric0ti.o0n0s a(pcp)ly2. 004 IEEE

parity bits from left to right [7], [8].1
Construction of RC-LDPC codes with extending has some advantages over using puncturing for the same purpose. The first advantage is that when we want to use our family of RC codes in the type-II hybrid-ARQ protocol, the extra parity bits of each code are generated only when we need to send them, whereas in puncturing usually all of the parity bits of the mother code are generated at the encoder at the beginning of sending each data packet. The more important advantage is that the decoding of punctured codes has to be done in the decoder of the mother code by inserting erasures at the locations of punctured bits while the decoding of each extended code is effectively performed in its own decoder (for decoding, we use belief propagation (BP) algorithm [9]). This results in both better performance and less computational complexity for the codes that are obtained by extending in comparison with the codes that are obtained by puncturing. To make this point more clear, note that when we decode the extended codes using the decoder of the lowest rate code (and inserting erasures in the locations of missing parity bits), all the rows corresponding to missing parity bits become redundant due to the effect of erasures on them. But since erasures don’t have any effect on the original check nodes of the extended codes, effectively, we will have a standard BP decoder for each extended code (even when we shot down the part of the decoder that corresponds to the missing parity bits). The only problem with extending is that if we start extending from a high rate code, it fails to provide good lower rate LDPC codes. This is because the row weights of the parity-check matrix of a high rate LDPC code are quite large and thus the newly added rows to this matrix do not improve the performance sufficiently, unless they have weights close to the large weights of the old rows. On the other hand, since hext is a fairly small square matrix, we cannot increase its row weights without having a large number of small cycles in the Tanner graph of this matrix. Similarly, increasing the row weights by inserting a large number of 1’s in the sparse area, produces a large number of cycles of length 4 in the Tanner graph of the code. Therefore a large degree of extension results in either unbalanced row weights or many short cycles. In either case the performance will degrade.
In the following section, we use the designed sequence of RC-LDPC codes in a type-II hybrid ARQ scheme and show their considerable improvement in throughput over similar existing schemes.
III. PERFORMANCE OF A TYPE-II HYBRID ARQ SCHEME BASED ON PEG-CONSTRUCTED RC-LDPC CODES
We consider using the designed RC-LDPC codes in a typeII hybrid ARQ scheme based on selective-repeat ARQ protocol. We also assume that LDPC codes are transmitted over a binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN) channel with bipolar signaling, and are decoded using iterative belief propagation algorithm [9]. For decoding, we only need the decoder for the lowest rate code (8/19). To decode the higher rate codes, missing parity bits are replaced by erasures
1 It is worth mentioning that assuming that the rates of LDPC codes are fixed, unlike our design, the encoder of [2] has a complexity which increases quadratically with k and the lengths of the codes.

at the decoder. Packet combining (see, e.g., [5]) would be used to combine different copies of the same coded bits until the receiver successfully decodes the transmitted packet. We also use LDPC codes for both error correction and error detection, and thus no extra redundancy for error detection is required. Moreover, we consider noiseless feedback channel and infinite buffer size at both transmitter and receiver. Also, in this work, we are not concerned about transmission latency, and the traffic of feedback channel, and only consider throughput η, defined below, as the measure of performance of the hybrid ARQ scheme [5].

∑ ∏ η

=

k N ave

=

N1 (1− F1 ) +

k

+∞

i −1

N i (1− Fi )

Fj

.

(2)

i=2

j =1

In (2), N is the average total number of bits that must be ave
transmitted in order for the information block of length k to be accepted by the receiver. Parameters Ni and Fi are the total number of transmitted bits and the frame (word) error rate (FER) after the ith transmission. As can be seen in (2), having RC-LDPC codes with low FER’s can improve the throughput. The FER curves for the designed RC-LDPC codes are given in Fig. 2, while the throughput of the corresponding type-II hybrid ARQ scheme, computed based on (2), is given in Fig. 4. In both figures the curves are plotted versus Es/N0, where Es is the average energy per transmitted symbol and N0/2 is the power spectral density of AWGN. For all simulation results, the maximum number of iterations for decoder is equal to 500, and for each signal to noise ratio, enough code words are simulated to generate at least 200 codeword errors.

In order to better evaluate the goodness of the extended codes we can compare the performance of each extended code with two codes having the following characteristics: one of the codes is PEG-constructed with the same length, rate, and symbol-degree distribution of the code obtained by extending (note that unlike extended code, this code is directly generated using PEG-construction). The other code, referred as “typical code”, has the same length and rate as the first code but its degree distribution is given by (1). The larger the amount of constraint that is imposed on the Tanner graph of extended codes during their construction, we expect the performance of these codes to degrade further compared to the performance of the above-mentioned PEG-constructed codes. This comparison has been done in Fig. 3, for the rate-8/14 and rate-8/15 extended codes. Although this figure confirms our expectation on superiority of the PEG-constructed codes over extended codes, we will show in the following that this outperformance translates to only a small difference in throughput. Also, as expected, we see in Fig. 3 that the performance of typical codes is better than the other two codes.

In Fig. 4, we have also given the capacity of BI-AWGN channel as well as the throughputs obtained in [3] and [6] for similar RC-LDPC and RCPT schemes, respectively. It can be seen that our RC-LDPC codes outperform the schemes of [3]

IEEE CommAuuthnoircizaedtiloicnensseSdoucseielimtyited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3ne223,2026 at 11:00:12 U0T-C78fro0m3I-E8E5E3X3p-lo0re/0. 4R/e$st2ric0ti.o0n0s a(pcp)ly2. 004 IEEE

Fig. 2. FER’s of RC-LDPC codes; rates from right to left: 8/10, 8/11, 8/12, … , 8/18, 8/19.
Fig. 3. Evaluating the performance of extended codes at rates 8/14 and 8/15; Solid lines: Performance of RC codes obtained by extending; Dot-Dashed
lines: Performance of the codes with the same block lengths, rates and degree distributions as the corresponding extended codes; Dashed lines: Performance
of typical codes with the same block lengths and rates as the corresponding extended codes.
and [6] by up to 0.5dB and can yield a throughput within 0.7dB of the capacity.2
In order to evaluate the quality of the throughput curve that we have obtained here, we compare it with an upper bound curve which can be obtained for type-II hybrid-ARQ protocols based on PEG-constructed RC-LDPC codes as following:
2 It is worth mentioning that we have also tested the regular extension of [2] with irregular codes at the early stages of this work and the results were much worse than the presented results here. This indicates the importance of careful extension in the performance of RC-LDPC codes. The extension should be designed to properly maintain the irregular structure of the code, as well as to create good dependency among new rows and columns and old columns.

Fig. 4. Throughput performance of type-II hybrid-ARQ protocol based on the designed RC-LDPC codes, RC-LDPC codes of [2] and RCPT codes of [6].
suppose that we manage to design a family of PEGconstructed RC-LDPC codes with the same rates and block lengths that we have considered here, such that the performance of each individual code is the same as the performance of the corresponding typical code. Then the throughput of this system can be considered as an upper bound for the throughput of our scheme. In fact, if we recall that irregular LDPC codes constructed by PEG construction are among the best performing LDPC codes at short block lengths, then this bound could be considered as an approximate upper bound for the throughput curve of any RC-LDPC code at this message block length. This upper bound has been depicted in Fig. 5 along with the throughout curve that we obtained for our family of PEG-constructed RC-LDPC codes. As can be seen, our throughput curve is very close to this upper bound especially at low to moderate values of signal to noise ratio, where the difference is negligible.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The requirement of establishing a virtually error-free link together with the availability of a feedback channel in wireless communication systems have put up type-II hybrid ARQ schemes as strong candidates for the channel coding protocol in the current and future generations of wireless systems [10]. Towards this goal, devising efficient RC codes with low encoding and decoding complexity and good performance is the most important step that has to be taken. In this paper we presented a deterministic framework for constructing lineartime encodable RC-LDPC codes which perform very well with iterative decoding. Important features of the proposed design are i) finding the proper rate for the mother code, ii) properly extending and puncturing the mother code to preserve both performance and linear-time encodability, iii) constructing a good mother code which is also linear-time encodable.

IEEE CommAuuthnoircizaedtiloicnensseSdoucseielimtyited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3ne323,2026 at 11:00:12 U0T-C78fro0m3I-E8E5E3X3p-lo0re/0. 4R/e$st2ric0ti.o0n0s a(pcp)ly2. 004 IEEE

Fig. 5. Throughput performance of type-II hybrid-ARQ protocol based on the family of PEG-constructed RC-LDPC codes with k=1024 in comparison with its upper bound.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 36, pp. 389400, 1988.

[2] J. Li and K. Narayanan, “Rate-Compatible Low Density Parity Check Codes for Capacity-Approaching ARQ Scheme in Packet Data Communications,” presented in Int. Conf. on Comm., Internet, and Info. Tech. (CIIT), Nov. 2002.
[3] D. N. Rowitch and L. B. Milstein, “On the performance of hybrid FEC/ARQ systems using rate compatible punctured turbo (RCPT) codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol.48, No.6, pp. 948-959, June 2000.
[4] J. Ha, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Optimal puncturing distributions for ratecompatible low-density parity-check codes,” unpublished.
[5] S. B. Wicker, Error Control Systems for Digital Communications and Storage. Prentice- Hall, Inc., 1995.
[6] R. Mantha and F. R. Kschischang, “A capacity-approaching hybrid ARQ scheme using Turbo codes,” Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, pp. 2341-2345, 1999.
[7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Antonio, Texas, USA, pp. 995-1001, Nov. 2001.
[8] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” unpublished.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[10] 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), “High Speed Downlink Packet Access,” 3GPP TR25.885, June 2001.

IEEE CommAuuthnoircizaedtiloicnensseSdoucseielimtyited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J4u3ne423,2026 at 11:00:12 U0T-C78fro0m3I-E8E5E3X3p-lo0re/0. 4R/e$st2ric0ti.o0n0s a(pcp)ly2. 004 IEEE

