IEEE 6th CAS Symp. on Emerging Technologies: Mobile and Wireless CO-. Shanghai, China, May 31-lune 2,2004

Design of Irregular LDPC Codec on a Single Chip FPGA
Y u h i Pei, Liuguo Yin, and Jianhua Lu
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China Email: pyk02@maiis.tsinghua,edu.cn

Abstract: A novel implementation of irregular Low density parity check (LDPC) codec on a single chip Xilinx FPGA is presented i n this paper. The encoder and decoder are accomplished by partial parallel architectures with very low complexity. Specifically, details including decoder and encoder structures, memory management, and required computation units to realize the variahldcheck node decoding and the parity-checkhits generation are discussed.It is verified that the errorcorrecting capability of the codes with the proposed scheme is kept the same as that by random generation method, while highly parallel encodingldecoding scheme may be realiid with ease. Thereby, the proposed design approach for the complex LDPC codee is very promising for real applications,
Keywordx Irregular Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Iterative decoding, Codec design, Partial parallel architectures.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were firstly discovered by R. G. Gallager in early 1960s [l]. Afier being overlooked for almost 35 yean, this class of codes has been recently rediscovered [2] and developed to be the most powerful error-correcting codes [3]. The decoding of an LDPC code allows a high degree of parallelism, which makes it very suitable to high data rate applications, such as wide-band wireless multimedia communications [4] and magnetic storage systems [5, 61. However, the hardware implementation of the LDPC encoder/decoder is quite challenging since the LDPC code is likely generated with a random scheme. As a matter of fact, the VLSI design of the LDPC codec is a crucial issue determining how well the merits of an LDPC code can be exploited in real applications
Current focus of VLSI design is on nonsystematic LDPC decoders. There are typically two kinds of architectures that have:been proposed. One is based on a fully parallel implementation scheme [6], which directly maps each individual node of a bipartite graph onto a processing circuit-unit, and the edges of the graph onto a network of interconnection. This decoder provides the fastest decoding speed, while suffering from very high hardware implementation complexity, especially with a routing wire overhead having too many globally long routing wires (111. Thereby, the code length by this scheme is quite limited, say, few thousands bits.
The other kind of decoder architecture is by the use of the partial parallel realization scheme [7, IO, 12, 131, which maps a certain number of variable nodes and check nodes to a single decoding unit, while the message passing that reflects the bipartite graph connectivity is jointly realized by the memory address generation and the interconnection among memory blocks and node computation units. The main advantage of this approach is a significant reduction of routing overhead and processing units, thereby achieving much longer codeword lengths.

It is noted that the LDPC codes that have been proposed for the above two decoder architectures are likely nonsystematic codes [6,7], while the generators of the codes
are always random-like and typically not sparse [XI, thereby
causing challenges in hardware implementation of the encoders.
In this paper, a novel codec design scheme for irregular LDPC codes is proposed, in which the VLSI implementation issues for both the encoder and the decoder are jointly
considered. In particular, the considered irregular LDPC codes are systematic, while the encoder and decoder are very suitable to be implemented by the partial parallel architecture with very low complexity. It is verified that the error-correcting capability of the codes considered by the proposed scheme is the same as that by random generation method [8]. Therefore, the merits of the irregular LDPC codes, namely, both powerful error-correcting capability and highly parallel encoding'decoding, may be well realized by the proposed design approach, being very promising for real applications.

11. IRREGULAR LOW-DENSITY PARIN-CHECK CODES

A. Structure of the LDPC codes

LDPC code is a kind of block code with a sparse parity check matrix. Specifically, an (N, d,, dJ regular LDPC code is a binary linear code with a code length of N bits, d, parity-check equations for every codeword bit, and d, codeword bits involved in every check equation. In other words, the parity-check matrix H has d, ones in each column and d, ones in each row, where the location of each nonzero element is random. For an irregular LDPC code, the degrees for variable nodes and check nodes are not fixed, they are chosen according to certain distributions. In particular, the variable node degree distribution is specified as

. t ( x ) = A +,++...+A d, Xd".'

(1)

And the check node degree distribution is defined by

p(x)= pdmx4-+'p , * , X " ~ + . . . + pd~xdc-1

(2)

where d, is the maximum variable node degree, do is the

minimum check node degree, and d, is the maximum check

node degree. To be convenient, we use ( N , A , ~ t)o denote

the ensemble of an irregular LDPC code.

rhccknoda

@ nrdlrnodni

R g . 1. Bipartilc graphofan LDPC code.
The shucture of an LDPC code may be depicted with a bipartite graph as shown in Fig 1. Specifically, the bipartite

0-7803-7938-1/04 /$20.000 2004 IEEE

221

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:14:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

graph of an ( N , A, p ) LDPC code is composed of N
variable nodes, (”,,i = I,Z,...,N ) , h’ check nodes, { c j ,,j = 1,2, ...,M ) ,and the edges that connect check nodes
and vanable nodes on the condition that every variable
participates in the corresponding check constraint. Moreover, the length of the information bits of an (N, A, p) LDPC code is K=N-M. Since any linear code should belong to a set of solutions, x , to a parity-check equation, HxT=OT,the
decoding algorithm of an LDPC code.can be performed
iteratively between the variable nodes and the check nodes
with a highly parallel scheme, which makes the LDPC codes very suitable for high data rate communications.

B. Theparipcheck matrix and the generaformatrix
In this paper, we focus our research on a group of
irregular LDPC codes with an M x N parity-check matrix
provided that M = M, .L and N = N b .L , where
L = 2‘ -1 , and p is a prime number. Moreover, the
numbers of degree-I and degree-2 variable nodes of the
group of codes are constrained to be Mb and
Mb .(L - l), respectively. The class of considered irregular
LDPC codes is generated with the scheme proposed in [8], which is composed of two steps:
First, construct an M, x N, base parity-check matrix
with a random generation scheme; Second, each individual element of the base matrix is
expanded to be a L L submatrix, thus a (M,.L) x (N,.L )
parity check matrix is obtained. It is note that in the matrix expansion, we not only use
zero matrixes and permuted identity matrix as that in [12, 131, hut also introduce matrix in which columnslrows have more than one nonzero elements to ensure the code to be systematic. As a result, the base parity-check matrix may be represented as the following:

[= ‘4.Mb

i: ff(pM&(3)

...P . pMhxni,4)

M.xn.14) )]

(3)

m e r e I M b x M b is an M , X M , identity binary matrix,

p , . ( 3 i j 4 d , ) is an M b x n , ( j ) binary matrix with j n&&b’i elements m each column, and Z(*)is a random

” ’ 1 column-wise matrix interleaver. After matrix expansion, the
resulting parity-check matrix can be represented as the following form:

E =[

’.
EI

“(%,L > , < m i W L ) ~ ~ , . ~ J ” ~ ~ ~ , . ,LM~ m, i,.d.b’LJ~) ~ ,

rE

1

(4)

And

I 0 0 ... 0

I I 0 ... 0

E = O...

.I..

I
...

......

0...

0 ... 0 I I&‘

.,(?:) where <M,L,,c.hcj,.r, (3 4 j 5 d , ) is an M b x
block matnx composed of L x L sub-matrixes as its elements, and each of the & ( j ) block-columns has j L x 1. identity-permuted sub-matrixes. Moreover, for the generation of every identity-permuted sub-matrix, a search procedure is implemented to randomly select a set of parameters
t ( & I , 2.31, a”,ahE GF(ZP)} to permute an L x I . identity submatrix according to the following scheme, on the condition that the expansion does not cause any small cycle with a length of 4:
a) Case 1, k = 0 : row index i sequentially takes va1ue.s
from 1 to L, while the column index value is
f ( d.(a”)’)w, here j sequentially takes values from 0 to
L-I;
b) Case 2, k = 1 : row index i sequentially takes values
from L to 1, while the column index value is . ( a ” ) ’ )w, here j sequentially takes values from 0 to
L-I;
c) Case 3, k = 2 : row index i sequentially takes values
from 1 to L, while the column index value is
L + 1- / ( a * .(a”)/)w,here j sequentially takes values from 0 to L1;
d) Case 4, k = 3 : row index i sequentially takes values
from L to 1, while the column index value is
L + 1 - / ( a ” . ( a l a ) ) ) ,where j sequentially takes values
from 0 to L-I. And, the corresponding generator matrix could he represented as:
Thereby, the codes made by the proposed construction scheme are systematic codes.
111. IRREGULAR LDPC CODEC DESIGN
The class of considered irregular LDPC codes is very suitable to be implemented with partial parallel architectures. In this section, we propose a decoder structure and an encoder structure for the irregular LDPC codes. A. Decoder Archifecfure
The partial parallel decoder consists of two arrays of processing units and three arrays of memory blocks that are denoted as MEMO, MEW,and MEMC, as shown in Fig. 2. The two arrays of processing units are Nb variable node computation units (VNCU) and Mbcheck node computation
units (CNCU).These are used to perform the computation of
the iterative decoding. M E M O contains two Na memory blocks of length L, one for received codeword information in log-likelihood-ratio form, and the other for iterative decoding outputs.
Furthermore, we assume that the number of nonzero elements of the base parity-check matrix Ha is Q. Then, M E W and MEMC are both composed of Q + M, memory

222

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:14:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

blocks, which are used to store messages form check nodes to variable nodes and messages from variable nodes to check nodes, respectively. Specifically, each nonzero element of
associated with the L 1's in the expanded submatrix, while
each n o m r o element of submamx ,M,y, takes two memory blocks. One is for node-decddmg messages
corresponding to the L nonzero elements in principle
diagonal of matrix E. The other memory block is for
node-decoding messages associated with the L - 1 nonzero
elements in minor diagonal of matrix E.

I

:

L

check-node processing mode. In this case, message in every clock cycle is read from each block of MEMC to the corresponding CNCUs, and then the output message from check nodes to variable nodes is written back to the associated memory blocks of MEMV. 3 ) Decoding Oucput: After the iterative decoding, the final
iterative decoding results that store in N , memory
blocks of MEMJO are output with a time division multiplex mode.
It is worth noting that the proposed decoder architecture has a regular structure with approximately the same complexity as that of regular LDPC decoders that proposed in [7]. Since the degree distributions are extended from regular pairs to irregular pairs, there has great potential in achieving better error-correcting performance. B. Encoder Architecture
For an information block Xi,(,_,, , the encoding
process may be represented as:
c = X w - ~xjG

r - - - - - - - - -I

, L1 .Ac.,(v :-.

.I

-E;]. I
. .T-

-r1 - 7-

I

I

I Chn. nodr

I- _."pP*"' _ - -&m-u - - _ -

Fig 2 Deader a r c h i t m m iur inegulx LDPC eodcr by the pruposcd
rchcmc
It is also noted that the memory block of MEMV, which is associated with a noniero clement in row-i and column-j
of the base mamx, connects CNCU; as its input and VNCU, as its output. Likewise, the memory block of MEMC, whlch is associated with a nonzero element in row-i and column-j of the baje mstrix, connects VNCU, as its input and CNCU, as its output. The decoder has a decoding procedure with the follouing three ~teps' I ) Inihlizofion: The received codeword information (ill
log-likelihood-ratio form) IS input into the MEMIO with 1. clock cycles, and at the same time, the values stored
in Q - M, memory blocks of MEMV are cleared to
zero 2 ) IferafiveDecoding: The decoder implements an iterative
decoding with 2. L clock cycles. In the first L clock
cycles. it performs variable node computation with VNCUs. Specifically, in evcty clock cycle, messages are read from every block of MEMIO and MEMV to the associated VSCUs Then, the iterative decoding result and the iterative messages from variable nodes to check nodes arc written to the corrcspondmg memory blocks of MEMIO and MEMC. respcctively. The mcmory readunle addresses of each MEMIO, MEMV, and MEMC arc generated by a counter or a field multiplier of GF(2'). according to its expanded matrix pardmeters. In
the second L clock cyclcs, the decoder works in a

Since matrix f$6.L)x((Nh-Mh).L) is a sparse matrix which
consists of L x L sub-matrixes, the multiplication can be
implemented by a partial parallel structure with very low complexity, where the encoded bit-block X,x(N.M,is
divided to be Nb- hf blocks of length-l bit-sequence.
Moreover, matrix (E-'!r is an upper hiangular matrix,
the multiplication with which may be implemented with a
binary accumulator [8,9].

I"f0-m U"

. I

Fig. 3. Encoder architeelwe for imgular LDPC codes by Ihc proposed

scheme.

Accordingly, we propose an encoder with partial

parallel architecture as shown in Figure 3. It consists of an

array of memory blocks, denoted as MEMI, and Ma

parity-check-bit-generating units, denoted as PCBGU.
MEMI are composed of Q - Mb memory blocks of

length L, which are used to store input source bits for the

generation of parity-check bits. Each memory block of

MEMI is associated with a nonzero element of submahix

p

...p , ) . The inputs port of all the

~ ~ ~ ~ . g l , ~ ~ . i r ~ ~ w~ith~ abbuos, nwhnileethce t

blocks that are corresponding to nonzero elements of

column-i (IY5VbN,-Mb. ) of the submatrix

wZ(rPiteM-'a.c"c;cels)sPMa&&%.

.

..p Tfd

'

r%

) "block

have of source

the bits

is

same written

223

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:14:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

in these memory blocks during encoding.

Likewise, the output ports of the memory blocks that

are corresponding to nonzero elements of row-j

- .( I I i I M ."),
... ~ ( p ,j ( , p ,

of

the

submatrix

p , ) are connected totheinput

ports 'of%&~f:9.'Yhe %&?pbnding block of parity-check

bits is generatedwith a time-division multiplex-mode. With

this encoder, the whole encoding procedure may be

conducted with N , . L clock cycles. In the first
(N, - M h ) .L clock cycles, source bits are output, and at

the same time, written into memory blocks of MEMI. In the
last M , . L clock cycles, the Mb blocks of parity-check bits are sequentially generated by PCBGU,, PCBGU2, ,..,

PCBGUMb,each with L clock cycles.

It turns out that, the encoder only takes Q - M , I-bit
memory blocks of length L , h f h multiple-input adders,

h f b binary accumulators, and one multiplex. Compared

with the encoder that presented in [7], the proposed encoder

computes the parity check bits by adders and accumulators

with a time division multiplex mode, while the

permutatiodde-permutation process and the complex

computations such as matrix multiplications and matrix

inversion are eliminated. Thereby, the encoding complexity

as well as the encoding delay is effectively reduced with the

proposed encoder. Moreover, the proposed encoder has the

same structure as that of the proposed decoder, and the

encoder and decoder may be well combined and

implemented in a single FPGA.

C. FPGA Implementation Issues

Based on the proposed architecture, an implementation

of an irregular LDPC code with the Xilinx Vertex-E

XCV3200E device is achieved. The LDPC code length is

N = N , . L = 48.127 = 6096

(8)

and the code rate is 1/2. The variable node degree

distribution and check-node degree distribution of the

investigated irregular LDPC code are
+ L ( x ) = 0.002526 t 0.636564~ 0.240607~'t 0.120303~'
and p(x) = 0 . 4 6 9 3 7 5 ~+~0.530625x6, respectively.
The codec is described in VHDL, and SYNOPSYS

FPGA Complier I1 was used to synthesize the VHDL

implementation. The resource utilization statistics are listed

in Table 1. It is noted that the utilization rate of the slices is

very low, thus the routing congestion that occurred in [6]

may not exist in our codec design.

Table I , FPGA resourcc utilization statistics.

Moreover, the post-routing static timing analysis results suggest that the maximum clock frequency of the codec may be up to 64 MHz. If the decoder performs 24 iterations for each code frame, then the codec may work with an encodingldecoding throughput of 64 Mbis, which is very promising for real applications.

IV. CONCLUSION
A novel codec design scheme for a group of irregular LDPC codes is proposed in this paper. Both encoders and decoders may be implemented with partial parallel architectures with very low complexity, while the error-correcting capability of the code is kept the same as that by random generation method, thereby providing a high speed LDPC codec with powerful error-correcting capability on a single chip FPGA.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (60132010) and the Tsinghua PHD Candidate Innovative Research Foundation (09240661 8).
REFERENCES
[I]U. G Gallager, Low-denriryparily-checkcoder. M.I.T. press, 1963. [2] D. I. MacKay and R.M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of IOW
density parity check codes," Eleclmnics Leners, vol. 32. no. 18. pp. 1645-1646,Aug. 1996. [3] T. Richardson, M. Shokmllahi, and R. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE lrum. on in/ormofian fheory,vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb. ZWI. 141 Liuguo Yin, Jianhau Lu, and Yaushou Wu,'.Combined Hidden Markov Source Eslimalion and Low-Density Parity-Check Coding: A Navel Joint Source-Channel Coding Scheme for Multimedia Communications," WimIe% Communicafions and Mobile Campling, Volume 2. ISS6W , PP. 643-650, Sep. 2002. [S] E. Yeo, P. Pluad, et 81, "VLSI arehitecrures for ilerstive decoden in magnetic recoding ehannels,"lEEE Trans.On Magnetics, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 748-755. March 2002. 161 A. J. BlanksbyandC. J. Howland, "A690-mW I-Gbk 1024~br,ate-Ill law-density parity-check code decoder," IEEE Joumol OJ Solid-store Cizuirr, vol. 37. no.3, pp. 404-412, Mareh 2002. I71 T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, "VLSI implementation-orienied (3, k)-regnlar low-density panty-check codes," IEEE workhop on signal pmcessig systrms (Sips). Sept. 2001 [SI Liuguo Yin, Yukui Pei, and Iianhva Lu. "A novel code consvuc~ion schcme for imgular LDPC codes with very low VLSI implementalian complexity," Submilled to IEEE rims. on Wlrelers Communrcolionr,in Dec. 2003. [9] R. Echard and S. Chang, "Deterministic n-rotation low-density parity-check codes," Eleclmnics Ldlerr, vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 464465, May 2W2. [IOIF. Verdicr and D. Dalerq, "A LDPC parity check malix ~ o n ~ f m ~ t i o n for parallel hardware decoding," 3rd lnremorionol Symparium on Turbo-Coder & RelofedTopics,Brest, France, September 2003. [ I l l E . Yeo, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, "Architectures and implementations of low-density panty check decoding algorithnls," IEEE hlemalionol Mihvesl Symposium on Cizuirr and Systems. Aug 4-7.2002. [12]H. Zhong and T. Zhang, "Design of VLSI implementation-oripnt~d LDPC codes," IEEE Yehicular Technolom Con/emnce (Vrc). Oct. 2003. [l3]D. E. Hoeevar, "LDPC code canstmclion with flexible hardware implementation," IEEE Intonational Conjerolce on Communica,;om (ICC), vol. 4, pp. 2708 -2712, 2003. [14]J. Campello. D. S. Modha, and S. Rajagopalan, "Designing LDPC codes using bit-filling." Pmceedings o/rhe IEEE ICC 2001. Helsinki. Finland, June 11-15.2001

224

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:14:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

