IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

679

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Performance of Multicarrier CDMA With Successive Interference Cancellation in a Multipath Fading Channel
Jeffrey G. Andrews and Teresa H. Y. Meng
Abstract—A high-capacity, low-complexity, and robust system design for a successive interference cancellation (SIC) system is developed and analyzed. Multicarrier code-division multiple access (MC-CDMA) is used to suppress multipath and to overcome the multipath channel estimation problem in single-carrier SIC systems. In addition, an optimal power control algorithm for MC-CDMA with SIC is derived, allowing analytical bit-error rate expressions to be found for an uncoded system. Low-rate forward error-correcting codes are then added to the system to achieve robustness. It is found that the capacity of the coded system approaches the additive white Gaussian noise capacity for SIC, even in a fading multipath channel with channel estimation error. This indicates that MC-CDMA is very attractive for systems employing SIC.
J. G. Andrew is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA.
T. H. Y. Meng is with the Electrical Engineering Department, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.826339

tics, this paper proposes coherent demodulation by estimating the fading channel distortion using pilot observations across both space and time. The optimum interpolation filter takes in multiple signals from receiving antennas, and exploits the space–time channel correlation to produce multiple channel-estimate outputs corresponding to every antenna. The optimal channel-estimation filter, mean-square error performance, and the pairwise symbol-error probability are derived for realistic scattering models to characterize the system performance. A design criterion is proposed for the pilot-symbol spacing and the filter length. Since the filter is a function of the statistical description of the channel, we investigate whether this statistical description and the resulting optimal filters can be estimated simply from the pilot observations.
T.-A. Chen is with the Wireless Advanced Technology Laboratory, Lucent Technologies, Whippany, NJ 07981 USA.
M. P. Fitz is with Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA.
S. Li is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.
M. D. Zoltowski is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.826334

Blind and Semiblind Detections of OFDM
Signals in Fading Channels
Ming-Xian Chang and Yu T. Su
Abstract—This paper considers the problem of blind joint channel estimation and data detection for orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) systems in a fading environment. Employing a regression model for a time-varying channel, we convert the problem into one where finding the data sequence x whose associated least-squares (LS) channel estimate z(x) is closest to the space of some regression curves (surfaces). We apply the branch-and-bound principle to solve the nonlinear integer programming problem associated with finding the curve that fits a subchannel in the LS sense. A recursive formula for fast metric update is obtained by exploiting the intrinsic characteristic of our objective function. The impacts of reordering the data sequence and selective detection are addressed. By employing a preferred order along with a selective detection method, we greatly reduce the detector complexity while giving up little performance loss. Both the complete and the reduced-complexity algorithms can be used for blind and semiblind detections of OFDM signals in a subchannel-bysubchannel manner. To further reduce the complexity and exploit the frequency-domain channel correlation, we suggest a two-stage approach that detects a few selected positions in some subchannels first, and then, treating the detected symbols as pilots, determines the remaining symbols within a properly chosen time-frequency block by a two-dimensional model-based pilot-assisted algorithm. The proposed methods do not require the information of the channel statistics, such as signal-to-noise ratio or channel correlation function. Performance of differential modulations like differential quaternary phase-shift keying and STARE 16-ary quadrature amplitude modulation are provided. Both blind and semiblind schemes yield satisfactory performance.

On the Suboptimality of Iterative Decoding for Turbo-Like and LDPC Codes With Cycles in Their Graph Representation
Motohiko Isaka, Marc P. C. Fossorier, and Hideki Imai
Abstract—In this paper, we focus on the suboptimality of iterative decoding on graphs with cycles, through examining the use of a reliability-based decoding algorithm form some concatenated codes with an interleaver, known as turbo-like codes. The a posteriori probabilities delivered by the iterative decoding are regarded as reliability information, and an efficient algorithm for the overall linear block code is applied at certain iterations. Simulation results show that the suboptimality of iterative decoding due to cycles can be at least partially compensated by this approach. Some insights about the potential additional coding gains achievable are investigated, based on the characteristics of the constituent decoders. These characteristics are related to the nature of suboptimality in the overall iterative decoding. The effects of some code parameters and channel conditions on the behavior of iterative decoding are also studied for a better understanding of its suboptimality.
M. Isaka is with the Department of Informatics, Kwansei Gakuin University, Sanda 6691337, Japan.
M. P. C. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA.
H. Imai is with Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.826327

M.-X. Chang is with Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
Y. T. Su is with the Department of Communication Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30056, Taiwan.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.826331
Two-Dimensional Space–Time Pilot-Symbol-Assisted Demodulation for Frequency-Nonselective Rayleigh Fading Channels Tai-Ann Chen, Michael P. Fitz, Shengchao Li, and Michael D. Zoltowski
Abstract—A two-dimensional space–time pilot-symbol-assisted demodulation system is proposed in this paper. Since complex scattering environments can produce nontrivial space–time correlation characteris-

Several Properties of Short LDPC Codes

Lei Wei

Abstract—In this paper, we present several properties on minimum distance

( ) and girth (

) in Tanner graphs for low-density parity-check

(LDPC) codes with small left degrees. We show that the distance growth

of (2, 4) LDPC codes is too slow to achieve the desired performance. We

further give a tight upper bound on the maximum possible girth. The nu-

merical results show that codes with large

could outperform the av-

erage performance of regular ensembles of the LDPC codes over binary

symmetric channels. The same codes perform about 1.5 dB away from the

sphere-packing bound on additive white Gaussian noise channels.

The author is with School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.826340

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:33:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

