IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

721

Transactions Papers

Several Properties of Short LDPC Codes
Lei Wei, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we present several properties on minimum distance( min) and girth( min) in Tanner graphs for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with small left degrees. We show that the distance growth of (2, 4) LDPC codes is too slow to achieve the desired performance. We further give a tight upper bound on the maximum possible girth. The numerical results show that codes with large min could outperform the average performance of regular ensembles of the LDPC codes over binary symmetric channels. The same codes perform about 1.5 dB away from the sphere-packing bound on additive white Gaussian noise channels.
Index Terms—Concatenated systems, final length analysis, iterative decoding, short low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, turbo decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, significant progress has been made in designing error-control code and iterative decoding to closely approach the Shannon limit [1]–[3], [4]. It has been regularly reported that iterative decoding can approach the Shannon limit to within 0.1 dB for turbo codes and within 0.0045 dB for irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Up to now, it was essential to have a very long codeword length (typically longer than 100 000 bits) in order to achieve such superior performance. For modest codeword lengths (typically 1000 to 100 000 bits), NASA turbo codes can come within 0.7 dB of the sphere-packing bound with very low complexity [5]. For very short codeword lengths (typically less than 100 bits), several optimal codes (for example, Golay code) can approach the sphere-packing bound to within 0.5 dB. Fossorier and Lin showed that linear block codes and ordered-statistics decoding can approach the sphere-packing bound to within 0.4 dB for a code length of 64 information bits [6], [7]. For codeword lengths of less than a few hundred bits, Wei and Qi showed that convolutional codes with long constraint lengths and hierarchical decoding can approach the sphere-packing bound to within 0.8 dB [8]. Wei further showed in [9] that iterative decoding can approach the sphere-packing
Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received November 21, 2002; revised April 10, 2003 and October 29, 2003. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant ECS-0216381.
The author is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816 USA (e-mail: lei@ee.ucf.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.826242

bound to within approximately 1 dB for block lengths as short as 140 bits. (All are for a block-error rate (BLER) of .)
Can short LDPC codes with min-sum or sum–product iterative decoding operate within 0.5 dB of the sphere-packing bound? In this paper, we aim to provide some insights into this question.
It is well known that iterative decoding works very well for LDPC codes, which were invented 40 years ago by Gallager [10]. Turbo codes and many other concatenated codes are also low-density codes. In [11], Tanner generalized Gallager’s LDPC codes to codes on general bipartite graphs, known as Tanner graphs. Tanner also developed two general algorithms called the min-sum and sum–product algorithms. For graphs without loops, both algorithms are optimal. In [12], Wiberg extended Tanner graphs to include trellis codes. Such modified graphs are now known as Tanner–Wiberg–Loeliger (TWL) graphs. With TWL graphs, Wiberg et al. showed that the famous Viterbi algorithm [13], [14] and the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) [or a posteriori probability (APP)] algorithm [15] are special cases of the min-sum and sum–product algorithms. Kschischang et al. extended TWL graphs into factor graphs [16]. Forney clarified factor graphs as normal realization [17]. A detailed review of the development in this area and a tutorial about factor graphs can be found in [16], [18], and [19].
In this paper, we will study the properties of minimum distance and the girth (i.e., the length of the smallest loop) in the Tanner graph for short LDPC codes. We will focus on small left and right degrees, since that will result in a larger girth. In general, the exact relationship between girths and the error performance for short codes is unknown. The only thing we know is that the cycle-free approximation no longer holds when short cycles enter the calculations. Many of the recent results (including [9]) indicated short codes with many small cycles may be decoded near optimally by iterative decoders. Nevertheless, during the past few years, many researchers have worked on designing short LDPC codes with large girths, since this approach may lead us to design good LDPC codes for short lengths.
Much work has been done in studying the rate of LDPC codes, including [10], [20], [21], and [22]. These studies are typically applied for long codeword lengths and different type of ensembles. In [20], Tanner presented methods to compute bounds for a particular LDPC code. In [23], Orlitsky et al. studied the size of stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs. In [24], [25], and [26], several algebraic methods have been proposed for constructing graphs with large girths. The key contributions of this paper are to present the minimum distance

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

properties for finite codeword lengths, to give the relationship

between minimum distance and the girth, and to establish a

tight upper bound on the girth for finite-length codes, which

can be used to evaluate the different constructing techniques.

We focus on those codes having large minimum distances and

large girths. In many cases, we extend or refine Gallager’s

results for short codeword lengths. Some of the concepts are

very similar to those in the newly published paper [22].

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we study

the properties of

for short LDPC codes. In Section III,

we study the properties of loop lengths for short LDPC codes.

The numerical results are presented in Section IV. Section V

concludes the paper. In this paper, we will focus on additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels with the sum–product

algorithm. We will only study the LDPC codes with codeword

lengths of 1000 bits or less.

TABLE I d REQUIREMENT FOR SHORT LDPC CODES

II. MINIMUM DISTANCE OF LDPC CODES
In this section, we will briefly review Forney’s lower bound [27]. We then examine the requirement for the code in terms of its minimum distance and multiplexities, in order to operate within 0.5 dB of the sphere-packing lower bound for a BLER of . Lastly, we present a few properties of the minimum distance of LDPC codes.

Fig. 1. State transition diagram.
In the next section, we will examine the minimum-distance properties of regular LDPC codes.

A. Minimum-Distance Requirement Based on Forney Lower Bound

Consider a binary LDPC code specified by a

parity-check matrix where each of the information bits is

encoded into a binary tuple codeword. The encoded bits

are then modulated into binary phase-shift keying (BPSK)

signals and transmitted over an AWGN channel, i.e.,

, where

is a zero-mean

independent Gaussian variable with variance

(double

sided), is the energy per information bit, and

is

the code rate.

Let and

denote the minimum Hamming distance

of the code and its multiplexity (i.e., the number of codewords

with the minimum weight). The block-error probability is then

bounded from below by [27]

(1)

where

.

Taking

, we have the minimum requirement on

. In Table I, we list requirements for achieving near-sphere-

packing bound decoding (within 0.5 dB) for a BLER of ,

where SP(dB) denotes the sphere-packing lower bound [28],

denotes the required minimum distance (which is com-

puted by setting

), and

denotes an estimated

required minimum distance. It is well known that the lower

bound in (1) is very loose, especially when

approaches

the Shannon limit. The values of

will serve the purpose

of code design more adequately. We determine the value of

as follows. We take the union bound over the first three

terms (

) with multiplexities of

(

).

B. Minimum-Distance Properties of Regular LDPC Codes

In this section, we will first examine the minimum distance

of some regular LDPC codes, and then establish relationships

between the girth and minimum distance.

LDPC codes can be represented by Tanner graphs. A Tanner

graph is a type of bipartite graph, in which the variable nodes

are listed on the left-hand side (LHS) and the parity-check nodes

are listed on the right-hand side (RHS). The links between the

variable nodes and parity-check nodes define the code. Let

and denote the left and right degrees of an LDPC code. For

example, for the popular (3, 6) regular LDPC code, we have

and , (i.e., each variable node links to three parity-check

nodes, and each parity-check node links to six variable nodes).

Each LDPC code is characterized by its

parity-

check matrix . The code has minimum distance if and

only if every

columns of are linearly independent

and some columns are linearly dependent [30]. That is, ar-

bitarily selecting

or less columns, (say

)

and performing the bit-wise XOR operation, i.e.,

, we will not find any zero-weight . But, for at least one

set of columns, we have zero-weight . This is identical to

the column-matching concept in [22]. We can model this proce-

dure using a state transition diagram, as shown in Fig. 1. Starting

from step 0, (the set contains no column), at each stage, we add

one more column into the set, and we select the weight of as

the state value. Here, adding a column is equivalent to adding a

variable node.

For example, starting from the empty column

, it

moves to

after adding the first column (e.g., the first

column is

for

and

), where

superscript denotes transpose. After adding the second

column, it moves to either state 0 if the first column is the same

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: SEVERAL PROPERTIES OF SHORT LDPC CODES

723

as the second column, or

if there are

rows con-

taining two ones (e.g., the first column is

and the second column is either

or

), or state

or

, respec-

tively, depending on the number of columns containing two

ones.

Since the Hamming distance of the code is equal to the

number of transitions (i.e., columns) starting from state 0 and

ending at state 0, we can prove the following theorem.

Theorem 1: The Hamming weights of LDPC codewords

with odd are even (i.e.,

).

Proof: When is odd, the transition of states starts from

to

, which is an odd number. After adding one

more column, must be even. For an even number of columns,

is even, while for an odd number of columns, is odd. The

number of transitions starting from state 0 and ending at state 0

can only be even. Therefore, an odd number of columns in

cannot be linearly dependent.

In [10], Gallager showed the weights of the Gallager en-

semble of LDPC codewords are even. Here, it is shown that the

weights of LDPC codewords with odd are even, regardless of

the type of ensemble.

Define the length of a loop (denoted ) as the number of

nodes in the loop, and

as the length of the smallest loop

(i.e., the girth). We can then increase by expurgating small

loops.

Theorem 2: If we expurgate all loops of

, meaning

, then

.

Proof: Because we expurgate all

loops, when we

add the second column, the smallest is

. We can further

show that when we add the th column,

. Therefore, can only reach state 0 if

. Thus,

every or less columns in are independent and, consequently,

.

When is small, we can further state the following theorem.

Theorem 3: (a) If , then

.1 (b) If ,

by expurgating all loops of

, then

for

. (c) If

, by expurgating all loops of

,

then

.

Proof: (a) For a loop of girth , it must contain vari-

able nodes and check nodes. If

, then the columns

of these

variable nodes of the loop are linearly depen-

dent, thus, the distance is equal to . Therefore, we have

.

Method 1: As illustrated in Fig. 2, only state three can reach

state zero on the next transition. We label the associated with

the first six columns. By expurgating those loops, we eliminate

the possibility of transitions. Consequently, the minimum dis-

tance is increased. Thus, part (b) is true.

Method 2: The first method becomes complicated when the

number of columns is larger than six. Thus, we need a different

approach to prove part (c). This method can also prove part (b).

In order to form a dependent set of columns, all variable

nodes must form complete loops. By ignoring the check nodes,

1This part was derived independently in X. Hu, “Low-Delay Low-Complexity Error-Correcting Codes on Sparse Graphs,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, October 2002.

Fig. 2. State transition diagram for up to six rows.

G Fig. 3. Graphs with largest .

each variable node must have three edges to connect to other

variable nodes.2 The key task is to find a graph (with nodes,

each connecting three other nodes), making

as large as

possible. In Fig. 3, we show such graphs with

,

where

is

, respectively.

By expurgating the loops with

, we eliminate the

possibility of forming two or four dependent columns. Conse-

quently, we have

, respectively. This proves part (b).

(c) Furthermore, no graph of complete loops with 6, 8,

10 variable nodes can be formed for

. When the

number of variable nodes increases to 12, we have the graph

with

, as shown in Fig. 3. Therefore, by expurgating

all loops with

or less, we have

.

This theorem is very similar to the results in [23]. This the-

orem shows that it is important to eliminate the small loops in

terms of increasing the minimum distance, particularly loops

of

for

. Intuitively, the iterative decoding algo-

rithms such as sum–product or min-sum algorithms often per-

form better on graphs with large loops. However, we shall note

that this is a sufficient, but not necessary, condition. Many codes

with good distance properties are known, and almost all of them

with many small loops.

2Putting back the check nodes, any connection between the check nodes will only make the smaller loops.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

Similar to the sphere-packing upper bound (or Hamming bound) on , in the next theorem, we show an upper bound on for an LDPC code.
Theorem 4: If an LDPC code with left degree can correct errors, then

(2)

where

denotes the number of binary -tuples of

weight , constructed by any linear combination of columns

from a total of columns in the matrix.

.

Proof: If the code can decode all up to errors, then all

linear combinations of, at most, columns must be unique. Oth-

erwise, we would have less than

linearly depen-

dent columns, contradicting the definition of . For a regular

LDPC code with left degree , all such linear combinations re-

sulting in weight- vectors are unique. Thus, their number, given

by the LHS of (2), cannot exceed the total number of weight-

vectors of length , given by the RHS of (2).

It is worth mentioning that in Theorem 4, we do not constrain

the right degree. The right degree can be constrained during the

computation of

.

The following theorem provides a way to compute this coef-

ficient for the case of .

Theorem 5: For a

LDPC code that can correct up to

errors, we have

(3)

for

, and

Fig. 4. Computation of B (x; 2).
TABLE II d BOUND FOR SHORT (2, 4) LDPC CODES

(4) where can be computed recursively as follows:

(5)

with

and

.

Proof: When

, we have choices for selecting one

column from a total of columns in , and there are two rows

containing a single 1, so

, and

. Without a loss of generality, we assume these two ones are

located in rows 1 and 2. If not, we just reorder the rows. When

we add the second column, we have

choices to maintain

(i.e., selecting one of

columns which have a 1

at the first or the second row), as shown in Fig. 4. Removing the

duplicated set, we have

.

If (4) does not hold, then these

columns must be

dependent, which results in

and contradicts the

assumption

and . For example, if

and , then three columns must be dependent.

Assume (3)–(5) hold for

. If (4) holds for

,

then we can add the

th column by choosing one of

candidate columns. Counting each selection set just once, we

have

. In

order to hold (4), must be larger than

plus

(i.e., each new one when we add the th column

extends

times).

In (3),

has the following meaning. If the number of

check sums (i.e., the rows in ) is smaller than , the code

has an error-correcting capability of less than , therefore, the

necessary condition for the code to have an error-correcting ca-

pability is

. This theorem provides another bound

on the error-correcting capability (minimum distance) of a code

with a left degree of two.

In Table II, we list the values of [the upper bound on

given in (2) and (3)], [the upper bound on given in (4)], and

(the upper bound on given in [10]). Clearly,

,

thus condition (3) holds. The results show the minimum distance

growth

is very slow. Thus, (2, 4) regular

LDPC codes cannot operate within 0.5 dB of the sphere-packing

bound for a BLER of

for

and

, even

with an optimal maximum a posteriori (MAP) or maximum-

likelihood (ML) decoder. When we use the sum–product type of

iterative decoder, the percentage of nodes having a left degree

of two needs to be limited in order to satisfy the stable condition

[31]. But here, it is rejected due to its poor minimum distance.

When

, it becomes very complicated to compute the

bounds given in Theorem 4. We can compute some upper

bounds on

for several small values of . Unfortu-

nately, we have not found any tight upper bound on for

, which could be very useful in determining whether short

(3, 6) LDPC codes can closely approach the sphere-packing

bound. In [32], Sason and Urbanke pointed out a direction

which may answer this question.

Gallager showed that for slightly high-density codes, for ex-

ample,

, the minimum distance growth can quickly

catch up to the random codes. However, when the left degree

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: SEVERAL PROPERTIES OF SHORT LDPC CODES

725

G

TABLE III UPPER BOUND FOR SHORT (2, 4) AND (3, 6) LDPC CODES

G Fig. 5. Box-fitting method and update procedure of value.

G Fig. 6. Procedure to find an upper bound on .
increases, we will show in the next section that the girth will decrease significantly.

III. AN UPPER BOUND ON GIRTH OF LDPC CODES

In this section, we will study the limitation of the girth. We

will first review the technique used by Gallager [10] to deter-

mine the loop length, then present a procedure to determine an

upper bound on the girth for given left and right degrees and a

given .

In [10], Gallager showed that the length of a loop can be found

by examining the number of ones at the angles of connected

rectangular boxes in the parity-check matrix, see Fig. 5. For ex-

ample, one rectangular box with four ones, one for each angle

point, has a girth of four (the dashed box). To find the minimum

value of for each variable is to find the smallest sets of con-

nected boxes containing two ones in the corresponding column.

We can modify this method to examine the risk in code con-

struction. For example, the dashed box in Fig. 5 indicates that

putting a one at position “X” will form a loop of

. Along

the dotted boxes, we can gradually update this factor down-

ward along each box, i.e., 4, 6, an indication that putting a one

at “X” will lead to a loop of

. This method can be used to

compute an upper bound on

for a given , , and .

Procedure to Determine an Upper Bound on :

1) Fill each element of the matrix with an “X.”

2) Change the first “X”s in the first column to ones, and

the first “X”s in the first row to ones. Set the rest of the

elements in the first column and the first row to zero. See

the first column and first row in Fig. 6 as an example. Let

and

.

3) Update those places (which may result in a loop if putting

one) by their values. For example, putting one at posi-

tion (2, 2), will form a loop of

. Therefore, we label

position (2, 2) as four. Set

and

.

4) Replace the first “X”s by ones in column and the

first “X”s by ones in row . Replace the rest of the

elements of column and row with zeros.

5) Repeat Steps 3 and 4 until all “X”s have been replaced by

either 0, 1, or its value, for example, the matrix shown

in Fig. 6.

6) Finally, let denote the maximum value in the first

column, which still needs to fill in more ones. Let

denote the maximum value in the first row which still

needs to fill in more ones.

is bounded from above

by

. In our example, we need to further

fill ones in columns five and up, and row four and up.

and

. Therefore,

for (3, 4)

LDPC codes with

.

Proof: The proof is simple. The update of values is from

the top left to the bottom right and the update always increases

by a positive factor. The first update is to replace “X” by four.

After that, the update of the bottom-right corner of a rectangular

box is simply to add the value at the top-left corner of the

rectangular box and two. Thus, the maximum value is non-

decreasing as the row or column numbers increase. When there

is a position marked “X” in the column, we will always change

it to one (not those with values). Otherwise, it forms a loop

of the girth equal to the marked value which is no more than the

(the upper bound value of ). When there is no position

marked with “X” and we have to select a place to put a one,

the best way is to put it at the place with the maximum value of

. Therefore,

. Repeating the same procedure for

rows, we prove the procedure will produce an upper bound on

.

In Table III, we list the upper bound on

for (2, 4) and

(3, 6) LDPC codes of different lengths. For (2, 4) LDPC codes,

according to Theorems 3 and 4, we can see that based on

the

upper bound is very close to the

upper bound

based on the value given in Table II. For example, for

16 (or 1024), we know

4 (or 12) from Table II. These

are remarkably close to

4 (or 11)

for the

16 (or 1024) case. Note that we may find some

LDPC codes which have

by using the procedure

plus heuristically searching over a reasonable size of random

codes. In other words, we can first construct the first few rows

and columns based on the procedure, then fill in one at those

positions with the largest values in the row or column. At the

same time, we keep updating the values after filling in every

single one.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

Fig. 7. Performance of a (3, 6) LDPC code with n = 38; k = 19, and G = Fig. 8. Performance of a (3, 6) LDPC code with n = 1020; k = 510, and

6.

G = 8.

For (3, 6) LDPC codes, the results indicate that the loop girth

is at least half the (2, 4) LDPC codes. Since the number of inde-

pendent iterations is less than

[10], there are only three

independent iterations for

. According to Fig. 3, if we

can find a (3, 6) LDPC code with

, then the minimum

distance of this code would not be smaller than 12. Unfortu-

nately, after searching over millions of codes with

,

we did not find any code with

. But, we do find (3, 6)

codes with

easily.

The above procedure follows the similar concept introduced

by Gallager. Gallager’s upper bound is much simpler, which

is very effective for long codewords. The above procedure is

tighter than the Gallager bound, but it becomes too complex to

run for long codewords. Moreover, Gallager’s code construc-

tion is a subset of

regular LDPC codes, while the above

procedure includes all LDPC codes.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

Fig. 9. Performance of two (3, 6) LDPC codes on BECs.

In this section, we first study very short (3, 6) LDPC codes

(

), since we can compute the code performance based

on the Forney lower bound and union upper bound. Conse-

quently, we are able to determine the imperfectness of the code

(by comparison between the sphere-packing bound and union

upper bound) and the imperfectness of the sum–product algo-

rithm. We then present the performance of a (3, 6) LDPC code

with

and

. We will focus on rate-half codes

only. All simulation points are with 100 iterations.

When

, we did not find any code with

.

When

, we found several codes with

. We pick

up the one with the best performance based on the Forney lower

and union upper bounds (i.e., the one with the largest minimum

distance,

). Fig. 7 presents the BLER as a function of

bit-energy-to-noise power ratio. It shows that the code perfor-

mance is about 1 dB away from the sphere-packing lower bound,

and the sum–product algorithm is about 0.6 dB away from the

union upper bound. The overall performance of the code de-

coded by the sum–product algorithm is about 1.6 dB away from

the sphere-packing bound.

In the second example, we present the performance of a (3, 6)

LDPC code with

. The performance of this code is 1.5

dB away from the sphere-packing bound for a BLER of

(see Fig. 8). It is worth mentioning here that the performance of

the above two codes are typical. We can find many similar (3,

6) LDPC codes with

which can operate about

1.5–1.7 dB above the sphere-packing bound.

In Fig. 9, we present the performance of the above two (3,

6) LDPC codes on binary erasure channels (BECs) with a cross

probability of . The average BLER is computed by the method

in [31]. It is interesting to see that both codes beat the average

performance of (3, 6) LDPC codes on BECs, but failed to reach

within 1 dB of the sphere-packing bound on AWGN channels.

This indicates our construction is good for finding good finite-

length codes on BECs.

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this paper, we first examined the requirement on the min-

imum distance

of any code in order to operate within

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: SEVERAL PROPERTIES OF SHORT LDPC CODES

727

0.5 dB of the sphere-packing bound for block lengths of less

than 1000 bits and a BLER of . We then presented several

properties on and the girth

. We showed that the

distance growth of (2, 4) LDPC codes is too slow to achieve the

desired performance (i.e., within 0.5 dB of the sphere-packing

bound for the block lengths less than 1000 bits). We further

gave a tight upper bound on the maximum . We studied

the relationship between the minimum distance and the girth

and showed that it will not be able to lead the construction of

an LDPC code with large based on the construction of a

code with a larger . Lastly, the numerical results show that

by constructing codes with a large , we could beat the av-

erage performance over the binary symmetric channels, but on

the AWGN channels, the same codes perform about 1.5 dB away

from the sphere-packing bound.

In the future, we will study other constructions such as parity

concatenated codes or turbo codes, hopefully to find a construc-

tion which has a reasonable distance profile to closely approach

the sphere-packing bound for short codeword lengths.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank the editor and three reviewers for their constructive comments, particularly for pointing out Dr. X. Hu’s dissertation (see Footnote 1) and providing the Poltyrev tangential sphere bound and the ordered statistics decoder (OSD) result in Fig. 7.

REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[2] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[3] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[4] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Iterative turbo decoder analysis based on density evolution,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 891–907, May 2001.
[5] “Telemetry Channel Coding,” JPL Report from Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) (green book), Oct. 1998. JPL and Cal. Tech., Pasadena, CA.
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 1379–1396, Sept. 1995.
[7] , “Computationally efficient soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 738–750, May 1996.
[8] L. Wei and H. Qi, “Near-optimal limited-search detection on ISI/CDMA channels and decoding of long convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 1459–1482, July 2000.
[9] L. Wei, “High-performance iterative Viterbi algorithm for conventional serial concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 1759–1771, July 2002.
[10] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[12] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., U. Linkoping, Linkoping, Sweden, Apr. 1996.
[13] A. J. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.
[14] G. D. Forney, Jr., “The Viterbi algorithm,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 61, pp. 268–278, Mar. 1973.
[15] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimal symbol-error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[16] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[17] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.
[18] , “On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 1997, pp. 12–25.
[19] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, G. D. Forney, Jr., F. R. Kschischang, R. J. McEliece, and D. A. Spielman, “Introduction to the special issue on codes on graphs and iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 493–497, Feb. 2001.
[20] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.
[21] G. Miller and D. Burshtein, “Bounds on the maximum-likelihhood decoding error probability of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2696–2710, Nov. 2001.
[22] D. Burshtein, M. Krivelevich, S. Litsyn, and G. Miller, “Upper bounds on the rate of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 2437–2449, Sept. 2002.
[23] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5, 2002, p. 2.
[24] S. Lin, J. Xu, and I. Djurdjevic, “Hybrid construction of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2–4, 2002.
[25] V. Pless, J.-L. Kim, I. Perepelitsa, and U. Peled, “Explicit constructions of families of LDPC codes with large girth,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2–4, 2002.
[26] M. O’Sullivan, “Construction of LDPC codes with large girth,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2–4, 2002.
[27] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Low bounds on error probability in the presence of large intersymbol interference,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Technol., vol. COM-20, pp. 76–77, Feb. 1972.
[28] S. J. MacMullan and O. M. Collins, “A comparison of known codes, random codes, and the best codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 3009–3022, Nov. 1998.
[29] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[30] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[31] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[32] I. Sason and R. Urbanke, “On the density of parity-check matrices of capacity-approaching binary linear codes on memoryless and symmetric channels,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2–4, 2002, pp. 478–487.
Lei Wei (M’95–SM’99) received the M.E. degree from the University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, in 1993, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia, in 1995, both in electrical engineering.
From 1995 to 2000, he was a faculty member with the Department of Engineering, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia. From 2000–2001, he was with the Telecommunications Information Technology Research Institute (TITR), University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia, as an Associate Professor. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando, as an Associate Professor. His current research interests include iterative decoding, reliability study for ad-hoc networks, digital modulation, UWB, spread-spectrum multiple access with applications to mobile communications, and biologically inspired signal processing. He was the Founder and Chair, Australian Information Theory Chapter, 1999, and a Member of the Organization Committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA) 2000. Dr. Wei was Cochair of the IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, September 2001, a member of the Technical Program Committee for the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC 2002), and an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS in the area of wireless communications from 1999 to 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

