FA2-6

performance Studies of a Multi-band OFDM System Using a Simplified LDPC Code

Khiam-Boon Png
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering National University of Singapore 10 Kent Ridge Crescent Singapore 119260

Xiaoming Peng and Francois Chin
Institute for Infocomm Research, 21 Heng Mui Keng Terrence Singapore 119613

Abstract-Ultra-Widehand (UWB) is a promising radio technology for networks delivering extremely high data rates at short ranges. Multi-hand Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (MB-OFDM) is a suitable solution to implement high speed data in ultra widehand spectrum by dividing the available spectrum into multiple bands. MBOFDM achieves adaptability as well as high performance, low-power and low-cost characteristics through the usage of OFDM. Due to the importance of ermr correcting codes for OFDM system, it is essential to employ a powerful ermr correctingcode for MB-OFDM system to improve the performance. Recently, Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) code has attracted gmat attentions because it achieves hit error rate near to Shannon limit. In this paper, we design and evaluate the performance of MB-OFDM system using LDPC code. In order to simplify the impiementation of LDPC encoder and decoder, we introduce a joint code and decoder design approach to construct a class of (3, k)-regular LDPC code which cxactly fit to a partly parallel decoder implementation. The simulations show that the pcrformancc of such simplificd LDPC coded MB-OFDM system is better than that of convoulational coded MB-OFDM system, and is very close to that of the conventional LDPC coded MB-OFDM system. The implementation complexity of the simplified LDPC code is carefully examined subsequently in the paper.
Keywords : LDPC, Ultra-Wideband (UWB), OFDM.
I. INTRODUCTION
Ultra Wideband (Uh’B) technology. has been seen as one promising solution for future short-range indoor communication applications and received a lot of at-
tentions recently [11. Multi-hand Orthogonal Frequency
Division Multiplexing (MB-OFDM), which breaks up
the available frequency spectrum into smaller bands and employed OFDM technique to each of subbands,
is under consideration of IEEE 802.15.3a standard
to implement high data rate applications using ultra-
wideband spectrum [Z]. The MB-OFDM system allows use of lower-rate analog-to-digital ( A D )and digital-
to-analog (D/A) converters, and simplifies other analog
components, reducing overall design complexity, power consumption and cost. The usage of OFDM for each
subband has a great significance in impicmcntation as
it comes to capturing energy in a dense multi-path

environment as well as adding benefit of comparatively low complexity through the use of fast Fourier transform (FIT) algorithms. As an OFDM system in essenct:, MB-OFDM transmits data using parallel narrowband subchannels within each suhband. The inter-symbol in-
terference (ISI) in OFDM can be eliminated by adding a
cyclic prefix (CP) (or zero prefix) of duration longer than the anticipated delay spread of the channel. However, i.n a multipaths environment, some of the subcarriers will experience deep fade and be completely lost causing the overall hit error rate to he dependent on the signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) of the weakest subcanier. Powerful
error-correcting codes can he applied to ensure that the overall bit error rate is dependent on the average received power instead of the weakest subcarriers [3]. Due to implementation limitation, convolutional code is currently considered as the error-correcting code for MB-OFDM system [Z].
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) code, first iiivented by Gallager in 1962 [4], has been rediscovered and brought to the attention of the research community by Mackay and Neal in 1996 [5] [6]. LDPC code is a powerful error correcting code that achieve pelformance close to Shannon limit. Its property, the minimum di:jtance of an LDPC code increases proportional to the code length with a high probability, is desirable for the high bit rate transmission that requires very low frame error rate. LDPC can be decoded with iterative softdecision decoding algorithms called message-passing algorithms. The most powerful of these algorithms is known as ”belief propagation”. The studies of LDPC for OFDM systems have been conducted in [7] [8]. The results showed that LDPC leads to increased transmi,$sion distance, lower power requirements, and increased throughput compared to known error correcting code l i e convolutional code, Reed-Solomon code and turbo code. However, in terms of implementation, both the encoding and decoding process LDPC codes are s i p nificantly more complex especially for LDPC codcs
constructed using semi-random methodology, which is unbearable for high-data rate applications.

0-7803-8373-7/04/$20.00 02004 IEEE

- 37fi -

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:54:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In this paper, we design and evaluate the performance of MB-OFDM system using a class of (3, k)-regular LDPC code designed using a joint code and decoder design approach. The performance of (he simplified LDPC code is nearly identical to the fully random LDPC codes while offering the benefits of less complexity and less hardware, making it the ideal solution for high data rate application.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 shows the system model of MB-OFDM system using LDPC code. Section 3 introduces the details of a joint code and decoder design approach for LDPC code. In section 4, simulation results are shown followed by the discussion. Finally, conclusions are reached in Section 5.

2. SYSTEM MODELOF LDPC-CODEDMULTI-BANDS OFDM SYSTEM

The multi-band OFDM (MB-OFDM) system has

three frequency subbands as shown in Fig.l(a). Each

OFDM symbol will be transmitted at any one time

interval using one of the subhands. Fig.l(b). shows the

is-.I"1 7- block diagram of the MB-OFDM system using LDPC
codes.

~ ~~.

..

SF vbb-nq nd #i3

~~

~.

S)U,bOl

Svbbnnd #2

*2

#5

'Cb' !

~~~

Subbud81

Symbol N4

0

TI T? T3 74 TJ ~6 Time

(a) Transmission of OFDM Symbols

Fourier Transform (IlTT). A cyclic prefix is appended to the front of the resulting time-domain complex baseband
signal to prevent IS1 and inter-carrier-interference (ICI).
The transmitted complex baseband signal ~ k ( t c)an be represented by the equation.

NSTP

re(t) =

c n e d j ' 2 r n A f ) ( t - TCP) (1)

n=-NsrJZ

f o r t E [ O , T F F T + T C ~ ]where Cn is the complex QPSK data, NST is the total number of subcarrier used, A, is the subcarrier frequency spacing, Tcp is the duration of the cyclic prefix and TFFTis the duration. The data are spread over both the time and frequency domain and can hence take full advantage of the time and frequency diversity of the channel.
The transmitted signal pass through a frequency selec-
tive multipath fading channel model derived from SalehValenuela model with a couple of slight modifications noted by IEEE P802.15 working group 3a for wireless personal area networks [8]. The channel model is based on lognormal distribution rather than Rayleigh distribution for multipath gain amplitude. The channel model consists of the following discrete time impulse response:

1-0 p=o
where &,(L,p) is [he multipath gain cos~ficient,Z is the delay of l t h cluster, and T,,J is the delay of
pth multipath relative to cluster Ph arrival time . The
multipath coefficients are considered as uncorrelated for
all m,n,I and p . The parameters for four channel models rue listed in Table I.
TABLE I CHANNEML ODELPARAMETERS

(b) Block Diagram of MB-OFDM System using LDPC Codes
Fig. 1. (a)Transmission of OFDM Symbols (b)Black Diagram of MB-OFDM System using LDPC Codes
In the transmitter, the binary information data is coded using a LDPC encoder before being mapped to the QPSK constellation. No interleaver is required here unliie in the original proposed system, as LDPC codes have the capabilities to correct burst errors by itself. The complex QPSK data is then pass through a serialto-parallel converter and modulated using inverse Fast

At the receiver, the' cyclic prefix is removed before F l T is performed on the received data. The received data is then converted by the parallel-to-serial converter before it is decoded using the sum-product algorithm as shown in Fig.l(b).
3. LDPCCODES
3.1. Basic LDPC Concept LDPC codes are linear block codes with sparse parity-
check matrix. They can be represented by bipartite graphs where one set of nodes represents the paritycheck equations (check nodes) and the other represents

- 377
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:54:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the coded data variables (variable nodes) as in Fig.2. The 1’s in the parity-check matrix are the links between the nodes. The shortest length of cycles of any of the nodes in a particular graph is known as the guth of the graph and it has been shown that maximizing the girth of the graph would improve the performance of the corresponding code.

Vm!hlr Nodm

Vulable

ChNkNods

Fig. 2. Example of a bipartite graph representation far a LDPC code

There are two main groups of LDPC codes: regular and irregular. Regular LDPC codes have the same number of 1s in every column of their parity-check matrices while irregular LDPC codes have a range of values. In [9], the optimal distribution of the 1s in paritycheck matrix of irregular LDPC codes is examined

and the LDPC codes constructed accordingly have very good performance, surpassing even the best turbo codes. LDPC codes can be decoded effectively using a wellknown and simple decoding algorithm known as the sum-product algorithm (or belief propagation algorithm) introduced in [4] which is an iterative decoding algorithm. Let the parity-check matrix of the LDPC code be H = lH,,,l, where m is row (i.e. check nodes) index and 1 is the column (i.e. bit nodes) index. If H,i = 1, then the m check node is connected to 1 bit node. The algorithm starts off by assigning a priori log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) L@i)’to each of the bits 1. For an AWGN channel, the ratio is given by

2

L(PC = 2 C l

(3)

where c represents the received coded bit and o2 is the
noise variance. Let L ( ~ L - a~nd) L(T,,I) represents
the information flowing from bit node to chcck node and thc information Rowing from chcck nodc to bit nodc respectively, the algorithm is simply represented by the following steps.
Step I . Initialization

L(m-m) = L(Pl), L(rm-d = 0

(4)

Step 2. Passing information from checks to bits

where A(m)is the group of bits which the m check is connected to. Step 3. Passing information from bits to checks

t(qi-m) =

+

L(rmt-i) (ti)

m’€dl)\m

where ~ ( 1 i)s the group of checks which the 1 bit :is

connected to.

+ c Step 4. Decoder decision = L@l)

L(Tm-1)

C’)

mEdI)

Hard decision is made on L(ql) and the resulting vector is then checked to see if it is a valid codeword. :If it is a valid codeword, the decoder will exit and return the vector as the decoder output. Otherwise the decoder will continue to repeat steps 2-4 until the decoder reached the maximum number of iterations specified.

3.2. Consrruction of Simplified LDPC

A partly parallel (3,k)-regular LDPC decoder archi-
tecture as introduced in [lo] is used in this paper to

construct the LDPC code for the MB-OFDM system.

The codes are constructed using the highly-structured

decoder architecture in a semi-random fashion. This

design also allows an efficient systematic encoding that

can be carried out without the use of a dense generator

matrix. Instead, the encoding process makes use of

sparse matrix multiplication and permutation sequence:s

that can be performed with less computation load and

greater speed.

The hardware realization of a parallel decoder for an

arbitrary LDPC codes is very complex even for small

code length (below 10,000 bits) [lo]. A fully parallal

decoder may be attractive in term of high throughput but

the high complexity of the hardware made it unsuitable

for practical purposes [lo]. Therefore a more practical

partly parallel decoder using a decoder-first design fcir

actual hardware implementation is considered.

“be structure of the decoder architecture is shown i n

Fig.3.The decoder consists of k2 memory banks each

with 4 RAMs used to stored the information used in the

decoding process. The ith memory bank is represented

as MEM BANK-(z,y), where 1: = ((i - 1)mod k + 1

Ly’J and y =

+l.Each RAM in the memory banks can

stored L information (i.e. L addresses) corresponding to

a group of L variable nodrs. The first RAM, RAM 1 is

used to store the variable node information and the other
three RAMs, E l - E3, are used to store the check node

information. The RAMs are addressed using an Address

Generator (AG) associated with the MEM BANK. The

address generator is a simple modulo L binary counter

that can be preset with any initial value. Permutation

within the L variable nodes are achieved by varying the

initial value of each AG. The variable node processor

units (VNU) and the check node processor unit (CNU)

is used to calculate the information associated to the

variablc nodes and check nodes respectively. The s h u f k

netwoi-k is used to shuffle the connections between

- 378 -
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:54:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the MEM BANKS and the CNLk to enable different permutations.

MMBM-(L.I)

uMB.Nx-aY>

MMBM~h4

by (1 - 3/k) and given an arbitrary k, any code length
that could be factored as L . k2 can be constructed provided that L cannot be factored as L = a . b,Va,b E
( 0 , ...,k - 1).

I
I

I s h a r Ne-

....

-1

Mu.

Fig. 3. A simplified panly parallel (3,k)-regulsr LDPC decoder architecture

By controlling the shuffling algorithm of the shuf-

fling nctwork, an cnscmblc of highly-structurcd parity-

check matrices can be defincd. Each or thcse codes has a parity-check matrix H = [HT,HT,H?IT, where Ho

and HI is deterministic and H2 is semi-random. The

structure of the deterministic sub-matrices HQ and HI

are shown in Fig.4. The column length and row length

of the sub-matrices are L.k and L - k 2respectively. Each

block matrix in Ho represents a LxL identity matrix

while each block matrix Pz,vin HI represents a LxL

identity matrix cyclicly shifted to the right by ((z-l).y)
mod L.The third sub-matrix Hz is constructed using the

decoder architecture and a Random Permutation Gener-

ator (RF'G) described in [IO] and can be represented as
.a L . k x L . k2 matrix with the following properties. The entries in Hz are all zeros except for k2 block . matrices of dimension LxL denoted as Tz,y. Tz,,, is a identity matrix cyclicly shifted to the right

by t,,y such that:

1) For same 2, tz,y, # t,,y,i~yl,Yz E

{I, ...,k);

2) For same Y.

- t,,Y # ((51 - 2 2 ) Y)

. mod L,Vz~,zEz{l,...,k}. Tz,y are randomly distributed in H2 with the con-

straints that there are k blocks of T matrix for each

y and only one block in every groups of L columns

in Hz. The ensemble of codes is generated by randomly

constructing H2 and the girth average [lo] of their

corresponding graphs are compared. If gu is the shortest

cycle that passes through node U in the bipartite graph

G, then the girth average of G is defined as g,/N
UEG
where N is the total number of nodes in G. The girth

average has been shown to be an effective criterion for

good LDPC codes and is used here to select the code

from the ensemble for our simulation.

From the above discussion, the dimensions of the

codes constructed are partly constrained by the code rate.

The code rate of .the code ensemble is lower bounded

Fig. 4. Sfrumre of Ho and HI
4. SIMULATION The performance of three different error-correcting codes on the multi-band OFDM system are investigated. The three codes are a punctured convolutional code with constraint length 7, an irregular LDPC code constructed randomly and a regular LDPC code constructed using the method discussed in Section nI. The code rate of the three codes are set to approximately 0.75. The code length of the irregular and regular LDPC codes are 1800 and 1812 respectively. The convolutional code is decoded using a Viterbi decoder with coding depth of 96 and the LDPC codes are decoded using the sum-product algorithm with the maximum iterations of decoding set
at 8. TABLE II shows the details of the MB-OFDM
system used in the simulations
TABLE II ME-OFDM SIMULATIOPNARAMETERS

Modulation an data subcarriers

Data hansmission rate

480 Mbps

528 MHz

Enor-correcting code rate

Number of subcarriers

128

Number of FFT sample points

128

Number of data carriers

1W

11 Number of cyclic prcfix sample poinls

32

We simulate the performance of the system in two different frequency-selective models: Channel Model 1 and 3 of Table I. For each of the channel models, one hundred realizations of the channel model for each frequency subbands is simulated and used as the channel conditions the system is transmitting over. In both cbanne1 models, it is assumed that the channel conditions remain unchanged during the transmission of a single packet o i data (quasi-static). The transmission of fifty packets each containing 1024 bytes of information bits

- 379 -
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:54:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

in each realization of the channel models are simulated. At the receiver, the bit-error-rate (BER) performance is calculated and the worst performing ten percent of the channel realizations are removed. The BER performance is then recalculated using the remaining realizations.

4.1. Results

The BER performances of the three codes in Channel

Model 1 and 3 are shown in Fig.5 and Fig.6 respectively.

Given the same code rate, the LDPC codes perform

much better than the convolutional code in both channel

models. The irregular LDPC code and regular LDPC

code has a coding gain of 2.60 dB and 2.53 dB re-

spectively at BER =

in Channel Model 1. In

Channel Model 3, the coding gain is 4.73 dB and

4.55dB respectively. More significantly, Fig.5 and Fig.6

demonstrated that the two LDPC codes have similar

performances in both channel models. The difference

between the SNR for a BER of

is only 0.07 dB in

Channel Model 1 and 0.18 dB in Channel Model 3.

emM
Fig. 5 . BER performance of MB-OFDM in Channel Model 1

Fig. 6. BER performance of MB-OFDM in Channel Model 3
In a fully parallel decoder, due to the large number of check and variable nodes and a random unstructured interconnections network between the nodes, the shuffling of- the data has to he done hoth temporally and spatially. This raises significantly thc complexity or the hardware realization of the decoder. The authors of [111

implemented a fully parallel 1024 bit, rate-1R prototype decoder with an admirable maximum throughput of 1 Gbitls. However, due to its apparent high complexity,
a fully parallel decoder will not suitable for practical implementation. In contrast, the decoder architecture discussed here makes use of a relatively smalI number
of simple elements such as binary counters and ~IOUFIS of RAM elements to provide a very structured and low-
complexity decoder.
5. CONCLUSIONS A joint code and decoder design approach is intro-
duced for a simplified LDPC coded MB-OFDM system
in this paper to construct a class of (3, k)-regul;n
LDPC code which exactly fit to a partly parallel decoder
implementation. This code design simplifies the implc-
mentation of LDPC encoder and decoder, especially for
high speed application. The simplified LDPC coded MFl-
OFDM achieves better performance than that of convoulational coded MB-OFDM system, and is very close to that of the conventional irregular LDPC coded MBOFDM system for high data rate mode. The complexily
of the proposed simplified LDPC is vety cnmpetitivc
to the convolutional code and much simpler than the
irregular LDPC code. It is concluded that the simplified
LDPC coded M€-OFDM is the best solution to achieve good performance for high data rate mode whereas keep
the simple hardware implementation.
REFERENCES
[I] FCC 02-48 First Repon and Order In the Matter of Revision of Part IS of the Commission's Rules Regarding Ulm-Widebad Transmission Systems, adopted Feb 14, 2002.
[2] IEEE 802.15 High Rate Alternative PHY Task Gmup (TG3a) for
wireless Personal Area Networks, "Multi-band OFDM Physical
Layer Proposal for IEEE 802.15 Task Group 3a" IEEE P802.15-
03/268r1. [31 K. Witrisal, Y.H. Kim, and R. Prarad. "A novel approach for
performance evaluation of afdm with s m r correctioncoding and
interleaving:' W C 1999 - Fall. IEEE V S 5Orh, vol. 1. pp. 2!J4
-299, 19-22 Sep 1999. [4] R. G. Gallager, "Law density parity check codes:' IRE Tranrac-
rionr on Infomrion Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28. January 1962. [SI D.J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal. "Near Shannon limit perfor-
mance of low density parity check codes:' Eiecronics Leners, vol. 32. no. 18. pp. 1MS-1616, August 1996. [6] D. J. C. Mackay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse "ices:' IEEE Transactions on Informarion Theoiy, vol. 45, pp. 3 9 9 4 3 1 , March 1999. [7] H. Futaki and T. Ohtsuki. "Performance of low-density paritycheek coded ofdm systems:' ICC 2002 IEEE Inremotionol Conference, vol. 3, pp. 1696-1700, 2002. [8] http://grouperieee.or~groupsl8O~l5/pub/2003/802Wirelesswc~rld/l5-
113-0353-011-1~1~3a-inRarun-ld~~~tfi~~fd~-phy.~pt.
[9] T. Richardson, M. Shokollahi. and R. Urbanke, "Design of
capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check code:$,'' a350 lT1, vol. 47, pp. 619-637. Feb 2001.
[IO] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi. "VLSI implementation-oriented 1:3,
k)-regular low-dcnsity parity-eheck codes:' 2001 IEEE W o r k h p on Sign01 Processing Systems, pp. 25-36, Sep 2001. [ I l l C. Howland and A. Blanksby, "Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity cheek codes:' Proceedings of 2WI IEEE lnr. Symp. on Cinrirs and Syrrems, vol. 4, pp. 742-745, May 2001.

- 380 -
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:54:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

