2010

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

Exact Thresholds and Optimal Codes for the Binary-Symmetric Channel and Gallager’s
Decoding Algorithm A
Louay Bazzi, Thomas J. Richardson, Senior Member, IEEE, and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Abstract—We show that for the case of the binary-symmetric

channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A the threshold can, in

many cases, be determined analytically. More precisely, we show

that the threshold is always upper-bounded by the minimum of

1 (1)

(1)

(1)

(1) and the smallest positive real root

of a specific

polynomial ( ) and we observe that for most cases this bound is

tight, i.e., it determines the threshold exactly. We also present op-

timal degree distributions for a large range of rates. In the case of

rate one-half codes, for example, the threshold 0 of the optimal degree distribution is given by 0 0 0513663. Finally, we outline how thresholds of more complicated decoders might be deter-

mined analytically.

Index Terms—Analysis, degree distribution, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, optimal, threshold, turbo code.

I. INTRODUCTION
I N his thesis (1962), Gallager introduced the concept of lowdensity parity-check codes (LDPC codes) together with various iterative decoding algorithms. For an introduction to the basic concepts of LDPC codes we refer the reader to [1]–[5]. The iterative decoding algorithms are best interpreted as message-passing algorithms executed on a bipartite graph which represents the code. Messages are passed along the edges of the graph between variable nodes on the left-hand side and check nodes on the right. The variable nodes are in one-to-one correspondence with the bits of the codeword and the check nodes are in one-to-one correspondence with a set of linear constraints defining the code. Decoding generally begins with variable nodes sending to their neighboring check nodes their received message. This message corresponds to the observation of the associated bit after passing it through a communication channel. Decoding continues with rounds of messages sent back and forth from check nodes to variable nodes and new messages are computed by each node as functions of messages previously

Manuscript received August 16, 1999; revised November 17, 2003. This work was performed while all authors were at Bell Laboratories. The material in this paper was presented at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000.
L. Bazzi is with the Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, American University of Beirut, Riad El-Solh, Beirut 1107 2020, Lebanon (e-mail: lp13@ aub.edu.lb).
T. J. Richardson is with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ 07921 USA (e-mail: tjr@flarion.com).
R. L. Urbanke is with the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), LTHC-DSC, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: ruediger.urbanke@ epfl.ch).
Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.833352

sent to them. Generally speaking, the messages represent esti-

mates of the bit associated to the variable-node terminal to the

edge carrying the message.

The locally best, but also most complex, iterative decoding

algorithm proposed in [1] is an instance of belief propagation

[6], a message-passing algorithm in which the messages repre-

sent conditional probabilities. The simplest decoding algorithm,

which we will call Gallager’s decoding algorithm A, allows as

messages only elements of the set

indicating the sign of

a bit. (Here we assume that the communications channel is the

binary-symmetric channel.) More precisely, at a check node, the

outgoing message along an edge is simply the product of all in-

coming messages excluding the incoming message along edge

. At a variable node, the outgoing message along an edge

is equal to the received message unless all incoming messages

(ignoring the incoming message along edge ) agree in which

case this message is forwarded. Although this simple decoding

algorithm cannot match the performance of belief propagation

it is nevertheless of interest because of its extremely low com-

plexity.

In Gallager’s original description, every variable node partic-

ipates in the same number of checks and every check involves

the same number of variable nodes. This gives rise to what

is now commonly referred to as a -regular LDPC code. In

[3], [2] it was suggested to let different variables participate in

different numbers of checks and to allow varying sizes of check

sets. Such codes are called irregular LDPC codes. Hence, in

general, LDPC codes are characterized by a degree distribution

pair

where and are functions of the form

,

and where

denote(s) the fraction of ones in the parity-check matrix of the

code which are in columns (rows) of weight . In the theory of

LDPC codes it is common not to focus on a single instance of

a code but to prove properties of ensembles of codes. In partic-

ular, we will be concerned with the ensemble of codes which

results when we fix the degree distribution pair but choose the

connections otherwise randomly.

Example 1 ( -Regular Ensemble): For the

ensemble we have

and

.

-regular

An analysis of message-passing algorithms is possible under an independence assumption. One analyzes locally the distribution of outgoing messages assuming all incoming messages are independent. If, in a finite graph, one unwraps the graph relative to a particular message, tracing back its genesis, then one obtains a tree structure representing the history of the message.

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BAZZI et al.: THRESHOLDS FOR THE BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNEL AND GALLAGER’S DECODING ALGORITHM A

2011

For finite graphs this tree will have within it repetitions, i.e., variable nodes, check nodes, and edges may appear more than once. The independence assumption is equivalent to assuming that there are no repetitions in the tree. If one considers a finite number of iterations of the message-passing algorithm then asymptotically, as the length of the code tends to infinity, most messages will satisfy the independence assumption.
For the binary-symmetric channel and various regular ensembles of graphs, Gallager numerically determined the largest crossover probability such that, under the independence assumption, the expected number of messages in error converges to zero as the number of iterations grows to infinity. It was shown in [4] that this number, which is called the threshold, determines the asymptotic (in the codeword length) behavior of the ensemble of codes: roughly speaking, for a code chosen randomly from the ensemble, with high probability, decoding will be successful if transmission takes place below this threshold, and the error probability will stay above a fixed constant if transmission takes place above this threshold.
Although this threshold can be easily determined numerically it is nevertheless pleasing and potentially insightful to derive analytic expressions. It is the aim of this paper to show that for the binary-symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A the threshold can be given explicitly in many cases. Moreover, for a wide range of rates the optimal degree distributions can be determined. The techniques used in determining the thresholds analytically are best illustrated by means of the even simpler example of the binary erasure channel (BEC).
Let denote the expected initial number of erasures. Then the expected fraction of messages passed from variable nodes to constraint nodes in iteration that are erasures fulfills the recursion [3]

Then

Proof: By the remarks above, the threshold is given by , where

First note that

with equality holding only at

.

It follows that the threshold is given by the minimum of

over the range

. In the sequel it will be slightly more

convenient to consider

. If

we

have

which clearly takes its minimum within the range

at the boundary point

. Further, this minimum is equal to

, which proves the assertion for the case

.

Now assume that . It is easy to see that for ,

has a pole at

and is equal to at . Since for any pair

the threshold is strictly below and since this threshold

is equal to the minimum of over the range

, it

follows that the minimum of lies in the interior of .

Taking the derivative of

with respect to and setting

the result to zero we get the polynomial equation

This equation has a root at

which, by our earlier remarks,

cannot represent the sought after solution. After dividing by

we get the simplified polynomial equation

(1)

We are interested in the supremum of ,

, such that

converges to zero as tends to infinity. It is easily seen that this

value of , call it , is equal to the supremum of all values ,

, such that the equation

(2)

does not have a positive solution with we get

. Solving (2) for

By Descartes’ rule of signs1 this equation has at most a single positive-real root and, therefore, since has at least one minimum in the range , it has exactly one positive real root.
In the following examples, we apply Lemma 1 to determine the threshold for some standard regular ensembles.
Example 2 ( -Regular Ensemble): Let be given by

(3)

In words, for a given positive real number there is a unique

value of such that fulfills the fixed-point equation (2). By

the remarks above, if

then the threshold is upper-

bounded by . This fact is used in the following lemma to de-

termine the threshold of regular ensembles for the BEC.

where and

Lemma 1 (Thresholds for the BEC and Regular Ensem-

bles): Consider a -regular ensemble. Then

f x 1Descartes’ rule of signs bounds the number of positive real zeros of a poly-
nomial ( ) in one variable. If

f x( ) = c x

If

, let

be the unique positive real root of the polynomial

m < m < < m c with 0 

111

and with all coefficients 6= 0, then

f the number of positive real zeros of is upper-bounded by the number of sign

N f c changes ( ) between consecutive coefficients when taken in order of

j increasing , see [7], [8, Ch. 6].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2012

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

Then Example 3 (
then Example 4 (

-Regular Ensemble): Let -Regular Ensemble): Let be given by

the exact threshold of the -regular ensemble for this decoder with erasures. It remains a challenge for future research to see if the thresholds for more complex decoding schemes can still be determined analytically and if the corresponding optimal degree distributions can be found.
II. EXACT THRESHOLDS
We now show that for the case of a binary-symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A the threshold can, in most cases, be determined analytically.
Let denote the expected number of initial errors, i.e., equals the crossover probability of the binary-symmetric channel. It was shown by Gallager [1, p. 48] (for the regular case) that the expected number of errors (under the independence assumption) in the th iteration is given by the recursion
(4)
where

where

and Then

and where

is the degree distribution pair.

Definition 1: The threshold is the supremum of all in

such that

as defined in (4) converges to zero as

tends to infinity.

Let us define

Example 5 ( -Regular Ensemble):

For small we may write

We will see that basically the same simple idea can be used

to derive analytic expressions for the threshold of many ensem-

bles if they are decoded by means of Gallager’s decoding algo-

rithm A. Even more, for a large range of rates we will be able

to analytically determine optimal degree distributions and their

thresholds.

Although only limited progress has been made so far along

this line, it is the hope that the presented techniques can be ex-

tended to analytically determine the thresholds in more com-

plicated cases. It was indicated in [4] that simple extensions to

Gallager’s decoding algorithm A involving message alphabets

of size only three or four can reach large fractions of the ca-

pacity at very low complexity. For example, a simple decoder

with erasures in which messages take on values in

,

with indicating an erasure, yields a threshold for the -reg-

ular ensemble of roughly . This should be compared to the

threshold under belief propagation

and also to Shannon

capacity of . An optimization with respect to the degree

distribution would almost certainly increase this threshold even

further, as would an extension of the message alphabet to size

four. Such decoders are prime candidates for practical imple-

mentations, yielding large fractions of the capacity at extremely

low complexities. Section IV contains a conjecture concerning

where

and

denote derivatives of

spectively. We claim that

unless

and , re-

(5)

To see this first note that since

we con-

clude that unless

we have

. To rule out the

case of equality, i.e., the case

, note that

together with

implies that

. So

which shows that also in this case

.

Henceforth, we will assume that (5) is fulfilled.

Lemma 2: In the range

and

,

is an increasing function in both its arguments. Furthermore, if

then, for small enough ,

.

Proof: We start by showing that

function in . Note that

where

is an increasing ,

for

Since

is strictly decreasing in the range

and since

, it follows that

for

. The claim now follows by observing that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BAZZI et al.: THRESHOLDS FOR THE BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNEL AND GALLAGER’S DECODING ALGORITHM A

2013

Taking the derivative of

with respect to we get

TABLE I THRESHOLDS FOR THE BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNEL AND GALLAGER’S DECODING ALGORITHM A FOR SOME STANDARD REGULAR ENSEMBLES

If

and

which proves that

gument.

Finally, if

then

then this expression is positive is an increasing function in its second ar-

By differentiating, one can check that

increasing for

and since

we have

for

of exists and is given by

is , . The limit as

which proves the last statement.

Since in the range

and

,

is

an increasing function in both its arguments it follows by finite

induction that for any

the sequence

will con-

verge to zero. Moreover, if

converges to zero then

must be strictly decreasing. In the sequel, it will be more con-

venient to work with the following alternative description of the

threshold.

Definition 2: The threshold is the supremum of all in such that

Thus, we see that

is well defined and continuous on

.

According to Definition 2 we have

(7)

This immediately gives rise to the following upper bound on the threshold.

Lemma 4: Let denote the smallest positive real root of the

polynomial

and assume (5)

holds. Then

(6)

does not have a strictly positive solution with

.

Lemma 3: If

then

.

Proof: Assume

. We first show that

.

By definition of we have

for

. By

Lemma 2,

for sufficiently small and, since

is continuous in , we have

for every

. Let

. Since

it

follows from Lemma 2 that

is nonincreasing and, there-

fore, converges to some value

which satis-

fies

. By assumption, the only solution to

for

is

, hence

. Thus, we

have

.

We now show that

. By the definition of , it follows

that we can find

arbitrarily close to such that

for some

. i.e., fulfills (6) for . For

any

, we have by Lemma 2 that

Since follows that

, we have . We conclude that

for all and it .

Rather than solving (6) for for a given we note that, generically, for a given there is a unique solution for for
where is given by

Proof: Evaluation of at any point

where

gives an upper bound on . In particular, we eval-

uate at

and at the smallest positive solution of the

equation

. It is easy to see that this smallest positive so-

lution is not larger than as required since a quick check shows

that

. Taking the minimum of these two bounds gives

our bound.

We note that, although one can construct counterexamples,

for most degree distributions of interest the minimum is taken

on at one of the two endpoints. For any specific example it is

generally easy to prove this assertion, typically by showing that

is either monotone or convex in the region between these

two endpoints.

Observe that the bound which stems from the evaluation at

can be seen as a stability condition, see [5], whereas

the bound which stems from the evaluation at the right endpoint

ensures that the iterative process gets started.

Table I summarizes thresholds of some standard regular en-

sembles. In all of these cases, the minimum in (7) is taken on

either at the left or at the right endpoint. For the ,

,

and ensemble the minimum is taken on at the left endpoint

so that the threshold is equal to . For the remaining cases,

the minimum is taken at the right endpoint so that the threshold

is given in terms of the smallest positive real root of the poly-

nomial . The latter cases are treated in some more detail in

the following examples.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

Example 6 ( -Regular Ensemble): For the ensemble we have

-regular

Note that

where rule of signs [7], we observe that which we denote by . Then

. Applying Descartes’ has a single positive root

The polynomial can be solved by radicals and the solution is given by

III. OPTIMAL DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS

Given the ease with which thresholds can be determined, one

might wonder whether optimal degree distributions for the given

decoder can be found. We will show in this section that for a

wide range of rates this is indeed the case. The proof has two

parts. First, we show how to find optimal right-concentrated de-

gree distribution pairs, i.e., degree distribution pairs

for

which has at most two nonzero degrees and for which these

nonzero degrees are consecutive. Second, we prove the opti-

mality of such right-concentrated degree distribution pairs for

a wide range of rates.

We will make repeated use of the following basic fact of linear

programming: Given a primal and a dual problem and a feasible

solution for each which have the same value, these feasible so-

lutions are optimal [9].

We start by showing that for a given right degree distribution

the optimal left degree distribution has bounded degree. We

will use the following notation. For any function

where

let denote

Numerically, the first ten digits of

are

.

Example 7 ( -Regular Ensemble): In this case we have

If

is a degree distribution pair then

,

are

the average degrees of variable nodes and check nodes, respec-

tively. The (design) rate associated to a degree distribution pair

is equal to

This can be slightly simplified by noting that

and the threshold will be denoted by

.

Theorem 1 (Bounded Left Degree): Let

be a given

degree distribution pair of rate

and threshold

.

Then there exists a degree distribution pair

such that

i) the largest index of any nonzero degree of is at most

By Descartes rule of signs, the last factor has at most one pos-

itive real root, and it clearly has one root in . In this case,

it might not be possible to express this root in terms of radicals

but can, of course, be determined to any desired degree by

a standard root extraction algorithm. The first ten digits of

are given by

.

Example 8 ( -Regular Ensemble): For the ensemble we have

-regular

ii) iii)
Proof: For

; .
, let

Let

. Then, by assumption, we have

The smallest positive-real root is a root of the last factor and is

given by

which in terms of the ’s can be expressed as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BAZZI et al.: THRESHOLDS FOR THE BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNEL AND GALLAGER’S DECODING ALGORITHM A

2015

Now,

iff

and

We will now show that for a wide range of rates the optimum right-concentrated degree distribution pairs are also left-concentrated. We will establish this fact in the following manner. Recall that

for all in for all
by

. Thus, for any

, we have

. Now define the degree distribution

Assume that we are looking for right-concentrated degree distri-

bution pairs which maximize rather than the actual threshold

. For each such degree distribution pair, it is an easy matter

to check whether

. Luckily, it turns out that this is

the case for all such optimal degree distribution pairs with rate

above, roughly, one-eighth. The next two lemmas establish that

each of the two respective quantities are maximized (for a given

and ) by left-concentrated degree distribution pairs.

Property i) is immediate. To see that ii) holds note that

Finally, by construction

for all

which proves property iii).

Note that one can always reduce the rate and increase the

threshold of a degree distribution pair by altering so that

increases for all

. Thus, ii) can be made an equality if

desired.

For any fixed rate

it is usually easy to find a strictly

positive lower bound for the threshold of the optimal degree dis-

tribution simply by exhibiting an example, and an upper bound

strictly less than is always provided by the capacity formula

, where is the binary entropy function. The-

orem 1 then implies a strict upper bound on .

Consider now right-concentrated degree distribution pairs

. Note that a concentrated degree distribution is

uniquely determined by the parameter

. The

following lemma states bounds for the parameter of the

optimal (right-concentrated) degree distribution pair. The proof

can be found in the Appendix.

Lemma 5 (Bounds on ): Let be fixed and let be a

lower bound on the achievable threshold of a (right-concen-

trated) degree distribution pair. Let

be the optimal (right-

concentrated) degree distribution pair.

(Lower Bound) Let be the unique positive root of the

equation

Then,

.

(Upper Bound) Let

equation

be the smallest positive real root of the

Lemma 6 (Left Concentration Maximizes Stability Condi-

tion): For a fixed and

the quantity

is

maximized by a concentrated degree distribution .

Proof: Assume

and

where

and

let

. Define

,

, and

. It is easy to verify that

and

. Consider the polynomials given

by

where

for

. For

we have

,

,

and

. Now

so

is decreasing in . This shows that

is min-

imized by (left) concentrated degree distribution. In the case

this proves the lemma. If, on the other hand,

and is not already concentrated then apply this procedure

to with

. Let us assume

and

. Then,

letting depend on as above, we have

Since

we see that

is increasing in .

This shows that left-concentrated degree distribution maximize

this quantity.

Lemma 7 (Left Concentration Maximizes ): For fixed ,

is maximized by a concentrated degree distribution .

Proof: Recall that is the smallest positive-real root of the

polynomial

and note that

is positive for small enough. Now, the condition

is equivalent to

where

. We will show that

Then,

is simultaneously minimized over the whole range

.

by the unique concentrated degree distribution

with pa-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

rameter . This choice then clearly maximizes . First note

that for

and

, the value of

is independent of . Thus, for

, we want to find an

optimal solution of the nonlinear program

Consider the following linear program:

It is easy to check that this inequality holds for

and

. We assume

and

. After some

manipulations (divide through by

and rearrange

terms) the above inequality can be written as

It is easy to check that if

is an optimal solu-

tion of this linear program then

is an

optimal solution to the above nonlinear optimization problem.

To solve the linear program let

. We claim that the

optimal solution is given by

(9)

The right-hand side of (9) can be written as the sum of

and a quantity indepen-

dent of . If

, then

is convex for

and equals at both endpoints. Thus,

in this case, the right-hand side of (9) is maximized over

by

. In the case

we have

First note that the value of this feasible solution is equal to (8)
Now consider the dual program

directly, hence, we can assume

in (9) in this case also.

Thus, setting

and multiplying by , (9) sim-

plifies to

(10)

Let us assume . Noting that

Define the tuple

by

we find that the inequality simplifies to

Clearly, assuming that

is feasible, the value of this so-

lution is equal to (8), the value of the solution of the primal

problem. This will establish the optimality of the claimed so-

lution. To prove the feasibility we need to verify for each

that

Now,

since . At

is minimized over

at

and

are both minimized at

, (10) simplifies to

which is clearly always fulfilled.

Let us assume

. Equation (10) can now be written as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BAZZI et al.: THRESHOLDS FOR THE BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNEL AND GALLAGER’S DECODING ALGORITHM A

2017

Now

takes on its maximal value for that unique in the range

which satisfies

(11)

so the inequality will follow if we can show that

Since But

it is sufficient to show that

Thus, (10) is proved.

Clearly, this value can be determined to any desired degree of

accuracy. We get

and

. Finally, for

this value of it is easy to verify that

.

Whenever the condition

fails, as it does for small

. rates, the optimal right-concentrated degree distribution pair has

to be found by means of the following less efficient procedure.

Rather than looking for the degree distribution which maximizes

the threshold for a given rate we will maximize the rate for a

given threshold. Given upper and lower bounds on , an upper

bound on the maximal degree of , and a fixed threshold

, the right-concentrated degree distribution pair with maximal

rate can be found by means of a one-dimensional family of in-

finite programs

We are now ready to find the optimal right-concentrated

degree distribution pairs as follows. For a given rate , find

a right-concentrated degree distribution pair of rate with

nonzero threshold. Now use this threshold in Lemma 5 to

bound the range of of the optimal right-concentrated degree

distribution pair. This bound implies a bound on the minimum

and maximum right degree of the optimal right-concentrated

degree distribution pair. Now, use Lemma 1 to bound the max-

imum degree of . From the discussion above we know that

the right-concentrated degree distribution which maximizes

is also left-concentrated. Given the bounds on the degrees there

are now only a few possible choices for the at most two nonzero

degrees of

and . For each such choice, there is a

one-dimensional family of degree distributions with the desired

rate which we can parameterized by a real parameter say.

The optimal choice of can now be determined analytically by

observing that reaches its maximum when

By discretizing the ranges of and the solution can be found

to any desired degree of accuracy.

The result of this optimization is shown in Fig. 1 where the

threshold is plotted as a function of the rate. The solid curve

corresponds to the capacity formula

. The dashed

curve corresponds to the optimal right-concentrated degree dis-

tribution pairs.

In the remainder of this section, we will show that over a wide

range of rates right-concentrated degree distribution pairs are

indeed optimal.

Let be a degree distribution, i.e., is a function

of the form

Finally, if for the degree distribution which maximizes we

have

then a right-concentrated degree distribution

with optimal threshold has been found. We note that empirically

the condition

is fulfilled for all optimal degree distri-

butions of rate at least one-eighth.

Example 9 (Rate One-Half Degree Distribution.): Applying the bounds above we find that the optimal rate one-half degree distribution is a member of the family of degree distributions parameterized by

with nonnegative coefficients and further

. Let be

the set of all such degree distribution. Let be the set of all

degree distribution with

. Denote the concentrated de-

gree distribution with value

by . As shown in the

following lemma, such degree distribution are extremal in a cer-

tain range.

Lemma 8 (Extremality of ):

for any

and

.

The proof can be found in the Appendix . The next lemma shows how this extremal property can be used to lower-bound the threshold of some right-concentrated degree distribution.

where

. Note that

is

strictly increasing in the range

and takes on values in

the range

. On the other hand, one can check that the

smallest real positive root is strictly decreasing in this range

and

whereas

. It follows that

Lemma 9 (Right-Concentrated Degree Distributions): Let

be a given degree distribution pair with

and with

threshold

. Then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

0 Fig. 1. Optimal right-concentrated degree distribution pairs. The solid curve corresponds to the capacity formula r = 1 h(x ) whereas the dashed curve
corresponds to the optimal right-concentrated degree distribution.

Proof: If in the sequel that and for all

there is nothing to prove. Hence, assume So assume that

. Let be any lower bound on the

. By assumption, for every

quantity . Then using Lemma 9 we get

Let
By Lemma 8, follows that for

for all

Now, if . It
then this leads to a contradiction, showing that the optimal rightconcentrated degree distribution is indeed globally optimal. But
is equivalent to

This shows that

For we can use the unique positive root of the equation

, where

,

as stated in Lemma 5. Since

and since is strictly

increasing for

it follows that

The claim now follows since this is true for any

.

Lemma 10 (Optimality of Right-Concentrated Degree Distri-

butions): Let

be the optimal right-concentrated degree

distribution pair of rate and with threshold . If

iff Solving this equation for results in the stated condition.

then

is optimal.

Proof: Let

be any optimal degree distribution of rate

and denote its threshold by . If

then we are done.

Fig. 2 shows the curve

for the optimal right-concen-

trated degree distribution together with the optimality region

marked in gray. We see that for rates roughly above , right-

concentrated degree distribution pairs are optimal.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BAZZI et al.: THRESHOLDS FOR THE BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNEL AND GALLAGER’S DECODING ALGORITHM A

2019

Fig. 2. The curve (r; x ) for the optimal right-concentrated degree distribution together with the optimality region marked in gray. For rates roughly above 0:4, right-concentrated degree distribution pairs are optimal.

IV. EXTENSION TO DECODER WITH ERASURES

where

In this section, we outline how the previous analysis may be carried over to more complex decoders. We will focus on the decoder with erasures and the -regular ensemble.

Example 10 (Decoder With Erasures [4]): We assume that

the received messages are elements of the alphabet

and

that they are the result of passing the transmitted word through

a binary-symmetric channel. Internally, the decoder uses mes-

sages in the extended alphabet

, with indicating an

erasure. At a variable node, the outgoing message along edge

is equal to sign

, where is the received value

at the given variable node, is a weight which is equal to

in the first iteration and for all future iterations, and the sum

extends over all incoming messages at the given variable node

except the one along edge . In short, the outgoing message is

the result of a simple voting scheme, whereby the received mes-

sage has more weight in the first iteration reflecting its higher

initial reliability. At a check node, the outgoing message along

edge is the product of all incoming messages exepct the in-

coming message along edge . This is analogous to the case of

Gallager’s decoding algorithm A except that an outgoing mes-

sage is now the erasure message if any of the involved incoming

messages is an erasure message.

Specializing the equations in [4] to the case of a -regular

ensemble, we get the following set of equations. For , we

have

Without justification, we apply the same method that succeeded in the case of the Gallager A decoder, i.e., we are trying to find fixed points of the equations in (12) and (13). Solving these equations for and equating the result gives the equation

This equation only involves the variables and . Further, in

the range of interest there is a unique nonzero solution for

for a given value of . Given a fixed-point pair

we

can use say (12) to find the input error probability for which

the given pair is a fixed point. Fig. 3 shows as a function

of . Note that the smallest possible value of is equal to

. In words, if the initial error probability is less

than , then the equation system does not have fixed points

(with nonzero values of ). If, on the other hand, the initial error

probability is larger than , then at least one such fixed point

exists. It is now tempting to make the following conjecture.

Conjecture 1 (Threshold of -Regular Ensemble): The

threshold of the -regular ensemble under the decoder with

erasures is equal to

.

whereas for

, we have

Explicit numerical evaluations of the recursions support this

conjecture. Unfortunately, it seems no easy task to give a rig-

orous proof. For a discrete dynamical system in two dimensions,

the behavior of the system is not necessarily determined by the

existence or lack of fixed points. The main problem lies in the

(12)

fact that, contrary to the case of a belief propagation decoder, we do not know of a Lyapunov function, such as the probability

(13) of error, for the given system. The analytic determination of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

Fig. 3. p as a function of p for the (3; 6)-regular ensemble. The smallest possible value of p , call it p , is equal to 0:0708.

threshold (in terms of roots of some polynomial) is hence an open problem.

APPENDIX

Bounds and Extremality: In this appendix we give the proofs

of Lemmas 5 and 8.

Let

be an optimal (right-concentrated) degree distribu-

tion pair with threshold . Then

Proof (Lemma 5): We start with the lower bound. Let be the optimal (right-concentrated) degree distribution
pair. Making repeated use of Lemma 11 and using (15) we get

(14)

Solving for

we get

(15)

The following bound will be used repeatedly. Lemma 11: Let be a degree distribution. Then
or equivalently

Letting

we get the said equation.

(16) In general, we use the notation to denote a positive number less than and to denote a positive number greater than . For

the upper bound, we start by solving (14) for . We get

(17)

Proof:

It follows that

Given an upper bound on , we can upper-bound and

lower-bound

by

and
where for the third line we used the Cauchy–Schwartz in- Next the rate condition implies that equality.
We are now ready to prove Lemma 5.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BAZZI et al.: THRESHOLDS FOR THE BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNEL AND GALLAGER’S DECODING ALGORITHM A

2021

Finally
Combining these equations results in the said formula. Proof (Lemma 8): Look at the linear program
and its dual

Note that for

, the inequality (18) holds exactly

as expected. In general, the expression on the left is a convex

function of , hence, we need only verify (18) for

and

. At

, the inequality (18) holds exactly, so we are

left only to verify (18) for

. Substituting in this value

(18) reduces to

(19)

Let us introduce the real parameter in place of , i.e., we con-

sider respect to is

. The derivative of this quantity with

where

and

. We claim that the

optimal solution of the primal problem is given by

for

and

Since

, is increasing on and de-

creasing on

. The claim now follows since, as remarked

earlier, the inequality is fulfilled with equality for

and

.

which has cost

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Amin Shokrollahi for interesting and useful discussions.

To see this note that the tuple

given by

gives rise to the same cost. Hence, to prove optimality we need

only show feasibility of this dual solution. Thus, for each

we require that the inequality

holds. Now,

after some manipulation, this inequality can be written in the

form

(18)

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th annual ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–619, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–619, Feb. 2001.
[6] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[7] R. Descartes, “Geometrie 1636,” in A Source Book in Mathematics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1969.
[8] P. Henrici, Applied and Computational Complex Analysis. New York: Wiley, 1974, vol. 1.
[9] A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming. New York: Wiley, 1986.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

