1738

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 3, MAY 2004

Run-Length-Limited Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based on Deliberate Error Insertion
Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE and Karunakar Pedagani

Abstract—We propose a novel approach to modulation and error control coding. The idea is to completely eliminate a constrained encoder and, instead, impose the constraint by the deliberate introduction of bit errors before transmission. The redundancy that would have been used for imposing the constraint is used in our scheme to strengthen the error control code (ECC), in such a way that the ECC becomes capable of correcting both deliberate errors as well as channel errors that occur during the detection. Our ECC-modulation scheme is based on iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes and a run-length constraint.
Index Terms—Combined constrained and error control coding, low-density parity check codes, modulation coding, run-length-limited constraint.

I. INTRODUCTION

C ONSTRAINED (or modulation) coding is used in communication systems to translate an arbitrary sequence

of input data to a channel sequence with special properties

required by the physics of the transmission (or recording)

medium [11]. One of the most common constraints, so called

run-length (RLL) constraint [10], bounds the minimal and/or

maximal lengths of consecutive like channel symbols, which

improves timing recovery, reduces intersymbol interference

in channels with excess bandwidth, and reduces transition

noise in nonlinear media. Most of the constraints used in

practical channels have finite memory and can be represented

by sofic systems [11]. A sofic system [1] is defined as a set

of sequences generated by walks on a directed labeled graph.

A graph representation of a constraint enables one to analyze

statistical properties of a code [5], [10], but also provides a

systematic procedure for code construction known as a state

splitting algorithm [1], [11]. The results of a state splitting

algorithm are the encoder in the form of a finite automaton

and a sliding window decoder with limited error propagation.

The encoder translates the sequence

of input words

of length to a sequence

of codewords of length

. We refer to the ratio

as a code rate. The graph

capacity (or Shannon noiseless channel capacity [12]), , gives

the maximal achievable rate of a code designed by the state

splitting algorithm. (See [11] and [3] for complete theoretical

Manuscript received February 26, 2003; revised February 18, 2004. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0208597, and by Seagate Technology.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85718 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona. edu; karun@ece.arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2004.826904

characterization of the state splitting). Channel constraints are imposed in encoder by the introduction of a redundancy into a coded stream, i.e., by reducing the information rate. The “strength” of the constraint is determined by the amount of introduced redundancy. The construction of high rate codes (that are the most interesting in practice) is especially difficult when the starting constrained graph is large. Since the automaton complexity grows rapidly with graph size resulting encoder and decoder obtained after several rounds of state splitting are complex as well. (The intractability of state splitting algorithm is discussed in [2].) Moreover, the decoding window size also grows as the number of rounds of state splitting increases [3], [4], which may cause unacceptable error propagation. Due to the inherently nonlinear nature of the encoding and decoding algorithm, the effect of error multiplication (the phenomenon that a single or few channel errors may cause multiple decoding errors) in the decoder occurs. In order to limit error propagation in the decoder, block codes are typically used. The code redundancy is exploited more effectively in long block codes, but the code complexity rapidly increases with the block length, because, very often, the state splitting algorithm requires many rounds of splitting. Another problem in practical systems is that the errors multiplied in the decoder may overwhelm the error correcting system and cause the error correction failure. Besides the remarkable effort that has been devoted to the development of the constrained code theory, code construction remains difficult to be fully automated, and a code construction requires ingenuity and skills in the art.
In this paper, we propose a novel coding approach to modulation and error control coding. We focus on maximum run-length constraint ( constraint) although the concept can be extended to any type of constraint. The idea is to completely eliminate a
-constrained code and, instead, to impose a constraint by the deliberate introduction of bit errors before transmission. The redundancy that would have been used for imposing the constraint is used in our scheme to strengthen the error control code (ECC) in such a way that the ECC becomes capable of correcting both deliberate errors as well as channel errors that occurs during the detection. We consider an error control scheme based on iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes (LDPC), a technique of great promise that is being extensively studied [13]–[16]. We demonstrate that the redundancy invested into LDPC error correction capabilities works, and that the novel approach outperforms the classical modulation-ECC concatenation scheme for the case of maximum RLL constraint. Another advantage of the proposed modulation coding method is that it is conceptually simple, and that no special constrained code design skills and efforts are necessary.

0018-9464/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND PEDAGANI: RUN-LENGTH-LIMITED LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES

1739

Fig. 1. Block diagrams of the (a) classical way of combining error control and modulation code, (b) reverse concatenation method, and (c) a novel scheme with introduction of deliberate errors.

II. BIT-FLIPPING BASED CONSTRAINED CODING SYSTEM
The channel coding portion of the block diagram of the state-of-the-art transmitter is depicted in Fig. 1(a). A user data stream is first encoded in the error control encoder (in recording applications, this is typically Reed–Solomon (RS) code), and a run-length constraint is imposed on the ECC coded data prior to the transmission through the channel (for sake of simplicity, we consider the additive white Gaussian noise channel (AWGN) model). The number of consecutive like symbols in a sequence is known as run length. A run-length constrained encoder converts a sequence of unconstrained binary words to a sequence of constrained words, such that minimum and maximum number of zeros between two ones is “ ” and “ ,” respectively. The constraint removes the possibility of occurrences of long strings of zeros, thus enhancing the timing recovery from the received modulated waveform while constraint controls the highest transition frequency. The run-length code establishes a nonlinear dependence between the data before and after the modulation coding. Because of this nonlinear dependence, even a small amount of errors in this coded data can result in error multiplication and can greatly degrade the decoder’s performance.
In order to reduce this effect, the reverse concatenation method is applied, as shown in the block diagram of Fig. 1(b). Here, the run-length constraint encoding is first applied on the input data and is followed by RS encoding. To satisfy the constraint among generated parity bits, run-length encoding is applied again. The error propagation caused due to channel errors is limited to the parity bits of RS coding and does not affect the remaining data.
Consider now the alternative scheme shown in Fig. 1(c). The LDPC encoder encodes the data word , and deliberate errors

are introduced in the codeword to satisfy the run-length constraint. Whenever the constraint is not satisfied (as detected by the RLL monitor block), the bits in the data word are inverted in such a way that run-length constraint is satisfied with minimal number of inversions.
The part of the block diagram in Fig. 1(c) after LDPC encoder can be treated as an equivalent channel, in which, besides the Gaussian noise, hard bit errors are added to the transmitted bits. The bits are therefore corrupted by noise but sometimes are inverted as well. The ECC must be designed to be able to handle both noise and the deliberate bit flips.
The errors introduced due to these deliberate flips depend only on the input data and are independent of the operating signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). A different codeword is decoded when the total number of errors exceeds the maximum number of errors a particular ECC can handle. Consequently, in such a scheme the minimum distance of the code has greater impact on the decoder’s performance even at higher SNR operating levels. The symbol error rate decreases with increasing SNR until a threshold; subsequently there is a domination of deliberate errors over the errors introduced by the channel. If the number of deliberate errors exceeds the error correcting capability of a code, the decoder fails to correct these errors. Unlike the other two schemes discussed—the traditional ECC and reverse concatenation technique—this scheme may be prone to attain a constant symbol error rate resulting in an error floor. The error floor is due to: 1) LDPC code structure and the suboptimal decoding algorithm as well as due to 2) the average number of deliberate bit flips per codeword that can exceed error correction capability of the code. However, as we will show shortly, a small increase in the minimum distance of the code can considerably suppress the error floor and make it insignificant for practical applications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1740

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 3, MAY 2004

Fig. 3. Finite-state machine for a maximum run-length constraint.

Fig. 2. Illustration of error floor for different maximum RLL constraints.

Fig. 2 shows an illustration of the error floor for some con-

straints. For a maximum RLL constraint

, the code does

not suffer any error floor until , indicating a successful

suppression of deliberate errors introduced. Euclidean geometry

code with minimum distance 35, codeword length and rate being

4096 and 0.83, respectively, is considered. As the constraint gets

severe, errors introduced are greater in number and are beyond

the error correcting capacity of the code. This results in an error

floor. A direct relation exists between the severity of the con-

straint and the error floor. The next section derives a mathemat-

ical relationship between the minimum distance of the code and

the error floor caused by the deliberate bit flips.

III. ERROR FLOOR ANALYSIS

In order to estimate the error floor caused by deliberate bit

flips, it is necessary to find how many bits in average are flipped

within a codeword of length , and how this number compares

to the minimum distance of the code. A bit-flipping mechanism

[or RLL monitor block in Fig. 1(c)] can be described by a finite

state machine that accepts coded ( -unconstrained) bit stream

as an input and produce a sequence in which

indicates

a bit flip in time instant . The example shown at the bottom of

the page illustrates the bit flipping for

.

The RLL monitor can be viewed as a nondeterministic finite

state machine with

states shown in Fig. 3.

A transition from a lower index state , to a higher index

state

, occurs if two consecutive bits in are

identical; otherwise, the state

is reached. The edges em-

anating from states

are labeled with a zero. The

state

is reached when consecutive like symbols

have occurred in . The corresponding NRZI encoder output

is then either a zero or one, and transition to the state

is made. Introduce two branches emanating from the

th

node, to distinguish the different instances of satisfying the con-

straint with/without introducing a deliberate error (flip). Hence,

the input associated with the edge labeled zero (which corre-

spond to an unconstrained sequence) is flipped. A generalized

adjacency matrix, which gives the number of dissimilar paths of

going (in one step) from state

to

is given by the

array as defined in (1). Associated with

is the variable “ ”

...

(1)

such that the element “ ,” signifying the existence of two

different paths in the transition from state

to

with one of them resulting in a flip. Essentially, the variable “ ”

is introduced to monitor the number of deliberate errors made

in a codeword. Assuming that bits are equally probable, we can

define , the “generalized” transition probability matrix as

[the transition probability matrix in a

conventional sense is ]. It is not difficult to find the steady-

state probability vector to be

(2)

, the th power of the state transition matrix, can

be used to find average number of bit flips in a codeword of

length . A th element in

is a polynomial in ,

with the coefficient of is proportional to the probability of

occurrence of flips encountered in traversing from state to

state . Hence, the corresponding coefficients weighted with

the respective state distribution can establish the probability

of making flips in an arbitrary input bit sequence. The

product

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND PEDAGANI: RUN-LENGTH-LIMITED LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES
TABLE I ERROR FLOOR AS A FUNCTION OF t; L; AND k

1741

results in a

dimension vector with its th element,

,

being a polynomial in

TABLE II EG CODE PARAMETERS

(4)

Clearly, the coefficient of of

specify the probability of

reaching the state after occurrence of runs of length

.

The coefficient of in the sum of all

represents the net probability of occurrence of flips. In other

words, if we define a polynomial

as

(5)

then the coefficients

, represent the probability of

occurrence of flips in codeword of length .

Assuming that a code has property of correcting exactly er-

rors or less, the lower bound on the error floor can be computed

as

(6)

The whole analysis assumes the input bits to the run-length monitor are independent and an optimal decoder is available. The above relationship is helpful in choosing a particular code for the desired error floor.
The error floor values for different values of as calculated using the relation derived in (6) are shown in Table I.
An increase in floor value with severity of the constraint and a substantial decrease with a small increase in is observed. For high values of , a complete suppression of error floor is achieved. Note that a floor value of less than 10 is practically insignificant for many magnetic and optical recording systems and the above scheme is promising with the usage of stronger LDPC codes. As shown in [14], the minimum distance of LDPC code is determined by the column weight, and hence we are looking at classes of codes with high column weights. One such class is Euclidean geometry codes, described in the next section.

IV. EUCLIDIAN GEOMETRY CODES

Code constructions based on the structure of finite geometries

are called finite geometry codes [17]. For some integer

and

, consider the -dimensional Euclidean geometry,

denoted by

, over

, where is a prime. This

geometry consists of points and

lines. Each point is an -tuple over

and the all-zero

-tuple is called the origin of the geometry. Every line is ei-

ther a one-dimensional (1-D) subspace or a coset of a 1-D sub-

space of the vector space of all the -tuple over

. Each

line consists of points. Two points are connected by one and

only one line. Two lines are either disjoint or they intersect at

one and only one point. Numerous code construction methods

exist based on the above properties for which minimum dis-

tances can be estimated easily. Knowledge of minimum dis-

tance of the code is essential in estimating the error floor, as

discussed in Section III. One such type of codes for which min-

imum distances are known is one-step majority-logic decodable

codes with lengths

. They have great practical im-

portance for their simplicity in decoding. We know there exist

lines not passing through origin,

which intersect on any given point . The error sums corre-

sponding to these lines are orthogonal on the digit position

corresponding to . Thus, a code whose null space contains the

incidence vectors corresponding to the above lines could cor-

rect

or fewer errors in the received vector. Table II

is a reference for the permissible values, derived from (6), to

have an insignificant error floor 10 for some of these

binary EG codes. As we can see, pretty low values of are

achieved for moderate code lengths and high code rates .

The proposed scheme of imposing the constraint by delib-

erate errors based on LDPC codes is now compared against the

classical modulation coding schemes mentioned in Section II,

namely with traditional ECC with constraint encoder and with

reverse concatenation scheme. Euclidean geometry code with

minimum distance 35, codeword length and rate being 4096 and

0.83, respectively, is considered for the proposed scheme. Using

(6) for the above parameters, an error floor of 10 is expected.

Note that the code rate is nearly equal to the “effective” code rate

of classical scheme considered. The “effective” rate includes the

rate of the code and modulation code used, if any. In case of re-

verse concatenation, if

is the rate of ECC code used, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1742

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 3, MAY 2004

Fig. 4. Results of the comparison of the proposed scheme with the direct Fig. 5. Results of the proposed scheme and reverse concatenation, both

concatenation and reverse concatenation.

decoded by SPA.

is the rate of the modulation encoder, the effective rate is given by

Both direct and reverse concatenation schemes employ (255,

239) RS code as ECC and a

constraint en-

coder as modulation encoder. Sliding window is used for mod-

ulation decoder and hard decoding is done for decoding the

ECC, where as the sum-product algorithm (SPA), an iterative

decoding scheme, is used in the proposed scheme.

For a

constraint, the bit-error-rate (BER) performance

for different schemes is shown in Fig. 4. As expected, better per-

formance (gain of 1 dB) is seen with reverse concatenation over

direct concatenation, as the dependence of error propagation is

limited to the parity bits. The redundancy that would have been

used for imposing the constraint is now used in our scheme to

strengthen the ECC (EG code), resulting in an impressive 10 dB

gain over the other schemes. Part of the gain is due to itera-

tive decoding being used. Since the minimum distance of the

EG code considered is high, a successful suppression of error

floor is also obtained. Another part of the gain is due to the fact

that LDPC decoder uses soft decisions, while the direct and re-

verse concatenation modulation schemes discussed above use

hard decisions. To make a fair comparison, we consider the de-

coding scheme in which an LDPC code decoded by SPA is used

instead of the RS code. Note that the direct concatenation does

not support soft-ECC decoding because the sliding window de-

coder does not output soft information that is required for SPA.

Fig. 5 shows the comparison of the proposed scheme and re-

verse concatenation scheme, both decoded by SPA. Both the

codes have same “effective rate” of 0.83 with codeword length

of 4096. The minimum distance of the code in the proposed

scheme is at least “35,” resulting in a practically insignificant

error floor of less than 10 [using (6)]. A gain of 4 dB is seen

at BER 10 . However, the next experiment illustrates the de-

Fig. 6. Illustration of decrease in gain with increase in the effective rate.
crease in gain with increase in the effective rate. Although the use of SPA decoding improves the performance of the reverse concatenation scheme over hard decoding, the lack of soft information from parity bits considerably inhibits the decoder’s performance.
Clearly, the rate of the code used in such a scheme greatly influences the decoder’s performance. With a decrease in the rate of the code, the amount of soft information decreases because of the increase in the number of parity bits. This decrease in soft-information inhibits the performance of the iterative decoder. Fig. 6 illustrates the influence of the rate over the above two schemes mentioned. A gain of 5 dB is observed for code rate 0.77, whereas a gain of 6.2 dB is seen for code rate 0.5.
V. CONCLUSION
The application of maximum run-length constraint by deliberately inverting some of the input bits is proposed. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND PEDAGANI: RUN-LENGTH-LIMITED LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES

1743

scheme relies on the iterative decoding of LDPC code to correct the introduced deliberate errors, replacing the need for an RLL modulation encoding. For a practical constraint, by proper choice of the code, this scheme gives impressive results over direct/reverse concatenation with hard/SPA decoding. Thorough analysis and results about the dependence of the error floor on minimum distance are supplied. Although the scheme is applied on maximum run-length constraint, it can be extended to any constraint in general. The future work will include the evaluation of such scheme in partial response channels.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The idea of this paper originates from a series of discussions with T. Richardson at Bell Labs in 1998.

[12] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., pp. 372–423, 623–656, 1948.
[13] B. Vasic, “Combinatorial construction of low-density parity check codes,” presented at the Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5 2002.
[14] B. Vasic, E. Kurtas, and A. Kuznetsov, “Lattice low-density parity check codes and their application in partial response channels,” presented at the Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5 2002.
[15] B. Vasic, “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on Steiner systems and their application in magnetic recording,” in Proc. Globecom, vol. 5, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 26–29, 2001, pp. 2954–2960.
[16] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[17] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.

REFERENCES
[1] R. L. Adler, D. Coppersmith, and M. Hassner, “Algorithms for sliding block codes: An application of symbolic dynamics to information theory,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-29, pp. 5–22, Jan. 1983.
[2] J. J. Ashley, R. Karabed, and P. Siegel, “Complexity and sliding-block decodability,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1925–1947, Nov. 1996.
[3] J. J. Ashley, “A linear bound for sliding-block decoder window size, II,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1913–1924, Nov. 1996.
[4] J. J. Ashley, B. H. Marcus, and R. M. Roth, “On the decoding delay of encoders for input-constrained channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1948–1956, Nov. 1996.
[5] J. W. M. Bergmans, Digital Baseband Transmission and Recording. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1996.
[6] W. G. Bliss, “Circuitry for performing error correction calculations baseband encoded data to eliminate error propagation,” IBM Tech. Bull., vol. 23, pp. 4633–4634, 1981.
[7] DVD Specifications for Read-Only Disc, Part 1; Physical Specification, DVD Consortium, v. 0.9, Apr. 1996.
[8] I. J. Fair, W. D. Gover, W. A. Krzymien, and R. I. MacDonald, “Guided scrambling: A new line coding technique for high bit rate fiber optic transmission systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 39, pp. 289–297, Feb. 1991.
[9] J. L. Fan and A. R. Calderbank, “A modified concatenated coding scheme with applications to magnetic data storage,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 1565–1574, July 1998.
[10] K. A. S. Immink, “Runlength-limited sequences,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 78, pp. 1745–1759, Nov. 1990.
[11] B. Marcus, P. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Finite-state modulation codes for data storage,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 10, pp. 5–37, Jan. 1992.

Bane Vasic (S’92–M’93–SM’02) received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nish, Serbia.
From 1996 to 1997, he was a Visiting Scientist at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Kodak Research, Rochester, NY, where he was involved in research in optical storage channels. From 1998 to 2000, he was with Lucent Technologies, Bell Laboratories. He was involved in research coding schemes and architectures for high-speed applications. He was involved in research in iterative decoding and low-density parity check codes, as well as development of codes and detectors implemented in Lucent (now Agere) chips. Presently, he is a Faculty Member of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson. He has authored more than 25 journal articles, more than 50 conference articles, more than half a dozen book chapters, and one book. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, communication theory, and digital communications and recording.
Dr. Vasic is a Member of the Editorial Board of the IEEE Transactions on Magnetics. He served as a Technical Program Chair, IEEE Communication Theory Workshop (2003) and as Co-organizer of the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) Workshops on Optical/Magnetic Recording and Optical Transmission, and Theoretical Advances in Information Recording (2004).
Karunakar Pedagani received the B.Tech. degree in electrical engineering from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Guwahati, India, in 2001 and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2003.
He was involved in researching iterative decoding and low-density paritycheck codes. His research interests include digital communications and coding theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

