54

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 1, JANUARY 2004

On Concatenated Zigzag Codes and Their Decoding Schemes
Xiaofu Wu, Student Member, IEEE, Yingjian Xue, and Haige Xiang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, we show that a concatenated zigzag code can be viewed as a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code. Based on the bipartite graph representation for such a parallel-concatenated code, various sum-product based decoding algorithms are introduced and compared. The results show that the improved versions of sum-product algorithm exhibit better convergence rate while maintaining the essential parallel form.
Index Terms—Bipartite graph, decoding algorithms, low-density parity-check codes (LDPCs), zigzag codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T URBO CODING and low-density parity-check (LDPC) coding are two classes of powerful coding schemes that have received considerable attention in the coding community because of their abilities to approach the Shannon limit. Unlike LDPC codes, turbo codes have a simple linear encoding algorithm. LDPC codes, however, have a fully parallelizable decoding algorithm, which may have potential advantages when parallel processors are used.
The concatenated zigzag codes introduced in [1] belong to the scheme of turbo coding. In this letter, we show that they can also be viewed as LDPC codes. Therefore, a concatenated zigzag code is both easy to encode and decode. Based on the bipartite graph representation, the sum-product algorithm is introduced as an alternative for the original BCJR algorithm [6]. Furthermore, we consider the convergence rate of various decoding algorithms, which is often neglected in comparing decoding algorithms for turbo codes and LDPC codes. Compared to the sumproduct algorithm, the BCJR algorithm exhibits much faster convergence rate, which has been proved by many simulations [3], [6]. Based on the previous work on parallel decoding of accumulate codes [2], we develop improved versions of sumproduct algorithm for a concatenated zigzag code with faster convergence rate while maintaining its essential parallel form.
II. BIPARTITE GRAPH REPRESENTATION OF CONCATENATED ZIGZAG CODES
A zigzag code is described by a highly structured zigzag graph as shown in [1, Fig. 1]. The encoding process is thus
Manuscript received January 16, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was prof. M. Fossorier. This work was supported in part by the National High Technology Research and Development Program (863 program) of China under Grant 2001AA123052 and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 60002010. The work of X. Wu was also supported by the China Visiting Scholar Foundation of Key Laboratory in University in collaboration with National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory in Southeast University.
The authors are with the Department of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China (e-mail: xfuwu@ele.pku.edu.cn; xue@pku.edu.cn; xianghg@pku.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2003.822493

straightforward. The information bits are firstly divided into

blocks where each block consists of bits. If we denote all

information bits as

,

;

; the

parity bits ,

can be obtained as follows:

(1)

Clearly, a zigzag code is completely parameterized by the pair

( , ). A concatenated zigzag code, however, can be described

by a triplet , , , where the additional parameter de-

notes the number of constituent codes. The transmitted code-

word consists of

, where represents data

matrix and

are formed according to (1)

for the interleaved data matrix [1]. The overall code is a

block code with coding rate

.

The idea of equivalent bipartite graph representation can be

easily adapted to a concatenated zigzag code. For a concatenated

zigzag code with

,

, its bipartite graph is given in

Fig. 1. The white nodes including both information and parity

nodes belong to the variable nodes and the black nodes represent

check nodes.

In this way, a concatenated zigzag code can be viewed as an

LDPC code with the check node of degree

and two

kinds of variable nodes, with degree of and 2, respectively, if

we ignore degree-1 variable nodes (i.e., the last parity bits),

whose ratio to the number of all variable nodes tends to zeros as

approaches infinity. With the well-developed theory of density

evolution [3], we can calculate the threshold of a concatenated

zigzag code under practical iterative decoding. The calculated

threshold for a rate-1/2 concatenated zigzag code with

,

is 0.906 dB, which is about 0.7 dB away from the

Shannon limit.

III. EFFICIENT DECODING SCHEMES
As the concatenated zigzag codes have the structures of both turbo codes and LDPC codes, a variety of decoding schemes are possible. When viewed as a parallel-concatenated code, the overall decoding structure (turbo decoding) is shown in [5] (denoted as TYPE-I (T-I) scheme). While viewed as an LDPC code, the typical sum-product algorithm (denoted as TYPE-II (T-II) scheme) can be directly implemented. As a parallel architecture has higher throughput and lower power dissipation than a serial architecture (which in inherent in the T-I scheme), the T-II scheme is more favorable for applications in future high-speed communication systems.

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WU et al.: ON CONCATENATED ZIGZAG CODES AND THEIR DECODING SCHEMES

55

Fig. 2. Message flow at a check node (Message-passing decoding for a zigzag code).

Fig. 1. Bipartite graph of a concatenated zigzag code.

However, a possible advantage of the T-I scheme over the

T-II scheme is its faster rate of convergence. Therefore, it is in-

teresting to ask if we can find decoding schemes combining both

advantages (i.e., fast rate of convergence and parallel implemen-

tation)? The answer is positive thanks to the bipartite graph repre-

sentation of a zigzag code. A zigzag code is, in essence, the

code, and the message-passing decoding of

has been shown in [2] to be subject to the form of parallel re-

alization with negligible performance loss. Based on this fact, we introduce two new message-passing algorithms for concate-

nated zigzag codes.

The message flow for a zigzag code takes almost the same form

as shown in [2, Fig. 2]. For notional clarity, we show the message

flow at the check node in Fig. 2 (but omit the forward and backward pass as shown in [2, Fig. 2(b) and (c)] for conciseness). The

extrinsic log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of information bit (for

example, in Fig. 2) is obtained by combining all the prior in-

formation

,

, from adjacent informa-

tion nodes except itself, with

from the channel,

from check and

from check

using the so called

“check operation”

. Hence the extrinsic message from a check node to

the information bit at the iteration and in the sub-code,

, can be computed as

(2)

where

denotes

the message obtained from the channel upon receiving noise

corrupted signal , and the prior information

is

the sum of the previous extrinsic information from the

sub-codes other than the currently considered sub-code, and

from the channel, i.e.,

(3)

while messages

and

correspond to a forward

and backward pass, respectively, along the code graph. As illus-

trated in [2, Fig. 2(b) and (c)] with an obvious modification, at

the iteration, they can be updated in parallel as

(4)

(5)

The BCJR algorithm has been proved in [2] to have an equiva-

lent but serial update rule with

,

replaced by

,

in (4) and (5), respec-

tively.

As we mentioned previously, the T-II decoding scheme em-

ploys LDPC-like scheduling with the bit (or parity) nodes and

check nodes activated alternately, which fails to exploit the spe-

cial “zigzag” trellis structure of the accumulate code. The par-

allel update rule shown in (4) and (5) isolates the “zigzag” trellis

subgraph and processes it locally, which is key to improving

the convergence rate of the original sum-product algorithm. As

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

56

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 1, JANUARY 2004

TABLE I DECODING COMPLEXITY IN OPERATIONS
PER INFORMATION BIT PER OPERATION

MT-I and T-I decoding schemes in an ascending order. In practice, the MT-I and MT-II schemes are more favorable due to their advantages in both the rate of convergence and parallelizable implementation. The MT-II scheme is fully parallelizable while the MT-I scheme can be implemented with just one parallel decoding module shared by all sub-codes, which can make a trade-off between hardware cost and processing time.
It can be justified intuitively that the convergence rate of the MT-I and MT-II schemes is faster than that of the original sumproduct algorithm since the messages from parity nodes are globally spread before flowing to check nodes. Furthermore, since the concatenated zigzag code belongs to the general class of LDPC codes, an open problem arises naturally: can we find more efficient forms of the sum-product algorithm for general LDPC codes, which may provide faster rate of convergence than the currently employed sum-product algorithm without noticeable increase in hardware cost?

Fig. 3. Simulation results for various decoding schemes.
shown in Fig. 2 [2], the update rule shown in (2)–(5) can be efficiently implemented in parallel and we thus obtain a modified TYPE-II (MT-II) decoding scheme.
When the global decoder keeps the successive update rule for sub-decoder modules as shown in [5, Fig. (2a)] and each sub-decoder module adopts the parallel update rule shown in (4) and (5), we get a modified TYPE-I (MT-I) decoding scheme. Due to successive update among sub-codes, we may use the most recent updated LLRs of information bits in an attempt to improve the performance of the MT-I decoding scheme, thus (3) is now updated as follows

(6) and other rules are changed accordingly by replacing

with

in (2), (4), and (5).

The decoding complexity is summarized in Table I for var-

ious decoding schemes. We assume that the implementation of

may require as many as

additions and

table lookups ([assuming

] are imple-

mented via table lookups), and the possible computations of a

list of

,

shown in (2), (3) may be

efficiently implemented by obtaining

at first and

computing

,

subsequently. The com-

putation of (6) is assumed to be performed iteratively by noting

,.

The T-I scheme has the same complexity as the MT-I scheme if

the equivalent BCJR algorithm presented in [2] is honored for

each constituent code (the authors in [2] call this equivalent im-

plementation form as “sum-product algorithm”).

The simulated performance for a (16384,4,4) concatenated

zigzag code with various decoding algorithms is shown in Fig. 3.

The rate of convergence differs indeed, with the T-II, MT-II,

IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTURE WORKS
In this letter, we show that a concatenated zigzag code can be viewed as an LDPC code. With its bipartite graph representation, we introduce various parallel decoding algorithms. By carefully scheduling the message flow of the original sumproduct algorithm, the rate of convergence may be accelerated for concatenated zigzag codes. It is very interesting to consider the scheduling problems of the sum-product algorithm for general LDPC codes in the future.
As the bipartite graph shown in Fig. 1 is similar to that of an irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) code [4], irregularity may be introduced to the graph structure of zigzag code to further improve performance, and parallel decoding schemes studied here are still possible to be employed in decoding irregular zigzag codes. We are currently working on this issue and related topics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to express grateful acknowledgment to Prof. M. Fossorier and anonymous reviewers for their patience and detailed comments, which significantly improved the presentation of this letter.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Ping, X. Huang, and N. Phamdo, “Zigzag codes and concatenated zigzag codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 800–807, Feb. 2001.
[2] J. Li, K. R. Narayanan, and C. N. Georghiades, “An efficient decoding algorithm for cycle-free convolutional codes and its applications,” in Proc.2001 IEEE Global Commun. Conf., San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1063–1067.
[3] S.-Y. Chung, J. G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[4] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000.
[5] L. Ping, S. Chan, and K. L. Yeung, “Iterative decoding of multi-dimensional concatenated single parity check codes,” in Proc.1998 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, June 1998, pp. 131–135.
[6] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding: turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

