1156

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Combinatorial Constructions of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Iterative Decoding
Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE, and Olgica Milenkovic, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper introduces several new combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, in contrast to the prevalent practice of using long, random-like codes. The proposed codes are well structured, and unlike random codes can lend themselves to a very low-complexity implementation. Constructions of regular Gallager codes based on cyclic difference families, cycle-invariant difference sets, and
affine 1-configurations are introduced. Several constructions of
difference families used for code design are presented, as well as bounds on the minimal distance of the codes based on the concept of a generalized Pasch configuration.
Index Terms—Cyclic difference families, iterative decoding, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, Pasch configurations.
I. INTRODUCTION
A FTER the discovery by MacKay and Neal [1] that long Gallager codes [2] can achieve near-optimum performance when used for transmission over white additive Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, it became a challenge to construct codes that would come as close as possible to the Shannon limit [3]. In the past few years, several low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were designed with performances very close to this limit [4], [5]. Also, a significant insight into iterative decoding was gained due to its interpretation in terms of message passing and belief propagation in graphical models [6], as described, among others, by Kschischang et al. [7], [8], and McEliece et al. [9]. The graphical model that provides a natural setting in which to describe message passing was introduced by Tanner [10] and reintroduced by Wiberg et al. [11]. Although these requirements related to error performance are important, complexity issues tend to dominate system architecture and design considerations, especially for extremely high-speed applications such as magnetic recording and optical communications. Iterative decoders proposed so far have very high hardware complexity and are incapable of operating at rates above 1 Gb/s, the speed of electronics in the next generation of these channels. The high complexity of the proposed schemes is a direct consequence of the fact that for random codes a large amount of information is necessary to
Manuscript received August 23, 2001; revised January 30, 2004. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0208597 and by Seagate Technology. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, September 2001.
B. Vasic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
O. Milenkovic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder CO 80303 USA.
Communicated by R. Urbanke, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.828066

specify positions of the nonzero elements in a parity-check matrix. In this paper, we introduce well-structured LDPC codes, a concept opposed to the prevalent practice of using random-like code constructions, with the exception of the results by Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [12], [13], Tanner, Sridhara, and Fuja [14], Rosenthal and Vontobel [15], and Johnson and Weller [16]. The parity-check matrices of our codes are completely determined by a small set of parameters, and can lend themselves to very low complexity implementations.

Although bipartite graphs are quite useful for visualizing

message passing, they are not very convenient for code de-

sign. Several constructions presented in this paper are purely

combinatorial and based on balanced incomplete block designs

(BIBDs) [17], extensively studied in connection with a large

number of problems in applied mathematics and communica-

tion theory [18]. More specifically, our codes are constructed

from the incidence matrix of

BIBDs [19]–[21],

where corresponds to the number of parity bits, and

corresponds to the column weight of the regular parity-check

matrix. The bipartite graphs of codes based on BIBDs have

girth six, which is acceptable in high speed–low complexity

applications where one cannot afford more than just a few

iterations (up to five); additionally, BIBD-based codes can be

designed to have very high rate (

) and relatively short

length (less than 5000 bits). High rates are necessary to keep

down the equalization loss (an important issue in recording

channels), while short block lengths are required to maintain

compatibility with existing data formats and to provide for a

simpler system architecture [22]–[24].

In this paper we present three general code construction tech-

niques. The first is based on difference families and the addi-

tive group of integers , and it makes use of the Bose [25],

[26], Netto [27], and Buratti [28] difference families, leading to

BIBDs for which

, where is a power of a prime.

This family of codes gives the best tradeoff between code rate

and code length. Unfortunately, there are not very many high-

rate, short-length codes in this class, especially for large values

of . We also introduce the notion of -fold cycle-invariant dif-

ference sets over (with

), and construct LDPC codes

by using circulant permutation matrices determined by such dif-

ference sets. Codes constructed by using this new class of dif-

ference sets have both minimum distance and girth at least six,

and exhibit excellent performance under iterative decoding. The

third code construction, based on affine -configurations (in-

teger lattices) is conceptually simple and produces a large family

of codes, at the expense of the code rate. The number of parity

bits of these codes is equal to , where is a prime and the

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

1157

blocks are defined as lines of different slopes connecting points

of a integer lattice and the number of blocks is equal to .

Designs and codes are very closely connected combinato-

rial entities, since one can be used to construct the other. For

example, codewords of fixed weight in many codes, including

the Golay code and the class of quadratic residue codes, sup-

port designs (see, for example, [29] and [30]). On the other

hand, the incidence matrix of a design defines a nonlinear code

if the rows of the matrix are viewed as codewords [31]. De-

signs have also been successfully used for constructing LDPC

codes. A construction method for LDPC codes, based on Eu-

clidean and projective geometries (subclasses of BIBDs) was

recently proposed by Kou et al. [12], [13] (the last section of

[13] mentions block designs, but the authors did not developed

the idea in detail). Two other approaches for designing struc-

tured LDPC codes are a method based on using subgroups of the

multiplicative group of a prime field [14] and a method based

on Ramanujan graphs [15]. Recently, Johnson and Weller [16],

as well as Vasic [32], presented almost identical approaches to

the design of LDPC codes using combinatorial designs. The

ideas in [32] and [33] were further developed in the series of pa-

pers [34]–[37]. MacKay and Davey [38] also used Steiner sys-

tems (a subclass of BIBDs) to construct Gallager codes. The ap-

proach presented in this paper differs from the aforementioned

approaches in the sense that it is both conceptually simpler, and

as will be shown, gives much simpler construction algorithms.

The encoding complexity of our BIBD codes is extremely low

and is basically determined by the size of a cyclic difference

family upon which a block design is based, or by the “ver-

tical” dimension of the lattice in the case of lattice construction.

We will also give the bounds on the minimum distance of the

BIBD codes. Bounds on the minimal distance of regular Gal-

lager codes with column weight three were first discussed by

MacKay in [4]. Here, we present tighter bounds for this case, as

well as new bounds for the case . Our bounds are derived

using simple combinatorial arguments, and are solely a function

of the parity-check matrix column weight. Tanner’s bounds on

the minimum distance based on the eigenvalues of the product

of the adjacency matrix of the code graph and its transpose [39]

can be shown to be trivial for the codes presented in this paper.

The outline of the paper is as follows. Section II introduces

BIBDs and describes their relation to bipartite graphs and

parity-check matrices of regular Gallager codes. Section III

describes a code-design method involving

sys-

tems (Steiner triple systems), derived from cyclic difference

families, and presents bounds on the minimum distance of the

codes, derived by using the concept of a Pasch configuration.

Section IV presents three constructions of cyclic difference

families for

, , and , and gives a list of known infinite

families. Section V contains the description of several new

construction techniques for designs that can be used to derive

high-rate LDPC codes. Additionally, this section includes

the description of a code construction based on circulant

permutation matrices and a novel class of combinatorial objects

termed cycle-invariant difference sets (CIDSs). The description

of another novel BIBD construction based on integer lattices

is given in Section VI, while Section VII contains the results

of computer simulations. Concluding remarks are presented in Section VIII.

II. BALANCED INCOMPLETE BLOCK DESIGNS AND THEIR EQUIVALENCE WITH BIPARTITE GRAPHS

In this section, we introduce the definitions and the notation

used throughout the paper. A BIBD with parameters

is

an ordered pair ( ), where is a -element set and is a

collection of -subsets1 of , called blocks, such that every el-

ement of is contained in exactly blocks and every -subset

of is contained in exactly blocks. Notice that

, so

that the parameter is uniquely determined by the remaining pa-

rameters of the design. A design for which every block contains

the same number of points, and every point is contained in

the same number of blocks is called a tactical configuration.

Hence, BIBDs are tactical configurations. The notation BIBD

will henceforth be used to specify a BIBD on points,

with block size , and index . A BIBD with block size

is

called a Steiner triple system (henceforth, STS). A BIBD is re-

solvable if there exists a partition of its block set into parallel

classes, each of which partitions the set . Resolvable STS with

index

are called Kirkman systems [40]. These combina-

torial objects have been intensively studied in the combinato-

rial literature, and some construction methods for them are de-

scribed in [19], [20], [41]. Besides resolvable STSs, we will also

use –configurations for LDPC code design. A –configuration

is an incidence structure of points and blocks such that each

block contains points, each point is incident with blocks, and

two different points are contained in at most blocks.

Definition 2.1: The point-block incidence matrix of a

design is a

matrix

, in which

if the

th element of occurs in the th block of , and

otherwise. The block-point matrix is the transpose of the

point-block incidence matrix.

Example 2.1: The collection

of blocks

,

,

,

,

,

, and

is a BIBD

system or an STS with

and . The point-block incidence matrix is of the form

If

, and hence

, the BIBD is symmetric, and is for

equivalent to a finite projective plane [42].

If one thinks of points as parity-check equations and of blocks as bits of a linear block code, then defines a parity-check matrix of an LDPC code [2]. The column weight of is ,

1The standard notation for the subset size is k, but we will use c instead; in this way, we will avoid the subset size being confused with the dimension of the code, typically denoted by k.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1158

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

the row weight is , and the code rate is

,

where the rank is evaluated over the field GF . Since the rank

of is usually quite hard to determine, one can bound the rate

of an LDPC code based on a

design as follows:

(1)

It should be noticed that the bound given by (1) is generally loose. For example, for the case of codes constructed from projective planes, the bound is trivially equal to zero, while the actual rate of the codes is quite high (see, e.g., [12], [13]). Therefore, for a given designed code rate, many BIBD codes will have a larger dimension than predicted by (1).
Remark 2.1: A more precise characterization of the rank (and “ -rank”) of the incidence matrix of -designs is given by Hamada [43].

Fig. 1. The bipartite graph representation of the Steiner (7; 3; 1) system.
to the constraint that every -element subset of is contained in as few blocks as possible. On the other hand, check nodes should not have too large a degree in order to allow for efficient iterative decoding. These two requirements are contradictory, and the tradeoff is especially difficult when one is interested in constructing codes with short length and high rate.

If every -element subset of is contained in exactly

blocks, the underlying design is known as a -design. In this

paper, we will restrict our attention to -designs only; more

specifically, to -designs with index

. We will henceforth

refer to them just as BIBDs. The constraint

implies that

no more than one block contains the same pair of points, or

equivalently, that no pair of columns of the parity-check matrix

contains two ones at the same positions.

From the lower bound on the code length for a given code

rate for codes based on the BIBD

systems one can

see that if the required code rate is higher than (which is

typically the rate of interest in recording and optical communi-

cations channels), it is impossible to construct codes shorter than

approximately 500 bits. Issues regarding the existence and the

number of BIBD families for a given set of parameters are ad-

dressed in Section V. The construction of maximum-rate BIBD

codes with

is trivial and reduces to finding , the com-

plete graph [42].

To visualize the decoding algorithm for LDPC codes, the

parity-check matrix is represented as a bipartite graph with two

types of vertices [8]–[10]. The first subset of vertices is

comprised of code bits, and the second subset of vertices is com-

prised of parity-check equations . An edge between a bit and

an equation exists if the bit is involved in the check. Translated to

the terminology of block designs, the two sets of vertices corre-

spond to and , respectively, and an edge between

and

exists if and only if

. Hence, the parity-check

matrix of the LDPC code is the block-point incidence matrix

.

Remark 2.2: The constraint

imposed on BIBDs im-

plies that there are no cycles of length four in the bipartite graph

of the code.

III. CODE DESIGN BASED ON DIFFERENCE FAMILIES

As pointed out in Section III, BIBDs offer a combinatorial tool for designing codes without short cycles. In this section, we present several simple construction of STSs using difference families of Abelian groups.

Definition 3.1: Let be a finite additive Abelian group of

order . Then -element subsets of ,

,

, form a

difference family (henceforth, DF)

if every nonzero element of can be represented in exactly

ways as a difference of two elements within the same member

of the family. In other words, every nonzero element of oc-

curs times among the differences

,

,

. The sets are called base blocks. If is iso-

morphic to , the additive group of integers modulo , then the

corresponding

DF is called a cyclic difference family

(henceforth, CDF).

Example 3.1: The block

is a base block of

a

CDF. To illustrate this, we create an array

, of differences

Example 2.2: The bipartite graph representation of the

Steiner

system whose incidence matrix is given in

Example 2.1 is shown in Fig. 1.

In order to have good error-control characteristics, it is desirable to have each bit “checked” by as many equations as possible, but due to the iterative character of the decoding algorithm it is also important that the bipartite graph does not contain short cycles. In other words, the girth of the graph (i.e., the length of the shortest cycle) must be large. The girth constraint is related

As can be seen, each nonzero element of occurs exactly once in .

Example 3.2: The blocks

and

are the base block of a

CDF based on the group

, since the nonzero elements of the difference arrays

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING
TABLE I THE ORBITS OF BASE BLOCKS f0; 1; 4g AND f0; 2; 7g IN A (13; 3; 1) BIBD

1159

formed according to (

and

),

are all different.

Definition 3.2: If is a group that acts on a set , then the

set

,

, is called the orbit of . For the

case that is a cyclic group of order and

, where

is the set of all base blocks of a CDF, a BIBD can be defined as

the union of the orbits of . If the number of base blocks is ,

the number of blocks in a BIBD is

.

Generally, given a

CDF with base blocks

,

, the point-block inci-

dence matrix of the BIBD can be written in the form

(2)

where each submatrix is of dimension . The orbits of the base block are represented by the positions of nonzero elements in the submatrix .

Example 3.3: The blocks

and

are the base block of a

CDF of the group

orbits of and are given in Table I.

The parity-check matrix corresponding to the

in Table I is given by

. The BIBD

the code. Hence, the self-orthogonal codes of Townsend and Weldon represent a special class of LDPC codes.

The codes based on are of special interest because they

are conceptually very simple and have a structure that can be

easily implemented in hardware. Notice also that for a given

constraint

the CDF-based construction maximizes the

code rate (see (1)), because for a given the number of blocks

is maximized. The code rate is independent from the choice of

the representation of the underlying group as long as the base

blocks belong to a CDF. Other choices for the groups may lead

to similar or better codes, but they are not considered in this

paper.

The rest of this section is devoted to establishing bounds on

the minimum distance

of BIBD-based codes constructed

from CDFs. The minimum distance determines code per-

formances under maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding at high

signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs), the region where most of the prac-

tical systems typically operate. Additionally, small minimum

distance may result in undesirable high error-floors. Bounds for

of Gallager codes with column weight

were first de-

rived in [38]. Another, more general technique for establishing

a lower bound for is due to Tanner [39]. It pertains to an

arbitrary linear code with parity-check matrix , represented

by a bipartite graph, and is based on combinatorial optimiza-

tion. The calculation of the bound involves finding the second

largest eigenvalue of the matrix

. For the codes based on

CDF, these eigenvalues can be found in closed form, but they

result in trivial bounds (see Lemma 3.1). Here, we present tight

bounds for

and also establish bounds for

. These

combinatorial bounds are derived using simple counting argu-

ments, and are solely function on the column weight of .

and contains only columns of weight three. The CDF codes described above have a quasi-cyclic structure similar in form to the self-orthogonal quasi-cyclic structure of Townsend and Weldon’s [44] codes and Weldon’s difference set codes [45]. Each orbit of a base block in the design corresponds to one circulant submatrix in the quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix of

Lemma 3.1: Let be a parity-check matrix of the form

given by (2). Then the largest eigenvalue of

is equal to

, while all the remaining eigenvalues are equal

to

. In the last expression, denotes the number of

times each point occurs in different blocks belonging to a given

, i.e.,

for

,

.

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix A.

Based on Lemma 3.1, one can use Tanner’s lower bounds [39] to find bounds on the minimum distance of the CDF codes. Tanner’s bounds are expressed in terms of the second largest

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1160

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

eigenvalue of are of the form

(see also [61]), and for the case of interest

configuration can always be visualized by creating a

array of

points

, as shown

at the bottom of the page. It is easy to see that no pair of points

occurs more than once in the same row. Hence, the rows of

represent blocks of a

configuration.

The first bound is trivial for

, i.e., for

. The

second bound is trivial for

, i.e., for

.

A general, nontrivial lower bound on for codes based

on BIBDs with block size can be easily obtained by using

two different arguments. The first one is based on the idea of

majority logic decoding [31]. A code is one-step majority logic

decodable if for every bit there exists a set of parity-check

equations that are orthogonal on that bit. In this context, the or-

thogonality condition imposes the requirement that each of the

check equations include the bit under consideration, and that no

other bit is checked more than once by any of the equations. If a

code is one-step majority decodable, then the minimum distance

of the code is at least

. From the described construction

of the LDPC codes based on BIBDs, it follows that

and

that therefore

. The same result can be obtained

by considering the Tanner graph of the code as follows. Start

by selecting a bit node and assume that its value is one. It has

check nodes at distance one and

bit nodes at distance

two. Since

, the girth of the code graph is at least six, and

therefore all bit nodes at distance two are distinct. However, to

satisfy the parity-check node equations at distance one, at least

of the bit nodes at distance two must have the value one. There-

fore, the minimum weight of a codeword has to be at least .

In order to improve the previously derived lower bound on

, we need to define a generalized Pasch configuration.

Definition 3.3: An

configuration in a D is a

subset of blocks of , whose union is an -element subset

of . A Pasch configuration or a quadrilateral is a

configuration in a STS.

Example 3.4: Consider an STS and a subset of six points, . Then the set of blocks

Example 3.5: A generalized Pasch configuration of a BIBD

with

and

can be represented by the rows of the

matrix shown as follows:

... ...

Lemma 3.2: The rows of define the smallest configura-

tion of a

BIBD in which each point occurs exactly twice.

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix B.

Remark 3.2: The existence of a Pasch configuration in an

STS is directly related to the minimum distance of the derived

LDPC code. If an STS has at least one Pasch configuration, each

point occurs exactly twice in the configuration, and therefore

there exist four linearly dependent columns in . This implies

that

. If the triple system is Pasch-free, then the min-

imum distance of the corresponding LDPC code is equal to six.

For example, the Bose construction to be described in Section V

produces LDPC codes with minimum distance

. The

CDFs following from the first construction by Netto result in

codes that have

, while the ones obtained from the

second construction by Netto result in codes with

(see

Section IV). This result can be extended to arbitrary designs. If

a

CDF and the underlying design contain a generalized

Pasch configuration, then

, and if the underlying

design does not contain a generalized Pasch configuration then

.

Example 3.6: For the example in Table I,

,

, and

forms a Pasch configuration.

Using the definition of a Pasch configuration for

, we

can now define a generalized Pasch configuration as a

configuration of a

BIBD. A generalized Pasch

and each of the points

occurs twice in

this group of blocks. Hence, the minimum distance of the code

constructed from this CDF is

. Furthermore, since the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

1161

TABLE II THE ONLY 2-(15; 3; 1) PASCH-FREE DESIGN

TABLE III SOME SMALL PRIME (v; 3; 1) CYCLIC DIFFERENCE FAMILIES

sum of all rows of the parity-check matrix is the all-one codeword, the corresponding LDPC code is even (i.e., all codewords of the code have even weight). Hence, since no two columns are identical, the minimum distance of the code also satisfies
.

Remark 3.3: Pash-free STSs are extremely rare. In other

words, most known STSs will result in codes with

.

In [19], Colbourn lists 80 nonisomorphic -

designs,

only one of which is Pasch-free (see Table II) (this particular

design is also described in [19]). In their recent work, Ling

et al. [46] present a construction techniques for anti-Pasch

STSs. However, these designs do not necessarily lead to codes

with quasi-cyclic structure. The existing connection between

Pasch configurations in designs and bounds on the minimum

distance calls for investigating the effects of other types

of configurations on and the girth of a bipartite graph. For

example, Beezer [47] defines the girth of a -design through the

concept of Erdös configurations, a generalization of the Pasch

configurations.

On the other hand, one can easily establish the following upper bound for the minimum distance of a code constructed from a CDF BIBD.

Theorem 3.1: For a CDF BIBD code with column weight ,

one has

.

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix C.

IV. CONSTRUCTION OF CDFS BY NETTO AND BURATTI
It is straightforward to construct a BIBD design once the CDF is known. However, finding the CDF is a much more complex problem and it is solved only for certain values of , , and . In this section, we will present several constructions for CDFs. One of the first known constructions due to Bose [25], [26] is described next.
The idea for the construction is based on the use of combinatorial objects known as mixed difference sets. Mixed difference sets are formed by taking elements from multiple copies of the additive group (say, ) of the elements of the design, distinguished by different subscripts [50]. One can show that the sets

where the elements

are taken modulo

, and the

subscripts are taken modulo three, form a DF.

Most constructions of CDFs that followed Bose’s work are

based on the use of finite fields. The following constructions

belong to this category.

A. The First Construction by Netto

This construction is applicable for

and a power of

a prime of the form

[27]. For a power of a

prime, is to be replaced by GF , the Galois field of order

. Let be the elements of the multiplicative group of the field

GF . Let be a primitive element of the field, and hence a

generator of the multiplicative group [48]. Write as

, , and for

, let be the group of th powers

in GF , and let

be a coset of th powers of . Then the

set

defines an STS difference family with

parameters

[27] (see also [49]). The base blocks

are typically given in the form

rather than as

.

Example 4.1: As an illustration, the difference families for some small primes are given in Table III.

An alternative combinatorial method for constructing a CDF

with parameters

, that can also be extended to the

case, was proposed by Rosa in [41]. Furthermore,

in [45], Weldon presents a list of constructions for CDFs with

the same set of parameters as described above, as well as a list

of the resulting codes of rate .

B. The Second Construction by Netto
This construction can be used to create CDFs when the number of points is a power of a prime and [27]. As in the first construction, let be a generator of the multiplicative group of the field GF and let be the group of th powers in GF . Then the set defines base blocks that are also called a Netto triple system. One more design construction technique is known as Netto’s construction. It is not directly based on CDFs, but is strongly related to the previously described constructions.

C. The Third Construction by Netto

Let

, where is a prime of the form

. Let and be two sixth roots of unity in GF . It is

straightforward to verify that

and that

and

, and that neither and are

perfect squares in GF . Define a relation

as follows:

holds if and only if

is a nonzero square in GF .

Then exactly one of the relations is true:

or

. Define

a function

as

, for all pairs

such that

holds. A Netto system [27] obtained by utilizing

the function is an STS with points and blocks

GF ,

, repsectively.

Netto systems are of interest because of the following

property.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1162

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

TABLE IV BASE BLOCKS PARAMETER FOR BURATTI CDF

Theorem 4.1: Netto triple systems for a power of a prime

of the form

and the third Netto triple system

described above are Pasch-free.

Proof: The proofs can be found in [19] (see also [51]).

Consequence: The Netto triple systems described in

Theorem 4.1 achieve the upper bound on minimum distance,

i.e.,

.

Example 4.2: The base blocks of the Netto triple system dif-

ference family for

,

are:

,

,

,

,

,

, and

. The re-

sulting code is quasi-cyclic, has

, length

,

and

.

D. The Construction by Buratti ( and )

Buratti’s method [28] gives CDFs with points and block

size , provided that is a prime of the form

.

The CDF is a set

, where base blocks have

the form

, and denotes a primitive element in

GF . The numbers GF for several different values of

are given in Table IV. Similarly, for

, the CDF is given

by

, where

, and

GF

.

If a difference set family with parameters

exists, it

is possible to construct difference set families with parameters

, where

, and

, by

using the following simple augmentation method due to Col-

bourn and Colbourn [51]: For each block

,

first subtract the smallest element from all elements of the set to

obtain

. Then form the difference sets

with addition performed modulo .

include projective geometries, affine geometries, unitals,

Denniston designs, as well as certain geometric equivalents of

-designs [19]. The known infinite families of BIBDs are listed

in Table V [19], [51]. For designs with a number of points

that is a power of a prime, these families are known as finite

Euclidean and finite projective geometries (for more details the

reader is referred to [51]).

The first class of finite-geometry codes is comprised of codes

with parity-check matrix defined as the point-line incidence ma-

trix of finite geometries, such as the LDPC codes described by

Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [13]. The second class of codes is ob-

tained from algebraic curves in a projective plane. In a projec-

tive plane, an algebraic curve is a collection of points that sat-

isfy a fixed homogeneous algebraic equation of some degree

, i.e.,

. An algebraic curve is irreducible if

is an irreducible polynomial over the ground field

GF . A line meets the curve in at most points. A conic is an

algebraic curve of degree two, or more specifically

A conic is irreducible if

is irreducible over the

ground field GF . For

, an

-arc in PG is a

set of points such that no

points lie on a line. A -arc

in PG is a set of points such that no three points lie on the

same line. A -arc is complete if it is not properly contained in

any

-arc. A line of the plane is said to be a secant, a tan-

gent, or an exterior line with respect to the oval, if the number

of common points of the line with the oval is 2,1, or 0, respec-

tively. For a given value of ,

-arcs of PG odd are

called ovals, and

-arcs of PG even together with

a nucleus point (a point for which every line incident to it is a

tangent of the oval) are called hyperovals.

In PG

, an oval design is the incidence structure with

points comprised from the lines exterior to the oval and blocks

specified by the points not on the oval. A block contains a point

if and only if the corresponding exterior point lies on the exte-

rior line. An oval design is a resolvable

Steiner -system, where

. In the simulation result sec-

tion, we will present the performance of the codes on a hyper-

oval constructed from a nondegenerate conic specified by the

equation

. Similar results were presented in [55].

Unitals or Hermitian arcs are defined as follows. In PG ,

a square, a Hermitian arc is a

-arc. The

arc is constructed from an algebraic curve of order

such

V. OTHER RELATED CONSTRUCTION TECHNIQUES
A. Finite Euclidean and Finite Projective Geometries
The existence and construction of short designs is an active area of research in combinatorial mathematics (the handbook [19] edited by Colbourn and Dinitz is an excellent reference). [19, Table 2.3] gives a summary of known results concerning the existence of short designs. However, very often the construction of these designs is somewhat heuristic or works only for a given block size. In many cases, such constructionsgive a very small set of designs with parameters of practical interests. An important exception is the subclass of BIBDs called infinite families [19]. Infinite families of BIBDS

that

. The arc intersects any line of

the plane at or

points. A unital constructed from an

algebraic curve of order

is a

Steiner system. A code based on this unital is described in terms

of the incidence matrix of the corresponding Steiner system. For

a power of , the rank of the incidence matrix is

, and

for a power of an odd prime, the rank of the incidence matrix

is

. Such designs are treated in great detail

by Assmus and Key and in [56] and in [57].

As it can be seen from Table V, the most known infinite

families of designs do not offer sufficient flexibility in choosing

the code length and column weight, especially for the high-rate

and/or moderate codeword length cases. In this region, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING
0 TABLE V
KNOWN INFINITE FAMILIES OF 2 (v; c; 1) DESIGNS

1163

column weight must be small and one solution is to use a special class of short, cleverly constructed CDF as in [28]. Notice that in [13] different modifications (including code shortening, for example) of Euclidean and projective geometry codes are given so as to get a larger set of code parameters.

B. The Latin Square Construction by Bose [59]

In order to describe this construction method for STSs due

to Bose, we will first define a special class of Latin squares. A

Latin square of order is an

array such that each row

and column contains the symbols in

exactly once.

A Latin square is idempotent if cell

contains symbol ,

, and commutative if cells and contain the

same symbol,

. Let SQ be an idempotent and commu-

tative Latin square of order

, let

and

. Define a collection of triples , so that

contains

• all triples of the form ;
• all triples of the form

, where

where

, and denotes the entry of

the Latin square SQ in row and column .

Then

is an STS of order

. If the Latin square

SQ is chosen in such a way that

, and that

, then the STS resulting from

the Bose construction is Pasch-free. This follows from the fact

that under the given conditions there are no Latin subsquares of

order two in SQ and

cannot hold for distinct

symbols . For more details, see [20].

Example 5.1: Consider the following idempotent, commutative Latin square of order :

This Latin square contains a sub-Latin square of order two, spec-

ified by the coordinates

, containing

the elements

. The four triples

derived by fixing the last coordinate of the first two pairs and choosing the first elements of the first two pairs in each block so as to include the points of the sub-Latin square of order two, form a Pasch configuration.
Closely related to the construction due to Bose described earlier is the Skolem construction [59]. This construction is also based on Latin squares, and it produces STSs of order In this case, the Latin squares of interest are the so-called half-idempotent commutative squares of order . A square of order is half-idempotent if the cells
contain the symbol . For more details about the Skolem construction, the reader is referred to [59].

C. Circulant LDPC Codes With Permutation Blocks: New Constructions

Based on the description of the Bose Latin square construc-

tion, it follows that the parity-check matrix of the corresponding

linear code has a block structure, where each block (except for

the set of blocks in the first column of blocks) is a permutation

matrix. Codes with such a structure are well known and have

been used in many applications. For example, in [39], Tanner

presented a class of codes of this type named Sparse Difference

Codes. The so-called array codes introduced by Blaum, Farrell,

and Tilborg [60], have parity-check matrices that are also com-

posed of powers of permutation matrices, and can be viewed as

LDPC codes [61]. Eleftheriou and Olcer [62] proposed this class

of LDPC codes for application in digital subscriber lines. More

recently, Kim et al. [63] presented a construction of families of

LDPC codes based on permutation matrices that have girth at

least eight.

We will present next a novel construction for a simple

family of LDPC codes using a similar idea. We will define the

parity-check matrix to be a block-circulant (cyclic) matrix

with blocks that are permutation matrices. The structure of

these codes is extremely simple and allows for finding simple

lower bounds for the girth, as well as the minimum distance.

The girth of all the constructed codes can be shown to be at least

six, while the minimum distance of a certain subclass of these

codes is at least six. The rate of these codes can have a large

range of values, and the family of codes produced in this way is

quite large. It is interesting to observe that for these codes it is

also possible to find the eigenvalues of

either in closed

form, or asymptotically [64]. Unfortunately, the bounds on

minimum distance presented by Tanner in [39] can be shown to

be very loose for these codes and are not included in the paper.

Code Description: Let be an

block-circulant

matrix with permutation blocks, i.e., block-circulant with blocks

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

that are different powers of the basic permutation matrix of order , i.e.,
(5.1)

with all possible and values will have the same minimum distance.
In order to construct codes with minimum distance higher than four, the exponents of the permutation matrices have to be chosen with more care.

where

are nonnegative integers and

Definition 5.1: Let be an ordered difference set over ,

and let denote the operator that cyclically shifts a sequence

positions to the right. If for

the ordered sets

are all different from each other (and

from ), and are themselves ordered difference sets, then we say

that is an

-fold cycle invariant difference set over .

is an

circular permutation matrix.

The row weight of the code is , while the column weight is

. The code generated by of the form given by (5.1) has

to be even (i.e., all codewords of the code have to have even

Hamming weight), because the sum of all codewords over one

row-block is the all-one codeword. We will describe next several

construction techniques for the exponent set

that

result in a Tanner graph free of cycles of length four.

Lemma 5.1: Let

,

and

, where

. Then the

LDPC code specified by of the form given by (5.1) has girth

at least six and for

girth at least eight. Furthermore,

no two columns of its parity-check matrix are identical, and

no three columns are linearly dependent. Hence, the minimum

distance of the code is at least four.

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix D.

Example 5.2: Let

,

, and

parity-check matrix is of the form

; then the

It can be easily shown that the generator matrix for this code is of the form

and is also a block-circulant matrix with permutation blocks. This special form of the generator matrix can make the encoding procedure very fast.

Codes described by a parity-check matrix with regular

column weight equal to two are also known as circuit codes

[65]. As pointed out in [66], LDPC codes with column weight

two can outperform LDPC codes with larger column weight in

magnetic recording applications, despite the fact that the min-

imum distance of these codes can increase only logarithmically

with the block length. This is due to two reasons: first, these

codes have girth at least eight; second, in magnetic recoding

applications, LDPC codes are inner codes for Reed–Solomon

(RS) outer codes, and the block-error statistics of LDPC codes

with column weight two is a good match for the RS decoder.

The permutation-matrix codes described above can be easily

shown to have minimum distance

. For our example,

it suffices to observe that columns 2, 14, 25, and 39 are linearly

dependent. Because of the symmetry of the construction, codes

Example 5.3: Consider and the ordered difference set . Then

which is easily seen to be a difference set. Since

is a -fold cycle invariant difference set over . On

the other hand, the difference set

over gives rise

to three different ordered sets, namel,y

, none of which is a differ-

ence set. Hence,

is a -fold cycle invariant difference

set (classical difference set) over .

The requirement for to be a difference set can be relaxed. It

suffices for to be an incomplete difference set, i.e., a set such

that the differences of its elements are all different, but do not

necessarily cover every possible value. From now on we will

refer to incomplete difference sets as difference sets.

One of the first constructions of classical difference sets is

due to Bose [25], [26]. For this construction, the parameters of

the difference family are

, where is an odd prime.

Let be a primitive element in the field GF . Define the

following set of integers:

GF

Clearly, consists of elements. It is also straightforward to

show that is a difference set modulo

, with

.A

similar construction method, which predates the Bose construc-

tion, is due to Singer [58].

We will present next a construction for the new class of com-

binatorial object described in Definition 5.1; the construction

can be viewed as an extension of the result due to Bose.

Theorem 5.1: Let be a primitive element of the finite field GF with an odd prime. Define a set of integers by

GF

Then the set forms a -fold cycle-invariant difference set .
Proof: The proof is given in Appendix E.

Example 5.4: Let

and

. The set

constructed by using the approach by Bose is

clearly a difference set, since its differences modulo are

. But the set is not two-fold cycle invariant,

since

, and for the last set

. On the other hand, the set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

1165

constructed according to Theorem 5.1 with

and primitive

polynomial

, can be easily checked to be a

CIDS of order .

Lemma 5.4: Let ,

, be elements of an -fold

cycle invariant difference set. Then, the LDPC code specified

by of the form given by (3) has girth at least six.

Proof: The proof follows along the same lines as the proof

of Lemma 5.1.

Theorem 5.2: Let ,

, be elements of an -fold

cycle-invariant difference set, with

. Then, the LDPC

code specified by of the form given by (5.1) has minimum

distance at least six.

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix F.

Example 5.5: Consider the two blocks from Example 3.4,

and

, now viewed over rather than .

The first difference set is two-fold cycle-invariant in the general

setting, since

,

and the differences generated by

are

, so that each element in appears at most

once. Hence, an LDPC code specified by the parity-check

matrix

Fig. 2. An example of the rectangular grid for q = 5 and c = 3.

A. Codes on a Rectangular Subset of an Integer Lattice

where the dimension of is eleven, has minimum distance at Consider a rectangular subset of the integer lattice defined

least six and girth at least eight.

by

Similarly, if we take the two blocks in the cyclic difference family as exponents for the permutation matrices of two different rows of blocks, we obtain

Notice that is not any longer block circulant, but the set

generates a set of differ-

ences

such that each element of appears at

most once. Hence, the underlying code has minimum distance

at least six and girth at least eight.

VI. LATTICE CONSTRUCTION OF LDPC CODES
In this section, we address the problem of constructing LDPC codes of large block lengths. As shown in the previous sections, the Buratti-type CDFs and the projective geometry approach offer a quite limited set of parameters and therefore small families of codes. In this section, we give a novel construction of
-configurations, in which every -tuple is contained in at most blocks. The blocks of these -configurations are lines
connecting points of a rectangular integer lattice. The construction problem can be seen as specifying a subset of points and a subset of lines that will result in a set of desired characteristics of the code. In this way, one can trade the code rate and number of blocks for the simplicity of construction and for the flexibility of choosing the design parameters. Also, as will be shown subsequently, -configurations greatly simplify the construction of codes with large girth.

where

is a prime. Let

be a one-to-one

mapping from the set to the point set . An example of such

a mapping is the simple bi-linear map

.

The numbers

are referred to as point labels.

Example 6.1: Fig. 2 depicts a rectangular subset of the in-

teger lattice with

and

.

A set of points is referred to as a line of slope

, starting at the point , if it contains the points

, where

. There are

different classes of parallel lines in this geometry.

Example 6.2: In Example 6.1, the lines of slope are the

triples

and so forth. We assume

that the point labels are periodic in the vertical dimension, and

therefore the line containing the points

also has

slope . Examples of lines with slope two are

and

. Notice that lines of infinite slope are not included in

the -configuration.

Lemma 6.1: The set of point labels of lines with slopes forms the blocks of a -configuration.
Proof: The proof is given in Appendix G.

Remark 6.1: In the lattice -configuration, the block size is

, the number of points is , the number of blocks is

.

Lemma 6.2: A free.

lattice -configuration is Pasch-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix H.

More generally, we have the following result.

Theorem 6.1: A lattice -configuration with

, for

even or

, does not contain a generalized Pasch

configuration.

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix I.

Fig. 3 shows the rate–length characteristics of lattice designs for different line (block) sizes . The solid lines correspond to the designs with maximal number of blocks. As can bee seen, lattice families have a rate loss compared to theoretically optimal designs. However, this loss becomes negligible for larger
and for longer codes. The abundance of lattice designs compared to infinite family BIBDs can be easily observed from Fig. 4. White markers denote codes resulting from the known infinite family BIBDs, while dark markers correspond to LDPC codes constructed using lattice designs.
Remark 6.3: The lattice construction can be extended to nonprime vertical dimensions , provided that the slopes are co-prime to .

Fig. 3. The rate–length characteristics of lattice designs.

Fig. 5 shows the growth of the required code length with

an upper bound on the minimum distance (of the form ) as

parameter.

Example 6.3: Table VI illustrates a -configuration based on

a lattice shown in Fig. 2.

Notice that there are parallel classes of blocks (lines),

each corresponding to a different slope. Denote the first

block (the one incident with the point ) in the class as

. In our example

,

,

,

, and

.

The corresponding parity-check matrix is

Fig. 4. Comparison of finite geometries and lattice design families.

where each submatrix is a circulant permutation matrix.

The power of which determines (i.e., the position of the

bit the first column of ) can be found by using

,

the th element of the first base block of the class of blocks

corresponding to the th slope, and is equal to

.

Notice that in general, the parity-check matrix of a lattice codes can be written in the form

Remark 6.4: Notice a similarity of the structure of the above

parity-check matrix with that obtained in [63], [67]. The codes

denoted by LU

in [63] have a square parity-check matrix,

while our codes have rectangular matrices of parity checks. This

is not surprising because it was shown in [63] that LU and

LU are equivalent to Euclidean geometry code [13], while

a square lattice design (which includes the lines with infinity

slope) is equivalent to the Euclidean plane.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING
TABLE VI AN EXAMPLE OF A LATTICE 1-CONFIGURATION

1167

Fig. 5. The rate–length curve for lattice designs with the minimum distance as a parameter.
Remark 6.5: The ensemble of LDPC codes described in terms of parity-check matrices constructed from random permutation matrices has a well-defined asymptotic distance distribution. Litsyn and Shevelev [68] showed that such an ensemble (referred to as “Ensemble A”) has superior distance distribution compared to other ensembles they considered in [68], in the context of ML decoding.
B. Integer Lattice Codes With Large Girth
In this subsection, we will show that a Tanner graph with high girth can be obtained by a judicious selection of sets of parallellines included in an integer lattice -configuration. The resulting parity-check matrix is also in the form of a block matrix with permutation matrices. We will only discuss codes of girth eight, although a generalization for higher girths is possible.
A lower bound on the minimum distance of LDPC codes with girth and column weight is given by the following formula due to Tanner [10]:
odd

SL GF , and the projective general group PGL GF .

Kim et al. [63] gave another explicit construction of high-girth

LDPC codes using Lazebnik and Ustimenko’s [67] method for

developing regular graphs. The construction of designs with

high girths appears to be a very difficult problem in general

[47]. However, the designs based on rectangular integer lattices

allow a simple algorithm for finding a girth-eight subdesign.

Moreover, for , there is an interesting connection between

codes of girth eight and “arithmetically constrained” sequences

defined by Odlyzko and Stanley [69].

Denote by a resolvability class corresponding to the set

of lines of slope , and by

a set of blocks of a subdesign

composed of resolvability classes corresponding to the slopes

from the set , i.e.,

. We are interested in

the following problem: find a set of slopes with maximum

possible cardinality such that

specifies a set of blocks

that result in a design with girth eight.

Example 6.4: For a subset of an integer lattice shown in

Fig. 2 (with , ), it can be shown by inspection that the

maximal set of slopes leading to a code of girth eight is of car-

dinality two (e.g.,

). The resulting parity-check

matrix is obtained by deleting columns of a parity-check matrix

of the original code corresponding to lines with slopes

,

and is of the form

where is of order . Due to the small size of the set , this matrix is useless for coding purposes and represents only an illustration of the key idea.
Definition 6.1: Let be the set of all sequences of integers that do not contain a -term arithmetic progression. We will refer to as the “earliest” sequence in if lexicographically precedes all other sequences in . is of the form
, and is cataloged in [70] under number M2353.
The sequence can be generated by the recurrence relation: , and it has
the property that it contains all numbers that only have the digits and in their ternary expansion [69].

even.
Although it still remains unclear whether increasing the girth of a bipartite graph is the best way to improve code performance under message-passing decoding, our simulation results indicate that it is a valid approach, especially when the constraint imposed on a number of iterations is not strict.
Recently, Rosenthal and Vontobel [15] constructed some short codes and large girth, using ideas by Margulis [53], including -regular Caley graphs of the special linear group

Theorem 6.2: For an arbitrary integer and for

, the

set of slopes resulting in codes with girth eight is of the

form

, i.e., it is a subsequence of

whose elements are less than or equal to .

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix J.

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we present the bit-error rate (BER) performance of various regular LDPC codes that were constructed ei-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Fig. 6. Performance of LDPC codes on combinatorial designs under message-passing decoding.

ther combinatorially or randomly. The LDPC codes were de-

coded iteratively by using the standard message-passing algo-

rithm. More details on the message-passing algorithm for bipar-

tite graphs can be found in [6], [7], [72]. The BER performance

of an LDPC code was estimated by running Monte Carlo sim-

ulations for at least 25 000 codewords and 15 message-passing

iterations. Hence, we were able to obtain BER as low as .

Figs. 6–9 show the BER performance of LDPC codes,

constructed using different combinatorial methods presented

in this paper, and random regular LDPC codes obtained from

Mackay’s online resource [73]. The rate of these codes vary

from to , and all the BER curves shown in Figs. 6–9

have been adjusted for their respective rate loss (i.e., the SNR

is determined from

). A legend in each figure gives

the following information in the respective order: method used

to construct the code, and a quadruple

.

As can be observed from Fig. 6(a), codes from difference

families, due to Bose and Netto, exhibit an error floor at approx-

imately 5.75 dB, which is expected behavior. Fig. 6(b) shows

the BER performance comparison between difference family

codes and randomly constructed (regular and irregular) codes

of similar length and rate. At BER of , a loss of 0.5 and

0.9 dB with respect to regular/irregular code, respectively, can

be seen. In Fig. 7, a relatively short code from a projective plane

exhibits a very good BER performance. In Fig. 8, we consider

rate- codes on integer lattices for the following parameters:

1)

,

; 2)

,

; 3)

,

;

4)

, ; 5)

, . In addition, we also con-

sider rate– CDF codes constructed using Buratti’s method

for

and

, and Wilson’s method

for

. The BER curves of an integer lattice

code and a MacKay code [73] of similar parameters is given in

Fig. 8(b), demonstrating that short integer lattice codes have per-

formance comparable to random-like MacKay codes. The BER

performance of a girth-eight LDPC code with column weight

Fig. 7. Performance of LDPC codes on finite geometries.

four is the most impressive among other curves shown in Fig. 9.

This code exhibits a sharp fall and its BER reaches at ap-

proximately 3.25 dB. A BER curve of a regular MacKay code

in Fig. 9(a) is given as a reference point without any attempt to

shorten it to match the length and rate of the given structured

code. The comparison of girth-eight and random codes of the

same lengths and rates is shown in Fig. 9(b). Random codes are

constructed by Neil’s method [74], and are free of cycle-four.

It can be seen from Fig. 9(a) that girth-eight codes have almost

identical performance with randomly constructed codes.

It is important to note that in simulations, that were run to

estimate the BER performance of the

girth-eight

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

1169

Fig. 8. Performance of integer lattice codes.

Fig. 9. Performance of girth-eight integer lattice codes.

code, 100 message-passing iterations were performed before

making the hard decision on a received word. An error floor

was observed if only 15 iterations were performed in the above

simulations.

As already described in the Introduction, due to stringent

delay constraints some applications do not allow for more than

several (5 to 6) iterations of message passing. Fig. 10 shows the

BER performance of two girth-eight integer lattice codes after

iterations,

. It can be seen that a significant gain with

respect to the uncoded system is achieved only after five itera-

tions, but that with another 10 iterations a performance gain of

approximately 1 dB can be achieved.

Finally, the performance of several codes based on the con-

structions presented in Section V is shown in Figs. 11 and 12.

Fig. 11 shows the performance of the codes described in

Lemma 1, while Fig. 12(a) plots the performance of block-cir-

culant codes with exponents taken from the Bose difference set

over GF ,

, with

, i.e.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Fig. 10. Performance of girth-eight integer lattice codes with respect to the Fig. 11. Performance of codes based on block-circulant parity-check matrices. number of iterations i.

Fig. 12(b) shows the performance of CIDS-based codes, with the construction presented in Theorem 5.1 and .
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced new combinatorial constructions for a class of high-rate iteratively decodable codes based on
BIBD and -configurations. The resulting codes have girth at least six. We also constructed balanced incomplete block designs using Netto and Buratti cyclic difference families, as well as novel affine geometry lattice configurations. We derived tight bounds on a minimum distance of BIBD codes using the concept of a Pasch configuration.
APPENDIX A PROOF OF LEMMA 3.1
Observe first that

Based on a well-known result, which states that for any point-block incidence matrix
[20], it follows that for the STS of interest

of a design

where and are the identity matrix and the all-one matrix of

order . The determinant of

can be easily found to be

of the form

This proves the claimed result.

Q.E.D.

APPENDIX B PROOF OF LEMMA 3.2

Let us start from an empty array and create the rows of

by minimizing the number of used points. The first row can

always be filled with points from the set

. Put

in the firstposition of the second row (now occurs twice) and

start filling out the rest of the second row. Since the first element

in the row is , we cannot use any other point from the first row.

Therefore, we must use points from the set

.

These points completely describe the second row.

We can put any number as the first element in the third row. If

we choose this entry to be , then since already occurs twice,

another row containing must be added to keep the number of

occurrences of even. Therefore, we chose not to make the first

entry , but rather a different number from the first row. Let this

one be . Now is the first entry in the third row and occurs

twice in the array. We continue filling the rest of the third row.

The points from the first row must be excluded, since is also

in the first row. The points from the second row, except for ,

are all allowed so let us take the first available number .

The rest of the third row ( positions) must be now filled

with (new) numbers that are not in the second row. For these,

we choose

. Suppose we continuine

this process until we arrive at the

th row. Every point in the

set

occurs twice in the first

rows of , and

the point occurs exactly once (in the first row). Therefore,

we have to continue appending rows so as to achieve an even

number of occurrences of the point . The above procedure

continues until rows are formed. However, must have

rows because the point and the points in the last column of

occur only once in the array. Since, at this stage, there are

exactly points that do not occur twice, we can take the points

from the last column of and append them as the

th row

of , which completes the procedure. The number of “new”

(nonrepeated) points used to fill the th row is

. The

total number of points used is

which is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

1171

Fig. 12. Performance of CIDS-based codes.

equal to

, the number of points in a generalized Pasch

configuration.

Q.E.D.

APPENDIX C PROOF OF THEOREM 3.1

Take any distinct and and consider two base blocks and

and the corresponding blocks obtained by adding

to

and . Notice that by adding

to elements of ,

the resulting blocks remain in the orbit of . Create a

array

, where

. (Notice that since

and are base blocks, all the elements in are different.)

The columns of contain blocks

, and the rows of

contain blocks

. Each element of

occurs exactly once in

and once in

, and,

therefore, exactly twice in the set

.

Q.E.D.

Example C.1: For the example in Table I, the array is

that belong to the same row must necessarily belong to different permutation matrices, and the same is true for ones that belong to the same column. Hence, the distance between two ones in the same column is of the form

(D1)

where

, , are the exponents of the permutation ma-

trices containing these two ones, respectively, and where the

subscripts are taken modulo .

Next, consider the component-wise difference of the ordered

exponents

of the first block-row of permutation

matrices and the ordered exponents

of the th block-row

Then all ’s are different and negative up to subscript number , and all different and positive for subscripts larger than . Next, define the following two variables:

and is given in Example 3.3.

Based on (D1), it follows that the distance between two ones in

the same column for the first

block-columns is at least

APPENDIX D PROOF OF LEMMA 5.1

Since

In order to show that the girth of the code is at least six, we have to show that there are no “rectangles” in the matrix , i.e., four ones that lie at the corners of a rectangle. Without loss of generality, consider two ones in the first row of . Two ones

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

it follows that no two ones in the same column can be at the same

distance as any other pair of ones within a different column.

It can be easily shown that the codes with

have girth

at least eight. This follows from the observation that in order to

have a cycle of length six in the Tanner graph, there should exist

three columns containing pairs of ones described by their corre-

sponding row positions

. This clearly

implies that one pair of ones must belong to the same column

of one permutation matrix, which is impossible. The result re-

garding the minimum distance of the codes is a straightforward

consequence of the previous argument.

Q.E.D.

One can distinguish several possible cases for which the two sets above are equivalent.

•

, which implies

contradicting the starting assumption.

•

, contradicting the starting

assumption.

•

or

. In the

first case, one arrives at the conclusion that

,

and in the second case one arrives at

. Both of

these results contradict the starting assumption.

Therefore, is a -fold cycle invariant difference set. Q.E.D.

APPENDIX E PROOF OF THEOREM 5.1
The proof is an extension of the Bose construction [50] for difference sets.
Take an arbitrary ordering of the set and define Consider the following two polynomials:

(E1)

where

and the indexes in

are taken modulo

.

Assume there exist indexes

such that

and

. The

polynomial

has coefficients in GF , degree at most one,

and as its root. Since is a primitive element of GF ,

no nonzero polynomial over GF of degree smaller than four

can have as a root. Hence, it follows that

. There-

fore,

which implies

and, consequently,

. This contradicts the starting

assumption.

Based on the previous argument, it follows that the elements

of form a difference set modulo

.

Assume next that that the indexes

are as described

before and

(E2)

where the indexes are taken modulo

. If

,

then the polynomial

has coefficients from GF , degree

at most three and as one of its root. Since is a primitive

element of GF it follows that

. Hence,

and consequently

APPENDIX F PROOF OF THEOREM 5.2

The codes described by (5.1) are even, and it is straightfor-

ward to see that no two columns in the parity-check matrix are

identical. Hence, it suffices to show that for no two block-rows

of permutation matrices one can find four columns that add up to

the zero-vector. If the number of permutation blocks per row is

less than or equal to three, the result follows trivially. Hence, let

, and assume that, on the contrary, there exist four columns,

that sum up to zero. Furthermore, assume that the row indexes of

the four ones in the first block-row and within the given columns

are

.

It is clear from the construction that either

• all four columns belong to different permutation matrices; • two columns belong to the same permutation matrix and
two belong to two different permutation matrices; or • two columns belong to one, while the other two belong to
another permutation matrix.

An illustrative example for the first case of options is shown at the bottom of the page. Consider the first case, and assume without loss of generality that

(F1)

Based on the cyclic construction of the parity-check matrix, the positions of the ones in the second block-row of permutation matrices and within the same columns are given by
, where

(F2)

for some nonnegative integers

and for different

(i.e., different elements from one of the cyclic

shifts of the -fold cycle invariant difference set). In order for

the columns to add up to the zero vector, one has to have

or equivalently

which, based on (F1), implies that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

1173

But this is impossible, since the integers

them-

selves belong to a difference set, and hence no two differences

can be the same. For the second case and for the given row po-

sitions in the first set of blocks, the row-indexes of ones in the

second block-row have to be of the form

. Hence, if

then the following equation

has to be satisfied as well:

As in the previous case, this result contradicts the starting as-

sumption that

belong to a difference set. The last

case can be treated in a similar manner as the second case,

with

, implying

. This again contradicts the assumption that

belong to a difference set.

Notice that since the argument presented above holds for any

choice of two rows of blocks, it follows that the minimum dis-

tance will be at least six for any number

of row blocks.

Q.E.D.

APPENDIX G PROOF OF LEMMA 6.1

Since is a prime, for each lattice point

there exists

exactly one line with slope that passes through the point .

For each pair of lattice points, there is no more than one line that

passes through both points. Therefore, the set of lines with

slopes is a -configuration.

Q.E.D.

APPENDIX H PROOF OF LEMMA 6.2

Consider a periodically extended lattice. We will show that

it is not possible to construct a quadilateral (with no sides with

infinite slope allowed), in which each point lies on two lines.

Fig. 5 shows one such quadilateral. Without loss of generality,

we can assume that the starting point of two of the lines is

. The slopes of four lines in Fig. 13 are: , ,

, and

. The points

and

are all

different and each of them lies on two lines. The remaining four

points will be on two lines if at lest one of the following three

conditions holds:

1)

and

2)

and

3)

and

with all additions performed modulo . Case 1) implies

which means that the points

and

are

identical, a contradiction. For the remaining two cases, would

have to be , which would imply that the two leftmost points are

identical, again leading to a contradiction.

Q.E.D.

Fig. 13. Quadrilateral in a lattice finite geometry.

In a generalized Pasch configuration, each point has to occur

exactly twice. This implies that for

, the set of points

has to be such that for each ,

for

exactly one . This is clearly impossible for even values of

. On the other hand, assume that is odd, and that the set of

blocks forming a generalized Pasch configuration is again spec-

ified by the ordered pairs

. By rotating

the set of lines in the generalized Pasch configuration appropri-

ately, one of the lines, say

, can be taken to correspond to

the line . Since the point has to belong to exactly two

lines, there must exist another line in the configuration specified

by , . Based on the previous discussion regarding the

points with

, it follows that without loss of generality, the

blocks can be divided into

pairs as follows:

Here,

, for

for any

. We will show next that that all lines of the configuration,

except for the one defined by , have to intersect the line

(note that there are

such lines). Since is prime,

for each pair

there exists a unique value of such that

. This implies that all lines differing

from the line

intersect the line , and all the points on

this line have to belong to exactly two lines in the configuration.

But this is impossible, since is by assumption equal to the odd

prime .

Q.E.D.

Note that for

the parity-check matrix (5.1) is of di-

mension

and hence of no practical importance for code

description.

APPENDIX I PROOF OF THEOREM 6.1

Let be an even integer. Assume that there exists a general-

ized Pasch configuration in the set of lines determined by the

set of ordered pairs

, where and

denote the starting point and the slope of the line, respectively.

APPENDIX J PROOF OF THEOREM 6.2
In order to construct a -configuration with girth eight, one has to eliminate those lines from the lattice that lead to the formation of triangles. Before proceeding with the proof of the the-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

orem, we need to briefly describe the relationship that exists between the set of slopes and triangles.
Consider a set of three different slopes: , , and . Without loss of generality, the equations for lines with the given slopes are of the form

where

. From this point on, we will assume

that all equalities are evaluated modulo . If a set of three slopes

determines a triangle, then the above set of equations has at least

one solution and vice versa. In other words, a set of three slopes

determines a triangle if and only if there exist three ordered pairs

,

, and

such that

or equivalently

(J1)

The last condition is identical to the condition for three slopes

to form a triangle in the Euclidean space, except that for the

case of interest, the equality is modulo . It can also be shown

that starting from (J1) one can prove that the slopes , , and

define a triangle. The proof is straightforward and therefore

omitted.

Observe that if three lines of slopes , , and form a

triangle, then the same is true of the lines with slopes

,

, and

, for any integer .

Lemma J.3: A set of three lines with slopes , , and

forms a triangle if and only if there are two nonzero integers

and

, such that

and

Proof: An equivalent form of the condition given by (J1) is

and opposite signs, or they both are equal to either or . Assume that for some nonzero integer , the set forms a three-term arithmetic progression, say

Then the left-hand side of (J2) reduces to

(J3)

If this value were to be zero, then either both and would

have to be zero, or and would have to be equal to and

, respectively. On the other hand, if the left-hand side of (J2)

is equal to zero, then taking and with value or gives

, which implies

or, equiv-

alently, that

form a three-term arithmetic progression.

To complete the proof we will show next that elements in

cannot be larger than . If not stated otherwise, all numbers

will be described in terms of their ternary expansion.

Case 1: Let the first (i.e., most significant) digit of the expan-

sion of be . Assume that there exists a slope in that

exceeds . Then the number

has zero as its

most significant digit. We can now subtract from a number in

smaller than , say , whose ternary expansion consists

only of ’s and ’s. In this way, we obtain a number that has

only ’s and ’s in its expansion. This number can be viewed as

the product of two and a number that has only ’s and ’s as its

digits. This now would imply the existence of a triangle, hence

excluding the possibility for to be in (this construction

corresponds to

).

Case 2: Let the first (i.e., most significant) digit of be .

Assume that there exists a slope in that exceeds .

Then the number

has zero as its most significant

digit. Therefore, can be written as the sum of two numbers

smaller than whose ternary expansion consists only of ’s

and ’s. Those two numbers specify and , thus eliminating

from inclusion in (this construction corresponds to

).

This completes the proof of the Theorem.

Q.E.D.

According to this expression, neither nor can be equal to

zero; if either or were zero, one would have

, which is impossible by construc-

tion. For the same reason, one must have

.

Q.E.D.

Since the -coordinates of the intersection points must be

larger then or equal to zero and smaller than , , and also

satisfy the following condition:

.

We are now ready to prove Theorem 6.1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Alexander Kuznjecov and Victor Kolesnik for their comments and suggestions, and Sundararajan Sankaranarayanan for running the simulations. The anonymous referees helped to significantly improve the presentation of the results, and the authors wish to thank them for their thorough reviews and helpful comments.
REFERENCES

Proof: According to the previous discussion, the criterion for including a slope in is that, for all and already in , it holds that

or equivalently

(J2)

for all nonzero and such that

,

,

and

,

. According to the

previous discussion, for the case

, and have to be

in

, and they either have different absolute values

[1] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding, Proc. 5th IMA Conf. (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), C. Boyd, Ed. Berlin, Germany: SpringerVerlag, 1995, vol. 1025, pp. 110–111.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., pp. 372–423, 1948.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–638, Feb. 2001.
[6] B. J. Frey, Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digital Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC AND MILENKOVIC: COMBINATORIAL CONSTRUCTIONS OF LDPC CODES FOR ITERATIVE DECODING

1175

[7] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[8] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[9] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s ‘Belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[10] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[11] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Eurp. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–525, Sept./Oct. 1995.
[12] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Construction of low-density paritycheck codes: A geometric approach,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 4–7, 2000.
[13] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[14] R. M. Tanner, D. Srkdhara, and T. Fuja. A class of group-structured LDPC codes. [Online] Available: http://www.cse.ucsc.edu/~tanner/ pubs.html
[15] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Construction of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 2001, p. 4.
[16] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Regular low-density parity-check codes from combinatorial designs,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, Sept. 2–7, 2001, pp. 90–92.
[17] T. Beth, D. Jungnickel, and H. Lenz, Design Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986.
[18] C. J. Colbourn, J. H. Dinitz, and D. R. Stinson, “Applications of combinatorial designs to communications, cryptography, and networking,” in Surveys in Combinatorics 1999. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, pp. 37–100.
[19] C. J. Colbourn and J. H. Dinitz, Eds., The Handbook of Combinatorial Designs. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996.
[20] C. J. Colbourn and A. Rosa, Triple Systems. London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1999.
[21] , Steiner Systems. London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press , 1999, Oxford Mathematical Monographs.
[22] B. Vasic, “Low-density parity-check codes: Theory and practice,” presented at the National Storage Industry Consortium (NSIC) Quarterly Meeting, Monterey, CA, June 25–28, 2000.
[23] , “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on Steiner systems and their application in magnetic recording,” in Proc. GLOBECOM 2001, vol. 5, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 26–29, 2001, pp. 2954–2960.
[24] B. Vasic, E. Kurtas, and A. Kuznetsov, “Lattice low-density parity-check codes and their application in partial response channels,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 453.
[25] R. C. Bose, “On the construction of balanced incomplete block designs,” Ann. Eugenics, vol. 9, pp. 353–399, 1939.
[26] , “An affine analogue of Singer’s theorem,” Ind. Math. Soc., vol. 6, pp. 1–5, 1942.
[27] E. Netto, Zur Theorie der Tripelsysteme, Math. Ann. , vol. 42, pp. 143–152, 1893.
[28] M. Buratti, “Construction of (q; k; 1) difference families with q a prime power and k = 4,5,” Discr. Math., vol. 138, pp. 169–175, 1995.
[29] V. K. Bhargava and J. M. Stein, “(v; k; ) configurations and self-dual
codes,” Inform. Contr., vol. 28, pp. 352–355, 1975. [30] E. Spence and V. D. Tonchev, “Extremal self-dual codes from symmetric
designs,” Discr. Math., vol. 110, pp. 165–268, 1992. [31] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting
Codes: North-Holland, 1977. [32] B. Vasic, “Combintorial constructions of structured low-density parity-
check codes for iterative decoding,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, Sept. 2001. [33] , “Combinatorial construction of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 312. [34] , “High-rate low-density parity-check codes based on anti-Pasch affine geometries,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC 2002), vol. 3, New York, Apr./May, pp. 1332–1336.

[35] B. Vasic, E. Kurtas, and A. Kuznetsov, “LDPC codes based on mutually orthogonal Latin rectangles and their application in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., pt. 1, vol. 38, pp. 2346–2348, Sept. 2002.
[36] B. Vasic and I. Djordjevic, “Low-density parity-check codes for long-haul optical communication systems,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 14, pp. 1208–1210, Aug. 2002.
[37] B. Vasic, E. Kurtas, and A. Kuznetsov, “Kirkman systems and their application in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., pt. 1, vol. 38, pp. 1705–1710, July 2002.
[38] D. MacKay and M. Davey. Evaluation of Gallager Codes for Short Block Length and High-Rate Applications. [Online]. Available: http://www. cs.toronto.edu/~mackay/CodesRegular.html
[39] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum-distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.
[40] T. P. Kirkman, “Note on an unanswered prize question,” Cambridge and Dublin Math. J., vol. 5, pp. 255–262, 1850.
[41] A. C. H. Ling and C. J. Colbourn, “Rosa triple systems,” in Geometry, Combinatorial Designs and Related Structures, J. W. P. Hirschfeld, S. S. Magliveras, and M. J. de Resmini, Eds. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997, pp. 149–159.
[42] J. H. van Lint and R. M. Wilson, A Course in Combinatorics. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.
[43] N. Hamada, “On the p-rank of the incidence matrix of a balanced or
partially balanced incomplete block design and its applications to errorcorrecting codes,” Hiroshima Math. J., vol. 3, pp. 153–226, 1973. [44] R. Townsend and E. J. Weldon, “Self-orthogonal quasicyclic codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, pp. 183–195, Apr. 1967. [45] E. J. Weldon Jr., “Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 45, pp. 1045–1055, Sept. 1966. [46] A. C. Ling, C. J. Colbourn, M. J. Grannell, and T. S. Griggs, “Construction techniques for anti-Pasch Steiner triple systems,” J. London Math. Soc., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 641–657, June 2000. [47] R. A. Beezer, “The girth of a design,” J. Comb. Math. and Comb. Comput., to be published. [48] R. J. McEliece, Finite Fields for Computer Scientist and Engineers. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1987. [49] R. M. Wilson, “Cyclotomy and difference families in elementary Abelian groups,” J. Number Theory, vol. 4, pp. 17–47, 1972. [50] I. Anderson, Combinatorial Designs and Tournaments. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Science/Claredon, 1997. [51] M. J. Colbourn and C. J. Colbourn, “Recursive construction for cyclic block designs,” J. Statist. Planning Infer., vol. 10, pp. 97–103, 1984. [52] L. M. Batten, Combinatorics of Finite Geometries. London, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997. [53] M. A. Margulis, “Explicit group-theoretic constructions for combinatorial designs with applications to expanders and concentrators,” Probl. Pered. Inform., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 51–60, 1988. [54] F. Karteszi, Introduction to Finite Geomteries. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1976. [55] S. Weller and S. Johnson, “Iterative decoding of codes from oval designs,” in Proc. Defence Applications of Signal Processing, 2001 Workshop, Adelaide, Australia, Sept. 2001. [56] E. F. Assmus and J. D. Key, Designs and their Codes. London, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994. [57] W. D. Wallis, Combinatorial Designs. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1988. [58] J. Singer, “A theorem in finite projective geometry and some applications to number theory,” AMS Trans., vol. 43, pp. 377–385, 1938. [59] C. C. Lindner and C. A. Rodger, Design Theory. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997. [60] M. Blaum, P. Farrell, and H. van Tilborg, “Array codes,” in Handbook of Coding Theory, V. Pless and W. Huffman, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1998. [61] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 543–546. [62] E. Eleftheriou and S. Olcer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC 2002), vol. 3, 2002, pp. 1752–1757. [63] J.-L. Kim, U. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, and V. Pless, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with girth at least six,” presented at the 40th Annual Allerton Conference on Communications, Control and Computing, Oct. 2002. [64] J. Baker, F. Hiergeist, and G. Trapp, “The structure of multi-block circulants,” Kyungpook Math. J., vol. 25, no. 1, June 1985.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

[65] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon Jr., Error-Correcting Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[66] H. Song, J. Liu, and B. V. Kumar, “Low complexity LDPC codes for partial response channels,” unpublished manuscript.
[67] F. Lazebnik and V. A. Ustimenko, “Explicit construction of graphs with arbitrary large girth and of large size,” Discr. Appl. Math., vol. 60, pp. 275–284, 1997.
[68] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: Asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[69] M. Odlyzko and R. P. Stanley, “Some Curious Sequences Constructed with the Greedy Algorithm ,” Bell Labs Internal Memo., 1978.

[70] N. J. Sloane and S. Plouffe, The Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences. San Diego, CA: Academic, 1995.
[71] B. Vasic, M. Ivkovic, K. Pedagani, and A. Cvetkovic, “High-rate girtheight low-density parity-check codes on rectangular integer lattices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., submitted for publication.
[72] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[73] D. Mackay’s Homepage [Online]. Available: www.inference.phy.cam. ac.uk/mackay/CodesFiles.html
[74] R. Niel’s Homepage [Online]. Available: ftp://ftp.cs.utoronto.ca/pub/ radford/LDPC-2001-11-18/index.html/

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

