IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1711

Design Methods for Irregular Repeat–Accumulate Codes
Aline Roumy, Member, IEEE, Souad Guemghar, Student Member, IEEE, Giuseppe Caire, Senior Member, IEEE, and Sergio Verdú, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We optimize the random-like ensemble of irregular repeat–accumulate (IRA) codes for binary-input symmetric channels in the large block-length limit. Our optimization technique is based on approximating the evolution of the densities (DE) of the messages exchanged by the belief-propagation (BP) message-passing decoder by a one-dimensional dynamical system. In this way, the code ensemble optimization can be solved by linear programming. We propose four such DE approximation methods, and compare the performance of the obtained code ensembles over the binary-symmetric channel (BSC) and the binary-antipodal input additive white Gaussian noise channel (BIAWGNC). Our results clearly identify the best among the proposed methods and show that the IRA codes obtained by these methods are competitive with respect to the best known irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. In view of this and the very simple encoding structure of IRA codes, they emerge as attractive design choices.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), channel capacity, density evolution, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, stability, threshold, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
S INCE the discovery of turbo codes [1], there have been several notable inventions in the field of random-like codes. In particular, the rediscovery of the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, originally proposed in [2], the introduction of irregular LDPCs [3], [4], and the introduction of the repeat-accumulate (RA) codes [5].
In [3], [4], irregular LDPCs were shown to asymptotically achieve the capacity of the binary erasure channel (BEC) under iterative message-passing decoding. Although the BEC is the only channel for which such a result currently exists, irregular LDPC codes have been designed for other binary-input channels (e.g., the binary-symmetric channel (BSC), the binary-antipodal input additive white Gaussian noise channel (BIAWGNC) [6], and the binary-input intersymbol interference (ISI) channel [7]–[9]) and have shown to achieve very good performance.
First attempts to optimize irregular LDPC codes ([10] for the BEC and other channels [11]) with the density evolution (DE) technique computes the expected performance for a random-like
Manuscript received October 22, 2002; revised April 1, 2004. A. Roumy is with IRISA-INRIA, 35042 Rennes, France (e-mail: aline.roumy @irisa.fr). S. Guemghar and G. Caire are with the Eurecom Institute, 06904 SophiaAntipolis, France (e-mail: Souad.Guemghar@eurecom.fr; Giuseppe.Caire@eurecom.fr). S. Verdú is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA (e-mail: verdu@princeton.edu). Communicated by R. Urbanke, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.831778

code ensemble in the limit of infinite code block length. In order to reduce the computational burden of ensemble optimization based on the DE, faster techniques have been proposed, based on the approximation of the DE by a one-dimensional dynamical system (recursion). These techniques are exact only for the BEC (for which DE is one-dimensional). The most popular techniques proposed so far are based on the Gaussian approximation (GA) of messages exchanged in the message-passing decoder. GA in addition to the symmetry condition of message densities implies that the Gaussian density of messages is expressed by a single parameter. Techniques differ in the parameter to be tracked and in the mapping functions defining the dynamical system [12]–[18].
The introduction of irregular LDPCs motivated other schemes such as irregular RA (IRA) [19], for which similar results exist (achievability of the BEC capacity) and irregular turbo codes [20]. IRA codes are, in fact, special subclasses of both irregular LDPCs and irregular turbo codes. In IRA codes, a fraction of information bits is repeated times, for
. The distribution
is referred to as the repetition profile, and it is kept as a degree of freedom in the optimization of the IRA ensemble. After the repetition stage, the resulting sequence is interleaved and input to a recursive finite-state machine (called accumulator) which outputs one bit for every input symbols, where is referred to as grouping factor and is also a design parameter.
IRA codes are an appealing choice because the encoder is extremely simple, their performance is quite competitive with that of turbo codes and LDPCs, and they can be decoded with a very-low-complexity iterative decoding scheme.
The only other work that has proposed a method to design IRA codes is [19], [21] where the design focuses on the choice of the grouping factor and the repetition profile. The recursive finite-state machine is the simplest one which gives full freedom to choose any rational number between and
as the coding rate. We will also restrict our study to IRAs that use the same simple recursion of [19], although it might be expected that better codes can be obtained by including the finite-state machine as a degree of freedom in the overall ensemble optimization. The method used in [19] to choose the repetition profile was based on the infinite-block-length GA of message-passing decoding proposed in [14]. In this work, we propose and compare four low-complexity ensemble

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

Fig. 1. IRA encoder.

optimization methods. Our approach to design IRAs is based on several tools that have been noticed recently: the EXtrinsic mutual Information Transfer (EXIT) function and its analytical properties [12], [22], [23], reciprocal channel (duality) approximation [22], [24], and the nonstrict convexity of mutual information.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the systematic IRA encoder and its related decoder: the belief-propagation (BP) message-passing algorithm. Existing results on the analysis of the decoder (i.e., DE technique) are summarized and applied to the IRA code ensemble. This leads to a two-dimensional dynamical system whose state is defined on the space of symmetric distributions, for which we derive a local stability condition. In Section III, we propose a general framework in order to approximate the DE (defined on the space of distributions) by a standard dynamical system defined on the reals. We propose four low-complexity ensemble optimization methods as special cases of our general framework. These methods differ by the way the message densities and the BP transformations are approximated:
1) GA, with reciprocal channel (duality) approximation; 2) BEC approximation, with reciprocal channel approxima-
tion; 3) GA, with EXIT function of the inner decoder; 4) BEC approximation, with EXIT function of the inner de-
coder.
All four methods lead to optimization problems solvable by linear programming. In Section IV, we show that the first proposed method yields a one-dimensional DE approximation with the same stability condition as the exact DE, whereas the exact stability condition must be added to the ensemble optimization as an explicit additional constraint for the second method. Then, we show that, in general, the GA methods are optimistic, in the sense that there is no guarantee that the optimized rate is below capacity. On the contrary, we show that for the BEC approximation methods rates below capacity are guaranteed. In Section V, we compare our code optimization methods by evaluating their iterative decoding threshold (evaluated by the exact DE) over the BIAWGNC and the BSC.

II. ENCODING, DECODING, AND DENSITY EVOLUTION

Fig. 1 shows the block diagram of a systematic IRA encoder.

A block of information bits

is encoded

by an (irregular) repetition code of rate . Each bit is re-

peated times, where

is a sequence of integers

such that

and

( is the maximum

repetition factor). The block of repeated symbols is interleaved,

Fig. 2. Tanner graph of an IRA code.
and the resulting block by an accumulator, defined by the recursion

is encoded

(1)

with initial condition

, where

is the accumulator output block corresponding to the input

,

is a given integer (referred to as grouping factor),

and we assume that

is an integer. Finally, the code-

word corresponding to the information block is given by

.

The transmission channel is memoryless, binary-input, and

symmetric-output, i.e., its transition probability

sat-

isfies

(2)

where

indicates a reflection of the output alphabet.1

IRA codes are best represented by their Tanner graph [25]

(see Fig. 2). In general, the Tanner graph of a linear code is a

bipartite graph whose node set is partitioned into two subsets:

the bitnodes, corresponding to the coded symbols, and the chec-

knodes, corresponding to the parity-check equations that code-

words must satisfy. The graph has an edge between bitnode

and checknode if the symbol corresponding to participates

in the parity-check equation corresponding to .

Since the IRA encoder is systematic (see Fig. 1), it is useful to

further classify the bitnodes into two subclasses: the information

bitnodes, corresponding to information bits, and the parity bitn-

odes, corresponding to the symbols output by the accumulator.

Those information bits that are repeated times are represented

by bitnodes with degree , as they participate in parity-check

equations. Each checknode is connected to information bit

nodes and to two parity bitnodes and represents one of the equa-

tions (for a particular ) (1). The connections between checkn-

odes and information bitnodes are determined by the interleaver

and are highly randomized. On the contrary, the connections be-

tween checknodes and parity bitnodes are arranged in a regular

0 1If the output alphabet is the real line, then y coincides with ordinary reflec-
tion with respect to the origin. Generalizations to other alphabets are immediate.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROUMY et al.: DESIGN METHODS FOR IRREGULAR REPEAT–ACCUMULATE CODES

1713

zig-zag pattern since, according to (1), every pair of consecutive

parity bits are involved in one parity-check equation.

A random IRA code ensemble with parameters

and

(information) block length is formed by all graphs of the form

of Fig. 2 with information bitnodes, grouping factor , and

edges connected to information bitnodes of degree , for

. The sequence of nonnegative coefficients

such that

is referred to as the degree distribu-

tion of the ensemble. The probability distribution over the code

ensemble is induced by the uniform probability over all inter-

leavers (permutations) of elements.

The information bitnodes average degree is given by

. The number of edges connecting information

bitnodes to checknodes is

. The number of

parity bitnodes is

. Finally, the code rate

is given by

(3)

Under the constraints

and

, we get

. Therefore, the highest rate with parameter set to is

. This motivates the use of

in order to get higher rates.

A. Belief Propagation Decoding of IRA Codes

In this work, we consider BP message-passing decoding

[26]–[28]. In message-passing decoding algorithms, the graph

nodes receive messages from their neighbors, compute new

messages, and forward them to their neighbors. The algorithm

is defined by the code Tanner graph, by the set on which

messages take on values, by the node computation rules, and

by the node activation scheduling.

In BP decoding, messages take on values in the extended real

line

. The BP decoder is initialized by setting all

messages output by the checknodes equal to zero. Each bitnode

is associated with the channel observation message (log-like-

lihood ratio)

(4)

where the mapping

is defined by [11]

(7)
and where the sign function is defined as [11]
if with probability if with probability if if .
Since the code Tanner graph has cycles, different schedulings yield in general nonequivalent BP algorithms. In this work, we shall consider the following “classical” schedulings.
• LDPC-like scheduling [19]. In this case, all bitnodes and all checknodes are activated alternately and in parallel. Every time a node is activated, it sends outgoing messages to all its neighbors. A decoding iteration (or “round” [31]) consists of the activation of all bitnodes and all checknodes.
• Turbo-like scheduling. Following [29], a good decoding scheduling consists of isolating large trellis-like subgraphs (or, more generally, normal realizations in Forney’s terminology) and applying locally the forward– backward Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [30] (that implements efficiently the BP algorithm on normal cycle-free graphs), as done for turbo codes [1]. A decoding iteration consists of activating all the information bitnodes in parallel (according to (5)) and of running the BCJR algorithm over the entire accumulator trellis. In particular, the checknodes do not send messages to the information bitnodes until the BCJR iteration is completed.
Notice that for both of the above schedulings one decoder iteration corresponds to the activation of all information bitnodes in the graph exactly once.

where is the channel output corresponding to the transmis-

sion of the code symbol .

The BP node computation rules are given as follows. For a

given node, we identify an adjacent edge as outgoing and all

other adjacent edges as incoming. Consider a bitnode of de-

gree and let

denote the messages received from

the incoming edges and the associated channel obser-

vation message. The message

passed along the outgoing

edge is given by

(5)

Consider a checknode of degree and let

de-

note the messages received from the incoming edges. The

message passed along the outgoing edge is given by

(6)

B. Density Evolution and Stability

The bit-error rate (BER) performance of BP decoding aver-

aged over the IRA code ensemble and over the noise observa-

tions can be analyzed, for any finite number of iterations and

in the limit of

, by the DE technique [11]. The usefulness

of the DE method stems from the Concentration Theorem [31],

[10] which guarantees that, with high probability, the BER after

iterations of the BP decoder applied to a randomly selected

code in the ensemble and to a randomly generated channel noise

sequence is close to the BER computed by DE, for sufficiently

large block length.

Next, we formulate the DE for IRA codes and we study

the stability condition of the fixed-point corresponding to

zero BER. As in [11, Sec. III-B], we introduce the space of

distributions whose elements are nonnegative nondecreasing

right-continuous functions with range in

and domain the

extended real line.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

It can be shown that, for a binary-input symmetric-output channel, the distributions of messages at any iteration of the DE satisfy the symmetry condition

(8)

for any function for which the integral exists. If has density , (8) is equivalent to

(9)

With some abuse of terminology, distributions satisfying (8) are

said to be symmetric. The space of symmetric distributions will

be denoted by .

The BER operator

is defined by

ries of (10)–(13) are sequences of pairs of symmetric distribu-

tions

). For this system, the BER at iteration is given

by

.

It is easy to see that

is a fixed point of (10)–(13).

The local stability of this fixed point is given by the following

result.

Theorem 1: The fixed point stable if and only if

for the DE is locally

(15)

where

.

Proof: See Appendix I.

where

is the left-continuous version of . We intro-

duce the “delta at zero” distribution, denoted by , for which

, and the “delta at infinity” distribution, denoted

by , for which

.

The symmetry property (8) implies that a sequence of sym-

metric distributions

converges to if and only if

, where convergence of distributions is in

the sense given in [11, Sec. III-F].

The DE for IRA code ensembles is given by the following

proposition whose derivation is omitted as it is completely anal-

ogous to the derivation of DE in [11] for irregular LDPC codes.

Proposition 1: Let (respectively, ) denote the average

distribution of messages passed from an information bitnode

(respectively, parity bitnode) to a checknode, at iteration . Let

(respectively, ) denote the average distribution of mes-

sages passed from a checknode to an information bitnode (re-

spectively, parity bitnode), at iteration .

Under the cycle-free condition,

satisfy the fol-

lowing recursion:

Here necessity and sufficiency are used in the sense of [11].

By following steps analogous to [11], it can be shown that if

(15) holds, then there exists

such that if for some

then

converges to zero as tends to in-

finity. On the contrary, if is strictly larger than the right-hand

side (RHS) of (15), then there exists

such that for all

III. IRA ENSEMBLE OPTIMIZATION

In this section, we tackle the problem of optimizing the IRA

code ensemble parameters for a broad class of binary-input sym-

metric-output channels.

A property of DE given in Proposition 1 is that

for

is a nonincreasing nonnegative sequence. Hence,

the limit

exists. Consider a family of channels

(10) where the channel parameter is, for example, an indicator of
(11) the noise level in the channel. Following [31], we say that
(12) is monotone with respect to the IRA code ensemble under BP decoding if, for any finite
(13)

for

, with initial condition

, where

denotes the distribution of the channel observation messages

(4), denotes convolution of distributions, defined by

(14)

where denotes -fold convolution,

where and are the message distributions at iteration of

DE applied to channels

and , respectively.

Let BER

, where is the trajectory

of DE applied to the channel . The threshold of the

ensemble

over the monotone family is the worst

case channel parameter for which the limiting BER is zero, i.e.,

BER

(16)

is the distribution of

(defined on

),

when

, and denotes the inverse mapping of , i.e.,

is the distribution of

when

.

The DE recursion (10)–(13) is a two-dimensional nonlinear dynamical system with state space (i.e., the state trajecto-

Thus, for every value of , the optimal IRA ensemble parame-

ters and maximize subject to vanishing BER

,

i.e., are solution of the optimization problem

maximize

subject to

,

(17)

and to BER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROUMY et al.: DESIGN METHODS FOR IRREGULAR REPEAT–ACCUMULATE CODES

1715

the solution of which can be found by some numerical tech-

niques, as in [11]. However, the constraint BER

is given

directly in terms of the fixed point of the DE recursion, and

makes optimization very computationally intensive.

A variety of methods have been developed in order to simplify

the code ensemble optimization [19], [24], [14], [32]. They con-

sist of replacing the DE with a dynamical system defined over

the reals (rather than over the space of distributions), whose tra-

jectories and fixed points are related in some way to the trajec-

tories and the fixed point of the DE. Essentially, all proposed

approximated DE methods can be formalized as follows. Let

and

be mappings of the set of sym-

metric distributions to the real numbers and vice versa. Then,

a dynamical system with state space can be derived from

(10)–(13) as

(18) (19) (20) (21)

for

, with initial condition

where

are the system state variables.

By eliminating the intermediate distributions

can put (18)–(21) in the form

, and and , we

Fig. 3. EXIT model.

Notice that, in general, (24) is neither a necessary nor a sufficient

condition for the uniqueness of the zero-BER fixed point of the

exact DE. However, if the quality of the DE approximation is

good, this provides a heuristic for the code ensemble optimiza-

tion.

By replacing the constraint BER

by (24) in (17), we

obtain the approximated IRA ensemble optimization method as

maximize

subject to

,

and to

(25) .

Approximations of the DE recursion differ essentially in the choice of and , and in the way the intermediate distributions and and the channel message distribution are approximated. Next, we illustrate the approximation methods considered in this work.

A. EXIT Functions

(22)

For all DE approximations considered in this work, the mappings and and the functions and satisfy the following desirable properties.

1)

,

.

2)

,

.

3) and are defined on

and have range in

.

4)

and

.

5)

, i.e.,

is a fixed point of the

recursion (22). Moreover, this fixed point corresponds to

the zero-BER fixed point

of the exact DE.

6) If

, the function

is strictly decreasing

in for all

. Therefore, the equation

has a unique solution in

for all

solution will be denoted by .

. This

Several recent works show that DE can be accurately de-

scribed in terms of the evolution of the mutual information be-

tween the variables associated with the bitnodes and their mes-

sages (see [12], [33]–[35], [13], [23], [18]).

The key idea in order to approximate DE by mutual infor-

mation evolution is to describe each computation node in BP

decoding by a mutual information transfer function. For histor-

ical reasons, this function is usually referred to as the EXtrinsic

mutual Information Transfer (EXIT) function.

EXIT functions are generally defined as follows. Consider the

model of Fig. 3, where the box represents a generalized compu-

tation node of the BP algorithm (i.e., it might contain a sub-

graph formed by several nodes and edges, and might depend

on some other random variables such as channel observations,

not shown in Fig. 3). Let

denote the input mes-

sages, assumed independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)

, and let

denote the output message. Let

denote the binary code symbol associated with message , for

, and let denote the binary code symbol asso-

ciated with message . Since

, we can think

of and as the outputs of binary-input symmetric-output

channels with inputs and and transition probabilities

It follows that all fixed points of (22) must satisfy (23)
and that in order to avoid fixed points other than , (23) must not have solutions in the interval , i.e., it must satisfy
(24)

(26) (27)
respectively. The channel (26) models the a priori information that the
node receives about the symbols ’s, and the channel (27) models the extrinsic information [1] that the node generates about the symbol .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

We define the binary-input symmetric-output capacity func-

tional

, such that

(28)

Namely, maps any symmetric distribution into the capacity2

of the binary-input symmetric-output channel with transition

probability

.

Then, we let

Fig. 4. Reciprocal channel approximation.

For a distribution

, we let the mapping be equal

to defined in (28), and for all

we define the mapping

(30)

denote the capacities of the channels (26) and (27), respectively.

The EXIT function of the node of Fig. 3 is the set of pairs

, for all

and for some (arbitrary) choice of

the input distribution such that

. Notice that

the EXIT function of a node is not uniquely defined, since it de-

pends on the choice of . In general, different choices yield

different transfer functions.

The approximations of the DE considered in this work are

based on EXIT functions, and track the evolution of the mutual

information between the messages output by the bitnodes and

the associated code symbols.

Remark. Two properties of binary-input symmetric-output

channels: Before concluding this section, we take a brief

detour in order to point out two properties of binary-input

symmetric-output channels. Consider a binary-input sym-

metric-output channel with

, where is not

necessarily symmetric (in the sense of (8)). Its capacity can be

written as

(29)

By concatenating the transformation

to the channel output, we obtain a new binary-input symmetric-

output channel with

such that

.

Moreover, since is a sufficient statistic for , the original

channel has the same capacity as the new channel, given by

. Therefore, by defining appropriately the channel output,

the capacity of any binary-input symmetric-output channel can

always be put in the form (28).

Another interesting property is the following.

Proposition 2: The mutual information functional is not

strictly convex on the set of binary-input symmetric-output

channels with transition probability

.

Proof: See Appendix II.

where

(31)

Namely, maps

into the symmetric Gaussian distri-

bution

such that the BIAWGNC with transition prob-

ability

has capacity .

The first key approximation in Method 1 is

(32)

for some

.

In order to compute and , we make use of the recip-

rocal channel approximation [24] also called approximate du-

ality property of EXIT functions in [22]. This states that the

EXIT function of a checknode is accurately approximated by

the EXIT function of a bitnode with the same degree after the

change of variables

and

(see

Fig. 4). Using approximate duality, we replace the checknode

by a bitnode and change

into

.

Since for a bitnode the output message is the sum of the input

messages (see (5)), and since the input distributions

and

are Gaussian, also the output distribution is

Gaussian, with mean

for messages sent to information bitnodes and

for messages sent to parity bitnodes. Finally, and are given by
(33)

B. Method 1

The first approximation of the DE considered in this work

assumes that the distributions at any iteration are Gaussian. A

Gaussian distribution satisfies the symmetry condition (9) if and

only if its variance is equal to twice the absolute value of its

mean. We introduce the shorthand notation

to denote

the symmetric Gaussian distribution (or density, depending on

the context) with mean , i.e.,

.

2Recall that the capacity of a binary-input symmetric-output memoryless channel is achieved by uniform i.i.d. inputs.

The second key approximation in Method 1 is to replace with a discrete (symmetric) distribution such that

(34)

for some integer

,

, and

such that

.

With this assumption, from the definition (28) of the operator

and since [11]: a) the convolution of symmetric distributions

is symmetric, and b) the convex combination of symmetric dis-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROUMY et al.: DESIGN METHODS FOR IRREGULAR REPEAT–ACCUMULATE CODES

1717

tributions is symmetric; it is immediate to write (18) and (19) as (35) at the bottom of the page. The desired DE approximation in the form (22) is obtained (implicitly) by combining (33) and (35). Notice that (35) is linear in the repetition profile and the optimization problem (25) can be solved as linear programming.
Example 1. Discrete-output channels: In general, when the channel output is discrete then the approximation (34) holds exactly. For example, for the BSC with transition probability we have

Example 2: The BIAWGNC defined by , is a channel such that

, where (36)

With these mappings, (20) and (21) can be put in the form
(40) where we used the fact that, as it can be easily seen from the definitions of and in (46)–(48)

Notice that, while in Method 1 we assumed and to be

symmetric Gaussian (see (32)), here (40) holds exactly.

As a consequence of these mappings, the communication

channel of the parity bits, with distribution , is replaced by a

BEC with erasure probability

.

Furthermore, for any

we have

In this case, since convolving symmetric Gaussian distributions yields a symmetric Gaussian distribution whose mean is the sum of the means, the discretization approximation (34) is not necessary and we have

From this result, it is immediate to obtain the approximated DE recursion as

(41)

(37)
By applying the operator and using (31) we obtain the DE approximation for the BIAWGNC as (38) at the bottom of the page.
C. Method 2
The second approximation of the DE considered in this work assumes that the distributions of messages at any iteration consist of two mass points, one at zero and the other at . For such distributions, we introduce the shorthand notation
. We let the mapping be equal to defined in (28) and the mapping be
(39)

Notice that (41) is the standard (exact) DE for the IRA ensemble

over a BEC (see [19]) with the same capacity of the

actual binary-input symmetric-output channel, given by

.

We point out here that this method, consisting of replacing the

actual channel with a BEC with equal capacity and optimizing

the code ensemble for the BEC, was proposed in [24] for the

optimization of LDPC ensembles. Interestingly, this method fol-

lows as a special case of our general approach for DE approxi-

mation, for a particular choice of the mappings and .

In this case, the fixed-point equation corresponding to (23) is

obtained in closed form as

(42)

for all

.

(for details, see [19]).

(35)

(38)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

For Method 3, by discretizing the channel observation distribution as in (34), we have3

Fig. 5. Turbo-like IRA decoder.

(44) For Method 4 we have

D. Methods 3 and 4

Methods 1 and 2 yield (almost) closed-form DE approximations at the price of some approximations of the message distributions and, above all, of the checknodes output distributions
and .
In much of the current literature on random-like code ensemble optimization, the EXIT function of a decoding block is obtained by Monte Carlo simulation, by generating i.i.d. input messages, estimating the distribution of the output messages, and computing a one-dimensional quantity [12]–[18]. Following this approach, we shall consider the IRA decoder with turbo-like scheduling (see Fig. 5) and obtain the EXIT functions of the inner and outer decoders.
The inner (accumulator) and outer (repetition) decoders are characterized by an EXIT function as defined in Section III-A, for some guess of the (symmetric) distribution . In general, the EXIT function of the decoders can be obtained as follows.

1) Let the channel observation messages be i.i.d., .

2) Assume the decoder input messages are i.i.d.,

.

3) Obtain either in closed form or by Monte Carlo simula-

tion the corresponding marginal distribution of the

decoder output messages.

4) Let

,

be a point on the EXIT

function curve.

(45)

IV. PROPERTIES OF THE APPROXIMATED DE
In this section, we show some properties of the approximated DE derived in Section III.

A. Stability Condition

Consider the DE approximation of Method 1. As indicated

in Section III-B,

is a fixed-point of the system

(33)–(35). We have the following result.

Theorem 2: The fixed point at

of the system (33)–(35)

is stable if and only if the fixed point

of the exact

DE (10)–(13) is stable.

Proof: See Appendix III.

For other DE approximations, stability does not generally

imply stability of the corresponding exact DE. Consider the DE

approximation of Method 2.

is a fixed point of the system

(41). We have the following result.

Proposition 3: The local stability condition of the approximated DE with Method 2 is less stringent than that of the exact DE.
Proof: See Appendix IV.

Our Methods 3 and 4 consist of applying the above ap-

proach under the assumptions

and

, respectively.

Let the resulting EXIT functions of the inner and outer de-

coders be denoted by

and by

, re-

spectively, and let denote the mutual information between the

messages at the output of the outer decoder (repetition code) and

the corresponding symbols (information bitnodes).

The resulting approximated DE is given by

If an approximated DE has a less stringent stability condition,

then the exact stability condition must be added to the ensemble

optimization as an explicit additional constraint. It should be

noticed that the DE approximations used in [24], [14], [19] re-

quire the additional stability constraint. For example, the codes

presented in [19] for the BIAWGNC and for which

are

not stable. Therefore, the BER for an arbitrary large number of

iterations is not vanishing.

(43)

The corresponding fixed-point equation is given by

,

and the condition for the uniqueness of the fixed point at ,

corresponding to (24), is

for all

. The

resulting IRA optimization methods are obtained by using this

condition in (25).

While for the inner decoder (accumulator) we are forced to

resort to Monte Carlo simulation, it is interesting to notice that,

due to the simplicity of the repetition code, for both Methods 3

and 4 the EXIT function of the outer decoder

can

be obtained in closed form.

B. Fixed-Points, Coding Rate, and Channel Capacity

An interesting property of optimization Methods 2 and 4 is

that the optimized ensemble for a given channel with channel

observation distribution and capacity

has coding

rate not larger than . In fact, as a corollary of a general result

of [23] (see Appendix V), we have the following.

Theorem 3: The DE approximations of Methods 2 and 4 have

unique fixed point

only if the IRA ensemble coding rate

satisfies

.

Proof: See Appendix V

3Just prior to the submission of the final revised version of this work we became aware of [36] which proposes essentially the same method as Method 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROUMY et al.: DESIGN METHODS FOR IRREGULAR REPEAT–ACCUMULATE CODES

1719

Fig. 6. Mutual information EXIT functions for BIAWGNC and Method 1.
TABLE I OPTIMIZATION FOR THE BIAWGNC

We show in Section V-A through some examples that this

property does not hold in general for other code ensemble opti-

mization methods, for which the ensemble rate might result to

be larger than the (nominal) capacity

. This means that the

threshold , evaluated by exact DE, is worse than the channel

parameter used for the ensemble design.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

A. Design Example for Rate- Codes
In this subsection we present the result of optimization for codes of rate and give examples for the BSC with crossover

probability and the BIAWGNC with signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)

SNR

In Fig. 6, the curve is the fixed-point equation used for the

optimization in Method 1, i.e., the function

. The

fixed-point equation curves for the other three methods are very

similar.

In Fig. 6, the curve (solid line) shows

as a function

of

for Method 1. The solutions of the fixed point (23)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004
TABLE II OPTIMIZATION FOR THE BSC

correspond to the intersection of this curve with the main diagonal (dotted line). Tables I and II give the degree sequences, the grouping factors, and the information bitnode average degrees for the four methods, for codes of rate over the BIAWGNC and the BSC, respectively. We compute the true iterative decoding thresholds (by using the exact DE) for all the ensembles (denoted by the SNR (DE) or (DE) in the tables) and report also the gap of these thresholds with respect to the Shannon limit (denoted by SNR (DE) or (DE) in the tables). Then, we compare it to the threshold of the approximated DE (SNR (approximately) and (approximately)). We observe that the codes designed by using Methods 2 or 4 have rate below capacity, which is consistent with Theorem 3. On the other hand, the codes designed by using Methods 1 or 3 have rate possibly larger than the capacity corresponding to the channel parameter used for design. It can easily be checked that all the designed codes are stable.

TABLE III IRA CODES, DESIGNED WITH METHODS 1 AND 3, EVALUATED
WITH DE, FOR BIAWGNC
TABLE IV IRA CODES, DESIGNED WITH METHODS 2 AND 4, EVALUATED
WITH DE, FOR BIAWGNC

B. Thresholds of IRA Ensembles

In this subsection, we present results for codes designed according to the four methods, for rates from to , and we compare the methods on the basis of the true thresholds obtained by DE. We present the code rate, the grouping factor, the average repetition factor, and the gap to Shannon limit, for both BSC and BIAWGNC.
Tables III and IV show the performance of IRA codes on the BIAWGNC. Tables V and VI show the performance of IRA codes on the BSC.
For all rates, and for both channels, IRA codes designed assuming GA (Methods 1 and 3) perform much better than those designed assuming BEC a priori (Methods 2 and 4). Nevertheless, Method 4 yields better codes than Method 2, especially at low rates. This is due to the fact that, in Method 2, the communication channel is replaced with a BEC with the same capacity, while this is not the case in Method 4. This difference in performance decreases as the rate increases.
Fig. 7 compares the performance of IRA ensembles with the best known LDPC ensembles [6] on the BIAWGNC. As ex-

pected, the performance of IRA ensembles is inferior to that of LDPC ensembles. However, in view of the simplicity of their encoding and decoding, IRA codes, optimized using Methods 1 or 3, emerge as a very attractive design alternative.
Fig. 8 compares the performance of IRA ensembles obtained via the proposed methods for the BSC. The best codes are those designed with Method 3.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper has tackled the optimization of IRA codes in the limit for large code block length. This assumption allows to consider a cycle-free graph and enables to evaluate the threshold of the code by iteratively calculating message densities (DE).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROUMY et al.: DESIGN METHODS FOR IRREGULAR REPEAT–ACCUMULATE CODES

1721

Fig. 7. Gap to Shannon limit (obtained by DE) versus rate for BIAWGNC.
TABLE V IRA CODES, DESIGNED WITH METHODS 1 AND 3, EVALUATED WITH
DE, FOR BSC

TABLE VI IRA CODES, DESIGNED WITH METHODS 2 AND 4, EVALUATED WITH
DE, FOR BSC

For the sake of tractable analysis, we proposed four methods to approximate those densities as a one-dimensional parameter. These approximations were motivated by recent results in the field of code design (EXIT functions, reciprocal channel approximation, and the nonstrict convexity of mutual information), and have led to four optimization methods that can all be solved as a linear program.
We found a general stability condition for IRA codes under exact DE. We showed formally that one of the proposed methods (GA, with reciprocal channel approximation) yields a one-dimensional DE approximation with the same stability condition, whereas the exact stability condition must be added to the ensemble optimization as an explicit additional constraint for another method (BEC a priori, with reciprocal channel approximation). We derived also results related to the rates of the codes:

in general, the Gaussian a priori methods are optimistic, in the sense that there is no guarantee that the optimized rate is below capacity. On the contrary, the BEC a priori methods have always rates below capacity.
Our numerical results show that, for the BIAWGNC and BSC, the Gaussian a priori approximation is more attractive since the codes designed under this assumption have the smallest gap to Shannon limit. Depending on the desired rate, the EXIT function of the inner decoder has to be computed either with Monte Carlo simulation (Method 3) or with the reciprocal channel approximation (Method 1). At least in the BIAWGNC there is some evidence that the best LDPC codes [6] designed with DE slightly outperform our designed codes. In view of this and the very simple encoding structure of IRA codes, they emerge as attractive design choices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

Fig. 8. Gap to Shannon limit (obtained by DE) versus rate for BSC.

APPENDIX I PROOF OF THEOREM 1

We follow in the footsteps of [11] and analyze the local sta-

bility of the zero-BER fixed point by using a small perturbation

approach. In order to do this, we need more details on the map-

ping and its inverse.

Given a random variable with distribution

, the dis-

tribution of is given by

(46)

where

For the sake of brevity, we introduce the shorthand notation

The -fold convolution of

by itself is given by

(49)

and where denotes the indicator function of the event . In particular, the mapping applied to and yields

where stands for the integer part. In order to study the local stability of the fixed point , we initialize the DE recursion at the point

Given

for some small

, and we apply one iteration of the DE

recursion (10)–(13). The step-by-step derivation is as follows. (47) From (47) we have

applying yields

By applying (49) we obtain

(48)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROUMY et al.: DESIGN METHODS FOR IRREGULAR REPEAT–ACCUMULATE CODES

1723

By applying we get and Hence, by noticing (50) at the bottom of the page we have

APPENDIX II PROOF OF PROPOSITION 2

Proposition 2 is a particular case of a more general result that we state in the following.

Proposition 4: Let be binary with

and

. Let be independent of and take

(finite) values with

. Conditioned on , is a

continuous random variable with conditional density function

Then

Finally, by using the fact that

and that

, the message distributions after one DE iter-

ation are given by

Proof of Proposition 4: First, notice that

where After iterations we obtain

Hence, we have (55) at the top of the following page.
Proof of Proposition 2: The assertion of Proposition 2 follows from Proposition 4 since for a collection of binary-input (51) symmetric-output channels with symmetric transition probability we have that ,

From the large deviation theory we get that [11]

(52)

APPENDIX III

PROOF OF THEOREM 2

The local stability condition for the system ((33) and (35)) is

given by the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix for the functions

in the fixed point

. The partial derivatives

of and are

(53)

where the last equality follows from the fact that

.

Then, by applying

to in (52) we obtain that

(implying that

) if the

eigenvalues of the matrix

are inside the unit circle.

The stability condition is obtained by computing explicitly

the largest (in magnitude) eigenvalue. We obtain

(54) where

Since the left-hand side (LHS) of (54) is increasing, condition

(54) is indeed an upperbound on , given explicitly by (15).

(56)

for for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(50)

1724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

(55)

Note that

. Since both limits tend to , we derive

an asymptotic expansion for

and .

The derivative of is given by

of variable

. The fourth equality is due to the

fact that the first and second integrands in the third line of (58)

are odd and even functions of , respectively. Then we use the

changes of variable

and

.

Lebesgue’s dominated convergence theorem completes the

proof. Since the sequence of measurable functions verifies

Since is symmetric, the sum over can be rewritten as Let us define

and since these functions are bounded by an integrable function independent of

Thus, Lebesgue’s dominated convergence theorem [37] applies (57) and
Following [38], (57) can be rewritten as (58) at the bottom of the page. The second equality in (58) is obtained by the change

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(58)

ROUMY et al.: DESIGN METHODS FOR IRREGULAR REPEAT–ACCUMULATE CODES

1725

Under the assumption that is symmetric, we get

Therefore, for large

Similarly, we get

It follows that

and that

And thus, for

if

if

and

if

From the inequality

if

.

The partial derivatives of and are

(64)

we get

where is defined in (53). Similarly We get the Jacobian matrix as

and the conclusion follows.

In the following, we show inequality (64). Letting

,

(64) becomes equivalent to (59)

where

(60)

(65)

(61)

It can be shown that

has a single minimum in the open

interval . Hence, by noticing that

(62)

and

we get inequality (64).

In order to be stable, the eigenvalues of should be inside the unit circle. Therefore, the stability condition reduces to

(63) Notice from (54) and (63) that the stability conditions under DE and approximated DE are the same.

APPENDIX IV PROOF OF PROPOSITION 3

The Jacobian matrix of the approximated DE (41) about the

fixed point

, for a given input channel distribution

, is

APPENDIX V PROOF OF THEOREM 3
Theorem 3 follows as a corollary of a result of [23] that we state here for the sake of completeness as Lemma 1. In order to introduce this result, we consider the model of Fig. 9, where , , and are binary sequences and where Channel 1 is the communication channel with output and Channel 2 is a BEC channel with output . Let the decoder be a maximum a posteriori (MAP) symbol-by-symbol decoder, producing for all
, output messages of the form
(66)

where

. Following [23], we

generalize the definition of and given in Section III-A to

the case of sequences as

where was already defined in (51). The stability of the exact

DE is given by the eigenvalues of

(where is defined in

(53)) while it is given by those of

for the approx-

imated DE (where

is given in (28)).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

Fig. 9. General decoding model.

(67)

where follows from the fact that the decoder is MAP. Again,

the decoder EXIT function is the set of points

for all

.

For the setup of Fig. 9 with the above assumptions, the fol-

lowing result applies.

Lemma 1: [23] Let be uniformly distributed and i.i.d. If Encoder 2 is linear with generator matrix having no all-zero columns, then the area under the EXIT characteristic satisfies

Fig. 10. Model of inner (a) and outer (b) decoders Method 4.

(68)

We start by proving Theorem 3 for the approximated DE of

Method 4. Consider the IRA encoder of Fig. 1 and the turbo-like

decoder of Fig. 5.

The inner MAP decoder receives channel observations for

the parity bits and input messages for the symbols of , and

produces output messages for the symbols of . The general

decoding model of Fig. 9, applied to the inner decoder, yields

the model of Fig. 10(a).

The outer MAP decoder receives channel observations for

the information bits and input messages for the symbols of ,

and produces output messages for the symbols of . The gen-

eral decoding model of Fig. 9, applied to the outer decoder,

yields the model of Fig. 10(b).

The upper channel is the communication channel with ca-

pacity

. Since we consider approximation Method 4, we

let lower channel to be a BEC in both Fig. 10(a) and (b). Let

, , and denote the number of information bits (length of

and of ), the number of repeated information bits (length of

), and the number of parity bits (length of and of ), re-

spectively. The inner and outer coding rates are

and

, and the overall IRA coding rate (3) is given by

where follows from the fact that, by the model assumption, is an i.i.d. uniformly distributed binary sequence, and
follows from the fact that the accumulator (inner code) generates with uniform probability (and uniform marginals) if driven
by the i.i.d. uniform input sequence . By applying Lemma 1 to the outer code model (Fig. 10(b)),
we obtain

(70)

where both and follow from the fact that the repetition

code is an invertible mapping, so the entropy

is equal to

the entropy of the information sequence (equal to bits) and

.

As seen in Section III-D, the approximated DE has no fixed

points other than

if and only if

for all

, where

and

denote the inner and outer

decoder EXIT functions. This implies that

By applying Lemma 1 to the inner code model (Fig. 10(a)), we

obtain

By using (69) and (70), we obtain

(71)
For Method 2, the above derivation still holds, since the com(69) munication channel in Fig. 9 is replaced by a BEC with erasure
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROUMY et al.: DESIGN METHODS FOR IRREGULAR REPEAT–ACCUMULATE CODES

1727

probablity

. In fact, the inner and outer decoder

EXIT functions can be rewritten as

and the area under these functions are again

Therefore, the final result (71) holds also for Method 2.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Dr. Alex Ashikhmin for the helpful discussion concerning the results in [23].
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th ACM Symp. Theory of Computing (STOC), 1997, pp. 150–159.
[4] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[5] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ‘Turbo-like’ codes,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Sept. 1998, pp. 201–210.
[6] R. Urbanke et al.. (2002) Web page. [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww. epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/
[7] N. Varnica and A. Kavc˘ic´, “Optimized LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 197.
[8] X. Ma, N. Varnica, and A. Kavc˘ic´, “Matched information rate codes for binary ISI channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 269.
[9] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1410–1422, June 2002.
[10] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low-density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 249–258.
[11] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] S. ten Brink, “Designing iterative decoding schemes with the extrinsic information transfer chart,” AEÜ Int. J. Electron. Commun., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 389–398, Dec. 2000.
[13] , “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[14] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.

[15] H. El Gamal and A. R. Hammons, Jr, “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 671–686, Feb. 2001.
[16] J. Boutros and G. Caire, “Iterative multiuser joint decoding: Unified framework and asymptotic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1772–1793, July 2002.
[17] F. Lehmann and G. M. Maggio, “An approximate analytical model of the message passing decoder of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 31.
[18] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Designing irregular LPDC codes using exit charts based on message error rate,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 454.
[19] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[20] J. Boutros, G. Caire, E. Viterbo, H. Sawaya, and S. Vialle, “Turbo code at 0.03 dB from capacity limit,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 56.
[21] H. Jin, “Analysis and design of turbo-like codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Calif. Inst. Technol., Pasadena, 2001.
[22] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: A model and two properties,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems (CISS 2002), Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002.
[23] , “Code rate and the area under extrinsic information transfer curves,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, July 2002, p. 115.
[24] S. Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2000.
[25] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[26] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[27] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Communications, vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[28] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[29] D. Forney, “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.
[30] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[31] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[32] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[33] S. ten Brink, “Exploiting the chain rule of mutual information for the design of iterative decdoing schemes,” in Proc. 39th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Oct. 2001, pp. 293–300.
[34] M. Tüchler, S. ten Brink, and J. Hagenauer, “Measures for tracing convergence of iterative decoding algorithms,” in Proc. 4th Int. ITG Conf. Source and Channel Coding, Berlin, Germany, Jan. 2002, pp. 53–60.
[35] S. Huettinger and J. Huber, “Extrinsic and intrinsic information in systematic coding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 116.
[36] S. ten Brink and G. Kramer, “Turbo processing for scalar and vector channels,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2003, pp. 23–30.
[37] A. Browder, Mathematical Analysis: An Introduction. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1996.
[38] T. F. Wong, “Numerical calculation of symmetric capacity of Rayleigh fading channel with BPSK/QPSK,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 328–330, Aug. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:39:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

