IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

2657

Extrinsic Information Transfer Functions: Model and Erasure Channel Properties
Alexei Ashikhmin, Member, IEEE, Gerhard Kramer, Member, IEEE, and Stephan ten Brink, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts are a tool for predicting the convergence behavior of iterative processors for a variety of communication problems. A model is introduced that applies to decoding problems, including the iterative decoding of parallel concatenated (turbo) codes, serially concatenated codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, and repeat–accumulate (RA) codes. EXIT functions are defined using the model, and several properties of such functions are proved for erasure channels. One property expresses the area under an EXIT function in terms of a conditional entropy. A useful consequence of this result is that the design of capacity-approaching codes reduces to a curve-fitting problem for all the aforementioned codes. A second property relates the EXIT function of a code to its Helleseth–Kløve–Levenshtein information functions, and thereby to the support weights of its subcodes. The relation is via a refinement of information functions called split information functions, and via a refinement of support weights called split support weights. Split information functions are used to prove a third property that relates the EXIT function of a linear code to the EXIT function of its dual.
Index Terms—Concatenated codes, duality, error-correction coding, iterative decoding, mutual information.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE seminal paper of Gallager [1, p. 48] suggested to evaluate the convergence behavior of iterative decoders for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes by tracking the probability distributions of extrinsic log-likelihood ratios ( -values). The procedure is particularly simple for erasure channels (ECs) because one must compute only the fraction of erasures being passed from one component decoder to another. For example, this is done in [2], [3] for irregular LDPC codes. However, for other channels, one must track entire probability density functions. A detailed analysis for such cases is described in [4], [5], where the procedure is called density evolution.
Density evolution can be simplified in several ways. First, empirical evidence shows that good EC codes are also good for many practical channels. This motivates designing codes for ECs, and then adapting the design for the actual channel [6,
Manuscript received March 25, 2003; revised March 15, 2004. The material in this paper was presented in part at the Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, March 2002; the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002; and the 3rd International Symposium on Turbo Codes, Brest, France, September 2003.
A. Ashikhmin and G. Kramer are with Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA (e-mail: aea@bell-labs.com; gkr@bell-labs.com).
S. ten Brink was with Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Crawford Hill, NJ. He is now with Realtek, Irvine, CA 92618 USA (e-mail: stenbrink@ realtek-us.com).
Communicated by S. Litsyn, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.836693

Ch. 6]. A second approach is to track only one number per iteration rather than density functions. For instance, one might track a statistic of the extrinsic -values based on their mean, variance, an error probability, a fidelity or a mutual information [7]–[17]. We refer to [13, Sec. IV] and [18] for a comparison of some of these tools. We consider tracking a per-letter average mutual information, i.e., we use extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts. Several reasons for choosing EXIT charts are as follows.
• Mutual information seems to be the most accurate statistic [13, Sec. IV], [18].
• Mutual information is the most robust statistic, in the sense that it applies without change to the widest range of channels, modulations, and detectors. For instance, EXIT functions apply to ECs without change. They further apply to symbol-based decoders [19] and to suboptimal decoders such as hard-decision decoders.
• EXIT functions have analytic properties that have useful implications for designing codes and iterative processors.
One aim of this paper is to justify the last claim. For example, we prove that if the decoder’s a priori -values come from a binary EC (or BEC) then the area under an EXIT function is one minus a conditional entropy. This property is used to show that code design for BECs reduces to a curve-fitting problem for several classes of codes including parallel concatenated (PC or turbo) [20], serially concatenated (SC) [21], LDPC, and repeat–accumulate (RA) codes [22], [23]. This fact gives theoretical support for the curve-fitting techniques already being applied in the communications literature, see, e.g., [24]–[30]. The success of these techniques relies on the robustness of EXIT charts: the transfer functions change little when BEC a priori
-values are replaced by, e.g., a priori -values generated by transmitting binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) symbols over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Moreover, the resulting transfer functions continue to predict the convergence behavior of iterative decoders rather accurately.
For the special case of LDPC codes, the area property is related to the flatness condition of [31] and has similar implications. For both LDPC and RA codes on a BEC, the curve-fitting technique is known through a polynomial equation [2], [23]. However, the area property applies to many communication problems beyond LDPC or RA decoding. For instance, it applies to problems with PC codes, SC codes, modulators, detectors, and channels with memory.
A second property we prove is that EXIT functions for BECs can be expressed in terms of what we call split information functions and split support weights. The former are refinements of the information functions of a code introduced in [32], while

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

the latter are refinements of the weight enumerators of a code [33]–[35]. The split information functions are used to prove a third property that relates the EXIT function of a linear code to the EXIT function of its dual. As far as we know, these are the first applications of information functions and support weights to a posteriori probability (APP) decoding.
This paper is organized as follows. The first part of the paper, comprising Sections II and III, deals with general channels. In Section II, we describe a decoding model that can be used for a wide variety of communication problems. In Section III, we use this model to define EXIT functions and derive general properties of such functions. The second part of the paper deals with BECs. In Section IV, we derive several properties of EXIT functions when the a priori -values are modeled as coming from a BEC. Sections V–VIII show how the area property guides code design. Section IX summarizes our results.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. EXIT Chart Example
Fig. 1. EXIT chart for a (2; 4)-regular LDPC code on the BEC.
Consider the EXIT chart for an LDPC code. Such a code is

often represented by a bipartite graph whose left vertices are

called variable nodes and whose right vertices are called check

nodes (see [4]). Suppose the variable and check nodes have

degrees and , respectively, so that we have a -regular

LDPC code. The code has a design rate of and, as is often

done, we assume the code is long and its interleaver has large Fig. 2. A decoding model for PC and SC codes. girth.

Suppose we transmit over a BEC with erasure probability . A

belief-propagation decoder then passes only one of three prob-

abilities: and (erasure). As we will show, the EXIT

functions turn out to be one minus the fraction of erasures being

passed from one side of the graph to the other, i.e., the anal-

ysis is equivalent to that of [2]. Fig. 1 shows the EXIT functions

when

and

. The curve for the check nodes is

the one starting at on the axis, and its functional form is

. The curve for the variable nodes depends on

and is given by

.

The decoding trajectories are depicted in Fig. 1 by the dashed

lines marked with arrows. For instance, when

, we begin

on the axis at

and move right to the check-node

curve. We then move up to the variable-node curve marked

, back to the check-node curve, and so forth. The

curve does not intersect the check-node curve, which means the

decoder’s per-edge erasure probability can be made to approach

zero. We say that there is an open convergence tunnel between

the curves. In contrast, the

curve intersects the check-

node curve, which means the decoder gets “stuck.” Convergence

is, in fact, guaranteed if

, and

is therefore called

a threshold for this decoder.

by the corresponding lower case letters. For example, we con-

sider to be a realization of . The decoder receives two vec-

tors: a noisy version of and a noisy version of , where

is either or . We call the to channel

the commu-

nication channel, and the to channel

the extrinsic

channel. One might alternatively choose to call the extrinsic

channel the a priori channel because we use its outputs as if

they were a priori information. However, we will consider iter-

ative decoding where this channel models extrinsic information

[36] coming from another decoder rather than true a priori in-

formation. Either way, the terminology “extrinsic” reminds us

that originates from outside the communication channel.

Fig. 2 depicts how we will model the information

that

the component decoders of a PC or SC code receive. For ex-

ample, suppose we perform iterative decoding for an SC code.

The inner decoder receives extrinsic information about the input

bits of the inner encoder, so we set

. The outer encoder, in

contrast, receives extrinsic information about the output bits of

the outer encoder, so we set

. In both cases, the extrinsic

channel is an artificial device that does not exist. We introduce

it only to help us analyze the decoder’s operation.

Often both the communication and extrinsic channels are

B. Decoding Model

memoryless, but we remark that the area property derived below remains valid when the communication channel has

Consider the decoding model shown in Fig. 2. A binary-sym- memory. For example, suppose we parse the bits into 4-bit

metric source produces a vector of independent informa- blocks, and map each of these blocks to a 16 quadrature am-

tion bits each taking on the values and with probability . plitude modulation (16-QAM) symbol. We send these symbols

An encoder maps to a binary length codeword . We write through an AWGN channel and they arrive at the receiver as .

random variables using upper case letters and their realizations We view the communication channel as including the parser,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASHIKHMIN et al.: EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

2659

Fig. 3. A decoding model with two encoders.

of the bits in . The appropriate model is then Fig. 3 (or Fig. 2)

with

and an extrinsic channel that is absent or completely

noisy.

For further analysis, we write for the vector with the

th entry removed, i.e.,

. We

expand the numerator in (3) as

the 16-QAM mapper, and the AWGN channel. This channel

has a 4-bit “block memory” but the area property applies. (Of

course, for such channels the property’s applicability to itera-

tive decoding is hampered by the fact that the extrinsic channels

are not accurately modeled as BECs.) As a second example,

suppose we map onto BPSK symbols that are sent over an

intersymbol interference (ISI) channel. The communication

channel now consists of the BPSK mapper and the ISI channel.

We will write for the capacity of the communication channel.

Fig. 3 depicts another decoding model with two encoders. In

fact, Fig. 3 includes Fig. 2: let Encoder 1 be the Encoder in

Fig. 2, and if

choose Encoder 2 to be the identity mapping,

and if

choose Encoder 2 to be Encoder 1. The reason

for introducing the second encoder is that, when dealing with

LDPC or RA codes, we need to make Encoder 1 the identity

mapping and Encoder 2 a repetition code or single parity-check

code. This situation is not included in Fig. 2.

An even more general approach is to replace

and

with a combined channel

. Such a model

could be useful for analyzing the effect of dependencies be-

tween the channel and a priori -values. For other problems,

the vector might have complex entries and Encoder 1 might

be a discrete-time linear filter. We will, however, consider only

the model of Fig. 3.

Let be the length of , , , and . The decoder uses and

to compute two estimates of : the a posteriori -values and

the extrinsic -values . The symbol ,

, gives

a priori information about the random variable with -value

(4)
where and are vectors corresponding to , and where the last step follows if the extrinsic channel is memoryless. Expanding the denominator of (3) in the same way and inserting the result into (3), we have
(5) where
(6) The value is called the extrinsic -value about .

(1) III. EXIT FUNCTIONS

where

is the probability that

con-

ditioned on the event

. Similarly, for memoryless com-

munication channels, the symbol gives information about the

random variable with -value

(2)

We will use (2) when dealing with PC codes in Section VIII. For simplicity, we assume that all random variables are discrete. Continuous random variables can be treated by replacing certain probabilities by probability density functions.
The decoder we are mainly interested in is the APP decoder [1] that computes the -values

A. Average Extrinsic Information
An iterative decoder has two or more component decoders that exchange extrinsic -values. Alternatively, the decoders could exchange extrinsic probabilities. The ensuing analysis does not depend on how the reliabilities are represented because we use mutual information.
Continuing, the from one decoder pass through an interleaver and are fed to another decoder as a priori -values . We model as being output from a channel as in Fig. 3. We define two quantities (see also [13]–[16]), namely
(7)

(3)

(8)

where

is the probability of the event

As done here, we adopt the notation of [37, Ch. 2] for mutual

conditioned on

and

. For example, suppose we information and entropies. The value is called the average

perform a maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) decoding a priori information going into the decoder, and is called

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

the average extrinsic information coming out of the decoder. An EXIT chart plots as a function of .
Consider first , and suppose the all have the same distribution, and that the extrinsic channel is memoryless and time invariant. We then have

(9)

We further have

because is binary. We will usu-

ally consider codes for which the are uniform and identically

distributed, and codes and extrinsic channels for which can

take on all values between and .

Consider next . Observe from (6) that is a function of

and , and that and are interchangeable since one

defines the other. This implies (see [38, Sec. 2.10])

(10)

We will use rather than

simply because better

reminds us of the word a priori. Some authors prefer to add

commas and write

, and similarly for entropies

with multiple random variables. However, we will adhere to the

notation of [37]. The following proposition shows that the in-

equality in (10) is in fact an equality for APP decoders with

extrinsic message passing.

Proposition 1:

Fig. 4. EXIT chart for repetition codes on BECs (upper three solid lines), a BSC (lower solid line), and BPSK on an AWGN channel (dashed line).
extrinsic channels are binary-symmetric channels (BSCs) with crossover probabilities and , respectively. We now have

(11) where

Proof: See Appendix A.

We remark that for non-APP decoders, the average extrinsic is the binary entropy function. For the case

and

information put out by the decoder will usually not satisfy (10) we use (12) to compute

with equality. The import of Proposition 1 is that we need to

consider only random variables in front of the decoder, i.e., we

have

(12) (14)

B. Examples

Example 1: (Repetition Codes on a BEC) Consider Fig. 2

with a length repetition code. Suppose the communication and

extrinsic channels are BECs with erasure probabilities and ,

respectively. We have

. Furthermore,

for the case

we have

Similar curves can be computed for

. We plot in Fig. 4

for

with

(it is the lowest solid curve). We

thus have

, i.e., is approximately

the same as in Example 2. Observe that the BSC curve is close

to but below the BEC curve. Similar observations concerning

thresholds were made in [6, Chs. 6 and 7].

(13)

where the second step follows by the symmetry of the code. We

plot versus in Fig. 4 where we have chosen

and

.

Example 3: (Repetition Code on an AWGN Channel) Con-

sider the repetition codes of Example 1, but where the commu-

nication and extrinsic channels are BPSK-input AWGN chan-

nels with noise variances and , respectively. We convert

these variances to the variances of their -values [36], namely,

and

, respectively. One can compute

and

, where

Example 2: (Repetition Code on a BSC) Consider the repetition codes of Example 1, but where the communication and

(15)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASHIKHMIN et al.: EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

2661

We plot in Fig. 4 for

as the dashed curve, where

so that

. Observe that the AWGN

curve lies between the BEC and BSC curves. Again, a similar

result concerning thresholds was found in [6, Chs. 6 and 7]. In

fact, recent work has shown that the BEC and BSC curves give

upper and lower bounds, respectively, on the EXIT curves for

repetition codes on binary-input, symmetric channels [39], [40].

Example 4: Consider LDPC variable nodes of degree . We

use the model of Fig. 3 where is one bit,

, and Encoder

2 is a length repetition code. We again make the communi-

cation and extrinsic channels BECs with erasure probabilities

and , respectively. We compute

(16)

Fig. 1 shows two examples of such curves when

and

.

Example 5: Consider LDPC check nodes of degree . We

use the model of Fig. 3 with

and with Encoder 2 a length

single parity-check code. Let the extrinsic channel be a BEC

with erasure probability so that

and (12) simplifies

to

(17)

Example 7: (Irregular LDPC Codes) An irregular LDPC

code [2] can be viewed as follows: Encoder 2 in Fig. 3 is a

mixture of either repetition codes or single parity-check codes.

For example, suppose that 40% and 60% of the edges are con-

nected to degree- and degree- variables nodes, respectively.

Inserting (16) into (19) with

and

, we have

(20)

The are here the same as the left degree distribution coefficients of [2].

IV. ERASURE CHANNEL PROPERTIES
The rest of this paper is concerned with the special case where the a priori symbols are modeled as coming from a BEC with erasure probability . We derive three results for EXIT functions for such situations. The first, an area property, is valid for any codes and communication channels. The second, an equation showing how to compute EXIT functions via the Helleseth–Kløve–Levenshtein information functions of a code [32], is valid when both the communication and extrinsic channels are BECs. The third, a duality property, relates the EXIT functions of a linear code and its dual.
A. Area Property
We have

An example of such a curve with

is plotted in Fig. 1.

(21)

Example 6: Consider Example 4 but where

has bits

and Encoder 2 is a length

single parity-check code. where

The code with codewords

is thus a systematic code. We

compute

(22)

(18) We will use (18) for generalized LDPC codes in Section VII-A.

Let

be the area under the EXIT func-

tion. We have the following result.

Theorem 1: If the extrinsic channel (i.e., a priori channel) is a BEC, then for any codes (linear or not) and any communication channel (memoryless or not) we have

C. Mixtures of Codes

(23)

Suppose we split into several vectors ,

,

and encode each separately. Let and be those portions of the respective and corresponding to , and denote the

Proof: See Appendix B.

length of by . Equation (8) simplifies to

Note that

(19)

which implies

. We will consider pri-

where and are the th entries of and , respectively, , and is the expression in square brackets in (19).
Observe that is simply the average extrinsic information for component code . Thus, the EXIT function is the average

marily cases where

for all so that

.

For instance, suppose that Encoder 2 is linear and has no idle

components, i.e., Encoder 2’s generator matrix has no all-zeros

columns. This implies

for all so that (23) becomes

of the component EXIT functions . This mixing property is

known and was used in [24]–[28] to improve codes.

(24)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004
TABLE I EXIT FUNCTIONS FOR SYSTEMATIC LINEAR BLOCK CODES

Furthermore, if both Encoders 1 and 2 are one-to-one (invertible) mappings then we can interchange , , and . For example, we can write (24) as

(25)

An important consequence of Theorem 1 is that it restricts the

form of the EXIT function. Moreover, one can sometimes relate

to the code rate, as shown in several examples below.

We remark that we will use two definitions of rate inter-

changeably:

and

. In most cases, these

two rates are identical, but if Encoder 2 is not a one-to-one

mapping then the second rate is smaller than the first. We will

ignore this subtlety and assume that

.

Example 8: (Scramblers) Suppose Encoder 1 in Fig. 3 is a

filter or scrambler, i.e., it is a rate one code. Suppose further

that Encoder 2 is the identity mapping and the communication

channel is memoryless. We then have

and

so that (25) gives

(26)

The area is therefore if independent and uniformly distributed binary inputs maximize (26). This result was discovered in [41] and motivated Theorem 1.

Example 9: (No Communication Channel) Suppose there is

no communication channel. Such a situation occurs for the outer

decoder of an SC code for which we also have

. The area

(24) is thus

(27)

Several EXIT functions for this situation are given in Table I,

where we write

to mean the average extrinsic information

when

. The functions are plotted in Fig. 5. We will

show that (27) has important consequences for code design.

Example 10: Consider Fig. 2 with

. This situation fits

the decoding of the inner code of an SC code (Section V) and the

component codes of a PC code (Section VIII). We have

,

, and

Fig. 5. EXIT chart for the systematic linear block codes of Table I.

Example 12: Consider the LDPC variable nodes of Example

4. We have

, so (25) becomes

(30)

Example 13: Consider the LDPC check nodes of Example

5. There is no communication channel, so we apply (27) with

and

to obtain

(31)

B. EXIT and Information Functions of a Code

The information function in positions of a code was de-

fined in [32] as the average amount of information in posi-

tions of . More precisely, let be the code length and be

the set of all subsets of

of size . Let

with

. We write

(28)

Observe that, by definition, we have

.

Let be a linear code and the dimension of . The infor-

Example 11: Consider Fig. 2 with

. We have

mation function in positions of is

and (25) becomes

(32)

(29)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASHIKHMIN et al.: EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

2663

We write the unnormalized version of as

so that in (36) we have

(33)

if , else.

(39)

We remark that the above definitions and the following theory The resulting EXIT curve coomputed from (36) is (13).

can be extended to nonlinear codes (cf. [32]).

Consider the following simple generalization of . Let be Example 15: (No Communication Channel) Suppose

the code formed by all pairs

in Fig. 3. Suppose Encoders (see Example 9), in which case we have

1 and 2 are linear, and that is a linear

code (which

means that has dimension ). Let be the set of all subsets

of

of the form

where

(40)

In other words, is the set of subsets of positions from the

first positions of , and positions from the last positions

of . We define the split information function in

positions

of as

(34)

We write the unnormalized version of as

Example 16: (MAP Decoding) Recall from Section II-B that MAP decoding of the bits in corresponds to Fig. 2 with and , i.e., there is no a priori information. We have
(41)

Note that the decoder’s average erasure probability is simply

. For instance, suppose we transmit using an

maximum distance separable (MDS) code [42, Ch. 11]. Any

positions of such a code have rank for

, and rank for

. This implies

(35)

We remark that is the information function of Encoder 1,

and is the information function of Encoder 2.

The following theorem shows that EXIT functions on a BEC

can be computed from the split information functions. We write

for the average extrinsic information when

and

there is no communication channel, and

when

and

.

Theorem 2: If the extrinsic and communication channels are BECs with respective erasure probabilities and , and if Encoders 1 and 2 are linear with no idle components, then we have

(36)
Proof: See Appendix C. Theorem 2 can be used to prove Theorem 1 for BEC communication channels: integrating (36) with (108), we have

if if
and if if
Inserting (42) and (43) into (41), we obtain

(42) (43) . (44)

We point out that only few binary MDS codes exist. However,

most of the theory developed above can be extended to -ary

sources and codes. For example, suppose is a -ary vector,

Encoder 1 is an

Reed–Solomon code over GF , and

. Reed–Solomon codes are MDS and the average symbol

erasure probability turns out to be precisely (44).

C. EXIT Functions and Support Weights
The information functions of a code are known to be related to the support weights of its subcodes [32]. The support weight
of a code is the number of positions where not all codewords of are zero. For example, the code

(45)

(37)
Example 14: (Repetition Codes) Consider the repetition codes of Example 1. We compute

has

. The th support weight of is the number of

unique subspaces of of dimension and support weight . For

example, the code (45) has

if

else

(38)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(46)

2664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

The sequence

is the usual weight dis-

tribution of a code. We also have

for

, and we

write

for

.

The numbers have been investigated in [34], [35], and

more recently in [43]–[48]. For instance, it is known that can

be written in terms of the as follows (see [32, Theorem 5]):

where for all we define we write

(47)

and

, and for

The numbers are known as Gaussian binomial coefficients

[42, p. 443]. The have been determined for some codes. For

instance, the

simplex code has (see [32, Sec. IV])

if

for

(48)

else.

Fig. 6. EXIT chart for the [7; 3] simplex code and its dual.

For example, for

we have

Inserting (48) into (47), and performing manipulations, we have

(see [32, Sec. IV])

(54)

(49) and

,

,

,

. In fact, we easily compute

Example 17: (Simplex Code with

) The

simplex

code is a single parity-check code. Equation (49) yields

(55)
for general . This shows that it can be simpler to compute directly rather than through (47).

Inserting (50) into (40), we have
Example 18: (Simplex Code with code has

(50) . ) The simplex

(51) Inserting (51) into (40), we have

(52)

where where

. This curve is plotted in Fig. 6 as the solid line, .

D. Split Support Weights
The fact that can be expressed in terms of the motivates the question whether can be written in terms of appropriate generalizations of the . This is indeed possible, as we proceed to show.
Consider again the linear code formed by all pairs in Fig. 3. We define the split support weights of as the number of unique subspaces of that have dimension , support weight in the first positions of , and support weight in the last positions of . We have the following generalization of (47).
Theorem 3:

Example 19: (Uncoded Transmission) Consider the uncoded transmission of bits. We use [35, eq. (7)] to compute
(56)

(53) Proof: See Appendix D for a sketch of the proof.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASHIKHMIN et al.: EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

2665

We remark that in (56) could be larger than the dimensions of the code for Encoders 1 and 2. Thus, it is not immediately clear how to relate and the support weights for Encoders 1 and 2.

Example 20: (Input–Output Weight Enumerators) Suppose Encoder 2 is the identity mapping. The are then the used in [21], [49] to determine the input–output weight enumerator function for the code generated by Encoder 1.

Example 21: (Simplex Code) Consider a systematic gener-

ator matrix for the

simplex code, and suppose that

Encoder 1 transmits the systematic bits while Encoder 2 trans-

mits the

redundant bits. We have

and

, and compute

if

(57)

else.

For instance, for

we use (57) in (56) to obtain

Fig. 7. EXIT chart for Example 22 (solid lines) and Example 25 (dashed lines).

(58)

Example 22: (Identity and Simplex Code) Suppose Encoder

1 transmits the information bits directly, and Encoder 2 gen-

erates the

simplex code. We have

and

, and compute

of

if

(59)

else.

For example, for

we use (59) in (56) to obtain

E. Duality Property

Consider the linear code formed by all pairs

in Fig. 3.

Let

be the EXIT function of the dual code of , i.e.,

is an

code. We have the following result.

Theorem 4: If the extrinsic and communication channels are BECs with respective erasure probabilities and , then we have

(62)

Proof: See Appendix E. If there is no communication channel

, then we have

(63)

Example 23: (LDPC Check Nodes) Consider the LDPC

check nodes of Example 5 for which there is no communication

(60) channel. The duals of single parity-check codes are repetition

codes, and Example 4 with

tells us that the repetition

code curve is

. We apply (63) and obtain

(64)

Note that is the of (51). We use (60) in (36) to compute the EXIT curve to be

This duality result was described in [6, Lemma 7.7]. We remark that (63) with replaced by is rather accurate for channels such as AWGN channels (see [60]). The use of (63) in this way is called a “reciprocal channel approximation” in [6, Lemma 7.7]. This approximation was used to design good codes in [27], [30]. The more general (62) was used in the same way for RA codes in [28].

Example 24: (Hamming Codes) The dual of a simplex code

is a Hamming code [42, p. 30]. Consider the

Hamming

(61) code for which (52) and Theorem 4 give

(65)

where

and

. This curve is plotted for various

in Fig. 7 as the solid lines. We recover (52) by using . The curve (65) is depicted in Fig. 6 as the dashed line.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2666

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

Fig. 8. Encoder and iterative decoder for an SC code.

Example 25: Consider Example 22 and the code formed by all pairs . A generator matrix for is
(66) where is the identity matrix, and is the parity-check matrix of the simplex code. A generator matrix for
is
(67)

where is the transpose of , and is the

all-zeros

matrix. Thus, the situation for the dual code is that Encoder

1 transmits out of the

information bits, while the

generator matrix of Encoder 2 is the first of

columns of

(67). The corresponding EXIT function can be computed using

Example 22 and (62). For instance, for

, we use (61) and

(62) to plot the EXIT functions shown in Fig. 7 as dashed lines.

V. EXIT FOR SC CODES

An SC code has an

outer code and an

inner

code with formation bits

(see Fig. 8). The outer encoder maps in- Fig. 9. EXIT chart for an RA code on the BEC. to coded bits . An interleaver per-

mutes the bits in to , and the inner encoder maps

to the length vector . The overall rate of the code is

where

and

.

We consider only the case where both codes are linear.

An iterative decoder for the SC code is shown in Fig. 8. Con-

sider first the outer decoder for which we use the model of Fig. 2

with

and . Example 9 tells us that for a BEC

we have

BEC, e.g., for finite-length codes and many decoder iterations. A common approach to enable analysis is to study ensembles of codes rather than specific codes [1]–[4], [50]. We will not use this approach, and instead consider only sufficiently long codes and interleavers for which the EXIT analysis becomes exact.
Equations (68) and (69) have the following implications. For successful decoding, the outer code EXIT curve must lie above the inner code EXIT curve. For SC codes this implies

(68)

or, using (68) and (69)

Next, for the inner decoder we use Fig. 2 with 10 tells us that

. Example

(70)
Thus, we get the satisfying result that the overall rate must be less than capacity for successful decoding [51]. However, (68)

(69) and (69) say more.

First, suppose that

for some satisfying

We will use these area results to interpret how to design SC

. We have

codes, and later RA, LDPC, and PC codes. Before proceeding, however, we caution that the interpretations rely on the accu-

(71)

racy of the model in Fig. 3. In particular, we assume that i.e., any area gap between the outer and inner code EXIT

has independent and uniformly distributed bits, and that the ex- curves implies a rate loss compared to . In fact, if the inner

trinsic channel is a BEC, i.e., the extrinsic channel is mem- code is a scrambler (i.e., a rate one code as in Example 8)

oryless and time invariant. These assumptions are not neces- and

, then

and the area between the

sarily valid in practice even if the communication channel is a curves is exactly the rate loss

(cf. Example 26 and Fig. 9).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASHIKHMIN et al.: EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

2667

The bound (71) means that the design of capacity-approaching

codes reduces to a curve-fitting problem, i.e., one must match

the outer code curve exactly to the inner code curve. Moreover,

the smaller the area between the curves, the larger the number

of iterations needed to achieve a desired per-edge erasure

probability. The EXIT chart thus shows graphically how the

decoding complexity (in terms of the number of iterations)

increases as one approaches capacity.

Second, if the inner code has rate less than one then we have

. That is, any inner code with

has

an inherent capacity loss that the outer code cannot recover.

Of course, strong codes with

do have

. However, iterative decoding is attractive just because pow-

erful codes can be built from easily decodable component codes.

Such component codes with

will inevitably leave sig-

nificant gaps between

and .

For example, suppose that the inner code is a length repe-

tition code and that the communication channel is a BEC with

erasure probability ,

. We have

As a second example, suppose we choose

. We then

have the problem that both the inner and outer code EXIT curves

start from

, and decoding cannot even begin to converge.

This problem can be overcome in several ways: make the code

systematic [23], let a small fraction of the check nodes have

degree [28], or use inner or outer code doping [52]. The first of

these approaches makes the code fall outside the class of serially

concatenated codes, so we consider it next.

VI. EXIT FOR SYSTEMATIC RA CODES

A systematic RA code of rate

has variable nodes

and an accumulator of length

. The design of [23] further

specifies a check-node layer with check nodes each having

edges going into the interleaver. Let be the average number

of edges going into the interleaver from the variable nodes. The

number of edges is both and

, giving

(75)

(72)

with equality if and only if

. Thus, repetition codes are

a particularly poor choice as inner codes when iteratively de-

coding. Similar large gaps to capacity for certain convolutional

codes are computed in Section VIII. This discussion suggests

Next, suppose the communication channel is memoryless with if is uniformly distributed. The areas and
under the respective variable and check-node/accumulator curves are
(76)

that it is a good idea to use a rate one inner code when iteratively decoding. In fact, an inner code with rate larger than one will also do, as shown in Example 26.
Example 26: (RA Codes on a BEC) An RA code [22] has an accumulator (a differential encoder) as the inner code and a mixture of repetition codes as the outer code. One can further punc-

(77)

For successful decoding, the variable-node curve must lie above

the check-node/accumulator curve, which requires

. So suppose we have

for some satisfying

. From (76) and (77) we have

ture the accumulator output by placing a layer of check nodes between the interleaver and accumulator, as was done in [23]. Suppose the check nodes all have edges going into the interleaver, and that the communication channel is a BEC with erasure probability . The EXIT function of the combined checknode–layer/accumulator inner decoder is (see [23, eq. (17)])
(73)

(78)
Equation (78) has the same implications as (71), namely, that any area gap between the two curves corresponds to a rate loss compared to . We thus again have the result that to approach capacity one must match the variable-node curve exactly to the check-node/accumulator curve. This is done in [23] by using a Taylor series expansion of an approximation to the check-node

curve. The paper [23] thereby followed the approach of [53]

The inner code rate is , which can be larger than one. One which we discuss later in Example 27.

can check that the area under (73) is precisely

, as required by (69). As an example of a code design, suppose we choose and connect 40% of the edges to degree- variable nodes and 60% of the edges to degree- variable nodes. We then have
and, using (13) and (19)

VII. EXIT FOR LDPC CODES
The design rate of an LDPC code is determined by the number of variable nodes and the number of check nodes
via (see [4, Sec. II-A])

(79) (74)

The area under the curve is precisely

. The EXIT

curve is plotted in Fig. 9 for erasure probabilities

and

. In this figure, we have

and

.

Observe that the decoder’s per-edge erasure probability can be

made to approach zero for both channels. The threshold for this

code is, in fact,

so that

. Thus, these

The true rate could be larger than the design rate because some

of the checks could be redundant. However, as is usually done,

we will ignore this subtlety. Note that is the code length

. Let and be the average degrees of the variable and

check nodes, respectively. The number of interleaver edges is

both

and , giving

repeat–accumulate codes cannot approach capacity.

(80)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

Suppose again that the communication channel is memoryless

with

if is uniformly distributed. We use (19),

(30), and (31), and find that the areas under the respective vari-

able and check-node curves are

(81) (82)

For successful decoding the variable-node curve must lie above

the check-node curve. This implies

, so suppose

that

for some satisfying

. From (81)

and (82) we have

(83)

Equation (83) has the same implications as (71) and (78): an area gap between the two curves translates into a rate loss compared to . We can again approach capacity only by matching the variable-node curve exactly to the check-node curve. We point out that this result is related to the flatness condition of [31]. The curve fitting is accomplished in [53] and [54] via Taylor series expansions of the check-node EXIT curve.

Fig. 10. EXIT chart for a right-regular LDPC code on the BEC.

Example 27: (Curve Fit Via Taylor Series) We follow the

approach of [53] and choose a right-regular (or check-regular)

LDPC code with

for all check nodes. The inverse EXIT

curve is

, and its Taylor series expansion

about

is

(84)

It is easy to check that all the remaining terms in the expansion

are negative, so any truncation of (84) will lie above

.

Suppose we truncate after four terms to obtain

(85)

We now choose

and

of the edges to be in-

cident to degree- , - , and - variable nodes, respectively. As

a result, the EXIT curve of the variable-node decoder is the

right-hand side of (85) if

. We further have

and

, while

.

The resulting curve is shown in Fig. 10 with

and

. The curve fit is rather tight near

, which means the decoder needs many iterations to correct

all erasures. Of course, as decreases the convergence tunnel

widens.

Example 5 are replaced by other codes. For example, the paper

[55] replaces the single parity-check codes by Hamming codes.

The motivation for doing this is to reduce the number of decoder

iterations and/or to lower the error floor. A disadvantage is that

one must implement more complex APP decoders. However,

we point out that low-complexity APP decoders exist for trellis

codes, and also for first-order Reed–Muller and Hamming

codes [56].

We next derive the design rate of generalized LDPC codes.

Suppose there are variable nodes and check nodes. Sup-

pose further that variable node represents a

linear

code that has the information bits going through the com-

munication channel and the coded bits going through the

extrinsic channel. For instance, the variable nodes of Examples

4 and 12 represent

repetition codes. The

average number of coded bits and degrees per variable node is

(86)

Similarly, suppose check node represents a code with no communication channel and with the bits going through the extrinsic channel. We write

linear coded

Example 28: (Unequal Error Protection) Consider the code

of Example 27 and suppose we choose only so many iterations

so that

. This means that the coded bits associated

with variable nodes of degree- , - , and - have erasure proba-

bilities less than

,

, and

,

respectively. Thus, if we have a systematic code, it makes sense

to design the encoder to associate the information bits with the

high-degree variable nodes [54].

A. Generalized LDPC Codes

(87)

The number of interleaver edges is both

and ,

and the number of constraints on the

coded bits is

. The design rate is therefore

(88)

Generalized LDPC codes are codes where the repetition where

and

. For example, for LDPC

codes of Example 4 and/or the single parity-check codes of codes we have

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASHIKHMIN et al.: EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

2669

Fig. 12. Encoder and iterative decoder for a PC code.

Fig. 11. EXIT chart for a generalized LDPC code.

The decoding model for variable node is Fig. 3 with En-

coder 1 passing independent bits directly to the communi-

cation channel, and with Encoder 2 putting out the bits of

the linear code. Suppose the communication channel is memo-

ryless with

if is uniformly distributed. We use

(19) and (25) to compute

Fig. 13. Alternative iterative decoder for a PC code. The second decoder receives only y .

(89) (90)

We again require

for successful decoding, so

suppose

for some satisfying

.

We then recover (83) and again find that one must match the

variable-node curve exactly to the check-node curve.

Example 29: (Hamming Check-Regular Codes) Con-

sider using

Hamming codes as the check nodes. We

computethe check-node EXIT curve via (49), (40), and The-

orem 4, and plot it in Fig. 11 as the lower curve. We mix

the variable nodes of Examples 4 and 6 by connecting one

half of the interleaver edges to

repetition codes and

the other half to

single parity-check nodes. This

means that 7/15 of the variable nodes are repetition codes,

and 8/15 are single parity-check codes. We therefore have

,

, and

. The vari-

able-node curve is shown in Fig. 11 for

, and it is

reasonably well-matched to the Hamming code curve. The de-

sign rate is

which is close to

.

The vector then represents the communication channel outputs corresponding to for
Fig. 12 has going to both decoders. This overlap means that one must subtract the channel -value from the of (6) before passing it to the other component decoder. In other words, for memoryless communication channels, the new extrinsic -value is
(91)

where is the same as

without the th component

of . Furthermore, we now have

(92)

Observe that is a function of and . One can show that , which means that (8) becomes

(93)

VIII. EXIT FOR PC CODES

The most common PC code puts out three kinds of bits:

Rather than dealing with (93), suppose we use the de-

systematic bits

, parity-check bits , and parity- coder shown in Fig. 13. That is, we consider new Decoders 1

check bits . The overall rate is thus

. and 2 where only Decoder 1 uses . The advantage of this

An encoder and decoder structure for such a code is shown in asymmetric approach is that one can apply all the results of

Fig. 12. Suppose the communication channel is memoryless. Section IV.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

For example, consider Decoder 1 for which we use the model

of Fig. 2 with

. Example 10 tells us that

(94)

where

. For Decoder 2 we similarly have

(95)

where

. For successful decoding, Decoder 1’s curve

must lie above Decoder 2’s curve. This implies

, so

suppose that

for some satisfying

.

From (94) and (95) we have

(96)

We yet again find that an area gap between the two curves trans-

lates into a rate loss compared to . The design of capacity-ap-

proaching PC codes thus reduces to a curve-fitting problem, as

is the case for SC, RA, and LDPC codes.

The areas (94) and (95) have further implications. Just like

the inner code of an SC code, if

then we must have

Fig. 14. EXIT chart for a PC code.

For instance, suppose we choose

plot the EXIT curves in Fig. 14 for

and

. We have

Similarly, if

then we must have

so that

. We

, where

which implies (see (94))

In either case, the component code has an inherent capacity loss

that the other code cannot recover. For example, if

and

Encoder 1 is a low-memory convolutional code with rate less

than one, then one will have a significant gap between and

in (96). We illustrate this point with the following example.

Example 30: (Turbo Code) Suppose Encoders 1 and 2 are

accumulators for which

of every bits are punctured. We

have

and compute the respective first and second

decoder EXIT curves to be

This is less than nent code with capacity.

, so that any choice of second compocannot make the overall code approach

A. Nonsystematic PC Codes
Nonsystematic PC codes have the same encoder structure as in Fig. 12 except that no is transmitted. The rate is therefore
and (94) becomes

(101)

(97) (98)

The curve (97) follows by replacing in (73) with , and then

noting that the extrinsic -value is a sum of an accumulator

-value and a channel -value. The curve (98) is simply (73).

We thus have

,

and

which has the same form as (95). We again find that the design of capacity-approaching codes reduces to a curve-fitting problem. One can further make similar statements about the component codes as was done above for systematic PC codes.
As a final remark, RA codes can be converted to nonsystematic PC codes as described in [57]. The conversion involves splitting the inner code into two parts, and considering each part as a new component code. The paper [14] shows that this trick can improve decoding efficiency.

(99)

IX. SUMMARY

(100) A decoding model was introduced that applies to a wide variety of code structures and communication problems. EXIT

Equality holds in (99) if and only if , so that

functions were defined for this model by averaging per-letter

for all interesting cases. We cannot, therefore, approach capacity mutual informations. Various properties of these functions

regardless of which second component code we choose.

were derived when transmitting information over a BEC. An

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASHIKHMIN et al.: EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

2671

area property was used to show that the design of capacity-approaching codes reduces to a curve-fitting problem for SC, RA, LDPC, and PC codes. A duality property lets one compute the EXIT function of a linear code from the EXIT function of its dual.
We suspect that other interesting EXIT properties can yet be found. Potential extensions of our results could be as follows.

The extrinsic channel is a BEC, so let be the set of positions of that were not erased, not including position . We have

(106)

where

. Inserting (106) into (105), we have

• The connection between EXIT functions and information functions motivates further investigations of support weights.
• Closed-form EXIT functions for convolutional codes on BECs would help explain how to design PC codes.

(107) where is the extrinsic channel erasure probability, and where we have partitioned the set of according to the number of erasures in . We find that (see [58, p. 303])

• Empirically, EXIT functions are robust to changes in the communication and extrinsic channels. For example, consider two modulators with different bit-to-symbol mappings but the same rate. The area property suggests that the area under both EXIT curves should be the same, and this is indeed approximately true for a wide range of mappings [9, Fig. 3], [41, eq. 12]. To understand the robustness better, bounds on EXIT functions for non-BEC channels would be helpful, and might improve the existing EXIT chart performance predictions. Some recent progress on this problem for LDPC codes has been reported in [39] and [40].

We expand

APPENDIX A PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1

(108)
The integral (108) is in fact a special case of Euler’s integral of the first kind, or the beta function. Using (21), (104), (107), and (108), we have

(109)

It remains to show that the triple sum in (109) collapses to

. Consider the vector of length , and observe that

we can expand

in different ways. For example, for

we have the following six expansions:

This last term is simply is binary, we have

(102)

. Thus, because
. We further have We sum these expansions and divide by

to obtain

(103)

(110)

This proves (11).
APPENDIX B PROOF OF THE AREA PROPERTY The terms in the sum of (12) are

The entropy

has the same form as (110) except that

one must add to the conditioning of all entropies. Inserting

the result into (109) proves Theorem 1.

APPENDIX C PROOF OF THEOREM 2

(104) Consider again (104), and note that

because En-

We expand the conditional entropy as

coder 2 has no idle components. Let and be the sets of positions without erasures in the respective and , not including

position for . For linear codes, we have (105)

(111)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2004

Averaging over all and and positions, we obtain

where is the unnormalized split information function of the dual code. Inserting (118) into (36), we have

(112)

We move the sum over and and write

inside the square brackets

(119)

We make the change of variables and collect terms to write

and

,

(113)

Finally, we use (113) in (112), and subtract (112) from one. The result is (36).

APPENDIX D PROOF OF THEOREM 3

(120)

We give a sketch of the proof. For a given

, let

The double sum is simply one. This proves (62).

be the linear code formed by those codewords of which are all

zero in those positions not in . Define

REFERENCES

(114)

and let

be the number of sets in such that

.

One can check that

(115)

Using arguments similar to those in [35, Lemma 1] (see also [42, Ch. 5.2]), we have

(116)

for

,

, and

. Solving this set of

equations for and using (115) proves Theorem 3.

APPENDIX E PROOF OF THE DUALITY PROPERTY We use [32, Corollary 3] (see also [59, Lemma 2.0]) to write
(117)
where is the split information function of the dual code. We can rewrite (117) as

(118)

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[3] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[4] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] S. Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2000.
[7] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806–808, May 1999.
[8] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Low complexity turbo-like codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Sept. 2000, pp. 73–80.
[9] S. ten Brink, “Designing iterative decoding schemes with the extrinsic information transfer chart,” AEÜ Int. J. Electron. Commun., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 389–398, Dec. 2000.
[10] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[11] H. El Gamal and A. R. Hammons Jr, “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 671–686, Feb. 2001.
[12] K. Narayanan, “Effect of precoding on the convergence of turbo equalization for partial response channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 686–698, Apr. 2001.
[13] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASHIKHMIN et al.: EXTRINSIC INFORMATION TRANSFER FUNCTIONS

2673

[14] S. Huettinger, J. Huber, R. Johannesson, and R. Fischer, “Information processing in soft-output decoding,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Allerton, IL, Oct. 2001.
[15] J. Boutros and G. Caire, “Iterative multiuser joint decoding: Unified framework and asymptotic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1772–1793, July 2002.
[16] J. Huber and S. Huettinger, “Information processing and combining in channel coding,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 1–5, 2003, pp. 95–102.
[17] F. Lehmann and G. M. Maggio, “Analysis of the iterative decoding of LDPC and product codes using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, pp. 2993–3000, Nov. 2003.
[18] M. Tüchler, S. ten Brink, and J. Hagenauer, “Measures for tracing convergence of iterative decoding algorithms,” in Proc. 4th Int. ITG Conf. Source and Channel Coding, Berlin, Germany, Jan. 2002.
[19] B. Scanavino, G. Montorsi, and S. Benedetto, “Convergence properties of iterative decoders working at bit and symbol level,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (GLOBECOM ’01), vol. 2, 2001, pp. 1037–1041.
[20] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[21] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concatenation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 909–926, May 1998.
[22] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ‘turbolike’ codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Allerton, IL, Sept. 1998, pp. 201–210.
[23] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 2000.
[24] S. ten Brink, “Rate one-half code for approaching the Shannon limit by 0.1 dB,” Electron. Lett., vol. 36, no. 15, pp. 1293–1294, July 2000.
[25] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Iterative turbo decoder analysis based on density evolution,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 891–907, May 2001.
[26] M. Tüchler and J. Hagenauer, “EXIT charts of irregular codes,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Conf. Information Science and Systems, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002.
[27] G. Caire, D. Burshtein, and S. Shamai (Shitz), “LDPC coding for interference mitigation at the transmitter,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Allerton, IL, Oct. 2002.
[28] S. ten Brink and G. Kramer, “Design of repeat-accumulate codes for iterative detection and decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 51, pp. 2764–2772, Nov. 2003.
[29] M. Tüchler, “Design of serially concatenated systems depending on the block length,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 209–218, Feb. 2004.
[30] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[31] M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. Minneapolis, MN: Inst. Math. and its Applic., Univ. Minnesota, 2000, vol. 123, IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, pp. 153–166.
[32] T. Helleseth, T. Kløve, and V. I. Levenshtein, “On the information function of an error-correcting code,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 43, pp. 549–557, Mar. 1997.
[33] V. K. Wei, “Generalized Hamming weights for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 37, pp. 1412–1418, Sept. 1991.
[34] T. Kløve, “Support weight distribution for linear codes,” Discr. Math., vol. 106/107, pp. 311–316, 1992.
[35] J. Simonis, “The effective length of subcodes,” Applicable Algebra in Eng., Commun., and Comput., vol. 5, pp. 371–377, 1994.
[36] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.

[37] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: Wiley, 1968.
[38] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[39] I. Land, P. A. Hoeher, S. Huettinger, and J. Huber, “Bounds on information combining,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept. 1–5, 2003, pp. 39–42.
[40] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai (Shitz), and J. Ziv, “Extremes of information combining,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Allerton, IL, Oct. 2003.
[41] S. ten Brink, “Exploiting the chain rule of mutual information for the design of iterative decoding schemes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Allerton, IL, Oct. 2001.
[42] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes.. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
0 [43] T. Helleseth, T. Kløve, and J. Mykkeltveit, “The weight distribution of irreducible cyclic codes with block length n ((q 1)=N ),” Discr. Math., vol. 18, pp. 179–211, 1977. [44] C. Bachoc, “On harmonic weight enumerators of binary codes,” Des.,
Codes, Cryptogr., vol. 18, pp. 11–28, 1999. [45] H. Chen and J. Coffey, “Trellis structure and higher weights of extremal
self-dual codes,” Des., Codes, Cryptogr., vol. 24, pp. 15–36, 2001. [46] S. Dougherty, A. Gulliver, and M. Oura, “Higher weights and graded
rings for binary self-dual codes,” unpublished paper, submitted for publication. [47] O. Milenkovic, “Higher weight and coset weight enumerators of formally self-dual codes,” Des., Codes, Cryptogr., to be published. [48] O. Milenkovic, S. T. Coffey, and K. J. Compton, “The third support weight enumerators of the doubly-even, self-dual [32; 16; 8] codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, pp. 740–746, Mar. 2003. [49] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996. [50] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002. [51] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, pp. 379–423, July 1948. [52] S. ten Brink, “Code doping for triggering iterative decoding convergence,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 2001, p. 235. [53] M. A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. 13th Conf. Applied Algebra, Error Correcting Codes, and Cryptography (Lecture Notes in Computer Science). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1999, pp. 65–76. [54] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002. [55] M. Lentmaier and K. S. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density paritycheck codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999. [56] A. Ashikhmin and S. Litsyn, “Fast MAP decoding of first order ReedMuller and Hamming codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.Theory, submitted for publication. [57] S. Huettinger, S. ten Brink, and J. Huber, “Turbo-code representation of RA-codes and DRS-codes for reduced complexity decoding,” in Proc. 2001 Conf. Information Science and Systems, Mar. 21–23, 2001. [58] I. N. Bronshtein and K. A. Semendyayev, Handbook of Mathematics, 3rd ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1997. [59] F. J. MacWilliams, “A theorem on the distribution of weights in a systematic code,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 42, pp. 79–94, 1963. [60] E. Sharon, A. Ashikhmin, and S. Litsyn, “EXIT functions for the Gaussian channel,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 972–981.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:38:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

