250

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

Hybrid Hard-Decision Iterative Decoding of Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Pirouz Zarrinkhat, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Hybrid decoding means to combine different itera-

tive decoding algorithms with the aim of improving error perfor-

mance or decoding complexity. In this work, we introduce “time-

invariant” hybrid ( ) algorithms, and using density evolution

show that for regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and

binary message-passing algorithms,

algorithms perform re-

markably better than their constituent algorithms. We also show

that compared to “switch-type” hybrid ( ) algorithms, such

as Gallager’s algorithm B, where a comparable improvement is

obtained by switching between different iterative decoding algo-

rithms, algorithms are far less sensitive to channel conditions

and thus can be practically more attractive.

Index Terms—Density evolution, hybrid decoding, iterative coding schemes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing decoding algorithms.

I. INTRODUCTION

I N THIS LETTER, we discuss the idea of combining existing iterative decoding algorithms in order to devise more effec-

tive algorithms. This is referred to as “hybrid algorithms.” Hy-

brid algorithms were first introduced by Gallager in the con-

struction of his well-known algorithm B [1, p. 50]. We, more

specifically, refer to algorithms such as Gallager’s algorithm B

as “switch-type” hybrid

, since they switch between

different algorithms through the iteration process. In this work,

we propose a new family of hybrid algorithms, called “time-in-

variant” hybrid

. These algorithms use a specific blend of

different algorithms in each iteration. The blend, however, does

not change by iteration, hence, the name “time-invariant.” In

the next section, restricting our attention to regular low-density

parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], we will provide a formal defini-

tion for hybrid algorithms. Focusing on an important category of

binary message-passing decoding algorithms, “majority-based”

(MB) algorithms [2], and by using density evolution, we will

then show the superiority of

algorithms over their con-

stituents. Finally, in Section III, we compare algorithms

with

algorithms, and demonstrate that in the absence of

the knowledge of the channel, algorithms can handily beat

algorithms in terms of error performance and decoding

complexity (convergence speed). Our study also indicates that,

unlike the case for algorithms, the optimal design of

algorithms is universal in the sense that it is not very sensitive to

Manuscript received September 4, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Dr. M. Fossorier. This work was supported in part by National Capital Institute of Telecommunications (NCIT), Ottawa, ON, Canada.
The authors are with Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: pirouzz@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.827438

the knowledge of the channel parameter. Throughout the letter we follow [3] for basic definitions.

II. HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHMS

Consider

, the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes of length , and suppose that

are

N message-passing algorithms which can be used to decode

over a given channel [3]. Each algorithm ,

, is specified in iteration ,

, by

and , its variable-node and check-node message maps, re-

spectively. Assuming that all messages have the same alphabet

space , we can formulate a new message-passing decoding

algorithm which is defined based on

as

follows. In iteration of , variable-nodes and check-nodes are

randomly partitioned into N groups according to probability

mass function vectors

and

, respectively, and the nodes in

group ,

, process the messages in accordance

with the constituent algorithm . The new algorithm is said to

be the hybrid of

according to hybridization

sequences

and

, and this is denoted by

We can symbolically specify with message maps

(1)

We focus in this letter on hybrid algorithms whose con-

stituents belong to the family of MB algorithms. (Refer to the

Appendix for an overview of this family). More precisely, we

investigate the cases where

is decoded over a binary

symmetric channel (BSC), using1

One way of combining MB algorithms is to switch between

them

. The sequence

in this case consists of el-

ementary vectors. Among algorithms, is notable. This

algorithm guaranties the fastest possible convergence of error

probability to zero, by switching in each iteration to the MB

algorithm that provides the greatest reduction in the error prob-

ability [1, p. 50]. To do so, however, requires the exact value

of the channel parameter, which might not always be known.

Another way of combining MB algorithms is to blend them

together in a time-invariant manner

. In this case, is

independent of . It is shown in the Appendix that for a given

1Since all MB algorithms have the same check-node message map, we have
dropped f~ g from the notation.

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: HYBRID HARD-DECISION ITERATIVE DECODING OF REGULAR LDPCs

251

H H TABLE I

THRESHOLD VALUES FOR MB,

, AND

ALGORITHMS

(8 9) Fig. 1. Graphical representation of density evolution [3] for C ; ,

1 = H ( decoded by MB , MB , MB , MB , and

MB ; MB ; MB ;

) = 0 0720 MB ; ~ , over a BSC with crossover probability  : .

channel parameter , an , be represented by a simple curve

, can . Similarly, the curve

(2)

represents the

algorithm devised by blending MB algo-

rithms according to vector

. By

an argument similar to that in [2], it can be shown that the av-

erage error probability of this algorithm converges to zero with

iteration if and only if

,

.

Example 1: Consider

and the four MB algorithms

that can be used to decode this ensemble over a BSC, namely

, , , and . Also consider , the

al-

gorithm that blends these MB algorithms according to

. Fig. 1 depicts the curves representing and

its constituents for a channel with

. One can see

that the necessary and sufficient condition for the convergence

of error probability to zero, i.e.,

,

, is not

satisfied for either of these MB algorithms. On the other hand,

as the portrayed evolution of the expected fraction of incorrect

messages for shows, the error probability for this algo-

rithm converges to zero by increasing the number of iterations,

and interestingly, there is still room for to cope with even

worse channels.

For every message-passing algorithm, the supremum of all

channel parameters for which the error probability converges

to zero, is called “threshold” [3]. For hybrid algorithms, the

threshold can be maximized over all vectors. (It is easy to

show that achieves the maximum threshold among all

algorithms with MB constituents [1, p. 50]). Table I lists the

threshold values of MB algorithms and the maximum threshold

values of

and

algorithms for several

pairs.

As can be seen, both hybrid algorithms have significantly higher

thresholds compared to their constituents, which is an indication

of their superior performance.

H H Fig. 2. Comparison between the convergence speed of

and

(8 9) = = 0 25 algorithms, for C ; and for  
 , 
 : , 0.50, 0.75, 0.90, 0.95,

= 0 0756 and 1.00 (left to right). (Both algorithms are set to achieve 

: .)

III. COMPARISON BETWEEN

AND

ALGORITHMS

Comparison of

and

values in Table I shows that

algorithms are slightly inferior, in terms of performance, to

their switch-type counterparts. They, however, as we will subse-

quently demonstrate, are more robust and can better cope with

unknown or changing channel conditions.

A. Unknown Channel Parameter

Let us consider the case where the channel parameter is un-

known and our main concern is to ensure the convergence of

or algorithms for as wide a range of channel param-

eters as possible. Based on the fact that the curves representing

MB algorithms are increasing in the channel parameter, it can

be proved that the convergence of error probability of an

or an algorithm to zero for a parameter implies its con-

vergence to zero for every parameter

. Therefore, the best

strategy we can choose in this case is to set these algorithms

for their maximum thresholds. The following example shows

that for such a scenario, although the convergence of

al-

gorithms is faster than that of algorithms when the channel

parameter is close to the maximum threshold, the latter can out-

pace the former for a wide range of parameters less than the

maximum threshold.

Example 2: Consider again

. For this ensemble, the

maximum threshold for the algorithm is obtained by using

, while for the algorithm,

it is achieved by starting with , and switchingto and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

252

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

IV. CONCLUSION

A general framework for hybrid decoding algorithms is in-

troduced. Using density evolution and by focusing on hybrid

algorithms which are based on majority-based algorithms, we

show the great improvement in threshold that “time-invariant”

hybrid

and “switch-type” hybrid

algorithms can

provide compared to their constituents. We also investigate the

speed of convergence of hybrid algorithms and show that

algorithms can outperform

algorithms when the channel

parameter is not perfectly known. This suggests that algo-

rithms could be practically more attractive than the well-known

(switch-type) Gallager’s algorithm B.

APPENDIX

H H Fig. 3. Comparison between the convergence speed of

and

algorithms, for C (8; 9). Subscripts and superscripts of the curve labels

represent actual and estimated channel parameters, respectively.

Consider

,

, and let the channel be

binary symmetric. For a nonnegative integer

, the majority-based (MB) algorithm of order , denoted

by , is defined by message maps

after iterations 19 and 29, respectively. For both algo-

rithms the maximum threshold is

. Assuming that

the channel parameter is unknown, we set both algorithms to

achieve . Fig. 2 depicts error-rate curves versus iteration

number, for the two algorithms and for several channel param-

eters. As can be seen, the

algorithm outpaces the

algorithm for all parameters less than, say, about 95% of .

B. Underestimated Channel Parameter

In this subsection, we compare the convergence speed of

and algorithms for the case where both algorithms are set

to have the fastest convergence,2 but due to changes in channel

condition, or estimation errors, we underestimate the channel

parameter, and hence the setting is suboptimal. The following

example shows how different the two algorithms perform under

such circumstances.

Example 3: Consider

again, and suppose that while

, the actual channel parameter, is

, we set and

algorithms for their fastest convergence over a channel

with (estimated) parameter

. Fig. 3 compares

the two algorithms. The subscripts and the superscripts of the

curve labels represent and , respectively. As can be seen,

while underestimation of the channel parameter can result in the

failure of the algorithm to converge (see

), it has

practically no effect on the performance of the algorithm.

(Compare

with

). Also comparing

with

shows that the performance of the algorithm

designed to achieve the maximum threshold

, on a

channel with

is almost as good as that of the al-

gorithm particularly optimized for this channel. This, however,

is not the case for the

algorithm, as the comparison be-

tween

and

indicates. This demonstrates that

the optimal design for algorithms is universal in the sense

that the algorithm designed to achieve , performs close

to optimal, in terms of convergence speed, on a wide range of

channels with

.3

H 2For the

algorithm, optimal ~ is obtained by exhaustive search, while

H for the

algorithm, G provides the optimal switching-sequence.

3We have tested other ensembles and have consistently observed the same

general trends as in Examples 2 and 3.

if otherwise

where all messages, including the channel message , have

an alphabet space of

. Assuming a cycle free

decoding neighborhood [3], it is shown that for a given channel

parameter , the recursion

(A-1)

where the polynomials

and

are given by

describes the evolution of the expected fraction of erroneous

messages with iteration number, if initiated by

[1, p.

50]. This recursion can be represented by the curve

(A-2)

which is increasing in both and . It is shown in [2] that

if and only if

,

.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Density evolution and convergence properties of majority-based algorithms for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” in Proc. 2002 Allerton Conf., IL, USA, pp. 1425–1434.
[3] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

