518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

DS-CDMA Code Acquisition in the Presence of Correlated Fading—Part I: Theoretical Aspects
Giovanni E. Corazza, Carlo Caini, Alessandro Vanelli-Coralli, and Andreas Polydoros
Abstract—This paper deals with the analysis of the code-acquisition process performed by a mobile terminal in a CDMA cellular system. The fundamental contribution is the setting of a theoretical framework for code acquisition analysis, accounting for the presence of fading and shadowing with specified coherence time. A multi-dwell architecture is considered, accounting for different verification strategies. The MAX/TC detection criterion is used, and the acquisition performance is analyzed following both the direct and flow-graph approaches. Expressions for the acquisition time probability density function under different assumptions are given, as well as closed-form expressions for the mean and variance of the acquisition time. Practical applications and numerical results are reported in the Part II companion paper.

subcarriers, and thereby limit the achievable throughput. This paper proposes a general framework for a controlled removal of intercarrier interference (ICI) and channel acquisition. The core idea behind our method is to use a finite power series expansion for the time-varying frequency response, along with the known statistical properties of mobile radio channels. Channel acquisition and ICI removal are accomplished in the frequency domain, and allow for any desired tradeoff between the residual ICI level, the required training for channel acquisition, and processing complexity. The proposed approach enables a high spectral efficient (64-QAM mode) of DVB-T in highly mobile environments.
The authors are with Philips Research National Laboratory, 5656 AA Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.823560
Dual-Phase Continuous Phase Modulation for Spread-Spectrum Multiple-Access Communication
A. T. McDowell, J. S. Lehnert, and Y. K. Jeong

G. E. Corazza, C. Caini, and A. Vanelli-Coralli are with the Department of Electronics, Computer Science and Systems, University of Bologna, 40136 Bologna, Italy.
A. Polydoros is with the Department of Physics, University of Athens, 157 87 Athens, Greece.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.823562
DS-CDMA Code Acquisition in the Presence of Correlated Fading—Part II: Application to Cellular Networks
Giovanni E. Corazza, Carlo Caini, Alessandro Vanelli-Coralli, and Andreas Polydoros
Abstract—This paper applies the theoretical framework for the evaluation of code acquisition in the presence of fading developed in the companion Part I paper. Code synchronization for CDMA cellular networks, such as IS-95 and cdma2000, is considered. A multi-dwell testing procedure is adopted. A procedure for the optimization of the multi-dwell parameters (number of dwells, dwell lengths, thresholds) to achieve minimum acquisition time is introduced and enforced. The effects of fading, interchip interference, frequency offset, multiple-access interference, and noise are taken into account in the determination of false alarm and detection probabilities. In particular, anomalous interchip interference despreading and internal interference cancellation effects are described. Numerical and simulation results, in terms of time for correct acquisition, confirm the accuracy of the proposed approach and show how it can be effectively used in the design and evaluation of a code-acquisition subsystem.
G. E. Corazza, C. Caini, and A. Vanelli-Coralli are with the Department of Electronics, Computer Science and Systems, University of Bologna, 40136 Bologna, Italy.
A. Polydoros is with the Department of Physics, University of Athens, 157 87 Athens, Greece.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.823557
Robust OFDM Receivers for Dispersive Time-Varying Channels: Equalization and Channel Acquisition
Alexei Gorokhov and Jean-Paul Linnartz

Abstract—A new class of direct-sequence spread-spectrum multiple-access (DS-SSMA) systems with continuous phase modulation (CPM) is defined. The signals are unique in that the spreading is done by adding an extra phase term to the information phase while maintaining phase continuity, constant envelope, and efficient bandwidth usage. The spreading phase is formed from the spreading code and is independent of the information phase, which allows despreading to be done separately before data detection, which, in turn, allows a simple CPM detector to be employed for data detection. The information phase is considered in the minimum-shift keying (MSK) format, and a serial-MSK-type spread-spectrum receiver is considered for performance analysis. Expressions for the signal-to-noise ratio, the power spectral density, and the probability of bit error are developed, along with methods for computing their values to an arbitrarily close approximation. Numerical results show that the proposed system is an attractive alternative to the conventional DS-SSMA systems.
A. T. McDowell is with Raytheon C3S, Fort Wayne, IN 46805 USA. J. S. Lehnert and Y. K. Jeong are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 USA. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.823561
Design of Efficiently Encodable Moderate-Length High-Rate Irregular LDPC Codes
Michael Yang, William E. Ryan, and Yan Li

Abstract—This paper presents a new class of irregular low-density

parity-check (LDPC) codes of the moderate length (10

10 )

and high rate (

3 4). Codes in this class admit low-complexity

encoding and have lower error-rate floors than other irregular LDPC

code design approaches. It is also shown that this class of LDPC codes is

equivalent to a class of systematic serial turbo codes, and is an extension of

irregular repeat-accumulate codes. A code design algorithm based on the

combination of density evolution and differential evolution optimization

with a modified cost function is presented. Moderate-length, high-rate

codes with no error-rate floors down to a bit-error rate of 10 are

presented. Although our focus is on moderate-length, high-rate codes, the

proposed coding scheme is applicable to irregular LDPC codes with other

lengths and rates.

Abstract—In orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing, time variations of a multipath channel lead to a loss of orthogonality between the

The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.823558

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:33:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

