IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

2961

High-Throughput Cognitive-Amplification Detector for LDPC Decoders
Melvin Heng Li Lim and Wang Ling Goh, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—With the advent of technology over the recent years, the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which were once seen as an impractical concept, are now poised to be the next big thing in the communication standards of today for their near-capacity performances. Nonetheless, the physical implementation of LDPC decoders is more often than not encumbered by the arithmetic of its decoding algorithm. Entangled by numerous computations of minima, LDPC decoders not only require considerable amount of resources to the implement cascaded pair-wise comparators, but also yield low decoding throughputs. In this paper, we propound a novel design for the computation of minimum and subminimum in LDPC decoding, known as the cognitive-amplification detector (CAD). By leveraging on the finite precision of fixed-point binary representation in actual hardware, our CAD proposition renders significant gains in decoding throughput and savings in resource consumption of up to 20% and 15%, respectively, not to mention negligible trade-offs in error-correcting capabilities.
Index Terms—Cascaded comparators, cognitive-amplification detector (CAD), high-throughput decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
J OINING the cutting-edge of modern communication are the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. First discovered by Gallager during the 1960s [1], these error-correction codes are by far the best known codes competent of performing near the theoretical bounds, otherwise known as the Shannon limits [2], besides the turbo codes [3]. Yet, LDPC codes are often held in high regard for having lower decoding complexities [4] as well as error floors [5] unlike their turbo counterparts. Furthermore, LDPC decoders are inherently driven by hardware-compatible computations that work well with parallelized architectures for higher decoding throughputs [6]. Therefore, LDPC codes have been accepted in a plethora of commercialized communication systems, including the 802.11n (Wi-Fi) [7], 802.16e (Wi-Max) [8], 10GBase-T Ethernet [9], DVB-S2 [10], 802.15.3 (WPAN) [11], etc. Correspondingly, it is only a matter of time before all other domains of communication get on the LDPC bandwagon.
The LDPC codes belong to a class of linear block codes that are characterized by the low-density of 1’s as opposed to 0’s in their parity-check matrices [12]. Thanks to this unique sparsity feature, near-optimal decoding of LDPC codes can be realized with the two-phase message passing (TPMP) [13], whereby an

iterative exchange of statistically independent messages occurs between the variable and check nodes of its Tanner graph [14]. Nevertheless, the design of an efficient LDPC decoder is often encumbered by the very two-phase framework of TPMP, much less its implementation on actual hardware. Due to the fact that either decoding phase of TPMP involves extrinsic information from its reciprocal, only one decoding phase is engaged at any point in time while the other idles and waits for its completion. As a result of this development, TPMP decoders typically have low hardware utilization efficiencies (HUEs), coupled with the need for two arrays of memory banks, one exclusively for each decoding phase.
In view of the various shortcomings in conventional TPMP, Mansour et al. [15] devised an alternative framework for LDPC decoding that obscures the former distinction between the two antithetical phases. Layered decoding [16], or turbo-decoding message passing (TDMP) as technically defined, entwines the mathematical procedures from the respective decoding phases of TPMP in a way that posterior information from one layer is made available immediately to the subsequent layers. For that reason, TDMP requires less decoding iterations to decipher the noise-corrupted codeword and eliminates the need for a second set of memory banks, thereby abating an inordinate amount of hardware as well as implementation complexities. Despite the differences, both decoding methodologies experience the same bottleneck, where the computation of marginal distribution for the respective variable nodes entails complicated methods that induce severe critical path delays and complex circuitries even with the min-sum approximation [17].
In this paper, an innovative cognitive-amplification detector (CAD) is proposed to address the aforementioned bottlenecks of LDPC decoding based on the min-sum approximation [17]. By exploiting the limited precision in hardware, CAD lends an alternative to the prevailing cascaded comparators that features lower critical path delays and computational complexities.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A summary of LDPC decoding, along with the crux of cascaded comparators, is given in Section II. Our CAD proposal is then expounded in Section III, followed by its implementations on modern LDPC decoders in Section IV. Last but not least, the conclusions are drawn in Section V.

Manuscript received December 03, 2013; revised March 15, 2014; accepted March 18, 2014. Date of publication August 04, 2014; date of current version September 25, 2014. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor A. Ashrafi.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: limh0097@e.ntu.edu.sg; ewlgoh@ntu.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2014.2333674

II. MIN-SUM DECODING BOTTLENECKS
In conjunction with the introduction of LDPC codes back in 1962, Gallager had also furnished his brainchild with a unique near-optimal decoding process, masqueraded under the names of “message passing” and “belief propagation,” determined by the context and application. Derived from graph-based models, LDPC decoding ensues a repetitious refinement of information circulating within a Tanner graph, a graphical equivalent of an LDPC code, until a valid codeword has been recovered.

1549-8328 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2962

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

In this paper, the following notations shall be adopted to fa-

cilitate the description of TPMP and TDMP, in addition the

referential of their respective operands. The -bit of a codeword

is denoted by whereas represents its corresponding

channel output , otherwise known as the noise-corrupted

codeword. The check-to-variable (CTV) message extracted

from the check-node to the variable-node denotes the

current bit-probability of . Hence,

symbolizes its

log-likelihood ratio. Similarly, the variable-to-check (VTC)

message sent by the variable-node to the check-node

contains the amount of belief that is a bit “0” or “1.”

Again, its log-likelihood ratio is denoted by

. refers

to the set of variable-nodes connected to check-node , while

implies the former definition without the variable-node .

Likewise, represents the set of check-nodes coupled to the

variable-node , whereas drops the variable-node . On

the other hand, signifies the number of binary bits used in

representing the above messages in hardware. Conversely, the

row and column weights of an LDPC code are represented by

and , respectively.

A. Two-Phase Message Passing (TPMP)

LDPC decoding first appeared as a two-phase operation due

to the nature of message exchange between the variable-nodes

and check-nodes of its Tanner graph. Otherwise known as the

horizontal and vertical computations, each of these procedures

independently evaluates the CTV and VTC messages based on

extrinsic information from its reciprocal phase, respectively, in

a studious fashion summarized as follows:

1) Initialize

with the soft channel outputs . Since no

other information is available at this point in time, the CTV

messages

are omitted from the equation.

(1)

(2)

TPMP then revisits Step 2 to commence its next iteration of decoding.

B. Turbo-Decoding Message Passing (TDMP)

Layered decoding, an alias for TDMP, is contrived from the

intersectional decoding of interleaved super-codes [18], which

associates each super-code of an LDPC code as a single layer.

As a result, the latest extrinsic information from the preceding

layer is factored into the computation pertaining to the current

layer. Despite the disparity in sequenced dependency, TDMP

shares the same decoding mathematics and assumptions in the

computations of CTV and VTC messages as the conventional

two-phase. Hence, rather than evaluating all CTV messages in

one go at Step 2 (refer to Section II-A), TDMP only computes

the

messages of one layer before reverting back to

Step 1 to reacquire the newest VTC messages, where

is

updated with the latest

information from the processed

layer using (1). As soon as the last layer is elaborated, syndrome

decoding takes place. Once again, layered decoding follows

with another iteration of processing in the event that neither of

the stopping criteria is satisfied, but this time from (3) instead of

(1), simply because the existing

messages have already

been updated by the previous iterations.

C. Correction Techniques
As compared to the classic belief propagation, the min-sum approximation offers ease of hardware implementation as well as reduced computational complexities. Still, it cannot achieve identical performance to that of the lossless belief propagation owing to the compounded degradation of precision upon every decoding iteration [19]. Hence, Fossorier et al. [20] introduced the idea of normalization to stabilize min-sum approximation, which is thereafter recognized as normalized min-sum (NMS), whereby a correction factor is appended onto (3) to form the following expression:
(6)

2) Once every single check-node has obtained its

from

the connected variable-nodes, the respective CTV mes-

sages

are calculated using the min-sum approxima-

tion [17].

(3)

3) Upon completion of the

computations,

will

be updated and hard-decision is performed based on syn-

drome decoding. If the decoded sequence is a valid code-

word, i.e.

, or the prescribed maximum number

of decoding iterations has been fulfilled, TPMP shall cease.

(4)

Strictly speaking, NMS is a degenerative blanket

that

suppresses the magnitude of the CTV messages and in the long

run that of the VTC messages. In order to harness its potential,

the correction factor should be recalibrated with each passing

iteration in conjunction with signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) based

on density evolution techniques [21]. Yet, in most cases, NMS

with a fixed correction factor has been proven to be sufficient

[22], and thus practiced in an abundance of applications for its

simplicity. Min-sum decoding with additive correction factors,

otherwise known as the offset min-sum (OMS) [23], is another

viable option besides NMS. Simulation results, however, have

confirmed that normalization yields better performances than

additive offsets [22]. Furthermore, normalization has an edge

over additive correction in terms of hardware implementation,

especially when is a power of two, i.e. no additional adder is

required in an NMS decoder.

D. Cascaded Comparators

(5) Thanks to the min-sum approximation, the complex element

of the computation of

messages in the horizontal phase is

4) Otherwise, if neither of the stopping criteria is observed, now simplified to a process of sign and magnitude comparison.

TPMP updates all VTC messages

with the latest Based on the famous “divide and conquer” strategy, the search

messages from the earlier iteration based on (1). for a minimum over an array of messages can be performed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIM AND GOH: HIGH-THROUGHPUT COGNITIVE-AMPLIFICATION DETECTOR

2963

circuits. Consequently, any form of processing that takes place

within the hardware can only be achieved with finite precision.

While it is possible to closely emulate the behavior of min-sum

decoding on hardware, this entails the exhaustive use of binary

bits just to capture the infinitesimal fractional numerals of one

message, notwithstanding the overwhelming resources needed

for the fidelity of the entire system. Therefore, like many other

applications, LDPC decoders are constructed based on limited

binary bits, typically ranging between five to seven bits [25],

to facilitate cost-effective implementations in conjunction with

marginal shedding of decoding performances.

By leveraging on this bit-allocation constraint, CD abolishes

the inordinate multi-bit pair-wise comparisons seen in the BTC

as the number of possible values a local minimum can assume

is reduced to a handful of predictable binary sequences and its

permutations. More precisely, instead of performing a clueless

search over a litany of quantized fixed-point messages for the

Fig. 1. Cascaded tree comparators for min-sum decoding.

minimum and subminimum values, our proposed CD confines

its search within the known range of binary sequences defined

via a convergent series of pair-wise binary comparators, better known as the binary tree comparator (BTC), as exemplified in Fig. 1.
Having the min-sum approximation, alongside the BTC, is a quantum leap for LDPC decoding, which engendered multiple breakthroughs in the wireless niche of modern communication. Nonetheless, even with the most efficient BTC in [24], the use of LDPC codes, notably within the domain of high-reliability communication, is not by any means close to taking off. In the case of high-density storage applications, for instance the non-volatile memories (NVMs), LDPC codes of long code lengths and high code rates are paramount for reliable communications in the presence of noise. Under such circumstances, there may be a need to increase the row weight of an LDPC code so as to preserve its high code rate and other propitious qualities. This increase on the other hand takes its toll on the BTC as it incurs substantial computational delays because of the latching of the intermediate operands in its cascaded configuration, translating into a decoding bottleneck. Even if the crit-

by the fixed-point quantization scheme. Correspondingly, CD compares each of its input operands against this pool of binary sequences to detect for the minimum and subminimum, which can be implemented via bit-wise logical operations. Moreover, given the fact that the operands of CD are independent entities, the evaluation of its minimum and subminimum sequences can be performed in parallel to alleviate the overall computational latencies of its decoder. Apart from doing away with cascaded architectures, the implementation of bit-wise logical operations not only utilizes less hardware resources, but also mitigates the critical path delays in its decoder, not forgetting the increase in operating frequencies. Therefore, CD-augmented decoders are capable of achieving much higher decoding throughputs, along with lower hardware requirements as opposed to conventional min-sum decoders based on cascaded tree comparators. Details on the minimum and subminimum computations are elucidated in the following subsections, including two variants of CD: the basic CD and its improved version, the cognitive-amplification detector (CAD).

ical path delays are mitigated with the insertion of pipelining

registers in between its comparator stages, the BTC would ul- A. Fundamental Cognitive-Detector (CD)

timately suffer routing congestions and low operating frequencies, not to mention the daunting increment in resource utilization, which collectively plummets decoding throughput. Contrariwise, higher-ordered comparators abate computational delays but further deteriorate decoding throughputs as a result of overwhelming congestions and complex circuitries. Moreover, these comparators occupy much more area than the BTC.

The pioneer framework of CD features a unique mechanism for the procurement of both minimum and subminimum, which can be described as a two-stage process. With prior knowledge on the representation scheme, CD first speculates the minimum by comparing each and every one of its input operands against a predefined set of possible binary sequences, derived from the number of quantization bits implemented. In the case of a 6-bit

III. COGNITIVE-AMPLIFICATION DETECTOR

fixed-point representation, the use of one sign-bit, two integerbits, and three-fractional-bits suggests a list of 32 possible

Inspired by the intricacies of cascaded tree comparators on sequences delineative of the extrinsic messages communicated

LDPC decoders, we designed a novel cognitive-detector (CD), throughout min-sum decoding, which ranges from “00000” to

which serves as an alternative to the computation of minimum “11111.” For each operand, CD correlates its 5-bit magnitude

and subminimum, exclusively for min-sum decoding of LDPC to every binary permutation in this list, i.e. “00000,” “00001,”

codes. Consistent with any application development life cycle, “00010,” , “11110,” “11111,” simultaneously via sequence

min-sum decoding was first formulated in software, which by detection, which can be physically realized with a combination

and large operates with floating-point configurations of infinite of OR logic gates, alongside the appropriate use of inverters or

precision. The execution of its functionalities and workings on NOT logic gates regulated by the “1”s of the respective binary

actual hardware, however, adheres to a different model. Input permutations. On the other hand, due to the fact that there is no

analog signals from the real world will have to be transformed correlative computation within sequence detection, concurrent

into binary bits via fixed-point quantization techniques before processing of every input operand can be implemented without

they can be logically interpreted and processed by the physical taking its toll on the operating frequencies.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2964

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Fig. 2. Sequence detector for “00000.”

Fig. 3. Sequence detector for “00001.”

Fig. 4. Sequence detector for “10001.”

Essentially, the “00000” sequence detector detailed in Fig. 2

performs sequence recognition by filtering the magnitude-bits

(two integer-bits and three fractional-bits) of its input operand

through an array of logical disjunction with the OR logic gates. Upon identifying the all-zero paradigm, this “00000” sequence Fig. 5. Cognitive Detector for the minimum sequence. detector presents a bit “1” to signify its existence. Otherwise, in

the event of other binary permutations, a bit “1” is produced to this process until a minimum has been identified. On the other

indicate its inexistence. In the same manner, the corresponding hand, the relative position of the minimum can also be derived

sequence detectors for the remaining permutations can also be by concatenating those intermediate bit-responses belonging to

designed, conversely with the strategic deployment of inverters the same binary permutation with an indexer.

along their respective input paths that coincide with the bit 1 Subsequently, besides the AND modules, the bit-responses elements. In other words, for every bit “1” element in the given from these sequence detectors are also processed concurrently

binary permutation, a reciprocal NOT logic gate is introduced by their respective XOR blocks, where exclusive disjunction is

before the OR logic gates to contrive its sequence detector. For performed via a series of XOR gates to check for repetitions of

that reason, the “00001” sequence detector elucidated in Fig. 3 a peculiar sequence among the input operands as elucidated in

comes with an additional inverter appended onto its rightmost Fig. 6. So long as that particular sequence is present, replicates

or least-significant bit to facilitate the recognition of “00001.” found in twos, fours, sixes, etc., in other words even-numbered

Consistent with this illustration, a pair of inverters can be fitted replicates, are concluded with bits “1’ and “0’ for odd and even

onto both ends of the “10001” sequence detector, i.e. the most , respectively. The reverse, however, is not necessarily true.

and least significant bits, for the same purpose as emphasized in Other than connoting odd-numbered repetitions, the reciprocal

Fig. 4. Based on these principles, the sequence detectors for all bits may likewise imply the single occurrence of that sequence.

other binary permutations can therefore be designed.

In order to circumvent this problem, CD reads the bit “1’ as an

Subsequently, once each and every input operand of CD has implication of both even and odd-numbered recurrences of the

been reviewed, the intermediate bit-responses from the various minimum, whereas its non-repetitive occurrence is denoted by

sequence detectors for the same binary permutation are routed the bit “0,” and vice versa for even .

to their individual AND modules, where logical conjunction is With that, the subminimum is estimated appropriately based

rendered. That is, the existence of a particular sequence among on the minimum sequence as well as the reading from its XOR

the input operands of CD is determined by a dedicated module block once available. In the case that multiple instances of the

that collates the outputs from its respective sequence detectors minimum sequence were detected, CD assigns that same exact

based on a network of AND logic gates as delineated in Fig. 5. sequence to its subminimum. Otherwise, if only one copy of its

So long as any one of its sequence detectors picks up traces of minimum exists, the subminimum takes on a one-bit increment

that particular binary permutation, its AND module generates a of its binary sequence. As an illustration, consider the “00000” bit “0’ competently. Otherwise, a bit “1’ is reflected. With that, sequence as the minimum. Assuming that more than one copy

the minimum can be deduced by interpreting the findings from of “00000” was identified, CD presents this binary sequence as

the AND modules progressively based on a multiplexed-switch its subminimum. Else, the subminimum is the next immediate

in an ascending order. CD begins by verifying the existence of binary sequence “00001.” Such an approximation significantly

the all-zero sequence. If it exists, CD enumerates the minimum reduces both computational and hardware complexities, on top

as “00000.” Else, CD continues to investigate the existence of of higher operational throughputs. Furthermore, it is implied in

the next binary permutation, which in this case is the “00001” (3) that the subminimum sequence is only applied to one of the

sequence. Once again, if at least one instance of “00001” was many connected variable nodes, specifically the node whereby

detected, that sequence is deemed the minimum assuming that the minimum originates from, whereas the minimum sequence

the all-zero sequence has not been spotted. If not, CD repeats is routed to every other node for iterative decoding. Therefore,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIM AND GOH: HIGH-THROUGHPUT COGNITIVE-AMPLIFICATION DETECTOR

2965
TABLE I BENCHMARKING PROPOSED DETECTORS AGAINST THE STANDARD
BTC ON FPGA BASED ON ROW WEIGHT OF 32

TABLE II BENCHMARKING PROPOSED DETECTORS AGAINST THE STANDARD
BTC ON FPGA BASED ON ROW WEIGHT OF 64

Fig. 6. Cognitive Detector for the subminimum sequence.

TABLE III BENCHMARKING PROPOSED DETECTORS AGAINST THE STANDARD
BTC ON FPGA BASED ON ROW WEIGHT OF 128

Fig. 7. Optimization of sequence detectors in CAD with “x.” (a) “000xx” sequence detector. (b) “0000x” sequence detector.

the loss in decoding performance with CD is negligible despite the reduced precision of its subminimum.

B. Optimized Cognitive-Amplification Detector (CAD)

The fundamental CD variant is more than just a mere replica

of the conventional BTC. Apart from providing the same exact

functionalities, CD succinctly interprets these computations via

low-complexity logic gates, thereby diminishing computational latter has to deal with all 32

correlative operations just to

delays and improving operating frequencies. Nevertheless, the determine the minimum, ensued by a case-elimination process

very quintessence of CD may at times fall short of practicality. to estimate the subminimum. Despite its simplicity, the overall

The correlation of each and every one of its input operand with gain with the inner workings of the CD augmentation may only

every possible binary permutation is an exhaustive process. As be marginal, be it the throughput enhancements or the resource

a matter of fact, the efficiency of CD deteriorates whenever the savings. Therefore, several approximations are incorporated in

row weight of its LDPC code decreases, especially in cases of the making of CAD, a revamp of CD, to accommodate a wider

extremities beyond a specific threshold. Consider a 6-bit BTC expanse of applications.

and a 6-bit CD, both with the same set of four inputs. It is self- The new and improved CAD adds another level of cognition

explanatory that the former requires only three comparisons to to facilitate the procurement of the minimum and subminimum

ascertain both the minimum and subminimum. In contrast, the by exploiting the checksums of min-sum decoding given in (3).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Fig. 8. Partial-parallel TPMP decoder architecture devised for FPGA Monte Carlo simulations.

Contrary to the fundamental, this optimized CAD variant takes input operands falls below the -threshold, CAD then proceeds

into account of the parity-sum accumulated at each check node with the second phase of sequence detection for all elements of

to deduce the appropriate sequences for both the minimum and as per that of CD, but with another set of sequence detectors

subminimum. Starting with the zero-error state, which suggests for “000xx,” “00000,” “0000x,” and “00010.” When organized

either the absence of bit error(s) among the connected variable in fashion, only four sequence detectors are required instead of

nodes or the occurrence of bit errors in pairs, CAD attempts to five to satisfy cognitive detection and magnitude amplification

narrow down its search boundaries even further to a handful of for the evaluation of minimum and subminimum. Thereafter,

rational binary permutations by capitalizing on some statistical the subminimum is likewise derived from the minimum based

distribution of its channel. Analogous to threshold detection in on the case-elimination process featured in CD.

hard-decision decoding, CAD aptly amplifies its minimum and subminimum to a relatively large predefined binary sequence

IV. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

on the assumption that each and every input operand exceeds a The feasibility of our proposed vicissitudes is first analyzed

certain threshold in the zero-error state. Although and are with an FPGA acid test applied to both CD and CAD to elicit

respectively prescribed decimal values of 0.5 and 0.875 in this the hypothesized advantages over the standard BTC on actual

paper, these figures will differ from one application to another. hardware. Based on arbitrary row weights of 32, 64, and 128,

In the event that the above conditions are not satisfied, CAD the state-of-the-art BTC in [24] and our proposed CD variants

proceeds to compute for the minimum via concurrent sequence are evaluated on the Virtex-6 ML-605 FPGA board along with

detection as demonstrated in CD. But unlike its prototype, the the Xilinx ISE 13.1 platform for their respective computational

optimized CAD variant does not involve the entire pool of

delays

, maximum operating frequencies

, and

binary permutations in its correlative operations. Instead, CAD total resource utilization, through synthesis, placement and

only considers the set of binary permutations that falls below routing. These measurements, together with their pipelined

the -threshold. Supposing that the aforementioned 6-bit fixed- equivalent, are condensed in Tables I, II, and III, accordingly.

point representation is adopted in conjunction with taking on Prior to any pipelining, our proposed CD variants demonstrated

a decimal value of 0.5 or a binary equivalent of “00100,” then savings in resources as opposed to the standard BTC due to

{“00000,” “00001,” “00010,” “00011}. As a result, CAD its innovative cognitive detection. Unequivocally, this simpli-

only correlates its input operands with these four permutations fication leads to a significant reduction in critical path delays,

of rather than all the 32 binary sequences of its fundamental which translates to higher operating frequencies that eventually

counterpart. Meanwhile, with the aid of “x’s, otherwise known outperforms the standard BTC regardless of row weight.

as the “don’t care” terms in digital electronics, these sequence Conversely, it is possible to engineer competitive operating

detectors are optimized further to lower hardware complexity. frequencies in the BTC by adding pipelining registers between

Starting with the “000xx” sequence detector depicted in Fig. 7, each and every comparator stage. Yet, the pipelined BTC now

CAD examines if all its input operands exceed the threshold of requires several more clock cycles to obtain both the minimum

“00100.” Once a bit “1’ is reflected, CAD then denotes as its and subminimum, not forgetting the increase in resource usage

minimum and subminimum, on the condition that no syndrome and routing complexity. Nevertheless, this alone does not deny

was detected. Else, CAD presents and as the minimum and the consideration of the BTC in all communication disciplines.

subminimum, respectively. Contrariwise, if one or more of its As the row weight of an LDPC code varies with applications,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIM AND GOH: HIGH-THROUGHPUT COGNITIVE-AMPLIFICATION DETECTOR

2967

Fig. 9. Error-correcting performances of various TPMP decoder configurations.

Fig. 11. Sequential TDMP decoder architecture devised for FPGA Monte Carlo simulations.

Fig. 10. Decoding convergences of various TPMP decoder configurations.

Fig. 12. Error-correcting performances of various TDMP decoder configurations.

the BTC remains a viable option for shorter codes, whereas the proposed CAD asserts its competence on the longer codes.
The next agenda on the deliberation of CD and CAD ensues some Monte Carlo simulations to validate their functionalities under both two-phase and layered decoding. Our proposed CD and CAD are each incorporated with a hardware Monte Carlo simulator that follows a 6-bit fixed-point binary representation scheme and a Box-Muller AWGN channel model [26] to elicit their ramifications on error-correcting performances, decoding convergences, and decoding throughputs of the corresponding LDPC decoder. These simulators generate random codewords that are initialized with the same seeds and attempt to decode them after AWGN interferences within 10 iterations until 200 bit errors and 100 frame errors are collected. In the following analyses, a rate-0.9 6 67 4489-bit Reed–Solomon (RS) based quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code is used.

Fig. 13. Decoding convergences of various TDMP decoder configurations.

A. TPMP Performance Analysis
In reference to the fundamental two-phase LDPC decoding, both CD variants, alongside the standard BTC, are individually tested based on the partial-parallel TPMP decoder architecture illustrated in Fig. 8. In conjunction with these studies, an ideal Monte Carlo simulation of min-sum decoding is performed on MATLAB as a control experiment. The empirical bit-error rate (BER) and frame-error rate (FER) curves highlighted in Fig. 9 suggest marginal differences in error-correcting performances between the CD variants and the standard BTC. The shedding

of performances (7%) between our CD and the BTC is mainly caused by the estimation of the subminimum. On the contrary, there is practically no discrepancy in performance between the optimized CAD and the basic CD despite the introduction of the -threshold. Moreover, the convergence of both the BER and FER plots of all three decoder configurations toward the higher SNR bands reinforces our cognitive-detection concept as well as the designs of our CD variants. Apart from verifying the functionalities of both CD and CAD, we are also interested in another form of statistic in iterative decoding. Better known as decoding convergence, this figure of merit states the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2968

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014
TABLE IV EFFECTS OF CAD AUGMENTATION ON MODERN HIGH-THROUGHPUT AND EFFICIENT DECODERS ANALYZED WITH FPGA

iterations needed to decode the actual transmitted codeword and

thus holds the reins of decoding throughput

, which is an

impasse between the maximum operating frequency

,

the overall computational delay

, and the total number

of decoding iterations required

, defined by

(7)

thereby reaffirming the definitudes of our conjectures. At the same time, the corresponding decoding convergences based on layered decoding are evaluated and captured appropriately in Fig. 13. Once again, our CAD variant leads the pack, though scantily, in decoding convergence by virtue of its magnitude amplifications, followed by the basic CD and the BTC, closely intertwined.
C. CAD Hardware Performance Analysis

where

is the length of the LDPC code.

Since rapid convergence is a critical factor to high decoding

throughputs, it is important to ensure that both our CD vari-

ants preserve this figure of merit, or even to the extent of im-

proving it. In the midst of conducting FPGA Monte Carlo sim-

ulations, the decoding convergences of our CD variants, along

with the standard BTC, at each SNR interval are averaged and

recorded according in Fig. 10 in conjunction with a syndrome

detector. Among the three decoder configurations, CAD has the

fastest decoding convergence due to its magnitude amplifica-

tion, thus inducing an approximation gain of 5% over the stan-

dard BTC. Again, the display of identical convergent behaviors

in our CD and the standard BTC, which taper toward that of our

CAD in the higher SNR regions, further asserts the practicality

of our proposed cognitive-detection concept, in particular the

CAD spin-off.

B. TDMP Performance Analysis
Other than the examinations in the two-phase decoding, the implications of our proposed CD and CAD on modern layered decoding become intriguing as the masses are hopping onto its bandwagon. Similar to that of TPMP, our proposed detectors, together with the standard BTC, are studied heuristically based on the original sequential TDMP decoder architecture detailed in Fig. 11. From Fig. 12, the BER and FER curves of all three decoder configurations demonstrate minimal contributions to performance degradation despite the subminimum estimations. Furthermore, these curves share the same convergent features toward the upper SNR bounds as the former TPMP analysis,

Lastly, the contributions of our CAD on actual hardware are

discussed in this segment. Manifesting discernible throughput

gains and resource savings, the augmentation of CAD together

with some state-of-the art decoder architectures, not to mention

the partial-parallel TPMP decoder architecture in [27], serial

TDMP decoder in [28], row-layered partial-parallel decoder ar-

chitecture in [29], as well as column-layered partial-parallel de-

coder architecture in [30], all tailored to the 6 67 4489-bit

RS-based QC-LDPC code, have been implemented on FPGA.

Synthesis and placement results collated in Table IV adduce

suggestive statistics in favor of our CAD proposal. Among the

benchmarked designs, the partial-parallel decoders explicitly

benefit from the curtailment of critical path delays owing to the

multiple instantiations of their minimum computation units or

horizontal computing processors (HCPs). As a result, the bench-

marked decoders seize an increase in

, not forgetting low-

ered routing complexities across the board. Moreover, with our

CAD, each of the benchmarked decoder yields a minimum re-

duction of 4% in

. Therefore, throughput improvements

and resource savings of more than 20% and 10%, respectively,

can be achieved with our CAD proposition.

V. CONCLUSION
The idea behind cognitive detection, a minimalist style of handling minimum and subminimum computations for LDPC decoding, has been demonstrated in this paper. Identified as a diminutive yet highly competent horizontal computational unit, CAD casts away the conventional framework of cascaded comparisons, and instead exploits the limitations of fixed-point binary representation by manipulating concurrent bit-wise

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIM AND GOH: HIGH-THROUGHPUT COGNITIVE-AMPLIFICATION DETECTOR

2969

operations to uncover the minimum value. Alongside threshold approximations and amplifications, CAD features unrivalled processing capabilities that mitigate both critical path delays and computational latencies. For that reason, CAD augmented LDPC decoders not only acquire throughput gains, but also require less hardware for fabrication without taking a toll on their error-correcting performances and decoding convergence. While the utility of CAD in non-uniformly quantized entities may unravel new challenges, the variation of thresholds and
under specific channel models also deserves a second glance.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[4] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[5] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[6] Y. Dai, N. Chen, and Z. Yan, “Memory efficient decoder architectures for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2898–2911, Oct. 2008.
[7] [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/11 [8] [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/16 [9] [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/3 [10] [Online]. Available: http://www.dvb.org/standards/factsheets [11] [Online]. Available: http://ieee802.org/15/pub/TG3c.html [12] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse
matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999. [13] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001. [14] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981. [15] M. M. Mansour, “A turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal. Process., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4376–4392, Nov. 2006. [16] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Low Power Electron. Design (ISLPED), Aug. 2002, pp. 284–289. [17] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005. [18] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003. [19] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.

[20] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[21] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1021–1025.
[22] W. Sulek, “On the overflow problem in finite precision turbo decoding message passing,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1253–1259, May 2012.
[23] J. Heo, “Analysis of scaling soft information on low density parity check code,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 219–220, Jan. 2003.
[24] K. K. Gunnam, G. S. Choi, and M. B. Yeary, “A parallel VLSI architecture for layered decoding for array LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on VLSI Design (VLSID), Jan. 2007, pp. 738–743.
[25] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[26] A. Ghazel, E. Boutillon, J. L. Danger, G. Gulak, and H. Laamari, “Design and performance analysis of a high speed AWGN communication channel emulator,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Comput. and Signal Process. (PACRIM), Aug. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 374–377.
[27] K. Shimizu, T. Ishikawa, N. Togawa, T. Ikenaga, and S. Goto, “Partially-parallel LDPC decoder achieving high-efficiency message-passing schedule,” IEICE Trans. Fund., vol. E89-A, pp. 969–978, Apr. 2006.
[28] J. Li, G. He, H. Hou, Z. Zhang, and J. Ma, “Memory efficient layered decoder design with early termination for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Syst. (ISCAS), May 2011, pp. 2697–2700.
[29] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, Aug. 2009.
[30] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and X. Zhang, “Reduced-complexity column-layered decoding and implementation for LDPC codes,” IET Commun., vol. 5, no. 15, pp. 2177–2186, Oct. 2011.
Melvin Heng Li Lim received the B.Eng. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, in 2009, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include coding, hardware verification, and optimization of algorithms on field-programmable gate arrays.
Wang Ling Goh (S’91–M’06–SM’09) received the B.Eng. degree in electrical and electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics from Queen’s University of Belfast, Belfast, U.K. in 1990 and 1995, respectively.
She was a Research Engineer at the Northern Ireland Semiconductor Research Centre while working toward the Ph.D. degree. She joined the school of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, as a Lecturer in 1996, and became an Associate Professor in 2004. Her research interests include digital/mixed-signal IC design, telemetry circuits, neural recording ICs, and 3-D IC.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:52:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

