IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCOBER 2014

1679

New Stopping Criterion for Fast Low-Density Parity-Check Decoders
Tian Xia, Student Member, IEEE, Hsiao-Chun Wu, Senior Member, IEEE, and Hong Jiang

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are favorable in low bit-error-rate and high code-rate applications. However, the decoding complexity for LDPC codes is quite large, especially for nonbinary LDPC codes. In this paper, we propose a new T -tolerance stopping criterion for LDPC decoders by exploiting the fact that the total a posteriori probability (APP) should increase across iterations when message passing (MP) algorithms are employed. Simulation results demonstrate that our proposed new T -tolerance criterion can greatly reduce the average iteration number (complexity) while the decoding performance degradation is controlled within 0.1 dB in the low bit-energy-to-noise-spectraldensity ratio (Eb/N0) scenarios.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check codes, stopping criterion.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes have recently drawn significant attention because of their capacity-approaching capability for various code-rates ever since their renaissance in late 1990s [1], [2]. However, the outstanding LDPC decoding performance relying on the conventional message passing (MP) algorithms would often induce high computational complexity, especially for nonbinary LDPC codes. The computational bottleneck lies in the check node processing in the iterative MP algorithms [1], [2]. To combat this complexity problem, the extended min-sum (EMS) algorithm was proposed lately where the messages of length q were truncated by choosing the nm largest ones (nm q) [3], [4]. In [5], [6], new sophisticated decoding algorithms were proposed to adaptively truncate the message length over iterations to further reduce the decoding complexity.
In addition to the message length, the decoding complexity of MP algorithms for LDPC codes also depends on the required iteration number. Usually, a maximum iteration number is preset. The MP algorithms terminate when either the estimated codeword satisfies all parity checks or the maximum iteration number is reached. This conventional stopping criterion is not efficient since it is observed that for the undecodable blocks, the MP algorithms always run up to the maximum iteration
Manuscript received May 17, 2014; revised July 8, 2014; accepted July 30, 2014. Date of publication August 21, 2014; date of current version October 8, 2014. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of USA under Grant NSF-CNS-NeTS: 0963793 and Louisiana Board of Regents under Grants LEQSF-EPS(2013)-OPT-IN-26, LEQSF-EPS(2011)-OPT-IN-03, and LEQSF(2011)-PFUND-242. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was M. S. Leeson.
T. Xia and H.-C. Wu are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803 USA (e-mail: txia5@lsu.edu; wu@ece.lsu.edu).
H. Jiang is with the Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs, Holmdel, NJ 07733 USA (e-mail: hong.jiang@alcatel-lucent.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2014.2349988

limit and cannot generate the correct codeword. Therefore, it would be better to terminate the MP algorithms early so as to avoid the unnecessary computational time and reduce the extra power consumption when undecodable blocks are experienced. To deal with this problem, a stopping criterion was proposed before to decode binary LDPC codes using the variable node reliability for identifying undecodable codeword blocks in [7]. In [8], the iterative decoding process would be terminated when a soft-word cycle appears. In [9], an MP algorithm would skip further iterations if the mean magnitude of the log-likelihood ratios converges. In [10], an error frame is identified for both binary and nonbinary LDPC codes when the check-sum stays the same value over several consecutive iterations.
However, the aforementioned previous stopping criteria either require a lot of memory storage space [8] or involve several parameters which are difficult to optimize systematically in practice [7], [9]. Moreover, it cannot be justified that undecodable blocks always demonstrate the constant check-sum patterns. To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a robust new stopping criterion for both binary and nonbinary LDPC decoders, which involves only one parameter and requires little computational burden. Heuristically, the maximum a posteriori probability (APP) for each variable node would increase when an MP algorithm is executed in progress across iterations [5]. Consequently, we propose to use the total a posteriori probability (APP) as the essential metric to check if an MP algorithm has a tendency to converge to a correct solution. Specifically, we propose a T -tolerance criterion such that the iterative decoding process terminates when the total APP decreases exactly for T + 1 times in aggregate during the execution of an MP algorithm.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The LDPC decoding complexity in terms of iteration number is analyzed in Section II. Based on this analysis, we devise a new T -tolerance stopping criterion for MP algorithms in Section III. Monte Carlo simulation results are shown in Section IV to demonstrate the tradeoff between the error performance and the complexity of our proposed stopping criterion for both binary and nonbinary LDPC codes. Conclusions will be drawn in Section V.1
II. DECODER COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
To reduce the overall complexity of an MP algorithm for decoding LDPC codes, not only it is important to lower the computational complexity for each iteration, but also it is desirable to make the required iteration number as small as possible. Generally speaking, the lower Eb/N0 is given, the more iterations may be required. In this section, we carry
1The preliminary results were shown in [11].

1089-7798 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/5in3d:1e2x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

1680

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCOBER 2014

TABLE I PROPORTIONS OF DECODABLE AND UNDECODABLE BLOCKS

blocks need at most just 5 iterations for QSPA to converge. On the other hand, the maximum iteration number should be set to 48 when Eb/N0 is 9 dB for all decodable blocks, and it should be reduced to 33 when Eb/N0 increases to 10 dB.
Since it is hard to estimate a precise upper bound of the required iteration number for an arbitrary Eb/N0, the maximum iteration number is usually set to be rather large in MP algorithms. However, the larger the maximum iteration number, the less efficient the MP algorithm when undecodable blocks are encountered, especially in low Eb/N0 conditions. To tackle this difficulty, in the next section, we will introduce a new stopping criterion for MP algorithms.

III. NEW ROBUST STOPPING CRITERION

Fig. 1. The cumulative density functions of the iteration numbers required for decodable blocks subject to different Eb/N0 values.

For undecodable blocks which constitute a great portion of codeword blocks in the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) conditions, no matter how large the maximum iteration number is chosen, the MP algorithm will always use up all iterations but fail to converge to the correct codeword. Indeed, the conventional stopping criterion of MP algorithms does not involve any convergence check during the iterative decoding process and therefore lacks the ability to identify the undecodable blocks. In this section, we propose a novel robust stopping criterion to monitor the evolution of the total APP such that the MP iterative decoding process can be terminated at an early stage when dealing with an undecodable block.

out Monte Carlo simulations to illustrate how many iterations A. Total a Posteriori Probability

are actually taken for a given Eb/N0 when a certain LDPC For MP algorithms in the probability domain, at the end

codeword is transmitted. We take a (147, 108) LDPC code over of the tth iteration, the estimated codeword symbols are ob-

GF(64), which is arbitrarily generated using the finite field tained as

method according to [12], for illustration. The maximum iteration number is set to be 50. One thousand Monte Carlo trials

cˆj = arg max p(jt) ,

j = 1, 2, . . . , n

(1)

are undertaken for each of four Eb/N0 values. In each trial, the codeword is modulated by 64-quadrature amplitude modulation where p(jt) is the q × 1 APP vector whose elements sum to 1, (64-QAM) and transmitted over the additive white Gaussian q is the order of the Galois field, and n is the codeword length.

noise (AWGN) channel. The received signal is decoded using Refer to [2] for the detailed formulation of the APP vectors.

q-ary sum-product algorithm (QSPA) subject to the maximum If an MP algorithm, say QSPA, can converge to the correct

iteration number.

codeword, the distribution of APP vectors pj would concentrate

According to Table I, the estimated codewords can be clas- more and more around the jth correct symbol as the iteration

sified into three groups: (i) codewords which are correctly number increases according to [5] since the iterative decoding

restored, (ii) codewords which satisfy the parity checks but are process can be deemed an SNR amplifier [13]. On the other

not the true ones, and (iii) codewords which are undecodable hand, if the MP algorithm has difficulty to converge, it indicates

and thus exhaust all possible iterations but the syndrome still that some estimated symbols either change from iteration to

contains nonzero element(s). For the blocks belonging to the iteration or converge to the incorrect results. Based on this fact,

first two aforementioned groups, we say that the blocks are de- to distinguish whether the iterative decoder is progressive or

codable since QSPA succeeds in generating a valid codeword. It is explicit that for low Eb/N0, undecodable blocks account for a large portion, while for high Eb/N0 undecodable blocks are rare.
To investigate how many iterations are taken for decodable blocks, we depict the cumulative density function (CDF) of the

stagnant, we propose to use the measure of total APP, denoted by P (t), as given by

P (t) d=ef 1 n

n
max

p(jt)

.

(2)

j=1

iteration numbers subject to different Eb/N0 values in Fig. 1. Fig. 2 depicts the evolution of the total APP P (t) with

One can observe that when Eb/N0 is 9 dB, more than 95% respect to the iteration number t when Eb/N0 is fixed at of decodable blocks need at most 20 iterations for QSPA to 9 dB for the nonbinary LDPC code (147, 108) over GF(64)

converge; when Eb/N0 is enlarged to 11 dB, all decodable using QSPA. Note that four individual trials drawn from the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:53:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIA et al.: NEW STOPPING CRITERION FOR FAST LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK DECODERS

1681

Fig. 2. The evolution of the total APP P (t) with respect to the iteration number t for Eb/N0 = 9 dB.
simulations stated in Section II are evinced here as examples: two decodable blocks a and b and two undecodable blocks c and d. Specifically, both block a and block b are correctly recovered by using six and eighteen iterations of QSPA, respectively. On the other hand, for both undecodable blocks c and d, QSPA runs out of fifty iterations but cannot restore any valid codeword.

Fig. 3. The frame error rate of the binary LDPC code (648, 324) versus Eb/N0 for different T values.
termination of MP algorithms. Thus, the iterative decoding process will terminate when either there are T times of total APP decreases or the maximum iteration number is reached.
IV. SIMULATION

B. New T -Tolerance Criterion
According to Fig. 2, the number of the cumulative times that the total APP decreases from one iteration to next during the LDPC decoding process for undecodable blocks is usually much larger than that for decodable blocks. Based on this key observation, we devise a new T -tolerance stopping criterion for MP algorithms where T -tolerance suggests that an MP algorithm can only tolerate at most T times of total APP decreases and will terminate as long as the number of the cumulate times of such total APP decreases exceeds T .
In detail, the T -tolerance stopping criterion can be carried out as follows:
1) Initialization: Set the tolerance time T , and reset a counter

The performance of a popular MP algorithm (QSPA) using our proposed new T -tolerance criterion is investigated for both binary and nonbinary LDPC codes via numerous Monte Carlo simulations. A binary (648, 324) LDPC code from the IEEE 802.11-2012 standard [14] and a nonbinary (147, 108) LDPC code over GF(64) generated according to [12] are used for illustration. The maximum iteration number is defaulted to 50. The binary (648, 324) LDPC codewords are modulated by binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) and the nonbinary (147, 108) LDPC codewords are modulated by 64-QAM. All codewords are transmitted over the AWGN channel.
Fig. 3 depicts the frame error rate (FER) performance of binary (648, 324) LDPC code versus Eb/N0 for different T values compared to the performance of the conventional sum-

C = 0;

product algorithm (labeled as “SPA” in the figure). It can be

2) At the end of the tth iteration, compute the total APP P (t) observed that the larger the value of T , the better the FER

according to (2);

performance. When T is too small, such as T = 0, 1, the T -

3) Compare P (t) with the previous value P (t−1); if P (t) < tolerance criterion is more likely to terminate the algorithm too

P (t−1), a decrease occurs and C is incremented by 1;

early before the decodable block can be recovered. However,

4) Once C > T , the MP algorithm terminates; otherwise, the FER performance of SPA using the T -tolerance criterion

continue to the next iteration (t + 1) and go back to approaches the performance of the conventional scheme very

Step (2).

quickly as T increases. It is shown that the FER performance

Obviously, our proposed T -tolerance criterion only requires degradation due to the 5-tolerance criterion (T = 5) is almost to record two scalars, namely P (t) and C. The computation of within 0.1 dB compared to the conventional SPA in the low

P (t) is also handy since the “max” operation in (2) is already Eb/N0 conditions.

available when the MP algorithm iteratively estimates the code- Since the proposed stopping criterion is to reduce the itera-

word in the probability domain. Hence, only a simple arithmetic tion numbers (thus reducing the complexity), Fig. 4 is drawn

average is required as the additional computational burden. For to show the average iteration number (AIN) versus Eb/N0 for the MP algorithms executed in the logarithm domain, the log- different T values compared to that of the conventional SPA.

likelihood ratios need to be converted to the APPs (see [5]) to It can be observed that the smaller the value of T , the less

accommodate our proposed new stopping criterion. Note that the value of AIN. The AIN gap between the SPA using the

our proposed new T -tolerance criterion will be incorporated 5-tolerance criterion and the conventional SPA scheme is large

into the standard syndrome-check stopping criterion for early in the low Eb/N0 scenarios.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:53:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1682

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 10, OCOBER 2014

q-ary sum-product algorithm (labeled as “QSPA” in the figures), respectively. Compared to the results for the binary code in Figs. 3 and 4, the FER performances of the nonbinary code for T = 0, 1 are much closer to the performance of the conventional scheme, and the AIN gap between the QSPA using the T -tolerance criterion and the conventional scheme is yet larger in the low Eb/N0 scenarios.
The FER-complexity tradeoff can simply be maneuvered by adjusting T . Our simulation results suggest that it is favorable to adopt the T -tolerance criterion in the low Eb/N0 situations where undecodable blocks are often found.

Fig. 4. The average iteration number of the binary LDPC code (648, 324) with respect to Eb/N0 for different T values.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel T -tolerance stopping criterion for decoding LDPC codes. It allows the total a posteriori probability to decrease iteration by iteration at most T times when a message passing algorithm is executed. Monte Carlo simulation results demonstrate that the 5-tolerance criterion (T = 5) can greatly reduce the average iteration number (complexity) in the low Eb/N0 conditions while maintaining the frame-error-rate performance degradation within 0.1 dB. It is desirable to adopt our proposed new stopping criterion when undecodable blocks are frequently encountered during the LDPC decoding process.

Fig. 5. The frame error rate of the nonbinary LDPC code (147, 108) over GF(64) versus Eb/N0 for different T values.
Fig. 6. The average iteration number of the nonbinary LDPC code (147, 108) over GF(64) with respect to Eb/N0 for different T values.
Figs. 5 and 6 also depict the FER performances and the AINs of nonbinary (147, 108) LDPC code versus Eb/N0 for different T values compared to the performances of the conventional

REFERENCES
[1] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[2] M. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low-density parity check codes over GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[3] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Decoding algorithms for nonbinary LDPC codes over GF(q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 633–643, Apr. 2007.
[4] A. Voicila, D. Declercq, F. Verdier, M. Fossorier, and P. Urard, “Lowcomplexity decoding for non-binary LDPC codes in high order fields,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1365–1375, May 2010.
[5] W. Tang, J. Huang, L. Wang, and S. Zhou, “Nonbinary LDPC decoding by min-sum with adaptive message control,” in Proc. IEEE ICASSP, Prague, Czech Republic, May 2011, pp. 3164–3167.
[6] X. Guan and Y. Fei, “Adaptive extended min-sum algorithm for nonbinary LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[7] F. Kienle and N. Wehn, “Low complexity stopping criterion for LDPC code decoders,” in Proc. IEEE VTC–Spring, May 2005, pp. 606–609.
[8] G. Glikiotis and V. Paliouras, “A low-power termination criterion for iterative LDPC code decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop SiPS—Design Implementation, Athens, Greece, Nov. 2005, pp. 122–127.
[9] J. Li, X.-H. You, and J. Li, “Early stopping for LDPC decoding: Convergence of Mean Magnitude (CMM),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 667–669, Sep. 2006.
[10] G. Han and X. Liu, “A unified early stopping criterion for binary and nonbinary LDPC codes based on check-sum variation patterns,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 1053–1055, Nov. 2010.
[11] T. Xia, H.-C. Wu, and S. C.-H. Huang, “A new stopping criterion for fast low-density parity-check decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2013, pp. 3661–3666.
[12] L. Zeng et al., “Constructions of nonbinary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 545–554, Apr. 2008.
[13] D. Costello and G. Forney, Jr., “Channel coding: The road to channel capacity,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 1150–1177, Jun. 2007.
[14] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Std. 802.11n-2012, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:53:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

