ISITA2014, Melbourne, Australia, October 26-29, 2014

Estimation of Areal Density Gains of TDMR System with 2D Detector

Rathnakumar Radhakrishnan, Nedeljko Varnica, Mats Öberg Marvell Semiconductor Inc. Santa Clara, CA, USA

Abstract— Two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) is expected to drive continued areal density growth of hard-disk drives (HDDs) as the growth for conventional perpendicular magnetic recording (PMR)-based HDDs is slowing down. Feasibility of manufacturing more than one reader in a single head has hastened the development of TDMR and considerable effort is underway in developing read channels that can exploit the availability of multiple readers. First generation of TDMRbased HDDs will likely derive its gains from the SNR improvement obtained by combining multiple readback signals to remove inter-track interference (ITI). In this case, data belonging to a single track of interest is subsequently detected. A natural extension to this system is to combine the readback signals without removing ITI and jointly detecting data belonging to two tracks using a two-dimensional detector. Under the assumption that tracks are written synchronously, in this paper, we explore from a systems perspective if further areal density gains can be obtained from such a system. We employ a grain-based channel model for our investigation and estimate gains by appropriate optimization of the dual-reader systems, including optimizing reader placement. Furthermore, for the set of reader placement configurations, which affords reliable detection of both tracks, we introduce a new coding scheme called cross-track coding and show that additional areal density gains can be obtained. In this scheme, user data is LDPCencoded and written such that every codeword spans two tracks as opposed to one track as in conventional PMR.
Keywords— two-dimensional magnetic recording, multi-track recording, shingled magnetic recording
I. INTRODUCTION
Two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) was originally envisioned as a technology where the areal density approached the ultimate limit of storing one bit of information per magnetic grain [1]. However, recently this term has become synonymous with multi-track recording, where multiple readers are available to read one or more tracks simultaneously, allowing better tolerance to inter-track interference (ITI). The idea of improving areal density using multiple readers has existed for several years and a number of articles have been published on this topic, e.g. see [2][3] and the references therein. Recent advances in manufacturing read heads with an array of two or more readers have accelerated its development, focusing particular attention on areal density gains that can be achieved with dual readers.
Various signal processing methods exist to handle ITI when two readback signals are available. First generation of TDMR systems will likely derive their gains from the use of two-

dimensional (2D) equalizers designed to cancel ITI, as illustrated in Fig. 1. A recent study of this system suggests a potential increase of 6-7% in areal density compared to the single-reader system [5]. Although beyond the scope of this paper, further increase in areal density is possible by packing more readers in the read head. The primary focus of this paper is to understand how much additional gain we can expect to achieve from dual readers through signal processing and coding. Specifically, using computer simulations, we estimate areal density gains that can be obtained by using a combination of 2D equalizer and 2D Viterbi detector designed to jointly equalize and detect two tracks (Fig. 2). Detecting two tracks provides opportunities for improving the performance of the decoder, and hence possibility of further gains. We introduce an error-correction coding (ECC) method called cross-track coding, wherein the encoded data is distributed across two tracks, and explore conditions under which this scheme is beneficial.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II we describe our software channel model as well as the details of the two read-channel architectures shown in Figs. 1 and 2. We also describe the joint optimization of 2D equalizer and targets used in our simulations. We discuss optimal reader placement in Section III followed by a description of our method for areal density optimization criteria and present results on the estimated gains obtained using this method. Further, we introduce the concept of cross-track coding in Section IV and present results on additional gains in Section V, followed by conclusions in Section VI.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Channel Model
Our software channel model attempts to model the readback waveforms as obtained from a typical TDMR setup as shown in Fig. 3. In this set-up, a set of 7 tracks are written on a Voronoi based grain media model with an average grain diameter of about 9nm designed such that the grain size distribution follows the typical log-normal profile observed in real media. We denote the tracks N-3, N-2, …, N+3, where track N is the main track of interest. We assume a shingled writer that spans multiple tracks and throughout this paper follow the convention that the direction of writing is from N-3 to N+3. For the areal density study, we do not consider trackedge noise and assume all tracks are written synchronously. On top of media noise due to the random grain locations, we also add electronics noise modeled as additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). Furthermore, the read process is modeled as a 2D

Copyright (C) 2014 by IEICE

674

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISITA2014, Melbourne, Australia, October 26-29, 2014

Fig. 1. Dual-reader TDMR system with 1D detector.

Fig. 2. Dual-reader TDMR system with 2D detector.
convolution of the head response, assumed to follow a 2D Gaussian profile, with media magnetization. We set pulse width at half the peak amplitude (PW50) of the reader response to be 20.65nm in the down-track and 33nm in the cross-track direction. Overall, we configure the model such that about 80% of noise power in the readback waveform is due to media noise and the other 20% is due to electronics noise under conditions comparable to current HDDs. Two readers, R1 and R2, are reading data from the media placed with some offset relative to track N.
B. Read-Channel Architecture with 1D Detector
Fig. 1 illustrates the likely first evolution of TDMR system architecture, where readback signals Y1 and Y2 are used to cancel ITI in the main track. This is achieved with the use of a two-input one-output equalizer consisting of a bank of two finite-impulse response (FIR) filters, whose outputs are summed together. This equalizer attempts to cancel ITI in track N and equalize it to a partial response target. Such an equalizer can be obtained by jointly optimizing the two FIR filters and monic-constrained target to minimize mean-squared error (MSE). This is a straightforward extension of the optimization described in [6] for the single-reader case.
C. Read-Channel Architecture with 2D Detector
A natural extension of the above architecture is to design a two-input two-output equalizer that jointly equalizes both track N and track N+1 (assuming R1 and R2 pick up signals predominantly from these tracks), followed by a 2D Viterbi detector that jointly detects data in these two tracks. The equalizer in this case is a bank of four FIR filters, equalizing Y1 and Y2 to four targets, as shown in Fig. 4. All the filters and targets can be jointly optimized, although it is not as straightforward as before. We describe below the method to obtain these filters and targets in detail.
Let the four filters be denoted by column vectors F11, F21, F12, F22 of length T and the four targets be denoted by column vectors G11, G21, G12, G22 of length L. We can compactly represent them as 2x2 block matrices as shown below,

Fig. 3. TDMR setup with two readers reading track N and N+1.
system, monic constraint has long been known to give good performance. The corresponding constraint for a dual-reader system is known as monic determinant [4], which is defined as



D G11(0)G22(0)  G12(0)G21(0) 1



where,

denotes the first coefficient of vector and

> @ similarly for others. To incorporate this constraint, we modify
the optimization cost function as J E e12  e22  OD , where λ is

the Lagrange multiplier. By equating the gradient of J with

respect to F and G to 0, we obtain the following set of

equations

OM (0)

ª¬«GG1211((00))

G12 G22

(0)º (0)¼»

¬ª«GG1211((00))

G12 G22

(0)º (0)»¼

T

(3)

G

OM «ª¬GG222(10(0))

0 0

 G12 (0) G11(0)

0ºT »
0¼

(4)

  where, M RX  RYTX RY1RYX 1 and M(0) is a 2x2 matrix
formed from elements M(0,0), M(0,L), M(L,0) and M(L,L). RX and RY denote autocorrelation matrices of the channel input and
output, RYX denotes their cross-correlation matrix and 0 denotes a length L-1 zero row vector. We first solve for λ and the first coefficient of the targets using (3) and subsequently, determine the rest of the coefficients by solving (4). Since, determinant of RHS of (3) is 1, λ2=|M(0)|. In order to obtain the first coefficients, we need to impose another constraint on the target. A variety of constraints are possible, but assuming a lower triangular solution allows solving (3) using Cholesky

F

«¬ª FF1211

F12 F22

º ¼»

G

ª«¬GG1211

G12 G22

º ¼»

(1)

> @ F and G are optimized such that E e12  e22 is minimized,

where e1 and e2 denote errors in the two outputs of the 2D equalizer (see Fig. 4). It is necessary to introduce a constraint

on the targets to avoid the all-zero solution. In the single-reader

Fig. 4. Block diagram of a dual-reader TDMR system showing four filters equalizing two readback signals to four targets.

Copyright (C) 2014 by IEICE

675

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISITA2014, Melbourne, Australia, October 26-29, 2014

decomposition. Once the targets are determined, the filters are obtained by solving F RY1RYX G . For all our simulations, we assume T = 20 and L=3.
III. AREAL DENSITY ESTIMATION
A. Optimal Reader Placement Performance of a TDMR system depends on the
positioning of the two readers with respect to the desired track, where the reader position is completely defined by the distance of R1 from the center of track N and the cross-track separation between R1 and R2. In this paper, areal density gains measured at the optimal reader placement are reported. Although the results are not presented here, we find that for the dual-reader system with 1D detector, the performance is maximized when either both R1 and R2 are placed close to the center of track N or when both are placed symmetrically around the edge of track N and N+1 as shown in Fig. 5. The parameter d was found to be about 10-15% of track width. For the areal density study we chose d = 15%. For the dual-reader system with 2D detector, only the symmetric reader placement turns out to be optimal. Naturally, optimal reader placement is a function of a number of system parameters, including the amount of ITI, but the above observations are generally true for the range of track widths we consider.
B. Squeeze-to-Failure Apart from comparing the gain of 2D detector, we also
report gains of ITI canceling dual-reader system over the single-reader system. This allows a comparison of our methods with other recent works that attempt to estimate this quantity. We use the squeeze-to-failure approach to estimate the achievable areal density. In this method, the smallest track w for any given bit length at which the system fails is determined, assuming rather conservatively that the point of failure corresponds to 1% bit error rate (BER) at the output of detector. Then, areal density is calculated after allowing for a track width margin of 10nm.
Using our software channel model, BER performance at various track widths and bit lengths are determined, which are shown in Figs. 6, 7 and 8 as contour plots for the single-reader, dual-reader with 1D detector and 2D detector system, respectively. From these plots, all pairs of track widths and bit lengths that result in 1% BER are read-off, where each such pair corresponds to a particular areal density. The best areal density is then the maximum among them. Results for the maximum achievable areal density of the three systems under consideration are shown in Table I. Optimal bit length is about 10-11nm for all the systems. However, track width can be squeezed by more than 5nm with dual reader and 1D detector and a further 1nm with the use of 2D detectors. Overall, our simulations suggest a gain of 7.3% and 10.17% for dual readers with 1D and 2D detector, respectively over single-
Fig. 5. Optimal reader placement configurations.

Fig. 6. Contour of log10(BER) for single-reader PMR system.
Fig. 7. Contour of log10(BER) for dual-reader TDMR system with 1D detector.
Fig. 8. Contour of log10(BER) for dual-reader TDMR system with 2D detector (for track N).
reader system. Our estimate of 7.3% is close to the estimate of 6.5% obtained using captured waveforms as reported in [5]. Further, the gain of 2D detector over 1D detector is estimated to be 2.6%, suggesting room for growth beyond the first generation of TDMR with dual readers.

Copyright (C) 2014 by IEICE

676

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISITA2014, Melbourne, Australia, October 26-29, 2014

TABLE I.

AREAL DENSITY GAINS OF DUAL-READER TDMR SYSTEMS

Single-reader

Track Width (nm) + 10nm margin
45.52

Bit Length
(nm)
11.0

Areal
Density (Tb/in2)

Gain over singlereader (%)

1.2885

0

Dual-reader + 1D detector
Dual-reader + 2D detector

40.21 39.18

11.6 1.3831 7.3 11.6 1.4196 10.17

Fig. 9B. System write-head positioning variation: an example with write head positioning varied on Tracks N and N+1. Track width significantly reduces for Track N. This example corresponds to the track squeeze on Track N.

IV. ECC SOLUTIONS FOR TDMR SYSTEM WITH WRITE TRACK MIS-
REGISTRATION
So far, we concentrated on the systems with identical track width for all tracks under consideration. In reality, variation in track width, due to write track mis-registration (TMR), cannot be avoided. In this section, we consider ECC solutions for such systems. We propose a solution that performs encoding and decoding across tracks. This scheme is termed cross-track ECC and relies on the idea of averaging signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) across tracks. It results in considerable areal density gains when significant track width variation is present.
As a practical example of the system with varying track widths, we consider the write head variation, as shown in Figs. 9A and 9B. Here, for simplicity and without loss of generality, we will assume that the variation of track widths (and, consequently, the SNR difference observed on different tracks N and N+1) is entirely due to the write head positioning variation. An ideal system would have the perfect positioning as shown in Fig. 9A. In this hypothetical system, all tracks have the same nominal width. In reality, write TMR can be modeled as a random process, e.g., with a Normal distribution N(0,σ2). Given this, it is easy to envision a system with different track widths for tracks N and N+1, as shown in Fig. 9B. Usually, in the write process a control loop is used to correct for write-head positioning variation; this loop typically is not fast enough to remove the positioning variation, but is capable of limiting the maximum possible variation to the levels of the order of, say, 3σ.
The idea of cross-track ECC is to assign written bits to ECC codewords in a fashion that distributes SNRs equally across codewords. As there are two distinct SNRs in our examples, the distribution of bits from two adjacent tracks into a single ECC codeword is chosen. The difference in the crosstrack ECC and along-track ECC decoding scheme implementation is shown in Figs. 10A and 10B. The goal of the cross-track ECC can intuitively be thought of as follows: At the input to the ECC decoder (output of data combiner shown in Fig. 10B), the cross-track ECC approach should obtain a BER that is roughly equal to the average of BER1 and
Fig. 9A. Ideal write-head positioning (no write TMR).

Fig. 10A. Decoder for along-track ECC. In the standard ECC solution for dual-reader systems, each individual track is encoded by a separate ECC.
Fig. 10B. Decoder for cross-track ECC. In the cross-track ECC solution for dual-reader systems, data from two adjacent tracks are interleaved into a codeword.
BER2 produced during decoding of the along-track ECC (shown in Fig. 10A). It is worth noting that the cross-track ECC scheme is naturally suitable for systems where the two readers read tracks N and N+1 simultaneously, perform decoding and then move onto tracks N+2 and N+3. Of course, such approach is also possible in the along-track ECC solution.
V. AREAL DENSITY GAIN OF CROSS-TRACK ECC Figs. 11, 12 and 13 show the codeword-failure-rate (CWFR) performance of an low-density parity-check (LDPC) code in the cross-track ECC (from Fig. 10B) as a function of normalized bits per inch (BPI) and compares it to the solution in which ECC is applied to each individual track (Fig. 10A). BPI is normalized with respect to a nominal bit length of 11.6nm, taking into account the code rate penalty. Symmetric reader position described in Section III was selected and kept fixed for all simulations shown in Figs. 11, 12 and 13. The LDPC code rate is R=0.9 and code length is 0.5KB; For fair comparisons, the code rate and code length is the same in both coding schemes, see Figs. 10A and 10B. The ECC decoder is a standard belief-propagation (BP) decoder of LDPC codes. The BP LDPC decoder is combined with the 2D soft channel detector in a turbo equalization scheme performed for 3 channel iterations; 8 LDPC iterations are performed per each channel iteration. We consider different track squeeze for track N, while track N+1 is kept at constant (nominal) width. The nominal track width was selected as 40nm in all simulations. In Fig. 11, we assume no track squeeze, whereas the maximum

Copyright (C) 2014 by IEICE

677

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISITA2014, Melbourne, Australia, October 26-29, 2014

Fig. 11. Comparing cross-track ECC and along-track ECC on systems with no write-head variation (constant track width TW = 40.0nm).
Fig. 12. Comparing cross-track ECC and along-track ECC: System with write-head variation assumes track squeeze = 6nm.
track squeeze in Figs. 12 and 13 is set to 6nm and 9nm, respectively. These assumptions reflect the system for which σ=3.0nm and the maximum track squeeze is 2σ (for Fig. 12) and  3σ (for Fig. 13).
From Fig. 11, we first note that there is practically no crosstrack ECC gain if the track widths are perfectly matched (e.g. no write TMR). As seen from Figs. 12 and 13, the more extreme the squeeze condition is, the more gain cross-track ECC scheme achieves. For example, the areal density gain with the cross-track ECC is estimated at roughly 3% when the track squeeze of 2σ is assumed. If the track squeeze of 3σ is assumed, the cross-track coding gain increases to approximately 5.5%. We note here that the methodologies that utilize a track squeeze to measure areal density gains are practical, simple and fast. The methodology we used here rely on squeezing one track to the maximum (or near maximum) tolerable   squeeze   while   the   other   track’s   width   is   kept   at   its   nominal value. This tool can be used as the first order approximation of the actual areal density gains in systems with write TMR described in Fig. 9B. The study that demonstrates the validity and accuracy of such approximation is beyond the

Fig. 13. Comparing cross-track ECC and along-track ECC: System with write-head variation assumes track squeeze = 9nm.
scope of this paper and will be presented in a future manuscript.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have shown two methods to derive additional areal density gains beyond the dual-reader TDMR system with 1D detector. Firstly, we showed using software simulations that the use of ITI preserving 2D equalizer along with 2D detector can potentially provide a gain of 2.6%. Secondly, we showed that detecting two-tracks simultaneously can be exploited further by cross-track coding to obtain additional gains of 3-5.5% when there is significant write track mis-registration.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge Richard T. Behrens for his contributions toward this paper and the many useful discussions they have had with him.
VIII. REFERENCES
[1] Wood, R.; Williams, Mason; Kavcic, A; Miles, Jim, "The Feasibility of Magnetic Recording at 10 Terabits Per Square Inch on Conventional Media," Magnetics, IEEE Transactions on, vol.45, no.2, pp.917-923, Feb. 2009
[2] Barbosa, L.C., "Simultaneous detection of readback signals from interfering magnetic recording tracks using array heads," Magnetics, IEEE Transactions on, vol.26, no.5, pp.2163-2165, Sep 1990
[3] Soljanin, E.; Georghiades, C.N., "Multihead detection for multitrack recording channels," Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol.44, no.7, pp.2988-2997, Nov 1998
[4] Venkataramani, R.; Sankaranarayanan, S., "Optimal Channel Shortening Equalization for MIMO ISI Channels," Global Telecommunications Conference, 2008. IEEE GLOBECOM 2008. pp. 1-5, Nov. 30 2008Dec. 4 2008
[5] Wood, R; Galbraith, R; Coker, J, “Two-Dimensional Magnetic Recording:   Progress   and   Evolution,”   The Magnetic Recording Conference (2014), Digest of, pp. 41-42, Aug. 11-13, 2014, Berkeley, CA
[6] Jaekyun Moon; Weining Zeng, "Equalization for maximum likelihood detectors," Magnetics, IEEE Transactions on, vol.31, no.2, pp.10831088, March 1995

Copyright (C) 2014 by IEICE

678

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:58:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

