IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

793

Efficient Decoder Architecture for Single Block-Row Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Chuan Zhang, Zhongfeng Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Xiaohu You, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Single block-row quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes have been proposed for high-speed applications recently. However, no existing work has systematically addressed the decoder design issue for such kind of codes. In this brief, an efficient decoder architecture for such kinds of codes is proposed by exploring the geometry properties of the check matrix. Compared with conventional approaches, the proposed method can achieve more than 20.8% of memory reduction. Additionally, the subblocksharing technique and the suboptimal low-latency searching method are employed to further reduce the hardware complexity.
Index Terms—Decoder design, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, matrix decomposition, single block-row.
I. INTRODUCTION
S INCE their rediscovery in 1997 [1], low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes have been receiving much attention due to their capacity-approaching capability. In order to facilitate efficient decoder implementation, quasi-cyclic LDPC (QCLDPC) codes have been proposed in [2]. Those hardware-aware codes are not only implementation friendly but also comparable in performance to computer-generated random LDPC codes [3], [4]. In high-speed-application scenarios, QC-LDPC codes with high rates and moderate lengths are required. To this end, several high-rate QC-LDPC codes have been proposed in [5] and [6]. However, restrictions on code rate and length hinder these codes from being widely accepted. Most recently, new single block-row regular QC-LDPC codes based on cyclic difference families (CDFs) or perfect difference families (PDFs) have been proposed in [7]. These codes enable us to flexibly choose the code rate and length to meet various design requirements. For a given code rate, the code length can even be chosen as the minimum achievable code length without any performance degradation compared with the ones in [5] and [6]. Such construction convenience along with their good errorcorrecting performance makes these newly proposed codes favorable for real-life applications.

However, to the best knowledge of the authors, the decoder architecture of such class of high-rate QC-LDPC codes has not been systematically discussed. In this brief, the decoder architecture, which aims to achieve high hardware efficiency, is presented. For single block-row QC-LDPC codes, column weight dv can be 3, 4, or even 5. The length of circulant matrix array L can be as long as 1000. The memory requirement becomes the bottleneck of efficient decoder implementation. In this brief, by investigating the geometry properties of the check matrix H, we rearrange the decoding steps of min-sum algorithm (MSA). Consequently, the 1-element-based decoding schedule and the corresponding decoder architecture are proposed. Compared with existing designs, the proposed decoder architecture can save more than 20.8% of memory resources. With the subblock-sharing technique and the suboptimal lowlatency searching method, both VNU and CNU blocks can be implemented with simple logic.
The remainder of this brief is organized as follows. Section II gives a brief review of the single block-row QC-LDPC codes. In Section III, the 1-element-based decoding schedule is proposed. Section IV presents the corresponding decoder architecture. The hardware estimation and comparison are presented in Section V.
II. PRELIMINARIES OF SINGLE BLOCK-ROW QC-LDPC CODES
A. CDF and PDF
For an additive group Zv = {0, 1, . . . , v−1}, we choose its t k-element subsets Bi = {bi1, bi2, . . . , bik}, where i = 1, 2, . . . , t and bi1 < bi2 < · · · < bik. If every nonzero element of Zv can be represented in exactly λ different ways in terms of bim −bin, where 1 ≤ m = n ≤ k, we say those subsets form a (v, k, λ) CDF.
If 1 ≤ n < m ≤ k, the difference bim − bin is defined as the backward difference over Zv. For a (k(k − 1)t + 1, k, 1) CDF, it is named as a (k(k − 1)t + 1, k, 1) PDF if all the backward differences cover the set {0, 1, . . . , (v − 1)/2}.

Manuscript received January 16, 2014; revised April 23, 2014; accepted July 30, 2014. Date of publication August 5, 2014; date of current version October 1, 2014. This work was supported in part by the Intel Collaborative Research Institute for Mobile Networking and Computing, International Science and Technology Cooperation Program of China under Grant 2014DFA11640, by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 3204004202, and by the Research Fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, under Grant 2014B02. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor Y.-B. Kim.
C. Zhang and X. You are with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China (e-mail: chzhang@seu.edu.cn; xhyu@seu.edu.cn).
Z. Wang is with Broadcom Corporation, Irvine, CA 92617 USA (e-mail: zfwang@broadcom.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this brief are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2014.2345290

B. High-Rate QC-LDPC Codes Based on CDFs and PDFs
Consider a rate (L − 1)/L regular QC-LDPC code with the check matrix of the form

H = [H1 H2 · · · HL]

(1)

where each circulant Hi (1 ≤ i ≤ L) is a z × z matrix. dv
and dc denote the column and row weights of matrix H,
respectively. For Hi, we denote the indexes of 1-elements in its first column in ascending order: 0 ≤ si1 < si2 < · · · < sidv ≤ L − 1. Since Hi is a circulant, it can be written as the sum

dv

Hi =

Isij

(2)

j=1

1549-7747 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/5in1d:0e2x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

We define the kth row of H˜ to be the kth layer. In order to reduce memory requirement and decoder complexity, the 1-element-based algorithm is proposed as follows.

Fig. 1. Decomposition of a weight-3 circulant matrix.
where Isij is the sij-step cyclically left-shifted identity z × z matrix. Therefore, Hi can be uniquely determined by the set {sij|1 ≤ j ≤ dv}. The construction steps of the newly proposed single block-row QC-LDPC codes are as follows. For more details of the code construction, please refer to [7].

Decoding Schedule for 1-Element-Based Algorithm

1. Initialization: Rc(0v) = α×

n∈N

(c)\(v)

sgn(In)

× min |In|.
n∈N (c)\(v)

L(v0) = Iv + m∈M(v) Rm (0v) .

2. Iterative decoding:

for 1 ≤ j ≤ itermax and yˆHT = 0 do

for 1 ≤ k ≤ 3 do

Rc(jv,k) = α × n∈Nk(c)\(v) sgn(L(nj−1) − Rc(jn−1))

× minn∈Nk(c)\(v) |Ln(j−1) − Rc(jn−1)|.

endfor

Rc(jv) =

1≤k≤3

sgn(Rc(jv,k))

×

min
1≤k≤3

|Rc(jv,k)

|.

L(vj) = Iv + m∈M(v) Rm (j)v.

yˆv = sgn(L(vj)).

endfor

3. Output: yˆ.

Construction of High-Rate QC-LDPC Codes
1. Choose parameters according to the following restrictions: 1.1 dv = 3 or 4. 1.2 If dv = 3, choose L ≥ 2; if dv = 4, choose 4 ≤ L ≤ 1000. 1.3 Choose z ≥ dv(dv − 1)L + 1. 1.4 If dv = 3 and L = (2 mod 4) or (3 mod 4), z = 6L+2.
2. If dv = 3 and L = (2 mod 4) or (3 mod 4), 2.1 Construct a (6L + 1, 3, 1) CDF Bi with 1 ≤ i ≤ L. 2.2 Otherwise, construct a (dv(dv −1)L+1, dv, 1) PDF Bi.
3. Simply assign sij = bij for 1 ≤ i ≤ L, 1 ≤ j ≤ dv.

Here, Iv and yˆv are the channel output and the decoding estimation, respectively. We refer to L(cjv) and Rc(jv) as the variable-to-check message and the check-to-variable message at the jth iteration, respectively. N (c) is the set of variable nodes participating in check node c, and N (c) \ (v) is the set excluding variable node v. Similar definitions apply to M(v) and M(v) \ (c). α is the scaling factor. Rc(jv,k) denotes the intermediate check-to-variable message generated in the kth
layer at the jth iteration. It is noted that the 1-element-based algorithm divides the Rc(jv) message updating into dv = 3 steps. Therefore, it is a rearranged version of MSA and can achieve
the same performance as normal TPMP algorithms.

III. 1-ELEMENT-BASED DECODING ALGORITHM FOR SINGLE BLOCK-ROW QC-LDPC CODES

IV. SEMIPARALLEL 1-ELEMENT-BASED DECODER A. Overall Architecture of the 1-Element-Based Decoder

According to the construction method, it is noted that each compound matrix Hi consists of three or four superimposed cyclically shifted identity matrices. For ease of explanation, in this brief we only discuss the decoder architectures for the QC-LDPC codes with column weight dv = 3. In this section we investigate the 1-element-based decoding algorithm for the single block-row QC-LDPC codes.
It is known that MSA is a suboptimal variant of the sum– product algorithm. As a two-phase message-passing (TPMP) algorithm, the likelihood messages of MSA are iteratively passed through the edges in the Tanner graph.

The architecture of the proposed semiparallel decoder is shown in Fig. 2. It is assumed that H is composed of 1 × L submatrices of dimension z, and the parallel number is p (1 ≤ p ≤ z). Therefore, the decoder requires p × L VNUs and p CNUs. The message-updating schedule is as follows.
1) Initialization Step: Before the initialization step, channel inputs are preloaded into the I memory blocks. Inputs associated with every p adjacent columns are stored in one I memory entry. During the initialization step, inputs stored in the I memory blocks are copied to the corresponding L memory blocks. Each L memory entry stores the column sums L(vj) of p

Illustrated in Fig. 1, it is noted that each weight-3 circulant adjacent columns. This step requires z/p clock cycles.

matrix can be decomposed into three weight-1 submatrices. 2) Check-to-Variable Message-Updating Step: In the

Consequently, check matrix H can be converted into a new check-to-variable message-updating step, messages associated matrix H˜ , which is composed of 3 × L compound matrices, with each row are passed to one CNU block through the

i.e.,

DeMUX and the permutation block “π.” The permutation block

⎡ H˜ 1,1 aH˜ 1,2 · · · H˜ 1,L ⎤ H˜ = ⎣ H˜ 2,1 H˜ 2,2 · · · H˜ 2,L ⎦ .
H˜ 3,1 H˜ 3,2 · · · H˜ 3,L

is required because messages in the L memory blocks are stored in column order, and the CNU blocks can only deal with (3) messages in row order. Each CNU block outputs four values: 1) the first minimum magnitude; 2) the second minimum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:51:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR SINGLE BLOCK-ROW QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

795

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the 1-element-based decoder.

magnitude; 3) the index of the first minimum; and 4) the signs of all messages in one row. Those values for the first layer are temporarily stored in the T memory block. The same process repeats for both the second and third layers. When all results for three layers are available, the merge unit combines those intermediate results together and output the final results to the R memory block. Similar to the L memory block, each R memory entry stores the messages for p adjacent rows. This step requires 3 × z/p clock cycles.
3) Variable-to-Check Message-Updating Step: In the variable-to-check updating step, Rc(0v) messages are recovered first. Using the values stored in the R memory block, the data distributor regenerates and passes the Rc(0v) messages to VNUs. After reshuffling the Rc(0v) messages back to the column order with the permutation block “π−1,” VNU blocks accumulate them with channel inputs to get column sums L(vj). Since the weight for each submatrix is three, the accumulation process is executed three times. L(vj) messages are stored in the L memory blocks. This step will consume 3 × z/p clock cycles.
4) Termination and Output Step: In this step, soft messages stored in the L memory blocks are employed by the decision block. If check equations are satisfied, the decoding process is terminated, and decoded bits are output. Otherwise, the decoding continues until the termination criteria are met. This step can be carried out with the check-to-variable messageupdating step at the same time. Thus, the latency for one decoding iteration is 7 × z/p clock cycles.
B. Optimization on the Proposed 1-Element-Based Decoder
1) Proposed Memory Architecture: In the proposed decoder, p groups of processing elements are working together. To reduce the memory area, messages of every p adjacent columns are stored in one entry of the I memory or L memory blocks. Similarly, the messages of every p adjacent rows are stored in one entry of the T memory or R memory blocks. Second, messages stored in the R memory block are no longer all soft messages any more. As mentioned earlier, for each row, we only store four values instead.

Fig. 3. Block diagram of an eight-input barrel shifter.
Since the weight of each submatrix is uniformly three, each column sum L(vj) is associated with three Rc(0v) messages. The accumulation can be implemented by either three accumulators at a time or one accumulator in three operations. The prior choice requires the L memory blocks to support three READ and three WRITE operations in one clock cycle, which triples the memory area. In several occasions, the prior option will lead to overlapped updating. Therefore, the latter option is adopted here, and the semiparallel updating schedule is employed.
2) Proposed VNU Block: Illustrated in Fig. 1, straightforward implementation of one VNU block requires two permutation blocks “π” and “π−1.” However, according to the proposed semiparallel decoding schedule, there is no overlap between the check-to-variable message-updating step and the variableto-check message-updating step. Thus, both permutation and depermutation can be implemented using one barrel shifter. Assume that p is an integer power of 2, the barrel shifter requires p × (log2 p + 2) 2-to-1 MUX’s. A block diagram of an eight-input barrel shifter is shown in Fig. 3.
In general, a p-input barrel shifter consists of (log2 p + 2) stages: log2 p shifter stages and 2 reversal stages at both the top and bottom. Stage i is actually a p-input 2i-step barrel shifter. In stage i, the 0-end input data of the jth MUX from left is routed to the 1-end input of the [(j + 2i) mod p]th MUX from left. The control signal C for VNUi in row layer j is determined as sij. When the shifter is executing the “π” function, R is set as 0. Otherwise, R is set as 1. Similarly, the functions of the adder and subtractor in the VNU block can be executed by a single adder. The VNU block is restructured and shown in Fig. 4.
3) Proposed CNU Block: The task of the CNU block is to find the first and second minimum values and the index of the first minimum value. One simple approach is to compare every element in the array one by one and keep the two minimum values until reaching the end of the sequence. The latency is equal to (2n − 3) comparisons, where n is the number of inputs. However, this method is only suitable when all data are input in sequence and suffer from the long latency. Since all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:51:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 61, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2014

Fig. 4. Structure of the proposed VNU block. Fig. 5. Optimal low-latency searching method.

Fig. 7. Step 2 of the suboptimal low-latency searching method.

Fig. 6. Step 1 of the suboptimal low-latency searching method.

inputs of the CNU block are available at the same time, the first Fig. 8. Architecture of the proposed CNU block.

minimum value and its index can be found with a binary-tree

architecture. Repeating this process, the second minimum value

can be found. Now, the latency is the processing time of 2 log2 n comparisons. Still, we can do better. In Fig. 5, the binary-tree

architecture is employed to find the first minimum value and its

index. It is noted that, at some point, the first minimum value

must have knocked out the second minimum value. Therefore,

we only need to compare the first minimum value’s adjacent

neighbors (indicated by dotted circles) in Step 2 to get the second minimum value. Now, we need [(log2 n−1)+(n−1)] comparisons. The latency is equal to the processing time of (log2 n + log2(log2 n) ) comparisons. We name this method the optimal low-latency searching method.
In order to identify all the adjacent neighbors of the first minimum value, we have to backtrack from the root all the way to the top of the binary tree. However, this operation is not suitable for hardware implementation. Therefore, an alternative way to find the second minimum value is proposed. Shown in Fig. 6, the new method first identifies the bigger value (the circled one) of each pair (pairs: 5-7, 2-6, 4-0, 1-3, 5-2, 0-1, 2-0). The minimum value of all those bigger values must be the second minimum value. The corresponding way is illustrated in Fig. 7.
The number of comparisons required is calculated as

Fig. 9. Architectures of both kinds of comparators.
time of (log2 n + log2(log2 n) ) comparisons) because Step 1 and Step 2 can be carried out in parallel. More importantly, this method is very suitable for implementation. Compared with the simple approach, this method has advantages in both latency and implementation feasibility. We name this method the suboptimal low-latency searching method.
Based on the suboptimal low-latency searching method, the proposed eight-input CNU architecture is illustrated in Fig. 8. Compared with the CNU architecture based on the pseudo-rank order filter in [3], which uses the same amount of comparators, the proposed CNU block has simpler control logic and requires

log2 n n 2i − 1 + (log2 n − 1) = 2n − 3.
i=0

much fewer 3-to-1 MUX’s. Therefore, the proposed CNU block (4) is hardware efficient, particularly when n is large.
The proposed CNU is composed of two kinds of comparators, which are shown in Fig. 9. The first kind of comparator

Although this method requires more comparisons than the (left) compares two inputs and indicates the smaller/bigger one

optimal method, its latency stays the same (the processing by “S”/“B,” respectively. The “L” output is set as 0 when the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:51:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR SINGLE BLOCK-ROW QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

797

TABLE I HARDWARE CONSUMPTION FOR DIFFERENT APPROACHES

Fig. 10. Architecture of the proposed data distributor.
left input is the smaller one; otherwise, it is set as 1. The second kind of comparator (right) outputs the smaller one of the two inputs.
4) Proposed Merge Unit: In order to find two minimum values and the index of the first minimum value of one specific row, the merge unit is required. Since each circulant matrix is decomposed into three cyclically shifted identity matrices, the function of the merge unit can be simply implemented by a sixinput CNU block.
5) Proposed Data Distributor: Using the messages stored in the R memory, the data distributor generates the check-tovariable messages with the architecture illustrated in Fig. 10. The data distributor is composed of p groups of MUX’s. Each group generates the check-to-variable messages of the corresponding CNU block. A total of L 2-to-1 MUX’s are required for each group.

V. HARDWARE COMPARISON AND CONCLUSION

In this section, the hardware complexity of the proposed

decoder is estimated and compared with others. Benefitting

from the 1-element-based decoding schedule, the decoder is of high memory efficiency. Table I lists hardware consumptions of the proposed approach and designs with other conventional approaches [3], [4]. Although there is no existing decoder design for the single block-row QC-LDPC codes, designs using the single block-row check matrices and existing techniques presented in [3] and [4] are listed for comparison.
For ease of explanation, we consider two single block-row codes: the rate-0.9167 (1020, 935) code with dv = 3, L = 12, and z = 85 and the rate-0.9333 (2115, 1974) code with dv = 3, L = 15, and z = 141. The 6-bit quantization is employed, and p = 64 and 128 for each design, respectively. According to

In this brief, the architecture for the single block-row QCLDPC decoder is proposed for the first time. The proposed design approach makes such kind of QC-LDPC codes more attractive for applications. It should be mentioned that multiple rows at different layers can be processed at the same time to meet very high speed requirement. On the other hand, the same goal can be achieved with on-the-fly computation while processing one block column within one or three clock cycles. Both design approaches will be addressed in our future work.
REFERENCES

Table I, the proposed (1020, 935) decoder requires 35 530 bits of memory. The one using the architecture proposed in [3] requires 61 540 bits of memory. The one using the architecture presented in [4] requires 44 880 bits of memory. Thus, the proposed decoder achieves 42.3% and 20.8% reduction, respectively. Similarly, the proposed (2115, 1974) single blockrow decoder can achieve 43.8% and 23.5% memory reduction compared with its counterparts, respectively.
For the design of the VNU block, the subblock-sharing technique is employed. Consequently, only one permutation block, one accumulator, and some amount of MUX’s/DeMUX’s are required. In order to balance the critical path and hardware cost of the CNU block, the suboptimal low-latency searching method is proposed. The critical path of an n-input CNU is equal to the processing time of (log2 n + log2(log2 n) ) comparators, which is very close to the optimal low-latency design.

[1] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Elect. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 457–458, Aug. 1996.
[2] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[3] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 483–488, Apr. 2007.
[4] Z. Wang and Q. Jia, “Low complexity, high speed decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISCAS, 2005, pp. 5786–5789.
[5] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[6] N. Kamiya, “High-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes derived from finite affine planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1444– 1459, Apr. 2007.
[7] H. Park, S. Hong, J. No, and D. Shin, “Construction of high-rate regular quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on cyclic difference families,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3108–3113, Aug. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:51:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

