The 2014 7th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing
A New Simplified RRWBF Decoding Algorithm for LDPC Decoder in CMMB

Xiangran Sun
Information Engineering School Communication University of China
Beijing, China

Yunyun Wei
School of Animation and Digital Arts Communication University of China
Beijing, China

Abstract—A new soft-value bit-flipping low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding is proposed based on a simplified reliability ratio based on weighted bit-flipping (RRWBF) algorithm. Moreover, we design a soft-output demapping and soft-decision decoding for the LDPC code in China Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting (CMMB). In addition, the complexity of decoding and the consumption of hardware is reduced effectively by our proposed simplified algorithm.
Keywords-RRWBF; LDPC; decoding; CMMB
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes are known as linear error correcting codes which was developed by Robert G. Gallager in 1960 [1]. In 1996 MacKay and Neal improved the concept of LDPC [2] which as new channel codes are growing to be concerned by people. Nowadays LDPC codes get great application on broadcasting system, telecommunication system, magnetic record and many other zones in the whole world. The decoding algorithms of LDPC codes are according to many encoding methods, which are classified as some classical construction method. The construction of Gallager shows good error performance with different decoding codes so many communication systems use these LDPC codes as the FEC codes such as DTMB and CMMB. The LDPC that construction of Gallager has uniform weight in every row and column that result in regular encoder and easy decoding implementations. The proper construction of LDPC codes can get huge minimum distance which avoids a problem due to error ground, which is a mainly obvious shortcoming of LDPC codes contrast with other error correcting codes.
The decoding methods of LDPC codes are classified in three categories including hard-decision, soft-decision or hybrid decoding. They show clearly different performance while different decoding methods are applied, in which using soft-decision algorithm like belief-propagation, hard-decision decoding algorithm like bit-flipping, and hybrid decoding methods like the soft bit-flipping to make use of beliefpropagation and bit-flipping algorithms [3] [4]. Soft decoding algorithms owns well performance while require much higher decoding complexity like Belief-Propagation (BP) decoding algorithm and its improved algorithm such as Sum-Product (SP) [5], the minimum decoding algorithm (Min-Sum, MS) [6], and improved minimum decoding algorithm (Modified MinSum, MMS) [7]. Instead, hard-decision decoding algorithm and

hybrid decoding methods balance between hardware implementation and complexity, even if the efficiency of bit error rate (BER) of BF is worse than that of BP. A hybrid decoding method is the fundamental form of BP and BF algorithms to decrease the complicacy of operation. A harddecision decoding algorithm hybrid decoding method is the foundation of all kinds of hybrid decoding method and many variants have been developed. Therefore it also has widespread application. In recent few years, a variety of BF hard decision algorithms based on improved algorithm weighted bit-flipping (WBF) decoding algorithm [8], reliability rate weighted bitflipping (RRWBF) algorithm [9], and improved reliability rate weighted bit-flipping (IRRWBF) algorithm [14] maintains the low complexity and well decoding performance to make it the further improvement and more practical. The decoding algorithms of LDPC codes based on BF, such as WBF and RRWBF algorithms strike a significant compromise between processing complicacy and error-correcting efficiency. WBF is appreciated not only because of the sums of weighted values, but also for the reason that since these sums can be preprocessed, WBF still preserves the speed advantages of BF as well. What’s more it was recently shown that RRWBF algorithm achieve the best performance among existing bit flipping-based algorithms.
In this paper, Section I introduces the basic definition and background knowledge. Section II illustrates the algorithm of improved bit-flipping. Section III presents RRWBF based on simplified LLR demapping. Section IV presents the simulation results of our optimized algorithm. At last, Section V is the conclusions about our simplified algorithm and future work.
II. IMPROVED BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHM
A. LDPC Codes Introduction
( )( ) A regular binary N, K dv , dc LDPC code has a code
lock length N , an information block length K . dv denotes
the number of ones in each column in a parity check matrix and
dc is the number in each row. LDPC codes are designed
irregularly with variable weights of column or row because it exerts a great impact on improving the performance further.
[ ] Suppose in LDPC code, H = Hmn is the check matrix of a ( ) { } code C . N m = n : Hmn = 1 is used to represent the

978-1-A4u7t9h9or-i5ze8d35lic-e1n/1se4d/$u3s1e.l0im0it©ed2t0o1: Y4oInEsEeiEUniv. Downloaded on Jun8e3214,2026 at 17:50:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

( ) { } associated code bits. Similarly, M n = m : Hmn = 1 is
used to represent the associated check bits. Assume a binary
( ) N , K code C of LDPC is used for error correcting on an
Additive White Gaussian Noise channel. According to
x n = 2c n − 1 for n = 1,2, " , N , suppose BPSK
( ) signaling to map a set of code c = c1, c2, " , c N to a ( ) transport sequence x = x1, x 2, " , x N . Let the received ( ) real value sequence is y = y 1, y 2, " , y N , with
y n = x n + wn where for n = 1,2, " , N , wn is
independent Gaussian random variables on AWGN channel.
( ) z = z 1, z 2, " , z N is the binary sequence which is the
output of the demodulator or demapper.
B. Improved Weighted Bit-Flipping Algorithm
The soft-decision decoding of LDPC codes is applied widely especially using WBF algorithm. It is key step to find the most unreliable bit by calculating error-term of message node participating in associated check process. The hard-
decision reliability zi is determined by the magnitude of the
input soft-value so that the value of each individual check node is determined by the value of minimum credible message node during the initialization step of the algorithm is given by:

y min m

=

nm∈Ni(nm) y n

(1)

where y n is the absolute soft-value of the n th message node.

y min m

is

the

minimum

magnitude

among

the

message

nodes

associated with the mth check procedure at the same time.

Then the iterative WBF procedure is carried out as follows. In
the first step we multiply the bit sequence z from the output of

hard decision to matric H T , the resultant syndrome vector
( ) s = s 1, s 2, " s i , " s M is derived. And then WBF
computes the value of every associated message node at

position.

¦ ( ) En =

2s m

−

1

y

min m

(2)

m∈M(n )

where E n is the error-term corresponding to each message node. The n th bit will be flipped based on the probability
which is quantified by E n . The minimum credible bit is the
associated bit which have the maximum value of E n . Finally, flip the unreliable bit in z depending on the calculated
maximum value of E n . The procedure includes above three
steps and repeats successively, unless the target is
accomplished that an all-zero syndrome vector s is achieved,
or the process is terminated due to the maximum affordable number of iterations.

C. Reliability-Ratio Based Weighted Bit-Flipping Algorithm
Because WBF has an obvious problem which use the associated check node with useful information, that leads to the
minimum soft-value y n from calculating the specific
message node, it is not enough reliable. For example, all message nodes might be changed possibly which participate in
the mth parity check. The message nodes are contributing to
the check, but it is too complicated to recognize the calculation they take part in. As the check which several irrelevant message nodes take part in is calculated, the result is influenced by the involved message nodes and the probability is negatively correlated with soft-value of message nodes. So, a new quantity is introduced to replace the term in the WBF, named as the Reliability Ratio, which is given by:

Rmn

=

β

yn y max
m

(3)

where

y max m

denotes

the absolute

value

of the maximum

magnitude for each message node associated with the mth check procedure at the same time. The coefficient β is a

normalization term which be used to obtain the basic

¦ condition

Rmn = 1. We do not compute En as in (2)

n∈N (m)

based

on

y

min m

,

but

calculate

the

result

of

the

below

expression

as follow:

¦ E n

=

2s m − 1 m∈M(n) Rmn

(4)

The next procedure of RRWBF is the same as classical WBF. The whole procedure will end as the target is accomplished that an all-zero syndrome vector is achieved, or the process is terminated due to the maximum affordable number of iterations.
III. RRWBF BASED ON SIMPLIFIED LLR DEMAPPING
A. LDPC Decoding Based on LLR Demapping Algorithm
LDPC decoder which is a kind of decoder of FEC usually works after the demodulator, especially in the modern broadcasting systems based on OFDM. The model of wireless broadcasting systems we analyze and simulate is shown in Figure 1.
RRWBF decoding algorithm of LDPC codes based on loglikelihood ratio (LLR) depends on the soft-value of the QAM demapper [10]. Meanwhile the algorithm obtains nice balance between the efficiency and complexity. The QAM demapper in the system using posteriori probabilities transmits the exact LLR for code bits to the LDPC decoder [11]. The exact LLR from the demapper’s output represents the information of each point in constellation from likelihood functions. The soft-value

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June82342,2026 at 17:50:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

comes from the proportionate distance to the vertical and horizontal boundary [12].

Figure 1. Wireless broadcasting system model based OFDM
Due to complicated operations and high data rate, LLR method has problems in terms of the performance and complexity. Many soft-decision techniques have been developed for avoiding complicated operations. For example, In order to decrease the exponential and logarithm function of LLR, the MAX method is proposed. But it leads to the decline of the performance rapidly. The Euclidean method is developed, so as to reduce the multiplication of the channel estimation value. But it needs complicated calculation such as root square. A novel simplified soft-decision demapping is proposed to reduce the high complexity [13]. The final soft bit values are given by:

( ) LLR bI ,K

[ ] [ ] [ ] =

Gch i 4

2
• ¯®­αm∈SiI(n0,K) u i

−α2

−

min u i
α ∈SI(1,)K

−

α

2

½ ¾

¿

[ ( ) ( )] = m0 bI ,k − m1 bI ,k

4

(5)

where

defined

( ) [ ] m0 bI ,k

=

min u i

α

∈SI(0,

)
K

−α2

and

( ) [ ] m1 bI ,k

= min u i α ∈SI(1,)K

− α 2 . Yet, (5) allows further

simplification with negligible decline of decoding performance

and conspicuous reduction of operation complexity.

B. Simplified LLR Algorithm

We analyze and simulate our proposed method in the China Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting system. It is designed for the 16-QAM constellation that its mapping scheme shows in
Figure 2. But it still can be used in other different QAM modes. Each constellation point is mapped to four bits
( ) b3, b2, b1, b0 . In our simplified method, we present two ( ) ( ) ( ) symbols bI ,1, bI ,2 and bQ,1, bQ,2 . Let b3, b1 ( ) ( ) ( ) correspond to bI ,1, bI ,2 and b2, b0 to bQ,1, bQ,2 , as we

use two boundaries of vertical and horizontal in constellation to decide the value of constellation point. The symbol
( ) bI ,1, bI ,2 lies in the same row for the vertical partition in ( ) constellation, and bQ,1, bQ,2 corresponding to the same
column for the horizontal partition. So we can rewrite equation (5) as follow:
( ) LLR bI ,K
{ } [ ] [ ] [ ] ( ) ( ) = Gch i 2 • uI i − αI ,0 2 − uI i − αI ,0 2
[ ] {( )[ [ ] ( )]} = Gch i 2 • αI ,1 − αI ,0 2uI i − αI ,1 + αI ,0
(6)

Evaluation of the terms DI ,k for the in-phase bits of a
constellation symbol yields
( )[ [ ] ( )] DI ,k = αI ,1 − αI ,0 2uI i − αI ,1 + αI ,0 (7)

In the similar way it can be easily verified that the DQ,k
functions for the two quadrature bits are the same as (7) with
uI [i ] replaced by uQ[i ] . Equation (7) is hard and
complicated to be implemented in the decoder, so we propose a further simplification way to approximate these terms as follows:

[ ] ­°DI ,1 = −uI i [ ] °°DI ,2 = uI i − 2 /

10

[ ] ®
°DQ,1 = −uQ i

(8)

[ ] °
¯°DQ,2 = uQ i − 2 / 10

Because the decoding algorithm is not particular, the expressions for LLRs in (8) have representative and catholicity. So the algorithm can be applied in any iterative decoder. These approximated expressions still need to satisfy a significant reduction of the operation contrast with the exact LLR.
Considering the noise variance σ 2 in the approximated
expressions to any scalar, we can still get the same expressions in (8) as practically and generally way.
C. Simplified RRWBF Algorithm
We propose a Simplified RRWBF (SRRWBF) algorithm which is based on low-complexity soft-decision demapping using simplified and approximated method. In SRRWBF
algorithm, y n which has been illustrated in (2) is composed
by the approximated terms DI ,k and DQ,k in (8). Referring to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June82343,2026 at 17:50:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the simplified LLR algorithm, we can put (3) into (4) and the result is given by

¦ ( ) En

=

1 yn

2s m − 1
m∈M(n )

y max m β

(9)

From (3) and (9) the error-term E n can be rewritten as:

¦ ( ) ¦ En

=

1 yn

ª

º

« 2s m − 1 yt »

m∈M(n ) ¬

t ∈N (t ) ¼

(10)

=

¦

«ª(2s m

−

1)

¦

St

º »

m∈M(n ) ¬

t ∈N (t ) ¼

where defined St

=

yt . According to (10), we can figure yn

out the conclusion that En is related with St for t ∈ N(t )

and

only

determined

by

S max t

which

is

the

max

value.

It

is

very simplified for LDPC decoding that the decoder only

computes the max value. Our proposed SRRWBF algorithm

can reduce the hardware complexity and power consumption

significantly. In addition, it enables us to choose soft-value

width, depending on the requirement of accuracy Signal-to-

Noise Ratio.

IV. SIMULATION
This section describes the simulation conducted upon our proposed algorithm. The simulation results use BER versus
Eb / N0 , where Eb denotes the information bit energy, N0
denotes the noise average power, to describe the efficiency of our algorithm.

It shows the processing time and accuracy of the LDPC decoding is mainly determined by the amount of the operation of real number so the value of soft-information due to the selection of bits width need to be considered as the important factor. We choose several different classical bits width of softoutput to simulate, so the result could show the performance and efficiency of our proposed method. Considering the efficiency and complexity the bits width of soft-output from QAM demapper is very important to LDPC decoder obviously. We can reduce the bits width of soft-value to increase the rate of QAM demapper and decrease the complexity of LDPC decoder. The consequence is the performance of LDPC decoding drop down distinctly. Our algorithm intend to balance the complexity and performance, moreover the simulation result can illustrate the conclusion. Figure 3 shows BER of LDPC decoding on the condition of 16-QAM mode of CMMB which we have shown in figure 2 as a function of SNR: our proposed SRRWBF algorithm, 3, 4 and 5 bits width of softoutput. It is obvious the performance level is substantially different when bits width of soft-value is 3, 4 or 5 bits. We can also find that there is a very good similarity corresponding to the number of soft-value bits is 4 or 5. Considering the hardware cost of LDPC decoder the five-bit width of soft-value from QAM demapper with SRRWBF is the optimum plan. This simplified idea can be applied to the general communication systems based on LDPC codes without the limit of QAM mode and OFDM mode.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper we present a novel LDPC decoding algorithm including approximate QAM demapping and simplified RRWBF algorithm in CMMB, which is depending on 16QAM demapper of low-width and efficiency soft-output. We have also implemented the QAM demapper and LDPC decoder using the algorithm on FPGA. It is an important conclusion that less soft-value by the selection of low-width bits could implement low-complexity LDPC decoder based on RRWBF algorithm. The whole design can be used to the implementation of the general communication systems based on LDPC codes which is beyond the limit of QAM mode and OFDM mode. Our future work is to improve the efficiency of QAM demapper and LDPC decoder and also reduce the hardware cost.

Figure 2. 16-QAM constellation of CMMB.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] J. Cho, J. Kim, and W. Sung. “VLSI implementation of a highthroughput soft-bit-flipping decoder for geometric LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 1083-1094, May 2010.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June82344,2026 at 17:50:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[5] H. Sankar and K. R. Narayanan, “Memory-efficient sum-product decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp.1225-1230, Aug. 2004.
[6] C. L. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Li, and S. Yang, “A simplified min-sum decoding algorithm for non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 24-32, Jan. 2013.
[7] J. Heo, “Analysis of scaling soft information on low density parity check codes,” IEEE Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 219-221, Jan. 2003.
[8] Zhang, J., and Fossorier, M.P.C.: ‘A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes’, IEEE Commun. Lett. , 2004, 8, (3), pp. 165–167.
[9] Guo, F., and Hanzo, L.: ‘Reliability ratio based weighted bit-Àipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes’, Electron. Lett. , 2004, 40, (21), pp. 1356–1358.
[10] J. Hagenauer, E. Oer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, 1996.
[11] I. Lee, D. Chang and D. Oh, “Multi-Level Modulation LDPC Decoding Algorithm for New Generation DVB-S2 System,” in Proc. 24th AIAA ,2008.
[12] Jang Woong Park, Myung Hoon Sunwoo, Pan Soo Kim, Dae-Ig Chang, “Low complexity soft-decision demapper for high order modulation of DVB-S2 system”, ISOCC '08, International, II.37-40, Nov.2008.

[13] Filippo Tosato, Paola Bisaglia “Simplified Soft-Output Demapper for Binary Interleaved COFDM with Application to HIPERLAN/2”, ICC 2002, IEEE International Conference on Communications, vol.2, pp.664-668, Aug. 2002.
[14] C.H. Lee and W. Wolf, “Implementation-efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 41, no. 13, pp. 755-757, June 2005.
[15] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711-2736, Nov. 2001.
[16] T. C. Chen, “Channel-independent weighted bit-flipping decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” IET Commun., vol. 6, no. 17, pp. 2968-8268, Nov. 2012.
[17] J. H. Hung and S. G. Chen, “An effective multibit-flipping algorithm for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Signal Processing and Communication Systems(ICSPCS), Gold Coast, QLD, pp.125-129, Dec. 2008.
[18] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814-816, Sep. 2005.

Figure 3. Bit error performance comparison SRRWBF of soft bit values for 3, 4 and 5 bits width in CMMB on AWGN channels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June82345,2026 at 17:50:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

