2014 IEEE Military Communications Conference

Design and Implementation of Seamless Rate Adaptive Decoder
Lu Qiu1, Min Wang1,2, Jun Wu1, Zhifeng Zhang1, and Xinlin Huang1
1College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China 2School of Mathematics and Computer Science, Gannan Normal University, Ganzhou, China
Email:{2012qiulu, 2011mwangcs, wujun, zhangzf, xlhuang}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract—Seamless rate adaptation (SRA) is one of the promising rate adaptive schemes for wireless communication system. However, the high complexity of decoding hinders its application. We propose an optimized Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) design and implementation for SRA decoder in this paper. In order to balance speed and resource consumption, a partialparallel architecture is used in SRA decoder, which consists of 8x8 parallel computation unit, each computation unit calculates decoding metrics in pipelining way. In order to further improve the throughput of the decoder, a parallel structure for multivariable Jacobian logarithm approximation is designed. We also illustrate how fixed-point SRA decoder is designed. Numerical simulation shows the decoding performance of our design has neglectable performance loss. The optimized decoder ASIC can achieve 84Mbps throughput running at 300Mhz, occupying an area of 5×5mm2 and consuming power 4.21W . Compared to our previous design in FPGA, the throughput of this ASIC increases about 17.5 times.
Index Terms—seamless rate adaptation, multi-variable Jacobian logarithm, partial-parallel architecture
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the major goals in wireless communication is to achieve high spectral efficiency under varying channel conditions. Rate adaptation is a feasible way to fully exploiting the dynamic bandwidth. Most rate adaptation schemes alter the channel coding rate or modulation constellation to adjust the transmission rate, which known as adaptive modulation and code (AMC) [1]. In such adaptive approaches, the transmitter needs the accurate feedback of real-time channel conditions obtained from the receiver. However, in time varying wireless network, it is impractical to achieve immediate and accurate feedback from receiver. Furthermore, the combinations of coding rate and modulation scheme are limited and discrete, it can only achieve stagewise rate adaption and spectrum efficiency.
Cui et al [2] proposed SRA and its corresponding decoding algorithm. SRA is a novel rate compatible modulation (RCM) in essence, in which modulated symbols are incrementally generated from information bits through weighted combination. The receiver feeds back only an acknowledgement until the data block can be correctly decoded. This scheme significantly simplifies the transmitter design, and it well matches the channel condition implicitly, thus it can achieve smooth rate adjustment in a broad dynamic range of channel conditions. The implementation of a high performance decoding algorithm

is another challenging problem. Wang et al [3] proposed the iterative decoding algorithm in log domain and investigated SRA’s partial-parallel architecture which reduce multiplications by 90%.
However, in [3], the hardware design has several aspects which can be further optimized. Firstly, decoding speed can be increased by pipelining the primary part. Secondly, the bottleneck of decoder throughput is multi-variable Jacobian logarithm approximation. [4] proposed a serial and recursive architecture for multi-variable Jacobian logarithm approximation. For n variables, it takes n time slot. This will decrease throughput dramatically for large number of variables. We proposes a parallel structure for multi-variable Jacobian logarithm which only needs log2 n clock cycles. Thirdly, the quality of fixed-point for SRA decoder will decide how much resources are required. In this paper, we put forward a fixed point design based on the experiment and computational formula.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the SRA and its encoder and decoder, respectively. Section III illustrates the hardware architecture of SRA’s LogMAP algorithm and improvement on multi-variable Jacobian logarithm. Section IV, the paper gives the simulation and ASIC implementation results. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. SEAMLESS RATE ADAPTATION
A. The Encoding Process
The encoding process of SRA is different from Low-density parity-check code(LDPC) [5]. LDPC is a code specified by a parity-check matrix which generates coded symbols by xor operation. However, in SRA, symbols are coded by arithmetic addition operation. The process of generating coded symbols can be described as a bipartite graph shown in Fig.1. Squares denote symbol nodes and circles denote bit nodes. We assume that it has N bit nodes and M symbol nodes. Every edge is assigned a weight Wl which belongs to predefined weight set W = {W1, W 2, ..., W L}. For example, W = {−4, −4, −2, −1, 1, 2, 4, 4} and L = 8 in [2].
The bipartite graph can be expressed by a random projection sparse matrix G with M by N . Every row in G only has L non-zero entries. In Fig. 1, We can see that a symbol can be

978-1-4799-6770-4/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEE

356

DOI 10.1109/MILCOM.2014.64

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:59:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. bipartite graph of encoding

generated by

N

ui = gi,j · bj i = 1, 2, ..., M

(1)

j=1

So, the SRA encoding can be expressed by u = Gb.

B. The Decoding Algorithm

A decoding algorithm is proposed in the arithmetic domain [2]. This is an iterative process in which horizontal process and vertical process take turns to work. However, the horizontal decoder needs a lot of convolutions which cost a large number of multiplying units. In order to reduce computation complexity, the arithmetic operations are transformed into log domain, then convolution is implemented by multi-variable Jacobian logarithm. [4] further proposes a serial and recursive structure for multi-variable logarithm approximation which is composed of look-up tables and adders. In order to support parallel calculation, we improve the decoding algorithm, and implement high-throughput hardware of the proposed decoding algorithm. 1) Initialization
The initial LLR message sent from bj to ui is llrqj,i = 0. 2) Horizontal processing
The LLR message sent from ui to bj can be divided into four sub-steps.
Firstly, We assume that ui and bj are connected by Wl. Refer to [3], We construct a 2D binary table T ablel,k for every Wl and k. One row of T ablel,k corresponds to a generation possibility of k. For example, Wl = 4 and k = 6 can be generated by {4, 2} or {4, 2, 1, −1}, thus T ablel,k will have 2 rows. For every row in T ablel,k, Wl is set to 0. If the weight is used for generating k in every row, it will be set to 0, and others will be set to 1.
Secondly, the convolution of probability in log domain in [3] can be rewritten as follow.

n

pk =

pkn − pkd

(2)

r=1

where

pkn =

N j=1

Br,cllrqj,i

pkd =

N j=1

ln

(1

+

ellrqj,i

)

pk is the convolution of llrq which sent to symbol node i, pkn denotes the nominator part, and pkd denotes the denominator part. If we looking up T ablel,k, Br,c represents the elements in r row and c column in T ablel,k.
Then we consider the noise. We model the channel noise as Additive white Gaussian noise(AWGN) N (0, σ2). If it receives
symbol ui, then noise with bj = 0 or bj = 1 are written as.

z0(k) = −(ui − k)2/2σ2

z0(k)

=

−(ui

−

k

−

Wl

2
)

/2σ2

(3)

At last, the LLR message sent from ui to bj llrri,j can be calculated as follow.

llrri,j = R0 − R1

(4)

where

R0 = ln R1 = ln

11 k=−11

epk +z0 (k)

11 k=−11

epk +z1 (k)

Especially in (2) (3) (4), the calculation of llrri,j re-

quires multi-variable jacobian logarithm approximation for

ln

n i=1

exi

.

How

to

reduce

time

slot

to

multi-variable

jaco-

bian logarithm approximation will be presented in the next

section.

3) Vertical processing

In the vertical process, the LLR message sent from bj to ui .

llrqj,i =

llrrm,j

gi,j = 0

(5)

m∈Cj /i

In (5), Cj denotes the set of non-zero elements of G in jth column, and Cj/i is the set Cj excluding i. 4) Hard decision
After Tmaxiterations , the iteration of decoding algorithm will halt. we can use (6) for hard decision.

llrrm,j ≥ 0 bj = 0 else bj = 1

(6)

m∈Cj

III. HARDWARE DESIGN

In this section, we propose a partial-parallel hardware

architecture for the proposed decoding algorithm. The key is to

improve ln

n i=1

exi

in

hardware

design

and

implementation.

We also give the detailed design for fixed-point algorithm in

addition.

A. Optimized Unit Processor Design
The hardware architecture is depicted in Fig. 2. Here, we assume M = N . It contains L × L Memory banks, L × L horizontal unit processors (HUP), L × L vertical unit processors (VUP), and L × L random address generators (RAG).
A Memory bank is connected to a RAG, a HUP, a VUP. Every Memory bank is composed of Q ram and E ram which

357 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:59:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. Timing diagram of HUP

Fig. 2. The partial-parallel architecture for SRA decode
accommodates a N/L×N /L sub-matrix of matrix G. The size of both Q ram and E ram are N/L. E ram is responsible for storing LLR message from symbol node u to bit node b. While Q ram stores the LLR message from bit node b to symbol node u. Every RAG’s size is N/L. Every RAG stores the column of non-zero elements in N/L×N /L sub-matrix of matrix G. A symbol node fetches LLR message corresponding to the connected bit nodes through address generated by RAG. After that, HUP can get the corresponding LLR message from Q ram.
A VUP is used to calculate LLR message sent from bit node b to symbol node u. From equation (5), it can be found that VUP is composed by adders. It sums a block of LLR messages from symbol nodes u. We pipeline the VUP to save slots and improve throughput. Since the VUP does not consume much resource, we double the VUP to get a high throughput. The two VUPs get two block of data from E ram and calculate them simultaneously. Thus if the previous VUPs need N/L slots to process N/L blocks of data, we now need N/2L. This optimization reduce the clock cycles needed and significantly improve the decoder’s throughput.

A HUP is used to calculate LLR message sent from symbol

node u to bit node b. Fig. 3 shows the timing diagram

of HUP which is composed of retrieving data (R) from Q

ram, probability convolution unit (PCU), noise calculation

unit (NCU), multi-variable Jacobian logarithm approximation

unit (JAU), subtraction unit (SU) and write back (W) to E

ram. PCU is composed of a T ablel,k and approximation of ln(1 + ex) . In this module, A look-up table (LUT)

T ablel,k is designed to calculate pkn. We design another LUT for function of ln(1 + ex) to approximate pkd. NCU is

responsible for calculating equation (3) formed by multiplies

and adders. Inputs of this module include ith received symbol

ui, weight Wl, and the estimated variance of channel noise.

Then, the JAU is a multi-variable logarithm approximation

of ln

n i=1

exi

.

We

design

a

parallel

structure

for

the

multi-

variable logarithm approximation in the next subsection. The

HUP calculates LLR message in a pipelining way which is

shown in Fig. 3. LLR message is firstly fetched out from Q

ram. Then, NCU and PCU run concurrently and consumes

4 clock cycles. JAU gets the result from NCU and PCU

and calculates R0 R1 which spends 4 clock cycles. SU is responsible for R0 − R1 calculation. At last, the final result

LLR message llrr is written back to E ram. We should note

that our pipeline has a difference with common ways. In

common pipeline, current slot of a operation can not intersect

with its self previous slot. While, in Fig. 3, we can see that

NCU, PCU and JAU has intersection with its self previous

slot. The reason is that we register the intermediate results to

ensure rightness of result in the pipeline.

The hardware design follows what we describe in decoding algorithm. At first, all Q rams are initialized to 0. In every iteration, the L × L HUPs simultaneously look up the RAGs to get an address for Q ram access and fetch the data from the Memory banks. Then HUPs calculate LLR messages according to equation (4) and store the results into ram E. Then L × L VUPs concurrently read LLR messages from E ram and compute LLR messages according to equation (5), then the results are written back into Q ram. This process iterate Tmax times, then L decision modules get data from E rams in a column and make decision on the final result at the same time.

358 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:59:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Improvement on multi-variable Jacobian logarithm

As mentioned before, equation (3) can be expressed in terms

of multi-variable Jacobian logarithm ln

n i=1

exi .

The

multi-

variable Jacobian logarithm consume most hardware resources,

so it is critical part of hardware design and implementation.

In case of two variables, the Jacobian logarithm equals to

the larger variable plus a correction term:

F (x1, x2) = ln (ex1 + ex2 )

(7)

= max(x1, x2) + f (− |x1 − x2|)

In Max-Log-MAP algorithm, the correction term is ignored. A look-up table is used in [3] to implement the correction term in order to improve the performance. In [6] and [7], the simplified correction term approximations are proposed. In case of multi-variable, wang et al [4] propose a recursive approach to implement the multi-variable computation in LogMAP algorithm.
We notice that the proposed fast decoding algorithm has two features. First, it has dozens of variables to compute, the throughput of decoder decreases with recursive approach. Second, ln (1 + ex) is used to calculate error correction term in Jacobian logarithm, which has high computation complexity. In addition, x may be a positive number or negative number in our decoder, whereas Turbo code has only negative number. For the multi-variable Jacobian logarithm in fast demodulation algorithm, we design a parallel approximation approach with pipeline property. Every two consecutive x are mapped to one new input by

F (x1, x2, · · · xn) = F (y1, y2, · · · y n+1 )

(8)

2

where yi = F (x2i−1, x2i). As Fig. 4 shows, formula (8) is implemented in a parallel manner, which requires the summations and the Lc(·) hardware units. The decoder can save a lot of time slot in hardware implementation, but does not consume much more other computing resources. From formula (2) (4), it can been seen that there are 23 variables. It will need 23 slots in the recursive way. While, it only takes 5 slots with our parallel design in theory. We implement the parallel structure and compress it into 4 clock cycles in practice.

The table is designed for −5 ≤ x ≤ 5.In order to implement
conveniently in hardware, we set the interval as 0.125 for x[−5, 5). In this range, the value of ln(1 + ex) is a linear
approximation of two ends. The table has total 80 entries as depicted in TABLE I. When x < −5, ln(1 + ex) is set as zero. When x > 5, ln(1 + ex) is set as x.

TABLE I THE TABLE OF ln(1 + ex).

Interval 0.125

Position 1 ... 40 41 ... 80

x -5.0000
... -0.125
0 ... 4.875

Value 0.00671
... 0.63259 0.69314
... 4.88260

C. Fixed-point Design
It is well known that floating point arithmetic consumes much more resources than fixed-point arithmetic. While mapping an algorithm from simulation onto hardware implementation, we need consider both dynamic range and desired precision of data . By analysing formula (2),(3),(4) and numerical simulation, we determine the range and precision of variables. The design is shown in TABLE II.We use 1 bit to determine the sign of all variables. If the variable is out of the range, we saturate the variable to its boundary value.

TABLE II
FIXED POINT DESIGN

Variable
u
σ
z0(k) z1(k) llrq
pkn pkd pk R0 R1 llrr

Range (-26,26)
(0,8) (0,30934) (0,31329) (-32,32) (-224,224) (-224,224) (-224,224) (-224,1014) (-224,1021) (-32,32)

Integer 6 6 16 16 6 8 8 9 11 11 6

Fraction 9 9 13 13 9 9 9 9 9 9 9

Fig. 4. The parallel approximation approach in Log-MAP algorithm.
The error correction term ln(1 + ex) can be calculated by looking-up table or approximated by a piece-wise function.

D. Simulation Results
We compare the BER performance of hardware design and software simulation in floating point. The channel SNR in our simulation is range from 5dB to 13dB . The BER performance is shown in Fig. 5. The performance of our optimized hardware implementation is very close to simulation performance.
Furthermore, we test the data throughput of hardware design and software simulation in floating point. The channel ranges from 5dB to 30dB. Fig. 6 shows the throughput of optimized hardware implementation for SRA decode in Additive white Gaussian noise(AWGN). The performance of hardware implementation is very close to software simulation as well.

359 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:59:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III FRONT-END PERFORMANCE OF ASIC IMPLEMENTATION OF DECODER

Component decoder HUP row HUP VUP col

Area (μm2) 11415322.536 1110350.648 845705.289 143037.739

Delay(ns) 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.8

Fig. 5. BER comparison of software simulation and hardware implementation

operation, we use Prime-Time for sign-off timing analysis. Then we perform formality and post simulation to ensure the normal work of the chip. After back-end operation, every block’s performance are shown in TABLE IV.

TABLE IV BACK-END PERFORMANCE OF ASIC IMPLEMENTATION OF DECODER

Component decoder HUP row VUP col

Area (mm×mm) 5×5
1.6448×1.0008 0.478×0.3896

Delay(ns) 3 2.8 2.7

Power(W) 4.21 -

In [3], the throughput of SRA decoder is only 4.8M bps, when L is set to 8 and M = N is set to 400. While in our design, HUPs and VUPs are in pipeline architecture. It just needs (11 + 3 + N/L + N/2L) × 16 = 1424 cycles which achieves a throughput 300M hz × N/1424 =84M bps. It increases about 17.5 times compared to our previous work.
An ASIC implementation of the decoder has been performed for Multi-Project Wafer (MPW) CMOS 65nm Standard Performance technology, with 9 metal layers. The implementation is done in standard cells using a library from SMIC (Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corporation).

Fig. 6. Goodput comparison of software simulation and hardware implementation
IV. ASIC IMPLEMENTATION
We implement the decoder with VHDL. In order to simplify the back-end design, we combine 8 HUPs, RAGs and Memory Banks of a row into a big block called HUP row. Meanwhile, we define a column of VUPs as VUP col. Futhermore, because VUP and HUP take turns to work, we use gate-clock strategy for power consumption reduction.
We have used Synopsys Design Compiler and adopted topdown strategy in logic synthesis. Because we prefer performance to resource, we select a clock with the period of 1.8ns(555 Mhz) as target. We use VCS tool to verify the synthesised design. The area and delay of every function block is shown as TABLE III.
We have used Physical Compiler for Place and Route. The steps taken for back-end physical design are: floorplanning, placing, clock-tree synthesis, routing, designning for manufacturing and physical verification. After such sequence of

V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents an optimized ASIC implementation for seamless rate adaptive decoder. Realizing that the key components affect the merits of hardware implementation, we propose an optimized partial-parallel architecture, a parallel structure for multi-variable Jacobian logarithm approximation, and improvement of the decoding speed by pipelining HUP and VUP computations. We also present the fixed-point design for the SRA decoder. Our proposed ASIC implementation for SRA decoder satisfies the requirements of most wireless communication system. In the future, we plan to reduce the power consumption and integrate the chip into practical wireless systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the Huawei Innovation Research Plan (HIRP) funding Grant No. YB2014030033, National Science and Technology Major Project of China under Grant No. 2013ZX03003004, and National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61390513. This work is also financially supported in part by NSFC General Program under contract No. 61173041, and the NSF of Jiangxi Province of China Youth Program under contract No. 20142BAB217007.

360 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:59:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REFERENCES
[1] W. Webb and R. Steele, “Variable rate qam for mobile radio,” Communications, IEEE Transactions, vol. 43, no. 2223-2230, 1995.
[2] H.Cui, C.Luo, K.Tan, F.Wu, and C.W.Chen, “Seamless rate adaptation for wireless networking,” Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Modeling, analysis and simulation of wireless and mobile systems, MSWiM 11, (New York, NY, USA), no. 437-446, 2011.
[3] M.Wang, J.Wu, S.F.Shi, and F.Wu, “Fast decoding and hardware design for binary-input compressive sensing,” Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 10, no. 591 - 603, 2012.
[4] H.Wang, H.W.Yang, and D.C.Yang, “Improved log-map decoding algorithm for turbo-like codes,” CommunicationsLetters, IEEE, vol. 10, no. 186-188, 2006.
[5] Gallager.R.G, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information, no. 21-28, 1962.
[6] M. C.Valenti, “An efficient software radio implementation of the umts turbo codec,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communication (PIMRS),SanDiego, no. 108-113, 2001.
[7] S.Asoodeh, “A new constructive approximation in log-map turbo decoder,” 7th WSEAS Int. Conf. on Electronics, Hardware, Wireless and OpticalCommunications, Cambridge, UK, no. 20-22, February.2008.
361 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:59:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

