2013 13th International Symposium on Communications and Information Technologies (ISCIT)
An Modified Beyond Belief Propagation Algorithm over AWGN Channel

Yibo Lv
School of Information Science and Tech Xiamen University
Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China wanglin@xmu.edu.cn

Lin Wang
School of Information Science and Tech Xiamen University
Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China wanglin@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract—Recently one decoding algorithm called as beyond belief propagation (BP) algorithm for LDPC Codes is derived using the knowledge of trapping set and different from standard BP algorithm, whose performance outperforms that of the latter over binary symmetric channel (BSC). However, the former is not suitable for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. In this paper how to improve bit error rate (BER) performance of Beyond BP Algorithm is investigated over AWGN channel. It is found that this algorithm can be modified through setting appropriate penalty factor and obtains better performance than BP one over AWGN channel. The simulation results show dependently on choosing penalty factor modified Beyond BP Algorithm outperforms BP one over AWGN channel in high signal noise rate (SNR) region or almost whole SNR one and there are some differences for different code rates. Concretely, for medium or low code rate proposed algorithm can obtain more performance gain relative to high one when short frame is used.
Keywords—modified beyond belief propagation, graphical model codes, penalty factor, ber
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC [1]) codes, as a class of linear block codes, can achieve near Shannon capacity, when they are decoded by message passing algorithms which are based on belief propagation (BP [2]) algorithm. The BP algorithm operates on a graphical model of a code known as the tanner graph [3], and computes marginal distributions of each node on the graph. BP algorithm as a suboptimal decoding algorithm can provide close approximations to optimal one if the code length is infinite [4][5]. Due to the constraint of decoding latency, resources consume and implement complexity in practical system, the LDPC code length has to be limited to finite one in practice. As a consequence, there existed a gap in performance between BP algorithm and optimal decoding algorithm (e.g., maximumlikelihood decoding), when decoding LDPC codes with short and medium length.
Currently, lots of iterative decoders based on standard BP algorithm operate on a code graph under the assumption that the graph is a tree. Therefore, those decoders have ignored the fact that certain harmful loopy structures existed in code graph can cause decoding failure. Obviously, the decoding algorithms,

which take the loopy structure of graph into account, can outperform those algorithms which neglect the structure. Recently, some variations of BP, which based on this theory, are proposed. In [6] an algorithm called uniformly reweighted BP (URW-BP) is introduced by Wymeersch et al. This algorithm can outperform standard BP for decoding regular LDPC codes by setting a constant parameter called edge appearance probability (EAP). Jingjing Liu and Rodrigo C. de Lamare in [7] improved this algorithm by means of delegating a distinct EAP value to each parity check node. This algorithm can be applied to decode regular and irregular LDPC codes and acquire better performance than URW-BP. But this algorithm need cycle counting operation at the beginning of decoding procedure which causes extra computing complexity. Moreover, because of the requirement, this decoder can only be applied for decoding short codes. In [8], a novel algorithm called multilevel decoder that outperforms the standard BP on binary symmetric channel (BSC) is introduced by Planjery et al. The similar works also can be found in [9] and [10]. This method use a finite number of bits to represent the messages delivered between variable nodes and check nodes in decoding procedure. The bits in these messages do not only represent the likelihood or probabilities, but also reflect the local structure in the code graph. This algorithm can improve the decoder performance at error floor region, but the cost is degradation in waterfall region. Although this method performs well on BSC, it is not suitable for decoding LDPC codes over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. In this paper we modified this algorithm through setting appropriate penalty factor, so that it can be used and obtains better performance than BP over AWGN channel. Simulation results show that our approach outperforms standard BP in high signal noise rate (SNR) region or almost whole SNR one and there are some differences for different code rates.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II analysis the advantages and disadvantages of the algorithm describe in [8]. We also introduce our modified algorithm in section II along with numerical results in section III. In section IV we conclude the properties of the proposed algorithm based on the simulation results.

This work was supported by the NSF of China under Grant No.61271241.

978-1A-u4t6ho7r3iz-e5d58lic0e-n3s/e1d3/u$s3e1li.m00ite©d t2o0: Y13onIsEeEi UEniv. Downloaded on Ju7n6e 24,2026 at 09:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. PRINCIPLE OF BEYOND BP ALGORITHM OVER AWGN CHANNEL

Fig. 1. An example of LDPC code factor graph.

A. Backgroud
Suppose we have K information bits being transmitted to LDPC encoder to form a set of codeword x whose length is N. So the code rate is K/N and the corresponding parity check is an M×N sparse matrix H. We use vector y to present the symbols received from AWGN channel. The goal for LDPC decoder is to find an 1 × N estimated codGeword xˆ which satisfies the parity check equation xˆ ⋅ H T = 0 . The decoding procedure can be concluded by a simple equation xˆ = arg max p(x | y) . Using Bayes’ rule the posteriori
distribution of the form:

p(x | y) = p(y | x) p(x) ,

(1)

p( y)

where the likelihood p(y | x) can be obtained from channel and p(x) is the prior information. Nevertheless, it is difficult to calculate p(x | y) or p(x), because of the high dimensional nature of x. For this reason we resort to BP a suboptimal message passing algorithm that can provide approximations to exact posteriori marginal distributions.
The LDPC codes can be represented by a factor graph, just like the one expressed in fig.1. There we usually use squares stand for check nodes and circles stand for variable nodes. There is an edge connecting the check node ci and the variable nodes vj in the factor graph if the entry hij of the parity check matrix H equals 1. At each iteration of BP algorithm, the variable nodes (check nodes) process the incoming messages and send extrinsic information to their neighboring check nodes (variable nodes) by follow a set of message passing rules. After a prescribed maximum number of iterations or after some stopping set are met, the decoder stop iterating and estimates codeword.

B. Beyond BP Iterative Decoding over BSC and AWGN
Standard BP algorithm assumes that the messages passed are statistically independent throughout the decoding process. However, in practice, the independence assumption is not valid due to the existence of loopy structures in graph. Extensive studies show that certain harmful loopy structures, referred as trapping sets [11-13], lead to bit error rate (BER) performance degradation in high signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) region.

Fig. 2. Messages passing on a six-cycle (a (4,4) trapping set). Four variable nodes are initially incorrect, and all other variable notes are correct. The variable node degree is three. Check node degree is arbitrary but only significant connections are shown.
As mentioned before, those LDPC decoding algorithms that exploit local structure of the code graph can achieve better performance than standard BP algorithm.
In [8], a novel algorithm is introduced. Following the well designed message passing rule, the information about the neighborhoods can be inferred from the incoming messages and utilized to compute the extrinsic information. As a result, this decoder outperforms standard BP in error floor region over BSC. For clarity, a simple example is used to illustrate the property of this algorithm.
A six-cycle factor graph is depicted in fig.2, which is also a (4,4) trapping set. Note that for fig.2, we use ○/● to present a variable node that is initially correct / incorrect, and a □/■ to present an even / odd degree check node. Two bits are used to describe the exchanged messages between variable nodes and check nodes. Let the leftmost bit be used to transmit information about local structure, the rest bit be used to present the binary value of the variable nodes. Following the message passing rules described in [8], at the end of fourth iteration as shown in fig.2, variable nodes can infer their neighborhoods by using the leftmost bit ( i.e., “0” denotes the messages coming from the six cycle, “1” denotes the messages coming from outside sub-graph).
This algorithm and its variations described in [9] and [10] outperform traditional BP algorithm over BSC. However, this algorithm is not suitable for decoding LDPC codes over AWGN channel. The reason is described below.
In log-domain, the channel information for BSC is defined as:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on Ju7n7e 24,2026 at 09:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Lch(c j ) = (−1) y j log((1 − α ) / α ) ,

(2)

where α presents the cross-over probability and yj∈{0,1} ( j ∈ {0,1,…, N-1}) presents the received codeword. While for AWGN channel, the Lch(cj) is expressed as:

Lch(c j ) = 2 y j / σ 2 ,

(3)

where σ presents the noise power spectral density and yj ( j ∈ {0,1,…, N-1}) is the received channel symbol:

y j = (−1)c j + n j ,

(4)

where nj is the AWGN, cj ∈{1,0}is the codeword.
Obviously, the magnitude of Lch(cj) ( j ∈ {0,1,…, N-1}) for BSC is equal. Therefore, it is reasonable that one bit can be used to present the value of the receive messages in the algorithm proposed in [8]. Combining with one bit to denote the structure’s information, the extrinsic information is expressed as {00, 01, 10, 11}. When in the initial step, “00” denotes L(0), “01” denotes L(1). Apparently, it is inappropriate to use one bit to present the value of those messages which are received from AWGN channel. As a consequence, the well designed message passing rules based on the properties of BSC, is invalid for AWGN channel.
While considering the difference between BSC and AWGN channel, it is necessary to modify this algorithm, so that it can be applied on AWGN channel.

C. Modified Beyond BP over AWGN
It is widely recognized that the existence of certain loopy structures (trapping set or short cycles) creates the statistical dependency among the extrinsic information exchanged between variable nodes and check nodes. This phenomena often referred as “over confident”[6]. Therefore, we can treat the extrinsic information, which are sending from cycles, as unreliable messages. Then in update procedure, the effects of those concentrated messages can be reduced for improving the decoder’s performance. Inspired by the algorithm mentioned in the above section, we also use an extra bit to convey the local structure information. Different from the algorithm mentioned above, a parameter, called penalty factor, is introduced to reduce the effects of those unreliable messages in updating procedure.
In the following part, we will describe the proposed algorithm designed for decoding LDPC codes with columnweight-three over AWGN channel. The degree of variable node dv is set to 3, and the degree of check node dc can be set to arbitrary positive integer. We use two symbols to reflect the outgoing messages’ confidence, which are represented by “S_VC” and “S_CV”, respectively. Among them, the “S_VC” denotes the reliability of messages send from variable nodes to check nodes; the “S_CV” denotes the reliability of messages send from check nodes to variable nodes.

1) Initionlization:

• Set S_VC = 0;

(5)

• Set S_CV = 0;

(6)

• Set Lch(j) = 2yj/σ2, (j = 0,1,…,N-1);

(7)

2) Variable nodes update:
• For clarity, we use m1 and m2 to denote the incoming messages and m0 to denote the outgoing message. All of them can be divided into two parts, that is m1 = {S_CV(1),L(r1j)}, m2 = {S_CV(2),L(r2j)} and m0 = {S_VC(j),L(qji)}.

• The L(qji) can be calculated by using:

∑ L(q ji ) = Lch( j) +

γ (i' )L(ri' j )

(8)

i'∈N ( j)\i

The parameter γ(i) in (8) is called penalty factor. The

value of γ(i) is decided by S_CV(i). If the S_CV(i) = 1,

then γ(i) = 1, else γ(i) is set to a positive decimal.

• The update rule for S_VC(j) is described following:

if S_CV(1) = S_CV(2) = 0, sign(L(r1j)) = sign(L(r2j)) = sign(Lch(j)); set S_VC(j) = 1 else S_VC(j) = 0;
if S_CV(1)=1 or S_CV(2)=1, sign(L(r1j)) = sign(L(r2j)); set S_VC(j) = 1 else S_VC(j) = 0;

3) Check nodes update • At check note Ci, the outgoing message transmitted to
variable node Vj is a combination of L(rij) and S_CV(i).
• L(rij) can be acquired using same function of standard BP:

∏ L(rij ) = 2 tanh−1(

tanh(L(q j'i ) / 2))

(9)

j'∈N (i)\ j

• The update rule for S_CV(i) described below:
if for j’∈N(i)\j, all the S_VC(j’) = 1; set S_CV(i) = 1, else set S_CV(i) = 0;

4) Decision Rule:

∑ • L(Q j ) = L(c j ) + γ (i)L(rij )

(10)

i∈N ( j)

• The similar decision rule to standard BP. We use (10) to calculate the value of L(Qj). Then we estimate the decoded codeword and decide whether stop the iteration.

As an improvement to the standard BP, the proposed algorithm requires more computing complexity. Nevertheless the computing complexity is small.

III. SIMULATION RESULT
In this section, we compared our proposed algorithm with the standard BP using simulations over AWGN channel. We consider four codes from [14], which are both MacKay’s codes with column weight three. Code A is PEGReg252x504 with N = 504, rate = 0.5. Code B is PEGReg504x1008 with N = 1008, rate = 0.5. Both Code A and B are constructed using Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) method of [15]. The rates of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on Ju7n8e 24,2026 at 09:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Code C and D are both 0.88. Code C is 495.62.3.2915, with N = 495, M =62. Code D is 999.111.3.5543, with N = 999, M = 111. To illustrate the potential application of the proposed algorithm, we also test low rate LDPC codes. Code E and Code F are both protograph LDPC codes which are constructed using PEG algorithms too. The code rates of them are both 1/3. The code length are N=1200 and N=600, separately. The base matrix of code E and F are depicted by (11). The maximum iteration number is 100. The modulation scheme used in the simulations is BPSK.

⎡2 1 0 0 1 0⎤

⎢⎢1 1 1 0 1 1⎥⎥ ⎢0 1 1 1 1 1⎥

(11)

⎢

⎥

⎣0 0 1 2 0 1⎦

Fig. 3. Comparison of the BER performances of the proposed algorithm and standard BP algorithm. The code rate is 0.5. N presents code length and fac denotes penalty factor.

Fig. 5. Comparison of the BER performances of the modified BP and standard BP algorithms. The code rate is 0.88. N presents code length and fac denotes penalty factor.
Bit error rates (BER) are plotted as a function of the signal noise ratio (SNR) of AWGN channel in fig.3, fig.4 and fig.5, where the “fac” denotes the penalty factor. The value of “fac” can be set empirically, there we only choose fac = 0.9 and fac = 0.75 two factor. The simulation results show that, for medium rate LDPC codes, our algorithm can outperform standard BP in high SNR region with little BER performance degradation in water fall region by selecting factor = 0.9. However, for high rate LDPC codes, this decoder performs better when we are choosing fac = 0.75 rather than fac = 0.9. From the simulation result depicted in fig.3, fig.4 and fig 5, it can be easily found that choosing appropriate penalty factors for different rate codes can increase our code’s guaranteed error-correction capability.
Although our algorithm outperform standard BP algorithm in high SNR region, the BER performance degraded in water fall region, especially for high rate codes. This phenomenon is due to the introduction of penalty factor which reduces the negative effect of unreliable message, however, also slows down the decoder’s convergence rate.
Those simulation results also suggest that the BER performance improvement for medium and low rate codes is more obvious than high rate codes. This is because for high rate codes, the error floor is not only caused by trapping set but also caused by the minimum distance of this code.

Fig. 4. Comparison of the BER performances of the modified BP and standard BP algorithms. The code rate is 1/3. N presents code length and fac denotes penalty factor.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have introduced a modified BP algorithm that can be used for decoding LDPC codes with column weight three over AWGN channel. In decoding procedure, one bit is used to reflect the local structure of code graph, or in another word, the confidence of the incoming message. By means of this symbol, the unreliable messages can be intelligent identified. A penalty factor is introduced in our algorithm which is used to limit the negative effect caused by the unreliable messages. The simulation results show that our algorithm outperforms standard BP algorithm in high SNR region with degradation in waterfall over AWGN channel. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on Ju7n9e 24,2026 at 09:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

simulation results also suggest that selecting appropriate penalty factor for different rate codes can dramatically increase our decoder’s error correction capability. Concretely, for medium or low code rate proposed algorithm can obtain more performance gain in high SNR region relative to high one when short frame is used. Meanwhile BER performance in the former can outperform that of BP Algorithm during almost the whole SNR region when penalty factor is larger. Here we used the empirical method to find the appropriate factor for different rate codes. We will study the relationship between the code’s graphical structure and the selected factor through analysis method in future. Finally proposed algorithm also may be expanded to arbitrary LDPC codes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Authors thank the support from NSF of China(No. 61271241).
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 37–45, Jan. 1962.
[2] J. Pearl, “Probablisitic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems,” San Francisco, CA: Kaufmann, 1988.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] Sae-Young Chung; Forney, G.D., Jr.; Richardson, T.J.; Urbanke, R., "On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit," IEEE Communications Letters, vol.5, no.2, pp.58,60, Feb 2001
[5] Richardson, T.J.; Urbanke, R.L., "The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.47, no.2, pp.599,618, Feb 2001

[6] H. Wymeersch, F. Penna, and V. Savic, ‘‘Uniformly reweighted belief propagation for estimation and detection in wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 11. no. 4, pp. 1587–1595, Apr. 2012.
[7] Jingjing Liu; De Lamare, R.C., "Low-Latency Reweighted Belief Propagation Decoding for LDPC Codes," IEEE Communications Letters, vol.16, no.10, pp.1660,1663, October 2012
[8] Planjery, S.K.; Chilappagari, S.K.; Vasić, B.; Declercq, D.; Danjean, L., "Iterative decoding beyond belief propagation," Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), 2010 , vol., no., pp.1-10, Jan. 31 2010Feb. 5 2010
[9] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders for LDPC codes surpassing floating-point iterative decoders,” IET Electronics Letters, vol. 47, no. 16, Aug. 2011.
[10] L. Danjean, D. Declercq, S. K. Planjery, and B. Vasic, “ On the selection of finite alphabet iterative decoders for LDPC codes on the BSC,” 2011 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), vol., no., pp. 345–349, 16-20 Oct. 2011.
[11] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” Proc. Allerton Conf. on Commun., Control and Computing, 2003.
[12] Diao, Qiuju; Tai, Ying Yu; Lin, Shu; Abdel-Ghaffar, Khaled, "Trapping set structure of LDPC codes on finite geometries," Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), 2013 , vol., no., pp.1-8, 10-15 Feb. 2013
[13] Vasić, B.; Chilappagari, S.K.; Nguyen, D.V.; Planjery, S.K., "Trapping set ontology," Communication, 47th Annual Allerton Conference on Control, and Computing, 2009, vol., no., pp.1,7, Sept. 30 2009-Oct. 2 2009
[14] [Online].Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/ data.html
[15] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, ”Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on Ju8n0e 24,2026 at 09:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

