IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

5917

Graphical Characterizations of Linear Programming Pseudocodewords for Cycle Codes
Nathan Axvig and Deanna Dreher

Abstract—The performance of linear programming decoding is determined by the set of nonzero linear programming pseudocodewords. The minimum pseudoweight of this set of linear programming pseudocodewords is also generally accepted as a good predictor of the performance of iterative message-passing decoding. Since the linear programming decoder has a natural description based on the Tanner graph of a code, linear programming pseudocodewords can be analyzed from a graphical viewpoint. In this paper, two graphical characterizations of linear programming pseudocodewords of cycle codes are provided: one for the entire set of linear programming pseudocodewords, and one for the set of minimal linear programming pseudocodewords. The first of these characterizations is used to determine a formula for the minimum degree of a graph cover necessary to realize a linear programming pseudocodeword of a cycle code, and the second is used to prove a result concerning the asymptotic performance of the linear programming decoder when considering transmission over either the additive white Gaussian noise channel or the binary symmetric channel. Finally, a discussion contrasting these two characterizations both with each other and with Horn’s characterization of bad pseudocycles is provided.
Index Terms—Coding theory, graph theory, linear programming (LP), pseudocodewords.
I. INTRODUCTION
T O any parity-check matrix defining a binary linear code, one can associate a Tanner graph. The Tanner graph provides a visual environment in which to examine codewords: every codeword gives rise to a valid numeric assignment to the variable nodes in the Tanner graph, and vice versa. It is on the Tanner graph that iterative message-passing decoding algorithms (e.g., the min-sum algorithm or the sum-product algorithm) operate, performing local computations at each node of the Tanner graph and transmitting resulting information to immediate neighbors. The Tanner graph can also be used as a base from which to construct the fundamental polytope, which is the feasible set over which the linear programming (LP) decoder of Feldman et al. [8], [9], operates.
Manuscript received March 07, 2011; revised July 27, 2011; accepted May 13, 2013. Date of publication July 11, 2013; date of current version August 14, 2013. This work was supported in part by NSF under Grants DMS-0602332, DMS-0838463, and DMS-0903517.
N. Axvig was with the Department of Applied Mathematics at Virginia Military Institute, Lexington, VA 24450 USA. He is now with the Department of Mathematics, Concordia College, Moorhead, MN 56562 USA (e-mail: ndaxvig@cord.edu).
D. Dreher is with the Department of Mathematics, University of NebraskaLincoln, Lincoln, NE 68502 USA (e-mail: deanna1ynne@yahoo.com).
Communicated by P. O. Vontobel, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2013.2265693

A heuristic link between iterative message-passing decoders and the LP decoder is presented in [18], where Vontobel and Koetter suggest that the local nature of iterative message-passing decoders may prevent these decoders from differentiating between actual codewords and valid configurations on all finite, unramified covers of the Tanner graph. Using this intuition as motivation, it is established in [18] that the set of normalized graph cover pseudocodewords is precisely the set of rational points in the fundamental polytope of the LP decoder. Although the exact relationship between iterative message-passing decoders and the LP decoder remains unclear, the identification of points in the fundamental polytope with valid configurations on finite covers of the Tanner graph, and hence with valid numeric labelings on the nodes of the graph, opens the door to using graphical methods to study the structure of the fundamental polytope and the performance of the LP decoder.
As opposed to maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding, which by definition can output only codewords, the LP decoder can provide as its output any extreme point1 of the underlying fundamental polytope. The presence of noninteger extreme points of the fundamental polytope, known as nontrivial LP pseudocodewords, is exactly what prevents the LP decoder from attaining ML performance [8], [9]. In this paper, we provide a new graphical characterization of LP pseudocodewords for the family of cycle codes. This characterization allows for both easy identification and construction of LP pseudocodewords for cycle codes. Additionally, using this new characterization we establish that the minimal degree necessary to realize an LP pseudocodeword on an -fold cover of the Tanner graph is either 1 (in the case of codewords) or 2 (in the case of nontrivial LP pseudocodewords).
It is shown in [18] that the performance of LP decoding on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) and the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel is largely determined by the minimum pseudoweight2 of all nonzero points in the fundamental polytope. Although the precise definition of pseudoweight is channel dependent, the minimum pseudoweight is always achieved at a minimal LP pseudocodeword of the fundamental polytope. Moreover, the minimum pseudoweight of a code is generally accepted as a good predictor of perfor-
1Extreme points are often referred to as vertices in the LP literature. We refrain from applying the term “vertex” to polyhedra to avoid confusion when speaking of both graphs and polyhedra simultaneously. Thus, the terms “node” and “vertex” are reserved for graphs, and “extreme point” is reserved for polyhedra.
2We use a slightly different definition of pseudoweight on the BSC than is used in [18]. Nonetheless, the statement still holds. See Section VII for further discussion.

0018-9448 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

mance in iterative message-passing decoding [15]. For the class matrix, i.e., a parity-check matrix that has relatively few 1s in

of cycle codes, we provide a new graphical characterization each row and column [11].3 In this paper, we choose not to focus

of these minimal LP pseudocodewords that is reminiscent of on issues of computational complexity, opting instead to ex-

the characterization of bad pseudocycles in Horn’s analysis of amine in detail the pseudocodeword structure of cycle codes as

the min-sum algorithm on cycle codes [13]. To arrive at this it arises from the parity-check matrix.

characterization, we prove several results concerning indecom-

posable promenades, objects that are similar in appearance to the nonpositive cost minimal (NPCM) promenades used in

A. Tanner Graphs and Cycle Codes

[12] to study word error probabilities for the class of codes—see Remark VI.5 for more on this. For the case of the AWGN channel, it is shown in [22] that the minimum pseudoweight of a cycle code is equal to the minimum distance of the code and that the minimum pseudoweight is achieved only by codewords. Our characterization of minimal LP pseudocodewords can be used to prove the same result for the BSC as well as for the AWGN channel.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We begin by giving a brief background to coding theory, iterative message-passing decoders, and LP decoding in Section II. We prove the first main result of this paper in Section III, where we give a new characterization of the full set of LP pseudocodewords in the case of cycle codes. We use the results from Section III to derive a method of constructing these pseudocodewords in Section IV. We also use our characterization from Section III to answer in Section V a question related to one posed in [15] concerning minimal realizations of pseudocodewords, and along the way we prove some additional results concerning graph cover realizations of pseudocodewords for general binary linear codes. We turn our focus to the set of minimal LP pseudocodewords in Section VI where we prove our second main result, which gives a precise graphical characterization of these particular pseudocodewords. We use the characterization obtained in Section VI to analyze the asymptotic performance of the LP decoder on both the AWGN channel and the BSC in Section VII. In Section VIII, we compare the two main characterizations of the paper and discuss how they are related to a similar characterization of bad pseudocycles given by Horn [13], and we conclude in Section IX.

We begin with some standard terminology from graph theory.

Definition II.2: A (simple undirected) graph

consists of a set of vertices, or nodes, and a set of edges,

such that each edge is a 2-subset of . If

is an edge

in , we say that and are adjacent, and is incident to both

and . Two edges are incident if they are both incident to a

common vertex. The neighborhood

of a vertex

is

the set of vertices in that are adjacent to . The degree of a

node

in is

.

A graph

is connected if, for any two vertices

, there is a path from to in , i.e., if there is a path

with

for all

,

, and

for each

.

A bipartite graph is a graph

such that can be

written as the disjoint union of two sets

such that

no two vertices in are adjacent, for

.

Iterative message-passing decoders are local algorithms that

operate on the Tanner graph of a code.

Definition II.3: Let

be an

parity-check

matrix for a code . The Tanner graph

associated

with is the bipartite graph

, where

is the set of variable nodes, or bit nodes, and

is the set of check nodes, and

if and

only if

.

In the remainder of this paper, we assume that all Tanner

graphs are connected.

We say that is a Tanner graph for the code if the parity-

check matrix associated with has as its null-space. In

this case, is a code of length

. If is a Tanner graph

for a code with parity-check matrix , then any codeword

can be thought of as an assignment of 0s and 1s to

the variable nodes in the Tanner graph

with the

II. BACKGROUND

property that every check node is adjacent to an even number

of variable nodes that are assigned a value of 1. Conversely,

All codes discussed herein are assumed to be binary linear any such assignment of 0s and 1s to the variable nodes of the

codes. As such, every code can be represented by a (binary) Tanner graph gives rise to a codeword. These assignments that

parity-check matrix. Note throughout that when we refer to a correspond to codewords are known as valid configurations.

vector, we typically think of it as a row vector.

Definition II.4: Let

be a bipartite graph. A

Definition II.1: A parity-check matrix for a code is an configuration on is a an assignment

of 0s and

binary matrix such that

. 1s to the vertices in . A configuration on is valid provided

The rows of are called checks. The columns of , which that for each

, an even number of the neighbors of are

correspond to coordinates of codewords, are called code bits. assigned a value of 1 and the rest are assigned a value of 0. We

In general, a code can have many distinct parity-check ma- will often denote a valid configuration on a bipartite graph

trices. We use the convention that a code is a binary linear code by

.

equipped with a specific parity-check matrix.

While there is an obvious correspondence between valid con-

The complexity of the LP decoder and certain iterative mes- figurations on a Tanner graph and vectors in the null space of the

sage-passing decoding algorithms is largely dependent on the associated parity-check matrix, we will take care to treat these

number of 1s in the particular parity-check matrix representing the code. To reduce this complexity, one can employ a low-density parity-check code: a code defined by a sparse parity-check

3We note that codes with sparse parity-check matrices may also be chosen because their LP relaxation is tighter than for general binary linear codes. See, for example, [19].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG AND DREHER: GRAPHICAL CHARACTERIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

5919

notions as separate. Thus, we use the convention that assign-

ments to the variable nodes in a Tanner graph are called config-

urations on the Tanner graph while vectors in the null space of

a parity-check matrix are called codewords of the code. We blur

the distinction between these two equivalent objects only when

referring to them notationally: if the variable nodes in are la-

beled

and

is some vector, we

will often write

instead of the more cumber-

some

.

The correspondence between valid configurations and code-

words is of particular note when considering cycle codes, which

are the codes of interest to this paper.

Definition II.5: A cycle code is a code whose Tanner graph

has constant variable node degree two, i.e., a code whose parity-

check matrix has constant column weight two.

Cycle codes are more amenable to analysis than general codes

because of their special structure: let be a cycle code with

Tanner graph . If is a valid configuration on and is the

set of variable nodes in that are assigned a value of 1 by ,

then the subgraph of induced by

is even (i.e., every

node in the subgraph has even degree) since every variable node

of has degree two and every check node must be adjacent to

an even number of variable nodes assigned a value of 1. Hence,

the subgraph must be a union of edge-disjoint simple cycles.

The converse is also true: an assignment of 1s to the variable

nodes on a union of edge-disjoint simple cycles and 0s to all

other variable nodes gives rise to a valid configuration on .

Example II.6: The parity-check matrix

has uniform column weight two, and hence defines a cycle code. The vector
is in the null-space of , and it gives rise to a simple cycle in the Tanner graph; see Fig. 1 for an illustration. We note that an isomorphic Tanner graph appears in [21, Fig. 6.1].

Fig. 1. The valid configuration corresponding to the codeword of Example II.6.

graph homomorphism

, called a covering map, with

the property that for each vertex of and each

,

the neighborhood of is mapped bijectively to the neighbor-

hood of . For a positive integer , an -cover of is a

cover

such that for each vertex of ,

contains exactly vertices of . If is an -cover of , we

say the degree of is .

Given a Tanner graph

, an -cover

of , and a node

, we call elements of

copies of .

Definition II.8 ([6]): See also [8, Sec. 5.2.2].

Let

be a Tanner graph for a code and

let be a valid configuration on some -cover

of

. Let be the set of variable nodes in that are assigned a 1

by . The pseudocodeword subgraph of the valid configuration

is the subgraph of induced by

.

Two kinds of graph cover pseudocodewords are associated

with : the unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword corre-

sponding to is the vector

, where

for each variable node

. The

normalized graph cover pseudocodeword4 corresponding to

is the vector

B. Pseudocodewords and the Fundamental Polytope

Given a check node

, the set of locally valid configu-

Roughly speaking, iterative message-passing algorithms rations at is work on the Tanner graph of a code as follows: each variable

node is assigned a value, or cost, based on the received word,

and this value is then broadcast to each adjacent check node. The check nodes make some computations based on their incoming messages and send a message back to each adjacent variable node. The variable nodes make some computations and send a message back to each adjacent check node, and

The extended normalized graph cover pseudocodeword corre-

sponding to (see [8], [9]) is the vector

, where is

the normalized graph cover pseudocodeword given above, and

is the vector with

this process repeats until some stopping criterion is reached,

at which point the variable nodes make a final computation to

decide the decoder output. The local nature of these algorithms leads to the study of graph covers.
Definition II.7 ([18]): An unramified cover, or simply a

for each check node .

and each locally valid configuration

cover, of a finite graph is a graph along with a surjective 4In [18], this is called the scaled (graph cover) pseudocodeword.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5920

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

We say

is a realization of (or of

or of ), and Definition II.11 ([9]): Let be a code with Tanner graph

we say

is a minimal realization of (or of

or of )

, and let be its fundamental polytope. Given a

if there is no realization of (or of

or of ) on a cover of received vector from a binary-input memoryless channel, the

degree strictly smaller than the degree of .

LP decoder is the decoder whose output is an optimal solution

Normalized graph cover pseudocodewords give us informa- to

tion about the proportion of variable nodes with a certain bit as-

signment and, in the case of extended normalized graph cover

pseudocodewords, the proportion of check nodes that are sat-

(1)

isfied by a particular locally valid configuration. Contrast this

with unscaled graph cover pseudocodewords, which give the where is a cost vector determined by the received vector .

number of nodes assigned a value of 1 by a valid configuration (For more details, see [8] or [9].)

on a graph cover. Vontobel and Koetter [18] prove that the set of The optimization problem given by Problem (1) seeks to min-

normalized graph cover pseudocodewords is precisely the set of imize a linear functional over all points in a polyhedron, and so it

rational points in the fundamental polytope of the Tanner graph is a linear program. Since the fundamental polytope is nonempty

(originally called the projected polytope in [8] and [9]):

and bounded, the general theory of LP states that 1) a solution

Definition II.9 ([8], [9]): Let

be a Tanner to Problem (1) always exists, and 2) that at least one solution is

graph with corresponding parity-check matrix , and recall that an extreme point of the fundamental polytope [4].

for a check node

we have

Definition II.12: Let be a nonempty polyhedron. A point

. The extended polytope

of (equiva-

is an extreme point provided that it is not in the convex

lently, the extended polytope

of ) is defined to be hull of

. In other words, is an extreme point of

all points

, where

, satisfying if it cannot be written as a convex sum

for any

the following constraints:

and

.

1)

By the preceding discussion, we may assume that the LP de-

2)

coder always returns an extreme point of as its output. We

3)

therefore make the following definitions.

4)

Definition II.13: Let be a code with parity-check matrix

5)

and

and fundamental polytope . A point is a LP pseudocode-

6)

word5 if is an extreme point of . An LP pseudocodeword that

The fundamental polytope

of (equivalently, the is a zero-one vector corresponding to a codeword is a trivial LP

fundamental polytope

of ) is

pseudocodeword. All other LP pseudocodewords are nontrivial

LP pseudocodewords.

It is shown in both [8] and [9] that the fundamental polytope

of any code is proper, i.e., the set of integer vectors in is

By Definition II.9, a vector is an element of if and only

if, for all checks

, the projection

is a convex sum of local codewords at . A local codeword

at is simply a zero-one vector of even weight.

Local codewords are so named because they satisfy the single

parity constraint imposed by the check . This interpretation of

Definition II.9 will be used in the proof of Lemma III.4. We will

also make frequent use of an alternate definition of the funda-

mental polytope given by Theorem II.10.

Theorem II.10 ([9, Th. 4]): Let be a code with Tanner graph

. The fundamental polytope

of

is the set of all vectors

satisfying the following

exactly the set of codewords . Using the fact that the fundamental polytope is proper, Feldman et al. derive one of the main properties of the LP decoder: the ML-certificate property. The ML-certificate property states that if the LP decoder outputs a codeword, then that codeword is the ML codeword [8], [9]. This does not, however, imply that the LP decoder attains ML performance: in addition to codewords, there are usually fractional extreme points of as well. (Since the constraints defining are linear with integer coefficients, basic results from LP imply that all extreme points are rational [4].) The presence of these nontrivial LP pseudocodewords is exactly what prevents the LP decoder from attaining ML performance.

constraints:

a)

for all

, and

III. CHARACTERIZATION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING

b)

for all

PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

pairs

, where

and is a subset of

with

odd cardinality.

By sifting through Definition II.9, one can deduce that, given

a Tanner graph and a rational point

in the asso-

ciated extended polytope, there exists a valid graph cover con-

figuration

that realizes

(see [3, Proposition V.3

or Proposition 3.7] for details). Aside from providing a com-

pact way of describing all normalized graph cover pseudocode-

words, the fundamental polytope plays a key role in the LP de-

coder of Feldman et al. [8], [9].

The main result of [1] is given in Theorem III.1 below. This

theorem provides straightforward necessary conditions that a

vector must satisfy for it to be an LP pseudocodeword of a cycle

code.

Theorem III.1 ([1, Th. III.11]): Let be a cycle code with

Tanner graph

and fundamental polytope .

5In some papers, all points in the fundamental polytope are known as pseudocodewords. Other papers use the term pseudocodeword to describe a generic point in the fundamental cone, i.e., the conic hull of the fundamental polytope (see Definition VI.1).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG AND DREHER: GRAPHICAL CHARACTERIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

5921

If the vector

is an LP pseudocodeword of , then the For (b), assume that

is even, and set

.

following two conditions must hold:

Since is odd, we have the constraint

a)

.

b) With defined to be

, the subgraph

of induced by

is 2-regular. Equivalently,

is a union of vertex-disjoint simple cycles

.

In this section, we strengthen the preceding result to the fol-

lowing, which provides a new graphical characterization of LP

pseudocodewords of cycle codes.

Theorem III.2: Let be a cycle code with Tanner graph

and fundamental polytope . A vector

is

an LP pseudocodeword of if and only if the following three

conditions hold:

a)

b) With defined to be

, the subgraph

of induced by

is 2-regular. Equivalently,

is a union of vertex-disjoint simple cycles

.

c) With defined as set of check nodes in that are adja-

cent to an odd number of variable nodes assigned a value

of 1 by , the cardinality of is itself odd for all simple

cycles in .

To prove Theorem III.2, we first prove two supporting

lemmas.

Lemma III.3: Let be a code with Tanner graph

and fundamental polytope , let

, and let

be given. Let

be two distinct nodes in

, and suppose

that each node in

is assigned either a 0 or a 1

by . Let denote the set of variable nodes in

that are assigned a value of 1 by .

a) If is odd, then

.

b) If is even, then

.

Proof: In the following, denotes the set of variable

nodes in

that are assigned a value of 0. We

first prove (a). Assume that is odd, and set

. Since

, we know that must satisfy the

constraint of the

fundamental polytope given in Theorem II.10

This can be rearranged to obtain

, or, more simply,

. By setting

and performing a sym-

metric argument, one finds that

, which completes the

proof.

Lemma III.4: Let be a code with Tanner graph

and fundamental polytope . Fix

and

define

. Let be the subgraph of

induced by

and suppose that is 2-regular. Then

the following are equivalent:

a)

.

b) For any

that is adjacent to an odd number of nodes

assigned a value of 1 by , must also be adjacent to

exactly two nodes in .

Proof: Throughout the proof, we use and to denote

the sets of nodes adjacent to the check that are assigned values

of 1 and by , respectively.

We first show that (a) implies (b). Since is 2-regular, this

means that

or 2 for all checks . If there exists some

check with

odd and

, we must therefore have

. Letting

, we see that violates the

constraint of the fundamental polytope in Theorem II.10, and

so

. Therefore, we have shown that (a) implies (b).

To show that (b) implies (a), we make use of the fact that a

point is in the fundamental polytope if and only if, for every

check , the projection

of onto the nodes adjacent to

is a convex sum of local codewords at (see Definition II.9).

Suppose that (b) holds, i.e., for all checks with

odd,

we also have

. Let

be given. If is even, let

and

, where

is used to

denote the indicator vector of the set in

, i.e.,

such that

if and only if

. Both and

are local codewords at , and we have

. If, on

the other hand,

is odd, we can write

. Set

Substituting, we obtain

and both and are local codewords at , and

. As defined, .

Since for all

we have shown that

is a sum of

local codewords at , we conclude that is an element of the

fundamental polytope.

Since

, we have

The necessary conditions given in Theorem III.1 come close

to providing a graphical characterization for LP pseudocode-

words of cycle codes. Proposition III.5 highlights a parity-based

For the reverse inequality, set set , we have the following constraint:

condition that, when combined with the necessary conditions of . Using this Theorem III.1, will allow us to complete the characterization of
Theorem III.2.

Proposition III.5: Let be a code with Tanner graph

and fundamental polytope . Let

be given, define

,

This can be rearranged to obtain

and let be the subgraph of induced by

.

Assume that is 2-regular (equivalently, that is a union of

vertex-disjoint simple cycles

), and let denote

the set of check nodes in that are adjacent to an odd number

Thus,

, and (a) is proved.

of variable nodes assigned a value of 1 by . Then is an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5922

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

extreme point of if and only if for every simple cycle in and end at the same simple cycle of , as well as for a path in

the cardinality of is itself odd.

to come into contact with more than two simple cycles of .

Proof: We first prove the “if” direction of the proposition. Construct a vector

as follows: assign values

Assume that for all simple cycles in , we have

odd, of 1 to the variable nodes of and values of to the variable

and suppose that there are

and a scalar

such nodes in . To all other variable nodes in , assign values of 0.

that

. For this to occur, it must be that and Let

be a vector built up according to the

both assign 0s to the nodes that does, and that and both cycle-path method. Lemma III.4 guarantees that

. From

assign 1s to the nodes that does. Thus, the only places where here, it is easy to check that the conditions of Theorem III.2 are

and can possibly disagree with are the variable nodes in . satisfied, and so is an LP pseudocodeword.

Fix a simple cycle of . Let

be an enu- Example IV.2: Let be the cycle code of Example II.6

meration of . Without loss of generality, assume that these whose Tanner graph is shown in Fig. 1. Since the Tanner

check nodes are indexed in such a way that respects the cyclic graph has girth 6, both cycles and paths may be written by

structure of . Partition the variable nodes of into groups specifying only the check nodes on the walk and omitting

such that is the set of all variable nodes in between

the variable nodes. The only possible nontrivial union of

and , where subscripts are taken modulo

. We say vertex-disjoint simple cycles is

. For

that two such subsets and are adjacent if

a set of paths satisfying the desired conditions, there are

. Lemma III.3 implies that is constant on each four choices:

,

,

, or

, and also that the common values assigned to any two adja-

. The nontrivial LP pseudocodewords

cent sets must add to 1. Since there are an odd number of these obtained by these choices are

sets and their adjacency structure is cyclic, we must have that

each variable node in is assigned a value of by .

Thus,

. By a symmetric argument,

. Since

cannot be written as a convex sum of elements of

, we

conclude that is an extreme point of .

For the converse, suppose that there is a simple cycle

so that has even cardinality. Let

be an enu-

meration of the checks in that respects the cyclic structure

of . With the sets defined as before, set

and

. Define a vector

by making it equal to

1 on all edges of , 0 on all edges of , and otherwise identical

This is a complete list of nontrivial LP pseudocodewords for this code.
The cycle-path method can produce the all-zeros vector (if the number of cycles in is chosen to be zero) and some nontrivial pseudocodewords. Indeed, it is easy to see from Theorem VI.2, the main result of Section VI, that all nontrivial min-

to . Define to be 0 on , 1 on , and otherwise equal to . It

is easy to see that

and that

. Lemma

III.4 implies that

, and so is not an extreme point of

.

Combining Theorem III.1 and Proposition III.5, we obtain

Theorem III.2.

imal LP pseudocodewords can be produced via the cycle-path method (though the cycle-path method can also produce LP pseudocodewords that are not minimal).
Since the fundamental polytope is proper (see Section II-B), each of the 16 codewords in Example IV.2 must also be an LP pseudocodeword, though none of them can be obtained by

the cycle-path method. This is not a contradiction to Theorem

IV. CONSTRUCTION OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

III.2; indeed, every codeword satisfies the conditions of Theorem III.2 since the empty graph is trivially 2-regular. Additionally, we note that in many cases there can exist nontrivial

Given a cycle code with Tanner graph , Theorem III.2 and LP pseudocodewords that cannot be obtained by the cycle-path

Lemma III.4 taken together provide a graphical litmus test to method, e.g., the vector of Example IV.8. Although the cycle-

check whether a vector is an LP pseudocodeword. Conversely, path method alone is insufficient to produce the complete set

by completely describing all LP pseudocodewords in a clear-cut of LP pseudocodwords, we will show that the complete set of

manner, Theorem III.2 and Lemma III.4 suggest a method of LP pseudocodewords can, in fact, be obtained by using -sym-

constructing them. What follows is a procedure of building LP metry in conjunction with the cycle-path method.

pseudocodewords for cycle codes that we refer to as the cycle- The concept of -symmetry is introduced in [8]. A -sym-

path method.

metric polytope is one whose group of rotational and reflective

Procedure IV.1: The cycle-path method: begin with a symmetries admits the additive structure of the code (for more

nonempty subgraph

of the Tanner detail, see [2]). We use -symmetry primarily as a method of

graph

that is a union of vertex-disjoint simple jumping from one LP pseudocodeword to another. How this is

cycles in . Next, select a collection of pairwise edge-dis- accomplished is made clear in the following definitions and dis-

joint paths from

, each of which cussion.

starts and ends at some simple cycle of . (Each such path Definition IV.3 ([8]): Let be a code with Tanner graph

will necessarily start and end at a check node of a simple cycle

, and let

and

be

in , since variable nodes only have degree two.) Ensure that given. The relative point of with respect to is the point

each simple cycle of is adjacent to an odd number of variable whose coordinates are given by

for all

.

nodes in . Note that it is permissible for a path in to start A proper polytope is said to be -symmetric provided that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG AND DREHER: GRAPHICAL CHARACTERIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

5923

for all points

and all codewords

the relative point

is also an element of .

With this definition, Feldman proves the following theorem.

Theorem IV.4 ([8]): Let be a code with parity-check matrix

. The fundamental polytope

of is -symmetric.

Additionally, for all extreme points of and for all codewords

, the relative point is also an extreme point of .

Example IV.5: Let be the code of Examples II.6 and IV.2,

and let be the fundamental polytope of the corresponding

parity-check matrix. Since

and

are both codewords, the proper-

ness of implies that both are extreme points of . We have

that

Note that is identical to the binary sum of and and

hence is also a codeword.

As was shown in Example IV.2, the point

is an extreme point of .

By Theorem IV.4, the point

must also be an extreme point of , a conclusion that is

corroborated by Example IV.2.

Proposition IV.7 below shows that any LP pseudocodeword

is either a codeword or lies in the -symmetry orbit of a pseu-

docodeword that is obtainable by the cycle-path method out-

lined earlier in this section. The proof of Proposition IV.7 re-

quires the following lemma.

Lemma IV.6: If is a graph without cycles, then the edge

set of can be partitioned as

, where each is the

edge set of a path in whose endpoints have odd degree in .

Proof: This result is easily obtained by induction on the

size of the edge set (for details, see [2, Proof of Lemma 4.4.1]).

Fig. 2. A Tanner graph .

of

that has odd degree in

. By Lemma III.4, every

vertex of

with odd degree in

must be on some

cycle of . It follows that is constructible by the cycle-path

method using for the cycles and

for the paths.

Since

, we are done.

Example IV.8: Let be the Tanner graph of Fig. 2, and let

and be the corresponding cycle code and fundamental poly-

tope, respectively.

The vector

is an element of by Lemma III.4, and it is an LP pseudocode-

word by Theorem III.2. The assignment of 1s to variable nodes

and prevents from being constructible by the

cycle-path method. With

given by

we define

Proposition IV.7: Let be a cycle code with Tanner graph

and fundamental polytope . For any LP pseu-

docodeword

, we have that lies in the -symmetry orbit

of either the all-zeros codeword or a nontrivial LP pseudocode-

word that is constructible by the cycle-path method.

Proof: By Theorem III.2,

. With defined

The pseudocodeword method using Finally, we observe that the -symmetry orbit of

is constructible by the cycle-path

and

.

, and so is in

.

to be

, let be the subgraph of induced by

. If is empty, then is an integer vector and the

properness of implies that

. We therefore have

,

V. MINIMAL REALIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

i.e., lies in the -symmetry orbit of , and we are done.

Another application of our characterization of LP pseu-

Now suppose that , and hence , is not empty. By The- docodewords lies in answering a question related to one raised

orem III.2, must be a union of vertex-disjoint simple cycles by Kelley and Sridhara in [15]: what is the minimum degree

. For any vector of length , let

be cover needed to realize a pseudocodeword on a graph cover?

the subgraph of induced by

, where de- This question was addressed in [15], but only in the context

notes

. Let be the set of codewords in of unscaled graph cover pseudocodewords. This section cul-

whose support is contained in the variable nodes of

. minates in Corollary V.8, which characterizes the minimum

Choose

to have maximal support, i.e., such that for all degree graph cover necessary to realize a normalized graph

we have that

. By Theorem cover pseudocodeword (i.e., an extreme point of the funda-

IV.4, we have that

is an LP pseudocodeword. More- mental polytope). While Corollary V.8 is pertinent only to cycle

over, since is a cycle code, the maximality of implies that codes, it is worth noting that many of our theorems regarding

has no cycles.

graph cover realizations of pseudocodewords leading up to this

We claim that is constructible by the cycle-path method. result apply to general binary linear codes.

Apply Lemma IV.6 to

to obtain a set of paths Kelley and Sridhara consider the minimum degree cover

whose edges partition the edge set of

needed to realize a given unscaled graph cover pseudocode-

and with the property that each path begins and ends at a node word in [15], where they prove the following result.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5924

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Proposition V.1([15, Corollary 3.7]): Let

be

a Tanner graph. If

is an unscaled graph cover

pseudocodeword that is minimally realizable on an -cover,

then

, where

and

.

They do not suggest this bound is tight; in fact, we see in

Example V.2 that this bound can be quite loose when the check

degrees are large.

Example V.2: For any

, consider the Tanner graph

defined by the

parity-check matrix of all ones. Then

is a codeword, and it is realizable as a valid

configuration on , which is a 1-cover of itself. In the notation

of Proposition V.1, we have

and

. Proposition

V.1 states that the minimum degree cover required to realize

is upper bounded by , which can be made arbitrarily larger

than 1.

The context of [15, Proposition V.1] is that of bounding the

minimum pseudoweight of a code with parity-check matrix , which will be discussed in detail in Section VII. For our

purposes, it suffices to note that the pseudoweight function is

invariant under rescaling by a positive real number, so that we

can consider normalized graph cover pseudocodewords, rather than unscaled graph cover pseudocodewords, when bounding

the minimum degree cover needed to realize a pseudocodeword.

The following proposition gives the exact value of the degree

of a minimal realization of an extended normalized graph cover pseudocodeword.

Proposition V.3 [3, Proposition 3.7]: Let be a Tanner

graph and let be the extended polytope of . Choose

. Then,

is realizable on an -cover if and

only if each coordinate of

is a nonnegative integer.

Proof: If

is realizable on an -cover, then

is a vector of nonnegative integers by the definition of a normal-

ized extended graph cover pseudocodeword. Conversely, for any positive integer such that

is a vector of nonnegative integers, in [8, Sec. 5.2.2] (see also

[9, Sec. V]) gives a construction that yields a realization of

. We show that this realization occurs on an -cover.

For each

, is the set of even-sized subsets of

.

Since

we have

where each

is a nonnegative integer. The con-

struction of Feldman et al. gives that for each

, there

are copies of check node that are satisfied via the locally

valid configuration . This constraint implies that there are

total copies of check node , i.e., that the realization occurs on

an -cover.

We will see in Theorem V.6 that there is a similar result for

points in the fundamental polytope. The proof of this theorem

rests on the following proposition.

Proposition V.4: Let

be a parity-check ma-

trix for the length- single parity-check code , let be the

fundamental polytope of , and let

. If

is given, then can be written as a sum of code-

words if and only if is a nonnegative integer vector and

is even.

Proof: We first prove the forward direction. Suppose that

can be written as a sum of the codewords

.

Then, clearly

is a nonnegative integer

vector. Also, since has even weight for each

,

we have that

is even.

Conversely, suppose that is a nonnegative integer vector

and

is even. It suffices to show that can

be written as a sum of codewords for some

, since

we can add

copies of the all-zeros word to write as

a sum of exactly codewords.

Let be the collection of sets such that

,

, is a multiset of binary vectors

that sum to with

if

and

and

are both odd. For each

, let

denote the number of odd-weight vectors in . We will show

that there is some

such that

is a codeword for each

, which will complete our

proof.

Our proof strategy is as follows: we will first show that is not empty. We will then choose an element of that mini-

mizes over all

. If

, we are done. To show

that is indeed equal to zero, we assume that

and

carefully deduce the existence of another element

with

, contradicting the minimality of .

First, we show that

. To see this, define a set of vec-

tors

as follows. For each

, let

for

and let

otherwise. Then,

for all

and

for

, and so

.

Pick

so that is minimal, i.e.,

for each

.

We wish to show that

, and so by way of contra-

diction assume

. Since

is even,

there must be an even number of odd-weight vectors in , and

hence

. We will now construct a set

with

, thereby contradicting the minimality of . We

begin by showing that all odd-weight vectors in must have

the same support. Say there exist

such that

and

each have odd weight and

,

and without loss of generality assume that

. Since

, we know that

, so pick

. Setting

and

results in a set of

binary vectors that sum to .

Moreover, the supports of odd-weight vectors are still nested,

since the above change eliminates odd-weight vectors without

creating more, and hence

. However,

,

which contradicts the minimality of . Thus no such

exist, which means that every odd-weight vector has the same

support. Let

for all with

odd.

We next show that the support of every vector in , regard-

less of weight, intersects (the complement of ) at most once

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG AND DREHER: GRAPHICAL CHARACTERIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

5925

and intersects at least

times. Suppose there exists

an

such that

. Pick

with

. Since

, pick

with

so that and

have odd weight. From

above, we know that

. Setting

and

results in a set of

binary vectors that sum to , and

,

which contradicts the minimality of . Therefore, for every

, we have

.

Suppose there exists

such that

, and note that the weight of must be even. Pick

with

. Since

, pick

with

such that and have odd weight. From

above, we know that

. Setting

and

results in a set of

binary vectors that sum to , and

,

which again contradicts the minimality of . Therefore, for

every

, we have

.

Since the support of every vector in intersects at most

once and at least

times, and is odd, we know that

the support of every even-weight vector in either intersects

exactly once and intersects exactly times, or intersects

nowhere and intersects exactly Let

times.

There are odd-weight vectors , and hence vectors with support , and so the above considerations show that
is the number of even-weight vectors in whose support contains , i.e.,

Similarly,

is the number of even-weight vectors

in whose support does not contain , i.e.,

is

equal to

Therefore,

By Theorem II.10, we know that
Rearranging this, we have and hence

Thus,

Since

, we have

and

. Pick

with

, and pick

such that and

have odd weight. Define

by

for

and

otherwise. Setting

results in a set

of

binary vectors that sum to . These vectors

still have nested supports of odd-weight vectors, since we have eliminated odd-weight vectors from without creating more,

and

, which contradicts the minimality of .

Thus, we have by contradiction that

, and so we have

written as a sum of

codewords.

Remark V.5: The content of Proposition V.4 is related to [18,

Lemma 56], and also to [16, Ths. 3.4 and 4.4]. One key differ-

ence is that Proposition V.4 provides a bound on the number of

terms in the sum, namely , for any that satisfies the conditions of Proposition V.4.

We can now prove the following theorem, which gives cri-

teria for realizing a normalized graph cover pseudocodeword

on an -cover.

Theorem V.6: Let be a Tanner graph, let be the funda-

mental polytope of , and let

be a rational point. Let

be such that is an integer vector that reduces to a

codeword modulo 2. Then is realizable on an -cover of .

Proof: Fix a check node . Without loss of generality, as-

sume the neighbors of correspond to the first coordinates

of , and let

. We will apply Proposition

V.4 to

to see that

can be written as a sum of

local codewords. These local codewords are then used to con-

struct check variables for so that we can apply Proposition

V.3 to see that

is realizable on an -cover.

Since

is an integer vector that reduces to a code-

word modulo 2, we know that

is an integer vector

that reduces modulo 2 to an even-weight vector, and hence

is even. By Proposition V.4, we know that

can be written as a sum of even-weight vectors,

say

. For each even-sized subset

of

, let

Thus,

is the fraction of codewords

for

which check node is satisfied precisely by . By definition,

is a nonnegative integer for each

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5926

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

By construction,
and is the number of codewords node is satisfied precisely by
, there are codewords
which means that

for which check

. However, for each

that have

. Hence,

is realizable on a 1-cover of ) or is minimally realizable on a

2-cover of .

Proof: Let be the smallest positive integer such that

is an integer vector. Suppose is not a codeword. Since is

proper, we know that

. Since

by Theorem III.2, we know that

. As in Theorem III.2,

let

and let be the subgraph of

induced by

, so that is a disjoint union of cycles

.

Let

be the vector with

if

and

otherwise. Then corresponds to the configuration on

that assigns 1s to all the variable nodes in

, and so

is a codeword. By the definition of , we have that

, so reduces to a codeword modulo 2. Thus, the min-

imum degree cover needed to realize is

by Corollary

V.7.

VI. CHARACTERIZATION OF MINIMAL LINEAR PROGRAMMING

for each

, and so our collection of s defined

PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

above are valid check variables.

While Section III gave a characterization of all LP pseu-

Repeating this process for each

yields valid check docodewords for cycle codes, this section gives a characteriza-

variables for each

. The point

is therefore in tion of a subset of these pseudocodewords called the minimal

the extended polytope of . Since

is a nonnegative LP pseudocodewords of the fundamental polytope. Minimal

integer vector, it is realizable on an -cover by Proposition V.3. LP pseudocodewords have received much attention [17], [18],

[22], in large part due to the fact that, on the AWGN channel,

An immediate consequence of Theorem V.6 is a characteriza- they are the most likely erroneous outputs of the LP decoder

tion of the minimum cover degree needed to realize an arbitrary

point in the fundamental polytope.

Corollary V.7: Let be a Tanner graph, let be the fun-

damental polytope of , let

be a rational point, and let

be a positive integer such that each coordinate of

is a nonnegative integer. In this scenario, is realizable on a

-cover. Moreover, is realizable on an -cover if and only

if reduces to a codeword modulo 2. In particular, if is

under the assumption that the all-zeros codeword is transmitted.

The minimal LP pseudocodewords are defined in terms of the

fundamental cone of a code.

Definition VI.1([16], [18]): Let

be a Tanner

graph with corresponding parity-check matrix and funda-

mental polytope . The fundamental cone

of

(equivalently, the fundamental cone

of ) is

the smallest positive integer such that is an integer vector,

then the minimum degree cover needed to realize is if

reduces to a codeword modulo 2, and is otherwise.

Proof: Since is an integer vector,

is an even in-

teger vector, and so

reduces to the zero codeword, modulo

2. Thus, Theorem V.6 gives that is realizable on a -cover.

If reduces to a codeword modulo 2, then Theorem V.6

gives that is realizable on an -cover. Conversely, if is

realizable on an -cover, then is an unscaled graph cover

pseudocodeword, and hence it is an integer vector that reduces

to a codeword modulo 2 by [16, Th. 4.4].

Let be the degree of a minimal realization of and let be

the smallest positive integer such that is an integer vector.

Then is an integer vector, and so

. From above, we

have

, and so

. Thus,

if and

only if reduces to a codeword modulo 2, which completes

the proof.

A minimal graph cover pseudocodeword is a nonzero rational point that lies on an extreme ray 6 of .7 A minimal LP pseudocodeword of is a minimal normalized graph cover pseudocodeword that is also an extreme point of .
The fundamental cone is the conic hull of the fundamental polytope [18], a fact that is easy to verify after observing that the constraints defining the fundamental cone are simply the homogenous constraints of the fundamental polytope. Because of this relationship, any minimal graph cover pseudocodeword is a scalar multiple of a minimal LP pseudocodeword. The purpose of this section is to prove the following clean graphical characterization of minimal LP pseudocodewords in the case of cycle codes.

Theorem III.2 and Corollary V.7 together imply that every

LP pseudocodeword of a cycle code can be minimally realized

on a cover of of degree at most two.

Corollary V.8: Let

be the Tanner graph of

a cycle code, let be its fundamental polytope, and let be an

LP pseudocodeword of . Then is either a codeword (i.e.,

6The extreme rays of a polyhedral cone are sometimes referred to as the edges of the cone. We opt for the former terminology since it alleviates confusion when speaking of both graphs and cones simultaneously. See also Footnote 1.
7This definition is identical to the definition of minimal pseudocodewords in [18]. This is a departure from our usual use of the term “pseudocodeword,” since a minimal graph cover pseudocodeword need not be an extreme point of the fundamental polytope. See also Footnote 5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG AND DREHER: GRAPHICAL CHARACTERIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

5927

Theorem VI.2: Let be the Tanner graph of a cycle code, let

be its fundamental polytope, and let

. Then is a trivial

minimal LP pseudocodeword of if and only if the following

two conditions hold:

a)

.

b) With

, the subgraph of

induced by

is a simple cycle.

Furthermore, is a nontrivial minimal LP pseudocodeword

of if and only if the following three conditions hold:

c)

.

d) With defined to be

, the subgraph

of induced by

is a union of exactly two

vertex-disjoint simple cycles

.

e) With

, the subgraph of

induced by

is a path joining and that

is internally disjoint from and .

In order to prove Theorem VI.2, we first develop our under-

standing of certain walks in the Tanner graph of a code.

Definition VI.3: Let

be a graph. A walk is an

ordered sequence of edges with the property that each adjacent

pair of edges share a common vertex. A walk implicitly places

a direction on the edges in that walk. As such, when thinking of

edges as being directed we will write to denote the edge

traversed in the opposite direction. A walk is closed if it begins

and ends at the same vertex, and a circuit is a closed walk that

never repeats an edge, not even in the reverse direction.

Let

be a (nonempty) walk in . Then has

backtracking if

for some

; oth-

erwise is backtrackless, and we call a promenade. If is

closed and

, we say that has a tail, or is tailed;

otherwise the closed walk is tailless. If a walk is backtrack-

less, closed, and tailless, we call a closed promenade. If is

a closed promenade in , then

is the degree of in the

subgraph of spanned8 by the edges of .

We say is (rotationally) equivalent to if is a rotation

of , i.e., if

for some

.

If

is a walk, we say that passes through

times if

, where

denotes the tail of an edge with respect to the walk under

consideration.

Feldman introduces the notion of a promenade in [8]. The

idea in Definitions VI.3 and VI.4 is very similar to that of an ir-

reducible closed walk in [21] and a pseudo-cycle in [13]. Since

we will primarily be concerned with closed promenades, we

often will care only about equivalence classes of closed prome-

nades under rotational equivalence. In an abuse of terminology,

we will also refer to these equivalence classes of closed prome-

nades as closed promenades.

8For a generic graph

and a subset

, the subgraph of

spanned by is defined to be the subgraph with vertex set

and

edge set .

Since we seek a characterization of points that lie on the

extreme rays of the fundamental cone of a Tanner graph, it

is useful to have a graph-theoretic characterization for those

closed promenades that correspond to extreme rays of the cone.

As we will see in Theorem VI.12, the notion of decomposability

given in Definition VI.4 gives precisely the characterization we

seek.

Definition VI.4: For any promenade on a graph , let the di-

rected edge multiset of be the multiset of directed edges

traverses, and let the edge multiset of be the corresponding

multiset of undirected edges.

We say a closed promenade is decomposable, or decom-

poses, if there exist

closed promenades

so

that

as multisets; otherwise is

indecomposable.

Remark VI.5: Indecomposable closed promenades are sim-

ilar to the NPCM promenades of [12]. NPCM promenades are

introduced in [12] to study the word error probabilities of

codes, a class of codes closely linked to cycle codes. One of the

main differences between indecomposable closed promenades

and NPCM promenades is that to be NPCM one first needs a

cost function on the edge set of the graph, while the notion of

indecomposability is purely graph-theoretic. Nonetheless, from

the definition given in [12] it is easy to show that all NPCM

promenades are indecomposable. The converse, however, does

not hold: [12, Corollary 26] states that any NPCM promenade

may pass through a vertex of a graph at most twice, whereas in-

decomposable closed promenades may use a vertex three times

(see [7, Example 4.17] for a concrete illustration).

Recall from Definition II.8 that the pseudocodeword sub-

graph of a valid graph cover configuration is the subgraph

induced by the variable nodes that are assigned a value of 1 and

their neighbors. In analyzing the minimal LP pseudocodewords

of a code, we will look at valid graph cover configurations

whose pseudocodeword subgraph gives rise to a promenade,

specifically, an indecomposable promenade.

Definition VI.6: Let

be a closed promenade on

the Tanner graph of a cycle code. We say

is a (graph

cover) realization of if

is a graph cover and

is a valid configuration on such that the pseudocodeword

subgraph of

forms a circuit

with each a

lift of , i.e.,

for all

. A minimal

realization of is a realization of on an -cover such that if

is also realizable on an -cover, then

.

If

is a closed promenade, then any realiza-

tion

of has as its pseudocodeword subgraph a circuit of

length that projects onto . Hence, if passes through a vari-

able node exactly times, then the pseudocodeword sub-

graph of any realization of contains exactly copies of ,

and so the notions in Definition VI.7 below are well defined and

unique.

Definition VI.7: Let

be a closed prome-

nade on the Tanner graph of a cycle code. The unscaled

graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding to is the

unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding to any

realization of . The normalized graph cover pseudocode-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5928

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

word corresponding to is the normalized graph cover

pseudocodeword corresponding to a minimal realization of

, i.e.,

, where is the degree of a minimal

realization of . It is shown in [7, Proposition 3.4] that every

closed promenade does indeed have a realization,9 and so the

vectors introduced in Definition VI.7 always exist. With the

aim of finding a graphical condition on that will result in

being a minimal LP pseudocodeword, we now explore more

graph-theoretic properties of indecomposable closed walks.

Definition VI.8: Let be a closed promenade on a graph .

The singleton edge set of is the set of (undirected) edges

in that traverses only once, and the double edge set of

is the set of (undirected) edges in that traverses twice,

without multiplicity. For each

, the edge multiset of

with respect to is the multiset of (undirected) edges that

traverses that are incident to .

Definition VI.9: Let be an indecomposable closed

promenade on some graph , with singleton edge set

consisting of the edges in some vertex disjoint union of

simple cycles

. Then the cycle adjacency graph

of is the graph with vertex

set

and edge set

, where

if and only if there is a path in that

connects and without touching any ,

.

The following proposition summarizes several results from

[7] concerning indecomposable closed promenades that will be

useful in the sequel. We note that in some cases similar results

exist for the NPCM promenades of [12]. This is not a surprise,

since as noted in Remark VI.5 all NPCM promenades are also

indecomposable. We make references to the parallel results of

[12] where appropriate.

Remark VI.10: We note that Proposition VI.11 and other re-

sults from [7] have been rephrased to accommodate the fact that

the results of [7] pertain to general simple, undirected graphs. As

noted in [7, Remark 2.17], there is a natural bijective correspon-

dence between the fundamental polytope/cone of a cycle code’s

Tanner graph and the fundamental polytope/cone of a general

graph: given a cycle code’s Tanner graph , one can construct a

general graph by simply “erasing” variable nodes (this works

because all variable nodes have degree two, so they can give rise

to edges). The reverse map takes a general graph and places vari-

able nodes in the middle of all its edges (an operation known as

subdividing the edge), thus obtaining the bipartite Tanner graph

to a cycle code. This correspondence also carries over to prom-

enades, since the topology of the graph remains the same and

promenades do not allow backtracking. Finally, we note that the

results of [7] carry over to general graphs with multiple edges

and hence to Tanner graphs with four cycles, since one can sub-

divide all the edges of such a general graph to obtain a simple

graph whose fundamental polytope/cone structure as well as its

promenades are all in a natural bijective correspondence with

those of the original graph.

Proposition VI.11 ([7]): Let be an indecomposable closed

promenade on a Tanner graph , let be the singleton edge set

9The notion of a realization in [7] is only superficially different from the notion of a realization introduced in this paper. See Remark VI.10.

of , and let be the unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword

corresponding to . Then each of the following holds:

1) uses each edge at most once in each direction, and so

uses each undirected edge at most twice (see [12], Lemma

7 for the same result for NPCM promenades).

2) never repeats a node without repeating an edge inci-

dent to that node in the reverse direction (see [12], where

Lemmas 5 and 8 combine for the same result involving

NPCM promenades).

3) consists of a nonempty union of vertex disjoint simple

cycles in .

4) If is a cycle in and

for some closed walks

and , then is a cycle in either or .

5) If lies on an extreme ray of the fundamental cone

,

then passes through each node of at most twice.

6) If passes through a node in more than twice, then the

cycle adjacency graph of contains a cycle.

7) If is a minimal graph cover pseudocodeword, then is

a minimal LP pseudocodeword of .

8) If uses each node in at most once, then is minimally

realizable on a 1-cover. If uses each node in at most

twice and is not realizable on a 1-cover, then is minimally

realizable on a 2-cover.

Moreover, substantial progress has been made toward char-

acterizing minimal LP pseudocodewords of a code in [7].

Theorem VI.12 (see [7, Th. 4.19]): Let be an indecompos-

able closed promenade on a Tanner graph , and let be the

normalized graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding to . If

is a minimal normalized graph cover pseudocodeword, then

the cycle adjacency graph is a complete graph on 1 or 2 ver-

tices.

This result is only concerned with minimal LP pseudocode-

words that can be obtained by taking the normalized graph cover

pseudocodeword corresponding to a minimal realization of an

indecomposable closed promenade. A natural question to ask

is whether there are minimal LP pseudocodewords that do not

arise in this way. Proposition VI.14 shows that every minimal

LP pseudocodeword does indeed arise from an indecomposable

closed promenade, and we will use Lemma VI.13 in its proof.

Lemma VI.13: Suppose

are indecomposable closed

promenades in the Tanner graph of a cycle code. Then

and lie on the same ray through the origin if and only if

.

Proof: Let

be the Tanner graph in the

statement of the Lemma. If

, then clearly and

lie on the same ray, so assume that and lie on the

same ray. Then,

for some

. Since counts

the number of times that passes through

, and is

indecomposable on the Tanner graph of a cycle code, also

counts the number of times that passes through each of the

edges incident to . By Part 1 of Proposition VI.11, we have

that uses each edge in at most twice, and so

for all

, and similarly

for all

. Thus,

.

By Part 3 of Proposition VI.11, we know that

,

and hence there exist

such that

. Hence,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG AND DREHER: GRAPHICAL CHARACTERIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

5929

, and similarly

. Therefore,

and so

.

Proposition VI.14: Let

be the Tanner graph

of a cycle code with corresponding fundamental polytope .

Let be a minimal LP pseudocodeword of , and suppose that

is a minimal realization of on the cover

of

.

If is the pseudocodeword subgraph of

, then

gives rise to an indecomposable closed promenade in . More-

over, the normalized graph cover pseudocodeword

corre-

sponding to

is precisely .

Proof: Let be the unscaled graph cover pseudocode-

word corresponding to

. Since is the Tanner graph of

a cycle code, we know that is an edge-disjoint union of cy-

cles

in , and so

is a union of closed prome-

nades in . Write

as a union of indecomposable prom-

enades

, and let

be the associated un-

scaled graph cover pseudocodewords. Since

, we have

. Since is minimal, lies

on an extreme ray of the fundamental cone of , and so each

of

is a multiple of . Hence,

all lie

on the same ray, which means that

by Lemma

VI.13, and so

.

Since lies on an extreme ray of and is indecompos-

able, Part 5 of Proposition VI.11 implies that uses each node

in at most twice. Hence, by [7, Proposition 4.14], is the

first integer point along its ray, and by [7, Corollary 3.5], is

minimally realizable on an -cover, where

and

is the number of times passes through for each

.

Let be the degree of over , so that is an -cover of .

Let be the degree of a minimal realization of . Then,

is a normalized graph cover pseudocodeword, and so

.

Since

lies on the same ray as

, and is an LP

pseudocodeword of , we must have that

; otherwise,

we could express as a nontrivial convex sum of

and

the zero vector, which is also in . However, since

is a

realization of on an -cover of , we have

, and so

is minimally realizable on an -cover of . Since

and is minimally realizable on an -cover of , we have

that

. Letting

, we obtain

some indecomposable closed promenade in such that

, where is the cycle adjacency graph of and

is the complete graph on vertices.

Proof: Suppose first that is a minimal LP pseudocode-

word of . From Proposition VI.14, we know that

for

some indecomposable closed promenade derived from ,

where is the pseudocodeword subgraph of a minimal realiza-

tion of . By Theorem VI.12, we have

.

Conversely, suppose that

for some indecomposable

closed promenade in such that

. Since

contains no cycles, we have that uses each node in at most

twice by Part 6 of Proposition VI.11. We will show that is a

minimal graph cover pseudocodeword. By Part 7 of Proposition

VI.11, is then a minimal LP pseudocodeword of , completing

the proof.

Let be the unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword cor-

responding to , and suppose that

for some rational points

. Pick

such that

for all

. Fix

. Since

,

is an unscaled graph cover

pseudocodeword by [16, Th. 4.4]. Let

be a realiza-

tion of

with covering map

, and let

be the corresponding pseudocodeword subgraph. Using the fact

that any cover of also defines a cycle code along with the

well-known theorem that even graphs decompose into edge-dis-

joint cycles (see, e.g., [20, Th. 1.2.27]), we can see that

must be an edge-disjoint union of cycles in , and hence

for some indecomposable prom-

enades

. Thus

,

where

is the unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword cor-

responding to . We will show that

for each

so that

. Since was arbitrary,

this shows that

all lie on the same ray as , and

so is a minimal graph cover pseudocodeword. Since and

lie on the same ray, we have that is a minimal graph cover

pseudocodeword, as desired.

So, let us show that

for each and . We begin

by observing that

and hence

Since

, we have

, and therefore

. Hence,

(2)

since is minimally realizable on an -cover. However, is where

denotes the multiset obtained by unioning

the degree of a minimal realization of , and hence

,

, and

. Thus,

gives rise to an indecomposable

closed promenade and

, which means that

.

with itself If

times. , then

promenade and

is a cycle. Since each , we must have

is a closed for

We can now prove the main result of this section.

some

. Since is indecomposable, we know

,

Theorem VI.15: Let be the Tanner graph of a cycle code, and so

for all and .

let be its fundamental polytope, and let

. Then is a So assume that

. Then, consists of the edges

minimal LP pseudocodeword of if and only if

for in two cycles

in and

; we will show that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5930

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

for some path in and

. Fix

Proof of Theorem VI.2: We begin by proving the forward

. Since the indecomposable promenade uses twice, direction, namely that if is a minimal LP pseudocodeword then

[7, Proposition 4.9] implies that we can extend to a path such the appropriate list of conditions in Theorem VI.15 is satisfied.

that

up to rotation of , for some indecompos- Suppose that is a minimal LP pseudocodeword. By Theorem

able closed promenades

, where

VI.15, we have that

for some indecomposable closed

a) and are vertex-disjoint, and

promenade in such that

.

b) is internally vertex-disjoint from both and , i.e., If is a trivial minimal LP pseudocodeword, then is a code-

the only shared vertex between and each is the root word, and hence

(i.e., condition (a) is satisfied).

vertex of .

Thus, is minimally realizable on a 1-cover of , and so

Notice that the undirected edges in do not contribute to and

. It follows that is a simple cycle and condition (b) is sat-

so

. Hence, Part 4 of Proposition VI.11 implies isfied.

that any cycle in is a cycle in either or . Since each On the other hand, if is a nontrivial minimal LP pseudocode-

is an indecomposable closed promenade, we know that each word, then is not a codeword, and hence

. Thus,

is nonempty, by Part 3 of Proposition VI.11, and so contains is not minimally realizable on a 1-cover of , and so

.

at least one cycle. However, only contains two cycles, and By the proof of Theorem VI.15, we have that

so we may assume without loss of generality that is contained for some vertex-disjoint simple cycles and and some path

in and is contained in .

that touches

only at its endpoints. Thus, conditions

If the double-edge set

for some

, then we (d) and (e) are satisfied. By Part 8 of Proposition VI.11, is

could again apply Proposition from[7, Proposition 4.9] to some minimally realizable on a 2-cover, and so the variable nodes in

edge

to obtain a walk and vertex-disjoint indecom-

are assigned a value of by

and the vari-

posable closed promenades

such that

. It able nodes on are assigned a value of 1 by

. (Note that

follows that

, where each is nonempty this is not a contradiction since the only nodes that are in both

by Part 3 of Proposition VI.11. Since

are vertex-disjoint, and are check nodes, since is the Tanner graph of a cycle

must have at least two components, contradicting that

code.) In other words, condition (c) is satisfied, and we are done

contains a single cycle. Hence,

for

.

with the forward direction of the proof.

Therefore

for

; without loss of gen- Conversely, suppose

and let

erality, say

. So

, and we

and

. Let be the

have that consists of the edges in . Fix

and subgraph of induced by

and let be the subgraph

. Since is closed and has no backtracking, of induced by

. We wish to show that is a

it cannot be contained in . Hence,

. Pick minimal LP pseudocodeword.

, and suppose, without loss of generality, that

If

(i.e.,

) and is a simple cycle, then we

is on . Then, traverses and has no backtracking or tail, have that

where is an indecomposable closed prome-

and so must traverse all of since is only incident to one nade with

. Hence, is a minimal LP pseudocodeword.

edge of not on . Since is closed, it must traverse all Since

, we have that is a codeword, and hence

of some integer number of times. Similarly, if traverses is a trivial minimal LP pseudocodeword.

any one edge in , then it must traverse all of , and since

On the other hand, suppose that is a union of exactly two

is closed, it must actually traverse all of an even number of vertex-disjoint simple cycles and , and that is a path

times.

joining and that is internally disjoint from and .

For each and , let be the combined number of times that Without loss of generality, assume begins at and

traverses or , and let be the number of times

are rotated in such a way that

is a walk in . Let

traverses . Since has no backtracking and

are each

. Then,

and is an indecomposable closed

incident to only one edge not on themselves, we know that each promenade. By Part 8 of Proposition VI.11, is realizable on

time traverses , it must also traverse either or , and a 2-cover, and hence

. Thus, is a minimal LP pseu-

hence

. Also,

, and so the combined docodeword of by Theorem VI.15. Since

, we have

number of times that traverses or is two and traverses that is nontrivial.

twice. Since the union of the s is equivalent to copies If is an indecomposable closed promenade with

,

of by (2), we have

then is a cycle, and so is a codeword, and we have empty

and a cycle in Theorem VI.2. Similarly, if is an indecom-

posable closed promenade with

, then is minimally

realizable on a 2-cover and we have

, with nota-

and so we must have

for all and .

tion as in Theorem VI.2.

Therefore, each time traverses either or , it also tra-

verses , and so

is a union of

copies of . Since

VII. PSEUDOWEIGHT

is indecomposable, we have

and

, as Consider transmission over either the BSC or the AWGN

desired.

channel, and assume that the all-zeros word is sent. Let be the

Theorem VI.2 now follows from Theorem VI.15.

received vector, and let be the associated cost vector of the LP

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG AND DREHER: GRAPHICAL CHARACTERIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

5931

decoder. The pseudoweight of a pseudocodeword

deter-

mines the probability that

. Hence, the pseudoweight

determines the probability that the LP decoder decides on

rather than .

Though much work was done on the pseudoweight (also

called the effective weight) of computation tree configurations

by Wiberg in [21] and Forney et al. in [10], the pseudoweight

of graph cover pseudocodewords was left largely unexplored

until the work of Vontobel and Koetter in [18] and Kelley and

Sridhara in [15]. In this section, we begin by discussing terms

and results that apply to general parity-check matrices. We then

lower bound the pseudoweight of any noncodeword minimal

LP pseudocodeword of a cycle code over the BSC and the

AWGN channel. Finally, we conclude with the observation

that LP decoding of cycle codes is asymptotically equal to ML

decoding on the AWGN channel for high SNR ratios and on

the BSC for small bit-flipping probabilities.

Definition VII.1 ([15]): Let

be an ele-

ment of

such that each coordinate of is nonnegative.

Without loss of generality, assume that

.

Let be the smallest number such that

The BSC pseudoweight of is

where

is the pseudoweight of and is the fundamental

polytope corresponding to .

In the same way as the minimum weight of a binary linear

code determines the performance under maximum likelihood

decoding, the minimum pseudoweight determines the perfor-

mance under LP decoding [18], [22]. Vontobel and Koetter in

[18, Lemma 41] implies that the minimum pseudoweight always

exists and that it must be attained at a minimal LP pseudocode-

word, when considering the AWGN pseudoweight given above

and the alternate BSC pseudoweight given in [18]. We leave it

as an exercise to show that the same conclusion holds true with

the definition of BSC pseudoweight used herein.

One can check that the pseudoweight of a vector in

coincides with its Hamming weight, and hence

for any parity-check matrix for . A natural ques-

tion to ask is when equality holds, i.e., when is

maxi-

mized? While it is shown in [14] that equality does hold in some

cases, examples are also given in [23] showing that this need not

be the case. Kelley and Sridhara [14] also analyze how many

extra rows must be added to a given parity-check matrix in

order to obtain

, when possible, and show

that if

, then any parity-check matrix for has

. Moreover, they prove the following the-

orem.

Theorem VII.3 ([15, Th. 3.1]): Let be a Tanner graph with

smallest variable node degree and girth . Then,

if if

and the AWGN pseudoweight is

In the case of cycle codes,

and

, and The-

orem VII.3 says that

, and hence

.

It is also shown in [13, Th. 6.3.9] that every bad promenade

From the definition, it is easy to see that pseudoweight is in-

variant under multiplication by positive scalars, and so the pseu-

doweight of a normalized graph cover pseudocodeword in the

fundamental polytope is the same as the pseudoweight of

any corresponding unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword. We

note that although a different measure of pseudoweight over

the BSC has at times been used [18], it is tightly connected

with the notion of pseudoweight given above [5]; in partic-

ular, the other notion of pseudoweight over the BSC is equal

to ours in the case where

is even, and is in the interval

otherwise [5]. In what follows,

we assume that we are transmitting across either the BSC or the

AWGN channel, and we write

for the pseudoweight of a

normalized graph cover pseudocodeword over one of these

two channels.

Similar to the notion of minimum weight for a code is the

notion of minimum pseudoweight, which applies to both the

BSC pseudoweight and the AWGN pseudoweight.

Definition VII.2: The minimum pseudoweight of a code

with parity-check matrix is

(see Section VIII) under min-sum decoding has AWGN pseu-

doweight at least

. Using the characterization of minimal

LP pseudocodewords of given in Theorem VI.2, we can ob-

tain similar results on the minimum pseudoweight of a code and

the pseudoweight of minimal LP pseudocodewords with either

the AWGN channel or the BSC.

Theorem VII.4: Let be the parity-check matrix for a

cycle code and let be the fundamental polytope of .

Then, any nontrivial minimal LP pseudocodeword of

has

over the binary symmetric channel or the

AWGN channel.

Proof: Let be a nontrivial minimal LP pseudocodeword

of . By Theorem VI.2, we know that the following conditions

hold

a)

.

b) With defined to be

, the subgraph

of induced by

is a union of exactly two

vertex-disjoint simple cycles

.

c) With

, the subgraph of

induced by

is a path joining and that

is internally disjoint from and .

Since each of

is a cycle, we know each of

con-

tains at least

variable nodes. Thus,

. Also,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5932

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

since

are vertex disjoint, the path from (c) above must

be nonempty. However, is a cycle code, and thus must begin

and end with check nodes. Therefore,

. Hence,

and we have a strict inequality in the case of the AWGN channel.

Now we consider the BSC in cases. Without loss of gener-

ality, assume that

and let be the smallest

positive integer such that

Fig. 3. An assignment corresponding to an LP pseudocodeword that is not in the orbit of a minimal LP pseudocodeword.

If

, then the first entries of are 1s, so that

. Hence, is the smallest positive integer so that

, i.e.,

. If

, then

. Thus,

.

Otherwise,

, and so

In this case,

. Since

and

are both integers,

implies that

.

Similarly, if

, then

and

.

VIII. COMPARISON OF CHARACTERIZATIONS
The similarity between Theorems III.2 and VI.2 is apparent, though there are important differences. Theorem III.2 classifies all pseudocodewords for cycle codes, yet it does not distinguish between minimal and nonminimal pseudocodewords. On the other hand, the set of minimal pseudocodewords is usually a proper subset of the set containing all the pseudocodewords, as is illustrated in the following example.
Example VIII.1: Let be the cycle code defined by the Tanner graph of Fig. 1. In Example IV.2, the nontrivial LP pseudocodewords were found to be

If

is even, then

and so

. Otherwise,

is odd and

.

Hence,

.

In any case, we have that

.

On the AWGN channel, the asymptotic performance (with re-

spect to SNR ratio) of LP decoding is determined not only by The pseudocodewords

and are minimal pseudocode-

the minimum pseudoweight of a code, but also by the number of words by Theorem VI.2. The vector is not, since it violates

LP pseudocodewords of with that weight [18], [22]. In partic- condition (e) of Theorem VI.2.

ular, the LP decoder and the ML decoder will be asymptotically Although the vector of Example VIII.1 is not minimal, it

equal (for high SNR ratios) when using a code whose nontrivial is in the -symmetry orbit of the minimal pseudocodeword .

minimal LP pseudocodewords all have weight larger than the Indeed, we have that

for

minimum distance. Theorem VII.4 can therefore be used to ob- . Thus, in this example each nontrivial LP pseudocodeword

tain a special case of a result from [22], which shows that, under is either minimal or it is in the orbit of a minimal pseudocode-

certain conditions, LP decoding and ML decoding are asymp- word under the action of -symmetry. A natural question to ask

totically equal. In particular, one can show that the conditions is whether this occurs in general; that is, whether the minimal

of [22, Th. 2] always hold for cycle codes (assuming girth at pseudocodewords “span” all pseudocodewords under the action

least six), and so LP decoding of cycle codes is asymptotically of -symmetry. This is not, however, the case: an LP pseu-

optimal. Theorem VII.4 can also be used to extend this result to docodeword can have four or more simple cycles in the graph

the BSC. On the BSC under the all-zeros assumption, the most induced by the variable nodes assigned a value of one-half and

probable nonzero outputs of the LP decoder are those minimal their neighbors, whereas by condition (d) of Theorem VI.2 a

LP pseudocodewords with pseudoweight , as well as those nontrivial minimal pseudocodeword can have at most two such

with pseudoweight

in the case where

is odd. cycles. Since

, the cycles induced by

Since by our definition any cycle code must have

, the variable nodes assigned one-half are invariant under -sym-

we can deduce from Theorem VII.4 that the only minimal LP metry, and so an LP pseudocodeword with more than two simple

pseudecodewords with pseudoweight or

must be cycles in is not in the orbit of any minimal LP pseudocode-

codewords. From this, it is an easy exercise to show that LP word. The LP pseudocodeword described in Fig. 3 gives a con-

decoding and ML decoding of cycle codes are asymptotically crete example. (It is interesting to note that the pseudocodeword

equal on the BSC in addition to the AWGN channel.

of Fig. 3 is a (real) sum of two minimal LP pseudocodewords.)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AXVIG AND DREHER: GRAPHICAL CHARACTERIZATIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR CYCLE CODES

5933

In [13], a promenade is called bad if uses a node in such that does not lie on any cycle in the subgraph of induced by . Horn shows that bad promenades are related to the failure of the min-sum decoder on cycle codes under the assumption that the all-zeros word is the ML codeword. If is an indecomposable promenade such that the corresponding normalized graph cover pseudocodeword is a nontrivial minimal LP pseudocodeword, then is nonempty and there exists a variable node on that does not lie on a cycle in the subgraph of induced by . Thus, the minimal vertices of that do not correspond to codewords certainly come from bad promenades, though we will see in Example VIII.2 that there are bad promenades that correspond neither to extreme points, i.e., LP pseudocodewords, of nor to minimal pseudocodewords. Example VIII.2: Recall the Tanner graph of Fig. 2. Since is the Tanner graph of a cycle code whose girth is six, a walk may be written uniquely by specifying only the check nodes on the walk and omitting the variable nodes. Consider the following closed promenade on :

cycle codes. These results give simple graphical descriptions of the objects with which they are concerned, aiding in the identification and construction of (minimal) LP pseudocodewords. While these characterizations are similar in nature, we have seen in Section VIII that these two results are distinct, with neither immediately implying the other. Moreover, each is shown to have its own intrinsic value: our characterization of all LP pseudocodewords was used in Section V (and Corollary V.8, in particular) to characterize the minimum degree graph cover necessary to realize an LP pseudocodeword of a cycle code. Applying our characterization of minimal LP pseudocodewords in Section VII, we extended a result from [22], showing that LP decoding and ML decoding of cycle codes agree asymptotically on not only the AWGN channel but also on the BSC.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The results in this paper are taken from the authors’ Ph.D. dissertations [2], [6]. The authors thank their advisor J. L. Walker for her help and insight, as well as the reviewers for their many helpful comments.

Whenever we can write

where and are closed

walks, such a decomposition has either or being tailed.

REFERENCES

Thus, is indecomposable.

The subgraph of induced by is all of . Since and

do not lie on any cycles in , is a bad promenade, in the sense

of Horn [13]. We see that is not a minimal LP pseudocode-

word of the fundamental polytope by Theorem VI.15 since

is a path with two edges, i.e.,

.

Moreover, uses each node of at most twice, and so is

realizable on a 2-cover by [7, Corollary 3.5]. Hence,

. Upon examination, we see that

and

are both closed promenades as well, and

and

Since and are not multiples of each other and , we see that is neither an extreme point of
nor a minimal pseudocodeword.
IX. CONCLUSION
We have provided new graphical characterizations of both the complete set of LP pseudocodewords for cycle codes as well as for the complete set of minimal LP pseudocodewords for

[1] N. Axvig, LP pseudocodewords of cycle codes are half-Integral Dec. 2012 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1212.2953
[2] N. Axvig, “Applications of linear programming to coding theory,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dep. Math., Univ. Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA, 2010.
[3] N. Axvig, D. Dreher, K. Morrison, E. Psota, L. C. Pérez, and J. L. Walker, “Analysis of connections between pseudocodewords,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4099–4107, Sep. 2009.
[4] D. Bertsimas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Introduction to Linear Optimization. Belmont, MA, USA: Athena Scientific, 1997.
[5] A. G. Dimakis, R. Smarandache, and P. O. Vontobel, “LDPC codes for compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 3093–3114, May 2012.
[6] D. Dreher, “Pseudocodewords on graph covers and computation trees,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Math., Univ. Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA, 2010.
[7] D. Dreher, “Cycles in graphs and covers,” SIAM J. Discrete Math., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1797–1819, 2012.
[8] J. Feldman, “Decoding Error-Correcting Codes via Linear Programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2003.
[9] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[10] G. D. Forney, Jr, R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, ser. IMA Volumes Mathematics Applications. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, pp. 101–112.
[11] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[12] N. Halabi and G. Even, “Improved bounds on the word error probability of Ra(2) codes with linear-programming-based decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 265–280, Jan. 2005.
[13] G. A. Horn, “Iterative decoding and pseudocodewords,” PhD dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, 1999.
[14] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “On the pseudocodeword weight and paritycheck matrix redundancy of linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, Sep. 2007, pp. 1–6.
[15] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[16] R. Koetter, W.-C.W Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. L. Walker, “Characterizations of pseudo-codewords of (low-density) parity-check codes,” Adv. Math., vol. 213, pp. 205–229, 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5934

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

[17] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007.
[18] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” Dec. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0512078
[19] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Bounds on the threshold of linear programming decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Punta Del Este, Uruguay, Mar. 2006, pp. 175–179.
[20] D. B. West, Introduction to graph theory. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1996.
[21] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[22] S.-T Xia and F.-W Fu, “Minimum pseudo-codewords of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Chengdu, China, Oct. 2006, pp. 109–113.
[23] J. Zumbrägel, V. Skachek, and M. F. Flanagan, “On the pseudocodeword redundancy of binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 4848–4861, Jul. 2012.

Nathan Axvig was born in Rugby, North Dakota in 1983. He received the B.S. degree in mathematics from the University of North Dakota in 2005 and went on to earn his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees, both in mathematics, from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln in 2007 and 2010, respectively.
In 2010 Dr. Axvig became a faculty member at Virginia Military Institute, where he served as Assistant Professor in the Department of Applied Mathematics for three years. In 2013 he joined the Department of Mathematics at Concordia College in Moorhead, Minnesota. Dr. Axvig’s research interests include coding theory, operations research, and industrial mathematics. He is a member of the Mathematical Association of America (MAA).
Deanna Dreher was born in Saginaw-Bay City, Michigan in 1982. She received the B. S. degree in mathematics from the University of Northern Colorado in 2004. Deanna continued on to earn her M.S. in mathematics in 2005 and her Ph.D. in mathematics with a minor in electrical engineering in 2010, both from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Since 2010, she has remained at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln as a Lecturer in the mathematics department.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:00:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

