2013 IEEE 24th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications: Fundamentals and PHY Track

Informed Dynamic Schedules for LDPC Decoding Using Belief Propagation
Huang-Chang Lee and Yeong-Luh Ueng Dept. of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Abstract—After the publication of the residual beliefpropagation (RBP) algorithm, many low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders using informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) have been investigated. In this paper, we propose the twofold-RBP (T-RBP) decoder that combines two residuals. Using T-RBP, significant improvement can be achieved in both convergence speed and convergence error-rate performance. In addition to T-RBP, the simplified-RBP (S-RBP) decoder is also proposed in order to reduce the complexity. Instead of comparing all the residuals of all edges in the code graph, as with previous IDS decoders, S-RBP only compares the residuals of the edges connected to a single check node, thus dramatically reduces the complexity without any significant degradation in performance. The proposed T-RBP and S-RBP can improve not only the performance of dedicated codes, but also that of punctured codes, especially the convergence speed. The improvement can make punctured LDPC codes more practical and becoming a competitive candidate for the rate compatible applications.
Index Terms— Belief propagation, informed dynamic scheduling, error-control codes, low-density parity-check codes (LDPC).
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] can provide near capacity performance using the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm. When an iterative BP algorithm is applied to the bipartite graph of an LDPC code, the decoding messages are iteratively exchanged between variable nodes and check nodes. The propagation of these messages can be ordered based on a variety of schedules. The most straightforward form of scheduling is flooding, or, equivalently, two-phase message passing. For each iteration of a flooding schedule, all variableto-check (V2C) messages are updated in the first phase, and then all check-to-variable (C2V) messages are updated in the second phase. Instead of updating messages in parallel, as with flooding, layered belief-propagation (LBP) [2][3] and shuffled decoding [4][5] sequentially update the messages in a predetermined and fixed order. Since the information generated in the current iteration can be used to generate extrinsic messages in the same iteration, the error-rate convergence speed can be improved.
In order to further accelerate the convergence speed, messages that can provide the greatest contribution to the decoding process should be updated first. This observation has led to the investigation of the informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategies presented in [6] and [7]. The residual belief propagation (RBP) algorithm presented in [6] is a well-known IDS, where the C2V residual is used to evaluate the importance of messages. The C2V residual is the absolute value of the difference in C2V messages between the current and the next iterations. In RBP, the C2V message with the maximum C2V

residual is updated first, and hence the convergence speed can be accelerated significantly. However, any improvement in the error-rate performance of RBP stops after a few iterations, and hence the convergence error rate of RBP is worse than that of both flooding and LBP. In order to achieve a superior convergence performance, node-wise RBP (NW-RBP), which not only updates the messages with the maximum C2V residual, but also updates all the messages generated by the same check node, was further proposed in [6] and [7].
In addition to the C2V residual, the relative message residual, adopted in Efficient Dynamic Scheduling for LBP (EDSLBP) [11], is generated using the a posterior Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) value of the variable node in the previous and current iterations. For EDS-LBP, the variable node with the maximum relative message residual is indicated, then all the C2V messages generated by the neighboring check nodes of the selected variable node are updated. Other residuals, such as the V2C residual for Variable-to-Check RBP (VC-RBP) [8][9] and Informed Variable-to-Check RBP (IVC-RBP) [10], have been investigated in previous studies.
The residuals adopted in the previous IDS decoders have been generated using the decoding messages from two successive iterations. In other words, these IDS decoders schedule the update of messages according to the change in status of the decoding process between two successive iterations. In this paper, we propose the twofold-RBP (T-RBP) decoder that can determine the decoding schedule based on three successive iterations by using the C2V residual and the relative message residual. First, the variable node with the maximum relative message residual [11], which is generated using the a posterior LLR value of the variable node in the previous and current iterations, will be indicated. Then, for each check node neighboring the indicated variable node, the edge messages with the maximum C2V residual [6], which is generated using the C2V message between the current and next iterations, will be selected and updated. By combining these two kinds of residual, T-RBP can utilize the decoding information generated in the previous, current and next iterations, and hence indicate the most important messages more precisely. As a result, a much faster convergence speed and a better error-rate performance can be achieved compared to all the previous IDS decoders.
In addition to performance, decoding complexity should also be considered. In this paper, simplified-RBP (S-RBP) is also proposed as a technique for reducing decoding complexity, but still maintaining a compatible performance when compared to other IDS decoders. S-RBP can be regarded as a simplified version of RBP, where the message with the maximum C2V residual is selected from a single check node

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:55:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4577-1348-4/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

321

instead of the entire code graph. Since only the residuals in a small part of the code graph, that is, one check node, need to be compared before each update, the decoding complexity can be significantly reduced. In addition to the lower complexity, S-RBP can provide faster convergence than NW-RBP for the first few iterations, and a better error-rate performance than RBP when the number of iteration increases.
For time-varying channels, codes with different rates are desired. Rather than implementing many dedicated codes with different rates, punctured LDPC codes, which can provide a variety of rates using the same mother code, are attractive. However, compared to dedicated LDPC codes, punctured LDPC codes suffer from slower convergence when using flooding or LBP [13], even if the puncturing pattern has been carefully designed according to the methods presented in [12]. In this paper, we will show that when punctured LDPC codes are decoded using either T-RBP or S-RBP schedules, the convergence speed and the convergence error-rate performance can be significantly improved, which makes punctured LDPC codes more practical, and becomes a competitive candidate for applications where rate-compatible multi-rate codes are necessary.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews the BP algorithm and the residuals used in the RBP, NW-RBP and EDS-LBP schedules. Section III introduces the proposed T-RBP and S-RBP decoders. In Section IV, the complexity of different IDS decoders are illustrated, then the convergence speed and error-rate performance of T-RBP and S-RBP for both dedicated codes and punctured codes are evaluated. Finally, Section VI concludes this paper.

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. BP decoding for LDPC codes
A binary LDPC code can be described using a bipartite graph consisting of N variable nodes and M check nodes, where vj denotes the j-th variable node (code bit), and ci denotes the i-th check node (check equation). When the BP algorithm is applied to LDPC codes, the V2C message Lvj→ci that propagates from vj to ci can be calculated according to

Lvj →ci =

mca→vj + Lvj ,

(1)

ca∈N (vj )\ci

where Lvj is the intrinsic LLR of variable node vj, and N (vj) \ ci denotes the neighboring check nodes that connect
to variable node vj, except for ci. The C2V message mci→vj that propagates from ci to vj, is generated according to

mci→vj = 2 × atanh(

tanh(

Lvb →ci 2

)),

(2)

vb∈N (ci)\vj

and N (ci) \ vj denotes the neighbors of ci, excluding vj. Equations (1) and (2) describe the rules for generating
the messages that will be exchanged between neighboring nodes. Several iterations are required before decoding can be completed.

B. Residuals for informed dynamic scheduling
There are two residuals adopted in the proposed IDS decoders presented in this paper. The first is the C2V residual [6], which is used in RBP and NW-RBP. The second is the relative message residual [11], which is used in EDS-LBP. The C2V residual is defined as the magnitude of the difference between the current C2V message mci→vj and the C2V message about to be updated, and can be denoted as:

rC2V (i, j) = |mpcir→e vj − mci→vj |

(3)

where mpcir→e vj is the pre-computation of the next update. In the decoding process for RBP, most of the pre-computation results

are only used for residual computation, but never updated. In

order to reduce the complexity, these pre-computed messages

can be generated by

mcpir→e vj

=

vb∈N (ci)\vj

sgn(Lvb→ci )

vb

min
∈N (ci)\vj

(|Lvb

→ci

|)

(4)

According to the simulation results described in [6], using the

pre-computed C2V messages generated by (4) rather than (2)

induces only a negligible degradation in performance. For the

IDS decoders considered in this paper, all the pre-computed

C2V messages will be generated according to (4), while the

messages that are actually updated will be generated according

to (2).

Relative message residual used in EDS-LBP is defined as

r(vj) =

Lkvj − Lkvj−1 Lkvj + Lvkj−1

(5)

where Lvkj−1 and Lkvj denote the a posterior LLR value of variable node vj before and after the k-th update, respectively. If the variable node vp has the maximum relative message residual, i.e., r(vp) = max{r(vj)|j ∈ {1 · · · N }}, then EDSLBP updates the C2V messages generated by the check nodes neighboring variable node vp. The relative message residual is used to indicate the variable node whose LLR value
was significantly changed during previous two updates. This
significant change in the LLR value means that the variable
node has received an important message, which can mostly
contribute to the decoding process if it can be immediately
propagated through the neighboring check nodes.

III. PROPOSED DYNAMIC SCHEDULES FOR LDPC CODES
A. Proposed T-RBP for performance improvement
The decoding process of T-RBP can be illustrated using a simple code graph, as shown in Fig. 1. First, the relative message residual of each variable node is generated using (5). From Fig. 1(a), suppose that v3 has the maximum relative message residual, and contains the most important message based on the previous and current iterations. Then, for each of the neighboring check nodes of the indicated variable node, c2, c3 and c4, the C2V residuals are generated using (3), then the importance of the C2V messages based on the current and next iterations can be compared. Suppose that mc2→v2 , mc3→v4

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:55:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
322

Fig. 1. The T-RBP decoding process.

Fig. 2. The S-RBP decoding process.

and mc4→v3 are the C2V messages with the maximum C2V residual of c2, c3 and c4, then the messages will be updated, as shown in Figs. 1(b), (c) and (d), respectively.
By combining the relative message residual and the C2V residual, the proposed T-RBP can schedule the update of messages according to the observations from the previous, current and next iterations. All IDS decoders described in the previous literature are only able to utilize the observations based on two consecutive iterations. For example, EDS-LBP examines the a posteriori LLR values of all variable nodes of the previous and the current iterations, and computes relative message residual. On the other hand, RBP and NW-RBP examine the values of all C2V messages of the current and the next iterations, and compute the C2V residual.
Using the twofold residual, the selections for the updated messages in T-RBP can be more precise, and a more efficient decoding schedule can be obtained. The detailed decoding process for T-RBP is described in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Proposed T-RBP
1: Initialize all mc→v = 0 2: Initialize all Lvj→ci = Lj 3: Compute all r(vj) using (5), j ∈ {1 · · · N } 4: Find r(vp)=max{r(vj)|j ∈ {1 · · · N }} 5: for every ca ∈ N (vp) do 6: Generate mcpar→ e vk using (4), vk ∈ N (ca) 7: Compute rC2V (a, k) using (3), vk ∈ N (ca) 8: Find rC2V (a, b)=max{r(mca→vk )|vk ∈ N (ca)} 9: Generate mca→vb using (2), and propagate 10: for every cn ∈ N (vb)\ca do 11: Generate Lvb→cn using (1), and propagate 12: end for 13: end for 14: if The stopping rule is not satisfied then 15: Position=3 16: end if

B. Proposed S-RBP for complexity reduction
The S-RBP can be regarded as a simplified version of RBP, where only the comparisons of the C2V residuals for each check node are required. An example of the S-RBP decoding process is shown in Fig. 2. From Fig. 2(a), it can be seen that rC2V (1, 1) is the largest C2V residual, and so mc1→v1 is updated. As shown in Fig. 2(b), (c) and (d), the messages with the maximum residual of c2, c3 and c4, are mc2→v2 , mc3→v4 and mc4→v3 , and are respectively updated. After the messages with the maximum residual generated by c4, i.e., mc4→v3 , is updated, the process of the comparison of residuals and the update of messages will restart from c1.
For both RBP and NW-RBP, which also use the C2V residual, the maximum C2V residual can be decided after comparing all other residuals in the code graph. As a result, a huge number of comparisons are required. On the other hand, for the proposed S-RBP, the comparisons only take place among the residuals generated by a single check node, and hence the number of required comparisons is almost 1/M that of RBP, where M is the number of check nodes in the code graph. The detailed decoding process for S-RBP is described in Algorithm 2.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Complexity
In this subsection, we evaluate the decoding complexity of an LDPC code consisting of N variable nodes and M check nodes. The total number of edges in the entire code graph is E = d¯v · N = d¯c · M , where d¯c denotes the average degree of check nodes, and d¯v denotes the average degree of variable nodes. Except for the updates of V2C and C2V messages used in conventional flooding and LBP methods, IDS decoders also require pre-computation, generation and comparison of the residuals. Following the computation method used in [7], [10] and [11], the numbers of operations required are presented in Table I. It can be observed that the total number of operations required by T-RBP is equal to the sum of that of EDS-LBP and S-RBP. Moreover, for all IDS decoders using the C2V residual,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:55:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
323

Algorithm 2 Proposed S-RBP 1: Initialize all mc→v = 0 2: Initialize all Lvj→ci = Lj 3: for every ci, i ∈ {1 · · · M } do 4: Generate mcpir→e vk using (4), vk ∈ N (ci) 5: Compute rC2V (i, k) using (3), vk ∈ N (ci) 6: Find rC2V (i, p)=max{r(mci→vk )|vk ∈ N (ci)} 7: Generate mci→vp using (2), and propagate 8: for every cn ∈ N (vp)\ci do 9: Generate Lvp→cn using (1), and propagate 10: end for 11: end for 12: if The stopping rule is not satisfied then 13: Position=3 14: end if
S-RBP requires the lowest number of residual generation and comparison operations.

Fig. 3. Frame error rate vs. number of iterations, where the length-1944 rate-1/2 WiFi [16] code is considered. (Eb/N0=1.75dB)

TABLE I COMPLEXITY TABLE

Schedule RBP
NW-RBP EDS-LBP
T-RBP S-RBP

Pre-computation E(d¯c − 1)(d¯v − 1) E(d¯c − 1)(d¯v − 1)
0
E(d¯c − 1)(d¯v − 1) E(d¯c − 1)(d¯v − 1)

Residual Generation E(d¯c − 1)(d¯v − 1) E(d¯c − 1)(d¯v − 1)
M (d¯c − 1)
M (d¯c − 1) + Ed¯c Ed¯c

Comparison

E(E − 1)

M (E − 1)

(N −1)M d¯v

(N −1)M d¯v

+ Ed¯c

Ed¯c

B. Frame error-rate performance for dedicated codes
In this section, the simulation results for the proposed TRBP and S-RBP decoders in the AWGN channel are compared with other decoding schedules. First, the frame error-rate (FER) performance versus the number of iterations is shown in Fig. 3. When the number of iterations is less than 5, the convergence speed of T-RBP is very close to that of RBP, and provides a much better FER performance than the other decoders. As the number of iterations increases, the error-rate performance of RBP can not continuously improve, and the FER of both T-RBP and S-RBP overtakes that of RBP. The convergence speed of S-RBP is only slower than RBP and TRBP in the first 10 iterations. When the number of iterations increases, S-RBP achieves the best FER performance, except for NW-RBP and T-RBP. Therefore, S-RBP provides a compatible performance with much lower decoding complexity.
The FER performance versus SNR is shown in Fig. 4. In order to emphasize the fast convergence of IDS decoders, the error-rate performance of NW-RBP, T-RBP and S-RBP are evaluated when the number of iterations reaches 15, and are compared to that of both flooding and LBP when the number of iterations reaches 25. It can be observed that the FER of

Fig. 4. Frame error rate vs. Eb/N0, where the length-1944 rate-1/2 WiFi [16] code is considered.
S-RBP is similar to that of NW-RBP, and better than that of both flooding and LBP. As expected, T-RBP achieves the best FER performance, and this advantage is enhanced as the SNR increases.
C. Frame error-rate performance for punctured codes
Following the puncturing patterns proposed in [15], the rate1/2 length-1944 WiFi code is used as the mother code, and is punctured to be a rate-3/4 length-1296 code. Its performance is compared to the dedicated LDPC code in the same standard, whose length and rate are equal to the punctured code.
Since the number of edges for the punctured LDPC code is larger than that of the comparable dedicated LDPC code, a single iteration for both the dedicated code and the punctured code contains a different number of updates. Consequently, the error rate versus the number of updates for both punctured and dedicated codes rather than the number of iterations, are shown in Fig. 5. It can be observed that, when the LBP decoder is used, the punctured code has a much slower convergence

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:55:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
324

a much better convergence error-rate performance compared to RBP without sacrificing the convergence speed. On the other hand, by reducing the number of comparisons, S-RBP can balance the error-rate performance and decoding complexity, and still retain a faster convergence speed than NW-RBP in a limited number of iterations. When these two schedules are applied to punctured LDPC codes, the convergence speed and convergence error-rate performance can be improved significantly compared to when only using LBP, making punctured LDPC codes more practical and becoming a competitive candidate for applications where rate compatibility is necessary.

Fig. 5. Frame error rate vs. number of updates, where the rate-3/4 length-1296 punctured and dedicated WiFi [16] codes are considered. (Eb/N0=2.75dB)
Fig. 6. Frame error rate vs. Eb/N0, where the rate-3/4 length-1296 punctured and dedicated WiFi [16] codes are considered.
speed than the dedicated code, but can achieve a better convergence error-rate performance when the number of updates is large enough. When IDS decoders are used, the convergence speed for the punctured code can be significantly improved, especially when the T-RBP decoder is used. As a result, the TRBP and S-RBP decoders can recover the punctured variable nodes more efficiently than the LBP decoder.
Fig. 6 shows the related FER performances for both the dedicated code and the punctured code. The number of iterations for the dedicated code and the punctured code is set to 40 and 25, respectively, such that the total number of updates for these two codes are similar. It can be seen that, the proposed IDS decoders, especially the proposed T-RBP strategy enables the punctured LDPC code to provide a better FER performance at high SNR levels compared to the dedicated code.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architechture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), pp. 107-112, Oct. 2004.
[3] Y.-L. Wang, Y.-L. Ueng, C.-L. Peng, and C.-J. Yang, “Processing-task arrangement for a low-complexity full-mode WiMAX LDPC Codec,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, Vol.58, No. 2, pp. 415-428, Feb. 2011.
[4] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Annual Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., pp. 8-15, Nov. 2002.
[5] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, K.-C. Wang, and C.-J. Chen, “A multi-mode shuffled iterative decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, Vol.57, No. 10, pp. 27902803, Oct. 2010.
[6] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Glasgow, UK, Jun. 2007.
[7] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470-3479, Dec. 2010.
[8] J.-H. Kim, M.-Y. Nam, and H.-Y. Song, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes,” Electronics Letters, IET., vol. 45, no. 2, Jan. 2009.
[9] Z.-X. Wang, X.-C. Wang, X.-Q. Yu, and D. Guo, “A BP decoding algorithm based on nodes residual for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Conferences WCNIS, pp. 124-127, Aug. 2010.
[10] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Ye, and G. Han, “Efficient informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, Oct. 2011.
[11] G. Han; X. Liu, “An efficient dynamic schedule for layered beliefpropagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp: 950-952, Dec. 2009.
[12] J. Ha and S. McLaughlin, “Optimal puncturing distributions for rate compatible low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Inter. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), pp. 233, Jun. 2003.
[13] D. Klinc, J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes for Ultra Wide Band systems,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, St. Louis, U.S.A., Nov. 2005, pp. 38563860.
[14] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, vol. 52, pp. 728-738, Feb. 2006.
[15] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “A high-throughput LDPC decoder architecture with rate compatibility,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems I, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 839-847, Apr. 2011.
[16] IEEE 802.11 Wireless LANs WWiSE Proposal: High throughput extension to the 802.11 standard. IEEE 11-04-0886-00-000n.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, T-RBP and S-RBP decoders have been proposed. Combining two different residuals, T-RBP can achieve

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:55:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
325

