IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

6049

The Approximate Maximum-Likelihood Certificate
Idan Goldenberg and David Burshtein, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The confidence in the reliability of a codeword output by some (not necessarily optimal) decoding algorithm is discussed. A new property which relies on the linear programming (LP) decoder, the approximate maximum-likelihood certificate (AMLC), is introduced to address this issue as follows. First, the channel output vector is decoded by some symmetric decoder , e.g., belief propagation or min-sum algorithm decoding. Second, the channel output vector is decoded by LP decoding. Third, if the decoding result of is a codeword, its LP value is compared to the LP value of the LP decoding result (the latter need not be a codeword). If these two values are close, the AMLC holds. Using upper bounding techniques, we show that the conditional frame error probability given that the AMLC holds, is with some degree of confidence below a threshold. In channels with low noise, this threshold is orders of magnitude lower than the simulated frame error rate, and our bound holds with a very high degree of confidence. This is in stark contrast with standard Monte Carlo simulation, which would require excessively long runs to demonstrate like performance. When the AMLC holds, our approach thus provides the decoder with extra error detection capability, which is especially important in applications requiring high data integrity.
Index Terms—Linear programming (LP) decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, maximum likelihood (ML) decoding, minimum distance, upper bounds on error probability.
I. INTRODUCTION
L INEAR programming (LP) decoding has emerged in recent years as a potential candidate for approximating maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. One reason for this is that it has been shown [1] that LP decoding has the ML certificate property, i.e., that if the decoder outputs a valid codeword, it is guaranteed to be the ML codeword.
Since the discovery of LP decoding, much research has been done on the subject of improving the performance of the decoder, e.g., by using integer programming or mixed integer LP [1], [2], adding constraints to the Tanner graph [3] and guessing facets of the polytope [4]. Moreover, the issue of decoding complexity has been addressed [5]–[7], as the complexity of LP techniques is in general polynomial but not linear in the block length . Vontobel and Koetter [5] have proposed an iterative, Gauss-Seidel-type algorithm for approximate LP decoding.
Manuscript received May 02, 2011; revised July 10, 2012; accepted May 06, 2013. Date of publication May 16, 2013; date of current version August 14, 2013. This work was supported by the Israel Science Foundation under Grant 772/09. This paper was presented at the 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: idang@eng.tau.ac.il; burstyn@eng.tau.ac. il).
Communicated by P. O. Vontobel, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2013.2263462

Based on their general approach, a linear-complexity (

)

iterative approximate decoder [8] for low-density parity-check

(LDPC) codes was suggested.

This low-complexity LP decoder was recently put to use in

a framework [9] aimed at harnessing the LP decoder for tasks

other than decoding. In this context, an algorithm with com-

plexity

was proposed which produces a lower bound on

the minimum distance of a specific code. Another use proposed

in [9] is an algorithm of the same complexity for finding a tight

lower bound on the fractional distance.

In this paper, we propose a new application for using the LP

decoder by introducing a new concept, the approximate max-

imum-likelihood certificate (AMLC), a tool which can improve

the error detection capability of any symmetric decoder (the

class of symmetric decoders includes, e.g., the standard sum-

product algorithm or belief propagation (BP) decoder) operating

on a codeword of a binary linear code transmitted through a

memoryless, binary input output-symmetric (MBIOS) channel.

We show that if decoder outputs a codeword that satisfies

the AMLC property, then there is a high degree of certainty

that it is the correct codeword. It is demonstrated that, when

applying this technique to LDPC codes within the error floor

region, the frame error rate (FER) conditioned on the AMLC

is several orders of magnitude lower than the average rate (the

average rate in the error floor region was previously studied by

Richardson [10]); ascertaining this improved reliability directly

using Monte Carlo simulations would require very long simu-

lation runs. This makes the AMLC especially useful in applica-

tions where a high level of data integrity is required.

The LP decoder is a central component in the evaluation

of the AMLC. Another component used in our analysis is an

upper bound on the ML decoding error probability expressed

in terms of the distance spectrum. In this paper, we use a

slightly modified version of the generalized second version of

the Duman–Salehi bound (the original version was proposed

by Shamai and Sason [11]).

This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides some

background material, related primarily to the LP decoder. In

Section III, we prove our main result concerning the AMLC. In

Section IV, numerical examples are provided. The results of the

paper as well as some implications are discussed in Section V.

The paper is concluded in Section VI.

II. PRELIMINARIES

Consider an ensemble of binary linear codes of block

length . From this ensemble a code is chosen uniformly at

random. Denote the (chosen code) random variable by ,

where is a random variable taking on a value within the

set

. We use or to denote a realization of

the random code selection. Following the notation in [1], let

and be the sets of variable and constraint nodes in the

0018-9448 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Tanner graph representation of , respectively, and denote

. Define the set to be the set of neighbors of

variable node

. Similarly, is the set of neighbors

of check node

. Denote by the constituent binary

single parity-check code corresponding to node

. Given

a code realization , the message to be transmitted is a

random variable uniformly distributed over

.

For

, let be the th codeword, with

its th bit denoted by . In particular, the codewords are

numbered such that is the all-zero codeword, i.e.,

.A

codeword

is transmitted over an MBIOS channel

described by a probability transition function

, where

is the transmitted code-bit and is the channel output. We will

also use the notation

to describe the vector channel

where appropriate. The channel symmetry implies that for the

th transmitted bit

and where (6)
and

is the log-likelihood ratio. All logarithms are natural. Note that

the constraints (3)–(5) imply that

.

An important observation is that the LP decoder has the ML

certificate property in the sense that if the solution is inte-

gral then it is the ML codeword.

Note that is a random variable which also depends on .

For the ease of reading and with a slight abuse of notation, we

did not mention this dependence explicitly. Also note that both

and are functions of and .

Let be some decoding algorithm, and let

be the decoded vector when using algorithm

. We allow to be a noncodeword vector (e.g., a pseu-

docodeword) and do not require to make a decision, i.e.,

failure is declared if

, though in our analysis we will

be primarily interested in cases where

.

Definition 1 (Decoder Symmetry): Let be the result of

transmitting some codeword through a symmetric channel. A

decoding algorithm is called symmetric if it satisfies

(1)

for all ,

, and

. Here,

is a vector derived from the

codeword and the multiplication

is component-

wise.

Note that this definition of decoder symmetry includes a

broad range of decoders, including BP, min-sum algorithm,

and various other iterative message passing decoders [12], the

optimal ML decoder, and also the LP decoder [1].

The LP decoder [1] for a general binary linear code solves the

following optimization problem:

(2)

III. APPROXIMATE ML CERTIFICATE PROPERTY: DEFINITION, ANALYSIS, AND CONSEQUENCES

In this section, we introduce the AMLC property. It is shown

that if this property holds then the decoding error probability can

be upper bounded. This upper bound holds with a certain confi-

dence level. We begin by defining the basic AMLC property. In

Section III-A, we derive a lower bound on the confidence level

with which our bound holds. In Section III-B, we complete the

derivation of the bound. The application of this bound to expur-

gated ensembles of LDPC codes is discussed in Section III-C,

which leads to the statement of our main result in Section III-D.

Definition 2 (The Approximate ML Certificate): Let be the

code used for transmission, and

be some constant. Sup-

pose that the channel output vector is fed to the decoding al-

gorithm resulting in the output , and that is also fed to

the LP decoder, resulting in the output . If the conditions

(7) (8)

both hold, then is said to satisfy the approximate maximum-

likelihood certificate (AMLC) property. The difference in the

LHS of (8) is called the proximity gap. We denote the fulfillment

of the AMLC property by

, where

(9)

subject to

By (7), is a codeword and hence feasible in the LP. Consequently, we have

where the vector is defined by

(3)

(10)

(4) and one may conclude that the proximity gap has to be nonnegative. If the proximity gap is zero, then has to be the ML
(5) codeword. This follows from the standard ML certificate of the LP decoder. By the fact that is a codeword, we have similarly to (10)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(11)

GOLDENBERG AND BURSHTEIN: THE APPROXIMATE MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD CERTIFICATE

6051

If the AMLC property holds for , then by (8) and (11) we conclude that
(12)
Now, if the AMLC holds, then the word error probability can be upper bounded as

For

, the following inequality holds:

(15)

since the RHS is an upper bound on the tail of a binomial distri-

bution. Now suppose that in a Monte Carlo simulation we obtain

with

. By (15) we observe that if is

very small, then the RHS of (15) is also very small, and thus we

can reject with a high degree of confidence. Conversely, if

in our simulation is close to 0.5, we cannot reject with high

confidence.

Define

(16)

Given the Monte Carlo result discussed above, one may conclude that (13)

where in the first inequality we used the fact that

(17)

which reflects the assertion

in (13). This assertion holds

is a necessary condition for decoding failure given that the

AMLC holds (as follows from (12)), and in the equality we used

the fact that

and

.

Note that in (13), the numerator depends on the channel prob-

ability transition function, while the denominator depends on

the channel and also on the decoding algorithm . We can

further upper bound the expression (13) by upper-bounding the

numerator and lower-bounding the denominator.

with confidence level

. Note that for fixed , the likeli-

hood that the bound (17) does not hold decays exponentially

with .

In effect, what we have done so far was to say that

holds with a high level of confidence provided by a simulation.

In a more general context, it should be noted that this is exactly

what every Monte Carlo simulation does, i.e., it gives a confi-

dence interval on the true error rate. As an example, an empirical

error rate of, say,

if achieved on

experiments

A. Lower Bound on the Denominator

provides a high-confidence level that the true error rate is less than , and an even greater confidence level that the error

To get a lower bound on the denominator of (13), one could rate is less than 0.5. A similar argument will be used in the se-

use Monte Carlo simulations. Consider a series of experiments quel to show that the upper bound on the decoding error prob-

conducted to estimate

. In ability conditioned on the AMLC property holds with a very

each experiment, we draw a code at random from the code high-confidence level.

ensemble , transmit a randomly selected codeword over We also note that the series of experiments described above

the noisy channel and decode using algorithm and the LP can be conducted assuming that the all-zero codeword is trans-

decoder. Suppose that we run experiments and find that mitted if all codes in the ensemble have the same coding rate.

in experiments. Let

This is stated in the following lemma.

Lemma 1: Consider the vector which is output by the LP

decoder. Also assume that all codes in have the same number

of codewords and that the symmetric decoding algorithm is

used. Then, we have

where if in the th experiment

, then

; otherwise

. If the channel is low noise then

we would expect to have

with small , and in

(18)

particular we would expect to have

, which (for large )

would imply

. Since is a deterministic but unknown meaning that in the denominator of (13) it can be assumed that

parameter, we cannot claim that

, even if is small; the all-zero codeword is transmitted.

rather, this situation falls under the framework of non-Bayesian hypothesis testing, so the series of experiments does allow us to say something about with some degree of confidence. Consider the hypothesis

Proof: See Appendix A. Obviously, the assumption of the all-zero codeword can simplify the simulation to some extent. To use this assumption, the constant-rate property must hold. Examples of ensembles fulfilling this property include standard parallel concatenated

(14) Turbo codes as well as systematic accumulate-based codes. In

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

the sequel, we consider ensembles of LDPC codes which do not

satisfy this assumption [thus we will not make the conditioning

on

as in (18)]. However, LDPC codes in general do ex-

hibit the phenomenon of rate concentration—most codes in an

LDPC code ensemble have rate equal to the design rate. Thus,

for such an ensemble we have

(23)

where

is the actual rate of the chosen code and is the

design rate of the LDPC code ensemble. For a highly concen-

trated ensemble (LDPC or otherwise), the first term is dominant,

and thus gives a good approximation to . One may use Lemma

1 for the evaluation of this term since it refers to a constant-rate

subensemble.

B. Upper Bound on the Numerator
Consider now the RHS of (17) (disregarding the constant 2). Recalling that is chosen at random from , one may write

where the expression on the first line, which holds for all

, is an adaptation of the 1965 Gallager bound [13] to our pur-

poses, and

is a probability measure on called a tilting

measure [11], which is allowed in general to depend on the

transmitted codeword (here we assume

was transmitted,

hence the subscript 0). The tilting measure is an arbitrary prob-

ability measure which is subject to optimization. By invoking

Jensen’s inequality in (23), we obtain

where Clearly,

(19) which holds for

(24) . Now let us restrict our

discussion to tilting measures which do not depend on the trans-

mitted codeword and which also decompose as -fold products

(20) of the same single-letter measure, i.e.,

where

Also recall that the channel is memoryless and thus its transition probability function also decomposes as an -fold product. Using this in (24) yields

(21)

We have the following result.

Lemma 2: For any

, the expression

in (21) is independent of .

Proof: See Appendix B. Due to Lemma 2, we can rewrite (19) as

(25)

(22) Shamai and Sason [11] have proposed a tight upper bound on the ML decoding error probability using the generalized second version of the Duman–Salehi bound, referred to as the DS2 bound. Using a slightly modified version of this bound, we can find an upper bound on . To this end, one may write

where is the distance spectrum of the code . Now we partition the code into constant Hamming weight subcodes where
contains all words in of weight plus the all-zero codeword (note that in general these subcodes are nonlinear). By applying a union bound over the subcodes on the LHS of (25) we obtain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(26)

GOLDENBERG AND BURSHTEIN: THE APPROXIMATE MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD CERTIFICATE

6053

where by (25)

are also in . To do this, we use the procedure described in [9,

Sec. 5] which obtains a lower bound

on the minimum

distance of the randomly drawn code

. If

,

then

. Note, however, that the converse is not necessarily

true, i.e., we could have

but with

. Define

the ensemble

(27)

(31)

Let and

denote the averages of the distance distribu-

tion and

, respectively, taken over the ensemble . By

Jensen’s inequality (applied as

),

we have

(28)

Then, clearly

. Let be the average distance spectrum

over . We will obtain an upper bound on which is identical

to (30) using a Monte Carlo approach, the argument for doing

so being similar to that made in Section III-A. Suppose we run

experiments. In each experiment, we randomly pick a code

and calculate

. Now suppose that in

experiments we obtain that

, and

is

small. From this set of experiments, we conclude, similar to

Section III-A that

(32)

The overall bound is given by

with high-confidence level.

Consider the following procedure for obtaining a bound on

the confidence level of (28)–(29) when [upper-bounded in

(29) The bound (28)–(29) only depends on the average ensemble distance spectrum, which is known for many code ensembles and in particular for LDPC codes. One may obtain the tightest

(32)] is used as the distance spectrum. The confidence level

output by this algorithm is a combination of the confidence level

associated with

(see Section III-A) and the statement

(32). That is, the null hypothesis in this case is

bound in this family by optimizing over , , and . This

optimization is performed for every value of in the sum (29)

(33)

separately. Some additional technical details regarding this op-

timization are provided in Appendix C.

Algorithm 1: Given an ensemble of codes , a probability

transition function

and number of trials , do

C. Application of the AMLC to Expurgated LDPC Ensembles

Consider the expurgated LDPC code ensemble , which is

obtained from the original ensemble by removing all codes

with minimum distance or less. The reason one should deal

with this ensemble rather than with is that the decoding error

probability over is dominated [14], [15] by a small set of

“bad” codes with small minimum distance; we will show that

if we can avoid these “bad” codes, then the occurrence of the

AMLC implies very low error rates.

Let denote the average distance spectrum over . It was

shown in [15] that if

is selected small enough, then with

probability

,1 a randomly selected code from is

also in . This implies that for large enough (such that the

expurgation process removes less than half of the codes) the

following bound holds:

1) Initialize: Set

.

2) Loop times:

• Pick a code uniformly from .

• Calculate

using the procedure described in [9,

Sec. 5].

• If

,

and skip to next loop

iteration.

• Transmit a random codeword from through the

channel.2

• Decode using the decoder and the LP decoder.

• If the output is not a codeword, or if

, set

.

3) Output confidence level of bound. Define

. If

, output

is defined in (16). Otherwise, output

“error.”

Algorithm 1 is designed for the purpose of jointly assessing

.

(30)

When using the DS2 bound we can plug (the upper bound (30)
on) instead of into (28). In practice, when applying the Monte Carlo procedure outlined in Section III-A, we draw codes at random from and thus we need to test whether these codes

1

as

.

the possibility of rejecting the hypothesis (14), and the validity

of (32) as an upper bound on the distance spectrum using the

same confidence level-based Monte Carlo-based method from

Section III-A. The algorithm counts the number of failed at-

tempts out of experiments, where a failure consists of either

having a code not pass the test

, or, having passed

2As mentioned in Section III-A, if the ensemble is nearly constant rate, one may use the all-zero codeword with small effect on the results.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

this test, getting an output from decoder which does not sat-

isfy the AMLC. The algorithm is correct because if the null hy-

pothesis (33) holds, then in any single experiment we would

have a probability of failure of at least 0.5. If the total number

of failures is small (i.e., less than half the total number of ex-

periments) then the confidence level, following the derivation

in Section III-A, is output. On the other hand, if

, the

result is deemed unreliable.

D. Statement of the Main Result

The analysis in this section leads to the following result.

Theorem 1: Consider the transmission of a codeword from

an LDPC code drawn at random from the ensemble over an

MBIOS channel. Fix the proximity gap

and the expur-

gation depth

. Then the probability of frame error when

using symmetric decoding algorithm given that the AMLC

(7)–(8) holds is upper-bounded by (28)–(29). This bound holds

with confidence level

which can be obtained using the

Monte Carlo experiments, as detailed in Algorithm 1.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Fig. 1. Comparison between the simulated frame error rate of the BP decoder,

the LP decoder, and the DS2 bound (29), assuming the AMLC, for the (3,4)-

regular LDPC code ensemble of block length

and various values of

. Transmission is over the BSC.

A. Comparison With Belief Propagation Fig. 1 shows a comparison between the FER obtained by a

TABLE I CONFIDENCE LEVEL BOUNDS FOR DIFFERENT VALUES OF AND

simulation of the BP decoder over the binary symmetric channel

(BSC) and the DS2 bound (29), calculated for various values

of . As a reference, we also include the FER obtained by the

LP decoder. The BP decoder which satisfies the symmetry con-

dition (1) plays the role of decoding algorithm outlined in

the previous section. In this example, we consider the ensemble

of (3,4)-regular LDPC codes with block length

.

Each code drawn from is used for a single transmission. In

the simulation, the BP decoder performs 100 parallel decoding

iterations. For the calculation of the DS2 bound and the distance

spectrum, we use

as the expurgation depth. We note that

when the BP and the LP decoders converged to a codeword, it

was always the correct codeword. Also, in the simulation codes

probability given that the AMLC holds for

, is by (29)

(with very high confidence) lower than

, which is about

1000 times lower than the simulated BP FER at

. In

the second experiment, both the BP and LP decoders succeeded

in decoding all transmissions, and thus in Algorithm 1 we ob-

tain

. This puts the confidence level of all the DS2 bound

curves in Fig. 1 at an extremely high level3 of

with minimum distance 2 were avoided, and thus the simulation results which reflect a random selection over are better than

(34)

the actual performance over . The reason for this is as follows.

Checking that a randomly chosen code has minimum distance at

least 2 is a computationally easy task. However, verifying that

a code has minimum distance at least using the

proce-

dure is computationally intensive. Therefore, in the simulation

we use codes after verifying they belong to , which ensures

better performance than codes drawn from . In fact, in the set

of experiments described next, we have seen that most codes in

fact belong to for

.

We conducted two experiments to determine the confidence

level of the bound in Fig. 1, using Algorithm 1. In the first exper-

iment, 150 randomly generated codes were tested over a BSC

with crossover probability

. In the second experiment,

600 randomly generated codes were tested over a BSC with

. In both experiments, all the codes belonged to the en-

semble (

). The results of the first experiment are sum-

marized in Table I. These results indicate that in this case, the

null hypothesis (33) can be rejected with very high-confidence

level even for

. Consequently, the conditional frame error

In this case, the conditional frame error probability given that

the AMLC holds is more than five orders of magnitude smaller

than the simulated FER (the difference between the BP curve

and the

curve for

). The confidence level in this

case is also much higher than in the first experiment. Due to

the high-confidence levels observed in the first experiment with

, the confidence level result of the second experiment

with

is not surprising, and in general we expect the

confidence level to increase as the channel noise level decreases.

As an alternative scenario, we consider the

-regular

LDPC code ensemble of length

transmitted over the

binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

The BP decoder is again compared to the DS2 bound, and the

results appear in Fig. 2. In the simulation, we have avoided

codes with minimum distance 2. As in the previous scenario,

3In this experiment, even if we had encountered a small number of failed

attempts the confidence level would still be very close to 1. This close proximity

of the confidence level

to 1 is insensitive to small variations of when

is large enough.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GOLDENBERG AND BURSHTEIN: THE APPROXIMATE MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD CERTIFICATE

6055

Fig. 2. Comparison between the simulated frame error rate of the BP decoder,

the LP decoder, and the DS2 bound (29), assuming the AMLC, for the (3,6)-

regular LDPC code ensemble of block length

and various values of

. Transmission is over the binary-input AWGN channel.

Fig. 3. Empirical behavior of proximity gap in the BSC with

. Upper

plot: Histogram of proximity gaps excluding cases corresponding to zero prox-

imity gap. Lower plot: Cumulative histogram of proximity gaps. In both plots,

each bin has width 0.1.

each randomly drawn code was used once and the LP and BP gap, and the lower plot shows the corresponding cumulative

decoders never converged to a codeword which was the wrong histogram. Due to scaling considerations, in the upper plot we

codeword. The expurgation depth used in this experiment is have excluded all cases corresponding to zero proximity gap.

. For

, the gap between the empirical BP After this exclusion, we draw the histogram where each bin has

FER and the DS2 bound with

is about three orders of width 0.1. It is apparent from the upper plot that the empirical

magnitude. In order to assess the confidence level in this case, rate of occurrence of large proximity gap values decays as the

we ran Algorithm 1 with

experiments. The algorithm proximity gap grows, which is not surprising. From the lower

yielded no failed attempts, which corresponds to a confidence plot, one can clearly see the tradeoff between the selection of the

level of

. As is evident from the plot, the proximity gap value, which affects the conditional upper bound

FER can be certified (with huge confidence) to be much lower on the decoding error probability, and the empirical probability

than the simulated error rate if the AMLC holds.

of fulfilling the AMLC condition. In particular, it can be seen

It is well known that ensembles of LDPC codes produced by that for

, our results can be used with

(i.e., zero

parity-check matrices do not have constant rate. However, for proximity gap) about 70% of the time. If one allows a proximity

the two ensembles considered in Figs. 1 and 2 we ran an experi- gap of

, the probability of satisfying the AMLC rises to

ment where the actual rate of codes from each ensemble was over 95%.

measured. In all cases the rate was identical to the design rate. When considering lower values of , the situation is much

The fact that these ensembles are nearly constant rate suggests improved. For

, Fig. 4 shows the same histograms as

that (see the argument at the end of Section III-A) one may use in Fig. 3. This improvement in the frequency of the occurrence

Lemma 1, i.e., assume transmission of the all-zero codeword of the AMLC is not surprising. For the case

, after

for purposes of testing whether the AMLC holds—as we have running experiments, there were only 50 events of nonzero

in producing the results in this section—with negligible effect proximity gap, so the empirical probability of not fulfilling the

on the results.

AMLC condition with

was

in this case.

B. On the Frequency of AMLC Occurrence

Note that the less noise there is in the channel, the more effective and useful the AMLC becomes. Our experimental re-

The results of Figs. 1 and 2 appear promising, because they sults indicate that it benefits both in the sense that the frequency

indicate that if indeed the AMLC holds, the error probability can of occurrence of the AMLC increases (even for small values of

be virtually guaranteed to be low. From a practical standpoint, ), and also that the confidence level of the upper bound on the

however, an essential question is how often the AMLC holds in decoding error probability conditioned on the AMLC property

practice. After all, the error detection provided by this method increases—again, enabling one to use smaller values of .

would not be of much practical use if there were many situations The natural conclusion is that the error detection capability

where

but

.

provided by the AMLC could be especially useful in data appli-

Fig. 3 shows the empirical behavior of the proximity gap, cations requiring high reliability, where a codeword should be

which serves to indicate the frequency at which the AMLC rejected unless we can certify that it is the correct codeword with

holds. The figure relates to the previously described experiment high probability. Obviously, achieving codeword reliability re-

with the BP decoder over the BSC (see Fig. 1), where

. sults of the sort we have demonstrated via simple Monte Carlo

The upper plot shows the empirical histogram of the proximity simulation would require very long simulation runs, especially

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

Fig. 4. Empirical behavior of proximity gap in the BSC with

. Upper

plot: Histogram of proximity gaps excluding cases corresponding to zero prox-

imity gap. Lower plot: Cumulative histogram of proximity gaps. In both plots,

each bin has width 0.1.

which must be nonnegative. One can then analyze the prob-

ability that is not the transmitted codeword conditioned

on knowledge of

by following the footsteps of the

derivation in Section III. The only drawback of this genie-

aided approach is that it is impractical to implement (we

do not know the ML codeword). So one way of looking

at our result is that we use a suboptimal but practical genie

which uses as a substitute for . As we have shown,

exploiting the information provided by this genie leads to

extra error detection capability.

2) AMLC for other ensembles. The fundamental principle be-

hind the AMLC result is very general. It can be applied to

any LP formulation, as in the case of the standard ML cer-

tificate. In particular, the LP program proposed by Feldman

[17] for general Turbo codes can be used in conjunction

with standard iterative decoding schemes to achieve better

error detection. Consider, for example, standard parallel

concatenated Turbo codes which are a special case of the

general concatenated codes in [17]. For these codes good

performance bounds can be obtained even without expur-

gation (see, e.g., [11, Fig. 2]), i.e., one can use in the

for channels with low noise. In fact, our technique for upper bounding the FER given that the AMLC property holds, has a common feature with the importance sampling method, since both attempt to alleviate the computational burden associated with simple Monte Carlo simulation. Using the AMLC thus provides an alternative to external error-detection codes, such as cyclic redundancy checks, which cause some coding rate loss.

V. DISCUSSION

We note the following additional points.

1) Connection to other notions of classic decoding. The

AMLC can be related to the optimality condition [16, Ch.

10.3] based on the so-called correlation discrepancy. The

latter is a sufficient condition for ML optimality of a given

codeword which is obtained under a slightly different

setting than the one we consider. Naturally, ML optimality

can also be guaranteed by the AMLC when

is

used (the normal ML certificate). The difference is that

even when the proximity gap is nonzero, we are still able

to give an informative bound on the error probability.

Another crucial difference is that our criterion is practical

to implement, whereas the method in [16, Ch. 10.3] is

in general prohibitively complex for codes of medium to

large block lengths.

The definition of the set

can also be

related to the concept of genie-aided decoding. The set

can be thought of as a list of the most

likely codewords, i.e., the codewords whose likelihood

function is at distance at most from the LP optimum.

Ideally, the LP optimum would also be the ML optimum

and in this case

would be nonempty for

any

. Indeed, one can envision a genie which has

knowledge of the ML codeword . Upon receiving a

codeword output by decoder the genie returns

DS2 bound, rather than . As noted in Section III-C,

even though LDPC codes have a typical minimum distance

which is linear in the block length, the average ensemble

error probability under ML decoding is dominated by a

small set (of size inverse polynomial with the block length)

of codes with small minimum distance [14], [15], and thus

one must expurgate to get good performance bounds. In

other words, expurgation is very helpful when dealing with

ML-based bounds related to LDPC code ensembles but

is not crucial in the case of parallel concatenated Turbo

codes.

Nonbinary LDPC codes are another application which

could benefit from applying the AMLC. For purposes of

LP decoding, one can use the LP formulation proposed

by Flanagan et al. [18], together with suitable definitions

of decoder (and channel) symmetry, under which the

definition of the AMLC may be extended to the nonbinary

case. An extension of the DS2 bound to the nonbinary

case can be found in [19].

3) Computational cost. The error detection capability implied

by the AMLC requires online processing, due to the extra

LP decoder which is applied at the receiver in addition to

the main decoding algorithm, . We note that in the case

of LDPC codes, this extra decoder can be implemented in

linear time [8]. There is also a one-time task of computing

the confidence level, which can be performed offline. The

computational complexity of calculating the lower bound

[9] on the minimum distance

is quadratic in the

block length. Assuming that decoder has complexity at

most quadratic in the block length, the task of obtaining

a confidence level using Algorithm 1 is performed with

complexity

, where is the number of simulated

blocks.

4) Parameter selection. It is possible to tune the AMLC re-

sult to obtain different error rates and confidence levels by

varying the value of the proximity gap limit and the ex-

purgation depth . Higher values of will produce higher

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GOLDENBERG AND BURSHTEIN: THE APPROXIMATE MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD CERTIFICATE

6057

values of the DS2 bound (this is evident from Fig. 1), but

on the other hand will increase the confidence level (as can

be seen in Table I), as the requirement (8) becomes more

lax. Higher values of will yield lower values of the DS2

bound. This, however, comes at the expense of a lower

confidence level because while running Algorithm 1 more

codes will be rejected as having low minimum distance.

5) Ensembles versus specific codes. One may observe that

in the example from the previous section, the AMLC re-

sult is applied to a random selection of a code from an

ensemble. In many applications, it would be desirable to

apply the AMLC result to a specific code rather than an

ensemble. The difficulty is that while ensemble averages

of distance spectra are typically known or can be easily

upper-bounded, for specific codes this is not the case in

general. Naturally, if one obtains for a specific code the

exact distance spectrum (or an upper bound), it is straight-

forward to plug it in the DS2 bound (28)–(29). Another

alternative is to use known concentration results [20], [21]

for the distance spectrum which enable one to give upper

bounds on the distance spectrum of a specific code, which

themselves hold with some confidence level. This confi-

dence level can be integrated with our confidence bound

. The result would be a looser bound [as compared

to (28)–(29)] which applies with confidence level worse

than

, but it would apply to specific codes.

6) Long LDPC codes. The AMLC is not easily implemented

for ensembles of LDPC codes with large block length.

The reason is that the computational complexity of cal-

culating the lower bound on the minimum distance (see

item 3 above), which is required to evaluate the confi-

dence level (see Algorithm 1), scales quadratically with the

block length, thus making it computationally difficult for

long codes. In particular, for capacity-approaching ensem-

bles—e.g., those in [12]—one must pick a very large block

length (of typical order

) in order to reap the ben-

efits of the optimal degree distribution. Application of the

AMLC is thus more computationally challenging in these

cases. An interesting avenue for future research would be

to find algorithms running more efficiently than the one

we use [9, Sec. 5] which produce (possibly looser) lower

bounds on the minimum distance.

7) Improved bounds. It may be observed that our bound can

be improved by any method which tightens the LP re-

laxation, e.g., facet guessing [4], lifting methods [1], and

others. By using any of these methods, one can obtain a

vector

such that

because the

optimization (2) is performed over a smaller domain. The

result is that for any codeword , we can use a smaller

value of in the AMLC (8). Since the DS2 bound (28)–(29)

varies exponentially with , the potential improvement is

substantial.

VI. CONCLUSION
A new property, the approximate maximum-likelihood certificate, is introduced. This property of a codeword obtained

with an arbitrary symmetric decoder operating on a codeword of a binary linear code at the output of an MBIOS channel enables to give a bound on its reliability, or equivalently, to increase the error detection capability. This is achieved for LDPC codes using tools related to LP decoding, including a recently proposed algorithm for finding a lower bound on the minimum distance of a specific code. It is shown experimentally that for regular LDPC codes, this upper bound is much lower than the simulated FER (at low values of FER). While the increased frame error detection capability only holds with a certain confidence level, it was shown that this level is extremely high in the error floor region. The AMLC property was also shown to hold very frequently in the error floor region, therefore making it potentially useful in applications where high data integrity is required.
APPENDIX A PROOF OF LEMMA 1 Recall that the code is drawn at random from the ensemble . Also recall that by assumption is a symmetric decoding algorithm. In this respect, we know [1], [8, Lemma 6] that the LP decoder is symmetric in the sense of (1). Now,
where 1) the first equality is by the definition (9), 2) in the second equality, we use the definition (6) and stress the dependence on , 3) in the third equality, we use the symmetry of the channel as well as the symmetry of the decoder , 4) in the fourth equality, we use the symmetry of decoder and that of the LP decoder, 5) in the fifth equality, we again use the definition (6), 6) the final equality is again by the definition (9).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6058
Also,

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2013

where 1) the second equality is due to the definition (35) of the sets and and the memorylessness of the channel, 2) the third equality is due to the same definitions of and as well as the symmetry of the channel ( ), 3) the fourth equality is due to the symmetry of the channel.

where 1) the second equality is due to the independence of the transmitted message on the selection of the code and by applying the previous set of equalities, 2) the third equality is again due to the independence of the transmitted message on the selection of the code and by collecting terms, 3) the final equality, which is the desired result, follows by the law of total probability.

APPENDIX C OPTIMIZATION OF THE DS2 BOUND
Consider the DS2 bound (28) for fixed . Let rewrite the bound in exponential form as

. First,

APPENDIX B PROOF OF LEMMA 2

Suppose that the code

is the code chosen for trans-

mission. For any two codewords

, define the sets

Assuming fixed values of

and , the exponent

should be maximized over

We now have

(35)

Lemma 3: Consider the maximization of

over the tilting measure

,

when

, and are fixed. Then,

1) A necessary condition for optimality is given by

(36)

where

is a Lagrange multiplier and

2) The solution to (36) can be expressed in the following implicit form:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GOLDENBERG AND BURSHTEIN: THE APPROXIMATE MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD CERTIFICATE

6059

where
(37) The appropriate normalizing constant is given by
(38)
Proof: “1” follows by standard calculus of variations techniques. “2” is obtained by algebraic manipulations of (36).
To find the optimized tilting measure, we solve (37) numerically, and determine via (38). The optimal values of and are then found numerically.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful to the associate editor and the anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[2] S. C. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixedinteger adaptive linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1656–1660.
[3] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[4] A. G. Dimakis, A. A. Gohari, and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 3479–3487, Aug. 2009.
[5] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Top., Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006, pp. 1–9.
[6] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On low-complexity linear-programming decoding of LDPC codes,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 509–517, Aug. 2007.
[7] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming approach to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1061–1072, Mar. 2008.
[8] D. Burshtein, “Iterative approximate linear programming decoding of LDPC codes with linear complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 4835–4859, Nov. 2009.

[9] D. Burshtein and I. Goldenberg, “Improved linear programming decoding of LDPC codes and bounds on the minimum and fractional distance,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 7386–7402, Nov. 2011.
[10] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, vol. 41, pp. 1426–1435.
[11] S. Shamai and I. Sason, “Variations on the Gallager bounds, connections, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3029–3051, Dec. 2002.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[13] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York, NY: Wiley, 1968.
[14] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[15] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115–1131, Jun. 2004.
[16] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[17] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, Sep. 2003.
[18] M. F. Flanagan, V. Skachek, E. Byrne, and M. Greferath, “Linearprogramming decoding of nonbinary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4131–4154, Sep. 2009.
[19] E. Hof, I. Sason, and S. Shamai, “Performance bounds for nonbinary linear block codes over memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 977–996, Mar. 2009.
[20] V. Rathi, “On the asymptotic weight and stopping set distribution of regular LDPC ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 4212–4218, Sep. 2006.
[21] O. Barak and D. Burshtein, “Lower bounds on the spectrum and error rate of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4225–4236, Nov. 2007.
Idan Goldenberg received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Electrical Engineering in 2001 and 2007, respectively, from the Israel Institute of Technology (Technion). During 2001–2007, he was with the Israel Defence forces, working as an engineer. He is currently concluding his Ph.D. degree at the department of Electrical Engineering-Systems at Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, and is also with SanDisk Corporation working as a research engineer. His research interests include codes on graphs and iterative decoding algorithms, coding theory, and information theory.
David Burshtein (M’92–SM’99) received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering in 1982 and 1987, respectively, from Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. During 1988–1989, he was a Research Staff Member in the Speech Recognition Group of IBM, T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY. In 1989, he joined the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, where he is presently a Professor. His research interests include information theory, coding theory, codes on graphs and iterative decoding algorithms. Dr. Burshtein serves as an Associate Editor for Coding Techniques for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:59:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

