2017 3rd IEEE International Conference on Computer and Communications
A LDPC Convolutional Code Optimization Method for FTN Systems

Zhanji Wu
, Xin Huang
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications BUPT
Beijing, China e-mail: wuzhanji@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract—Next-generation satellite communication requires high transmission efficiency and high reliability to provide subscribers with various services. To satisfy these requirements, we optimize low-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPC CC) for faster-than-Nyquist (FTN) systems with good degree distributions, girth profile (GP) as well as good sliding-window girth (SWG). In this paper, we mainly investigate the time-invariant LDPC CC which can be a parent code of a low-density parity-check block code (LDPC BC). A comprehensive set of LDPC CC optimization algorithm for FTN systems is presented and the optimized LDPC CC for FTN system can achieve about 2.9dB gain compared with the LDPC BC from WiMAX standard.
Keywords-low-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPC CC), faster-than-Nyquist (FTN), iterative decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
To increase throughput of limited bandwidth in nextgeneration wireless and satellite broadcasting standards, there have been much attended to FTN method. The first studies on FTN signaling concept date back to 1970s [1]. And it has received much more attraction recently as a means of providing higher transmission rate beyond the Nyquist criterion in the same spectral shape consuming the same energy per bit [2]. In fact, by employing the FTN signaling, the transmission band can be reduced to around 80% without compromising the minimum Euclidean distance between different binary sequences, in spite of the inherent high inter-symbol interference (ISI) levels [1]. Recent studies that focus on practical receivers, however, make it still possible to achieve the same bit error rate (BER) performance with the conventional way.
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have attracted considerable attention because they can achieve a performance of only 0.04dB from the Shannon limit with iterative message-passing decoding and sufficiently long block sizes [3]. Recently the excellent asymptotic performance demonstrated by LDPC CC makes it a strong competitor of the quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC BC used in communication standards. Moreover, LDPC CC has the advantage of being more adaptable to flexible frame length. The most important factor affecting iteratively decodable LDPC performance is the girth of the corresponding Tanner graph [4] on account of the fact that codes with bad minimum distance may perform much better than codes with large minimum distance. LDPC CC has almost the same circle characteristics as LDPC BC so that the main goal of optimizing LDPC CC is better circle characteristics as well.

The idea of applying LDPC BC to FTN systems has been studied in many researches. In [5], Bocharova sums up his work on QC LDPC optimization and involves a channel model of FTN signaling into the LDPC BC code optimization loop. The result shows that the optimization method is effective and that it is necessary to consider the specific FTN system while optimizing the codeword. Bocharova's work is limited to QC LDPC BC with FTN. On the basis of this we push our work to LDPC CC, and we further investigate performance comparison between QC LDPC BC and LDPC CC.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly introduce the system model of FTN and related formulas, as well as some definitions of LDPC CC. In Section III, the optimization techniques used for code design in this paper are explained. Then in Section IV, the BER performances of sliding window decoding (SWD) are simulated for the new constructed LDPC CC codes under both the Nyquist system and the FTN system. Moderate QC LDPC BC and LDPC CC codes with rate
R 1/ 2 are analyzed when the FTN sampling interval W =0.74 . Conclusions are drawn in Section V.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. FTN System Mode

In this paper, we consider the communication system of Fig.1. At the transmitter, instead of the sampling period
T0 of the Nyquist sampling system, one information
symbol is generated every T WT0 . In Fig. 1, a>n@
indicates the symbol after constellation mapping with the
period T0 , h t  represents the shaping pulse whose power spectral density is H  f  2 , and then the signal

after pulse shaping can be expressed as s t  .

st ¦a>n@ht  nWT0 ,W d 1

(1)

The transmission interval of h t  is T0 whenW =1 , in this case the shaping pulse h t  remains orthogonal. In

other cases when W  1, the h t  is no longer orthogonal

so that within the same time period more information

symbols can be carried and as a consequence the ISI is

unavoidable. At the receiver, an MAP equalizer is combined with

an iterative decoder of an LDPC code to eliminate the ISI

[6]. These blocks constitute the iterative demodulation-

decoding loop, including a bit-interleaver and a soft QAM

mapper. The Ungerboeck model [7, 8] of the MAP

algorithm is adopted here.

978-1-5090-6352-9/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

1469

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Input LDPC CC message Encoder
Output LDPC CC message Decoder

Interleaver Deinterleaver

a[n] Mapper

FTN Modulator s[t] h(t)

AWGN Channel

FT N Equaliz
er

Matched Filter h*(-t) r[t]

Interleaver

We arrange H  D by column degree with increasing

order. Let Hij D,i, j 1, 2,...,c 1, j ! i denote a sub-
matrix consisting of i th column to j th column of
H  D .Then we can definite girth profile gGP (3) and
slide window girth gW (4) respectively.

gGP  g1 g2 ... gc g 

(3)

Figure 1. FTN System using LDPC CC
Decoding Window ω Delay L
Shift S

where gi ,i 1, 2,..., c stands for the girth of the submatrix

H1i  D .

^  `   gW

i

min
0,...,cW

g

Hii1W

D

(4)

where $W$ stands for the length of the sliding window.

BP Decoder
Figure 2. Sliding window decoding of LDPC CC.

B. LDPC Convolutional Code Definitions

Consider a LDPC CC with rate R b / c determined
^ ` by its polynomial parity-check matrix H D hij D ,
i 1, 2,...,c  b, j 1, 2,...,c where the parity-check poly-

nomials hij  D are either zero or monomial entries Dwij

of nonnegative integer degree wij . We denote ms
^ `wij as syndrome memory of LDPC CC.
H  D can be expressed as a base

maxi, j matrix

^ ` B H D |D 1 along with a degree matrix W wij ,i

1, 2,...,c  b, j 1, 2,...,c where hij  D =Dwij and wij 1 if hij  D =0 .

By tailbiting a LDPC CC to length M ! ms we obtain
the binary parity-check matrix of a Mc, Mb QC LDPC

block code

ª «

H

T 0

H1T

...

H

T ms

0 ...

0º »

«0 «

H 0T

...

H

T ms

1

H

T ms

...

0» »

HT

«

« « «

H

T ms

0

...

H

T 0

H1T

»

...

H

T ms

1

» » »

(2)

«

»

« ¬

H1T

...

H

T ms

...

0

...

H

T 0

» ¼

where Hi ,i 0,1,..., ms represents a c  bu c matrix
satisfying the relationship that
H  D H0  H1D  ...  Hms Dms [9]. As a result, the
LDPC CC is referred to as the parent convolutional code of the QC LDPC block code.

­°

g

j

® ¯°

g ' j , j 1, 2,..., p 1 ! g'j, p d j d c

(5)

Assume that g and gc represent the GP of two
matrices, respectively. If there exists a constant p, p  Z  , 2 d p d c so that (5) is satisfied, then g is said
to be superior to gc .
When the girth of LDPC codes is same, code with good GP and SWG can effectively reduce the error floor.
LDPC CC is very easy to encode with the parity check matrix. Until the present moment t , the information se-
quence is recorded as > @ u>0,t@ = u0 ,u1,...,ut and the
encoded sequence is > @ v>0,t@ = v0 , v1,..., vt . Through the
equation v>0,f@H>T0,f@ 0 , a recursive formula can be

obtained as .

vt

H

T 0

=vt ms

HT ms



vt ms

HT
1 ms

1



...



vt

HT
1 1

(6)

The encoded sequence vt consists of two parts vt =

¬ª vt0 , vt1 º¼ , representing information bits and parity bits

respectively. Similarly, H0 can be recorded as H0 =

ª¬

H00

,

H

1 0

¼º

. Then we obtain (7).

vt1 ¬ªH01 ¼ºT

vt0

¬ªH00 º¼T



vt

ms

HT ms



...



vt

HT
1 1

(6)

When solving present vt , the information bits vt0 are

known.

As

long

as

H

1 0

is

full

rank,

the

parity

bits

v t1

can

be computed.

The sliding window decoding from [5] is adopted for

LDPC CC. Fig.2 shows how the SWG decoding is

illustrated. Additional parameters Z and S are

introduced which determine the number of input and

output blocks of size c and b , respectively. The

decoding delay measured by block of size c is denoted by

L.

At each step of the decoding algorithm, S c received

likelihoods enter the decoder. These input likelihoods

together with Z-S  c likelihoods from the decoder

buffer are processed together by a predetermined number

1470
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of iterations of the BP decoding and S b decoded information bits corresponding to the S c likelihoods that entered the decoder L steps ago, are the output from the decoder. Then the buffer content is shifted by S c input values and the next S c received likelihoods enter the decoder. Thus, the decoding delay is equal to L c input symbols.
III. LDPC CC OPTIMIZATION
Similar to QC LDPC BC, the optimization of LDPC CC is divided into three steps: find a good degree distribution, construct a good base matrix and search for an appropriate degree matrix.
The degree distribution is an important factor that affects the performance of LDPC CC, and is closely related to specific system because the most suitable distributions of different systems are not the same. Thus, the optimization of the degree distribution should be carried out in conjunction with the specific system of the FTN and the specific parameters of FTN. Instead of constructing a number of codewords for a large number of simulations when each degree distribution is investigated [5], we introduce extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart analysis. The EXIT chart is often used to predict the performance of iterative decoded LDPC in system. Since the EXIT chart analysis can be performed without the concrete construction of LDPC parity-check matrix, it is possible to reduce the amount of work. In [10], the equalizer and the variable nodes are regarded as decoder I, the check nodes are regarded as decoder II, and specific formulas and analytical procedure are given. Under the inspiration of [11] and [12], we can search the most suitable degree distribution for the specific FTN system basing on genetic algorithm and small Gauss increment algorithm. However, when the base matrix is relatively small in size, an exhaustive method is preferred to screen out the optimal degree distribution. For different degree distribution, the extrinsic information transferring between two decoders is analyzed so we can examine its performance and find the most suitable degree distribution that has the best performance.
After determining the degree distribution, the base matrix satisfying degree distribution constraint is constructed by the criterion of circle characteristics. The following five criteria in order ensures good circle characteristic:
1) Number of common positions in columns;
2) Number of common triples in columns intersecting
in more than 3 positions;
3) gGP of the Tanner graph of the current base matrix; 4) Approximate cycle extrinsic message degrees [13]
(ACE)-like criterion of shortest circles;
5) Number of the cycles with minimum ACE-like
criterion. For QC LDPC, the usage of simplified encoding
method [14] asks for particular dual-diagonal parity structure constraints of its matrix, both base matrix and degree matrix. But for LDPC CC, encoding is very easy even when a simplified encoding method is not used, let alone more flexible structure constraints. When encoding through the parity check matrix, we only need to

guarantee that the corresponding part of the parity bit of matrix H0 is full of rank. So, we search for an appropriate degree matrix with great GP and SWG under this constraint. The detailed search steps are as follows:
1) Set the target parameters, including GP and SWG. 2) For a given base matrix whose columns are arranged with weight from small to large, randomly generate the degree vector column by column to satisfy the simplified encoding constraint. 3) Each time a column of degree is generated, calculate the girth of the sub-matrix. If the number of columns that have been generated is greater than the length of the sliding window $W$, calculate the girth of the latest $W$ columns. 4) Compare GP and SWG with the target parameters. If GP or SWG is worse, return to the second step to regenerate the column. 5) Repeat the second step to the fourth step, and ultimately, we get a degree matrix with target GP and SWG.
By optimizing GP and SWG, it is possible to effectively reduce the error floor of the LDPC CC code.

Code C1 B1
WiMAX

TABLE I.

CODE PARAMETERS

M or ms
49
96
96

Base Matrix
12u 24 12u 24 12u 24

Degree Distribution 2(10)3(11)11(3) 2(13)3(8)11(3) 2(11)3(8)6(5)

TABLE II.

Code C1 B1
WiMAX

Girth 6 6 6

TCODE CIRCLE CHARACTERISTICS

W

gW

g GP

24

6

10(21)8(22)6(24)

24

6

10(17)8(23)6(24)

6

8

10(19)8(23)6(24)

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In section III, a set of integrated optimization algorithm is given. By using these algorithms, we have optimized the corresponding LDPC CC for FTN system where we use the roll-off factor of 0.4 for the root-raised cosine pulse and the time compression factor of 0.74 for sampling interval. QPSK modulation is adopted, as well as 4 effective taps for equalizer and 5 global iterations in our simulations. The BER performance of the new LDPC
CC C1 of rate R 1/ 2 which is optimized for the FTN system will be presented and compared with the BER performance of the new optimized LDPC BC B1 and the LDPC BC from the WiMAX [14] under the same decoding delay L 2304 . The SWG decoding for LDPC CC and the BP decoding for LDPC BC are used in the simulations, both with 30 times of iteration.
Parameters of the newly constructed codes such as syndrome memory, size of the base matrix and their column degree distribution are tabulated in Table I. The

1471
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

girth, GP, and SWG are tabulated in Table II. The degree
distribution d i in Table I means the number of
columns whose weight is d is equal to i and the GP
g  j in Table II means that the girth of the submatrix
consisting of first j columns is equal to g . To make LDPC CC comparable with BC we choose
syndrome memory ms to be about M / 2 blocks of length c . Both of the decoding delay is 2304( L=2304 ), and for LDPC CC the decoding window Z to be four times of ms blocks of length c , shift S to be the same as ms blocks of length c .
Figure 3. Comparison of BER performances with the Nyquist system

performance of the codeword B1 optimized for this system has a gain of nearly 2dB compared with the WiMAX LDPC BC. And for the optimized LDPC CC C1, there is an additional 0.9dB gain. Besides, we can see from the figure that, unlike the Nyquist system, the BER curve of C1 drops the fastest of the three at high SNRs, and it seems to experience the error floor even later, or not to experience at all.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we present an efficient combinatorial code optimization to find suitable LDPC CCs for the FTN system. This optimization method is divided into three steps: find a good degree distribution, construct a good base matrix and search for an appropriate degree matrix. By using this optimization method, we have found a relatively good LDPC CC for the FTN system for given specific system parameters. Different codeword will be obtained if the system changes since any change in parameters will affect the suitability between system and codeword. Simulations of FTN system show that under comparable complexity the optimized LDPC CC outperforms two LDPC BCs, one from WiMAX standard and another optimized for the FTN system, which is more than 1.0dB gain. In contrast to the simulation results of Nyquist system, our optimized LDPC CC do prove to be more suitable for the FTN system. In a word, the LDPC CC optimization method is effective.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is sponsored by the National Natural Science Fund (61171101), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.

Figure 4. Comparison of BER performances with the FTN system
Fig.3 shows the BER performance of each codeword from Table I under the AWGN channel, with the orthogonal Nyquist signaling when the time compression factor W =1 . At low signal-to-noise ratios(SNRs), the optimized LDPC BC B1 performs best, and LDPC CC C1 performs worst. At high SNRs, however, B1 and C1 appear to have undergone error floor, while the BER curve of WiMAX LDPC BC declines rapidly, and the performance surpass B1 with a very significant margin. Although under the Nyquist system, with comparable complexity restrictions for the same delay, LDPC CC loses compared to the optimized block counterpart. The simulation results of FTN system when the time compression factor W =0.74 are shown in Fig.4. At low SNRs, the codeword from WiMAX lose to B1 with about 0.45dB. At the BER of 1e-5, it is clear that the

REFERENCES
[1] J. E. Mazo, "Faster-than-nyquist signaling," in The Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1451-1462, Oct. 1975.
[2] J. B. Anderson, F. Rusek and V. Owall, "Faster-Than-Nyquist Signaling," in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 101, no. 8, pp. 18171830, Aug. 2013.
[3] Sae-Young Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, "On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit," in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58-60, Feb 2001.
[4] R. Tanner, "A recursive approach to low complexity codes," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533547, Sep 1981.
[5] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov and R. Johannesson, "Searching for Binary and Nonbinary Block and Convolutional LDPC Codes," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 163-183, Jan. 2016.
[6] M. Tuchler, R. Koetter and A. C. Singer, "Turbo equalization: principles and new results," in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 754-767, May 2002.
[7] G. Colavolpe and A. Barbieri, "On MAP symbol detection for ISI channels using the ungerboeck observation model," in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 720-722, Aug 2005.
[8] G. Ungerboeck, "Adaptive Maximum-Likelihood Receiver for Carrier-Modulated Data-Transmission Systems," in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 624-636, May 1974.
[9] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel and D. J. Costello, "On Deriving Good LDPC Convolutional Codes from QC LDPC Block Codes," 2007 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Nice, 2007, pp. 1221-1225.

1472
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[10] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer and A. Ashikhmin, "Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection," in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670-678, April 2004.
[11] P. Guo, X. Wang and Y. Han, "The enhanced genetic algorithms for the optimization design," 2010 3rd International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Informatics, Yantai, 2010, pp. 29902994.
[12] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi and R. L. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619637, Feb 2001.
[13] Tao Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor and R. D. Wesel, "Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction," in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242-1247, Aug. 2004.

[14] "Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems", IEEE P802.16e/D12 Draft, Oct. 2005.
[15] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov and R. Johannesson, "LDPC convolutional codes versus QC LDPC block codes in communication standard scenarios," 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Honolulu, HI, 2014, pp. 27742778.
[16] "Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure channel coding and modulation systems for broadcasting interactive services news gathering and other broadband satellite applications; Part I: DVB S2", V1.4.1, Nov. 2014.
[17] J. Yu, J. Park, F. Rusek, B. Kudryashov and I. Bocharova, "High Order Modulation in Faster-Than-Nyquist Signaling Communication Systems," 2014 IEEE 80th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2014-Fall), Vancouver, BC, 2014, pp. 1-5.

1473
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

