LDPC Decoder with Embedded Coding on
Unreliable Memories
Guangjun Ge∗, Liuguo Yin∗and Qin Huang†
∗Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology,
School of Aerospace, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
†School of electronic and information engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Email: yinlg@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—Unreliable message storage severely degrades the
performance of LDPC decoders. This paper discusses the various
impacts of bit errors of finite-precision messages on LDPC
decoders. Discrete density evolution indicates that the sign bits of
finite-precision messages have the most influence on the decoding
threshold. As a result, this paper proposes to protect the sign
bits of messages by Hamming product codes. Simulation results
show that the proposed scheme only has a degradation of 0.1
dB for the LDPC decoder with a storage error ratio of 0.001,
which outperforms the traditional triple modular redundancy
scheme.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are widely used
in space communications due to their capacity-approaching
capabilities [1] [2] [3]. The outstanding performance of LDPC
is based on the soft-decoding algorithms which consume
a large number of memories. However, the radiation en-
vironment will give rise to fault problems for memories
when LDPC decoders are used in the spacecraft [4]. Such
unreliable storage will severely degrade the performance of
LDPC codes. Thus, it is important to consider the robustness
of LDPC decoders utilizing unreliable memories.
There are many studies on the effects of unreliable hard-
ware on LDPC decoders. Varshney considered the thresholds
and residual errors of LDPC codes with the faulty Gallager A
decoding in the earlier stage [5]. Extended studies on faulty
Gallager B decoders were then developed in [6], [7], [8] and
[9]. Besides these bit flipping decoding algorithms, the belief
propagation (BP) decoding of LDPC on noisy hardware was
studied in [10] and [11], where infinite-precision message
with additive Gaussian noise was considered. Finite-precision
message for the min-sum decoding of LDPC was studied in
[12], [13] and [14]. It showed that quantizing messages with
more bits was not always beneficial for LDPC decoders with
hardware errors.
In general, the existing works treated each finite-precision
message as an integer, while this paper discusses the various
impacts of different bits of the finite-precision messages.
Density evolution analysis indicates that the sign bits of
the messages play the most important role in the decoding
performance of LDPC codes. Based on this result, we propose
an embedded coding scheme on the sign bits to achieve
a robust LDPC decoder. First, we put the messages into
blocks by taking advantage of the parallel message structure
of the quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC decoders. Then, Hamming
product codes are introduced to correct the sign bits of the
message blocks. We also discuss efficient iterative decoding
algorithms for the Hamming product codes, which achieve
good performance with low complexity. Simulation results
show that there is only a degradation of less than 0.1 dB for
the LDPC decoder with the memory error ratio up to 0.001,
which outperforms the traditional triple modular redundancy
(TMR) scheme.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the
system models are introduced. Section III presents the discrete
density evolution analysis. The construction and decoding
of the embedded Hamming product codes are provided in
Section IV. Section V concludes the entire paper.
II. SYSTEM MODELS
A. LDPC decoder
The hardware architecture of the QC-LDPC decoder is
shown in Fig. 1, which consists of interleaver (Π𝐻(LDPC)),
variable node units (VNU), check node units (CNU) and data
buffers (RAM). Since the matrix of QC-LDPC is divided into
sub-blocks, the decoders are always implemented with the
partially parallel architecture, which means the messages of
each sub-block are calculated by the same VNU or CNU
node in the pipeline operations. The constraint of the LDPC
code is executed by the interleaver, which is used to deliver
the messages between the VNU and CNU based on the parity
check matrix of LDPC. To execute the BP decoding of LDPC,
the decoder firstly obtains the message 𝑚0 from the channel.
Then, VNU and CNU perform iterative computations, where
the internal messages 𝑚𝑣2𝑐and 𝑚𝑐2𝑣are produced. Specifi-
cally, in VNU,
𝑚𝑣2𝑐(𝑖) = 𝑚0 +
∑
𝑐′∈𝒩(𝑣)∖𝑐
𝑚𝑐′2𝑣(𝑖−1),
(1)
while in CNU,
𝑚𝑐2𝑣(𝑖) = 2tanh−1[
∏
𝑣′∈𝒩(𝑐)∖𝑣
tanh(𝑚𝑣′2𝑐(𝑖)/2)],
(2)
where 𝒩(𝑣) and 𝒩(𝑐) are defined as the sets of nodes
connected to node 𝑣and node 𝑐, respectively. These messages
are stored in memories during the decoding process. To
implement LDPC decoders on integrated circuits, all of the
978-1-5090-5019-2/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(
/ )
N
l
(
/ )
M
l
l
M
N
VNU
CNU
VRAM
LRAM
CRAM
v2c
m
v
m
v2c
m
c
m
c2v
m
c2v
m
d
m
0
m
r
m
(LDPC)
H
3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Fig. 1.
The partially parallel architecture of LDPC decoders
messages will be quantized into bits. Existing studies [15]
have shown that, 4-6 bits quantization on messages can pro-
vide ideal compromise between complexity and performance
for LDPC decoders. Among the quantized bits, one is used
for the sign, while the rest are used for the magnitude value.
B. Error model of memory
Following the studies in [13] and [14], we assume a binary
symmetric channel (BSC) model for the storage errors, as
shown in Fig. 2. The cross-over parameter 𝛼of the BSC
channel is the flipping probability of the RAM cell, which is
relevant to the radiation level and the storage duration. It is
important to emphasize that, not all the messages in the LDPC
decoders experience the same storage duration in memories.
The channel message 𝑚0 is only read but not updated at
each iteration round, while the internal messages 𝑚𝑐and 𝑚𝑣
produced by CNU and VNU are updated once accessed. To
model such a difference, we define 𝛼0 to be the flipping
probability of memories for the period of one iteration. In
such a case, the flipping probabilities 𝛼𝑣= 𝛼𝑐= 𝛼0 are
constants for the VRAM and CRAM, which store internal
messages; while for the LRAM, the flipping probability 𝛼𝑟(𝑛)
can be derived as follows:
𝛼𝑟(𝑛) =
𝑛
∑
𝑖=1,3,5,...
(𝑛
𝑖
)
𝛼𝑖
0(1 −𝛼0)𝑛−𝑖
= ((1 −𝛼0 + 𝛼0)𝑛−(1 −𝛼0 −𝛼0)𝑛)/2
= (1 −(1 −2𝛼0)𝑛)/2,
(3)
which is a function of the iteration number 𝑛, and gradually
increases along with the iteration process.
III. ANALYSIS ON BIT ERRORS OF MESSAGES
In this section, we firstly execute a discrete density evolu-
tion on the BP decoding of LDPC codes. Then, a threshold
analysis is provided to demonstrate the various effects of
finite-precision message bits, where the sign bits are shown to
have the most influence on the decoding thresholds of LDPC
codes.
BSC( )
D
BSC( )
D
BSC( )
D
RAM
Quantizer
Quantizer
. . .
VNU/CNU
CNU/VNU
Fig. 2.
The BSC model for the unreliable memories
It has been proved by Varshney [5] that the symmetric
conditions of density evolution are still suitable for the faulty
LDPC decoders with symmetric hardware errors. Therefore,
we can utilize the discrete density evolution to analyze the
finite-precision LDPC decoders with our proposed models.
In this paper, only the regular (𝑑𝑣, 𝑑𝑐) LDPC codes are
considered for the sake of simplicity.
We define 𝑷𝑚= {𝑝1, 𝑝2, ..., 𝑝2𝑄−1} as the probability
mass function (PMF) of the corresponding message 𝑚, where
𝑄is the number of quantization bits and 𝑝𝑖is the probability
of the 𝑖th quantization symbol. For example, 𝑷𝑣is the PMF
vector of the message 𝑚𝑣shown in Fig. 1. Moreover, 𝑷𝑘is
defined as the value of 𝑷at the 𝑘th decoding round. As the
symmetric conditions still hold, we can restrict the transmit
codewords to all zero sequences, thus the channel message
PMF vector 𝑷0 is initialized as
𝑷0 = {𝑝𝑖=
1
√
2𝜋⋅2/𝜎
∫𝑞𝑖
𝑞𝑖−1
exp(−(𝑡+ 2/𝜎2)2
8/𝜎2
)𝑑𝑡},
(4)
where 𝑞𝑖is the value of the 𝑖th quantization symbol, 𝑞0 = −∞
and 𝑞2𝑄−1 = +∞. Meanwhile, 𝑷0
𝑐2𝑣is initialized as
𝑷0
𝑐2𝑣= {0, ..., 0, 𝑝2(𝑄−1) = 1, 0, ..., 0}.
(5)
In addition, we define 𝑬= {𝑒1, 𝑒2, ..., 𝑒𝑄} as the error vector,
where 𝑒𝑖is the error probability of the 𝑖th quantization bit.
For example, we can make 𝑒1 = 𝑒2 = ... = 𝑒𝑄= 𝛼0 for the
VRAM and CRAM error models described in Section II-B,
where all quantized bits experience the same error probability.
Further, the corresponding PMF transfer matrix Π(𝑬) is
defined and calculated as follows:
Π(𝑬) = {𝑝𝑖𝑗=
𝑄
∏
𝑘=1
𝛽𝑘(𝑖, 𝑗)}, (𝑖, 𝑗= 1, 2, ..., 2𝑄−1), (6)
where 𝑝𝑖𝑗is the transfer probability from the 𝑖th quantization
symbol 𝑠𝑖to the 𝑗th one 𝑠𝑗. And 𝛽𝑘(𝑖, 𝑗) = 1 −𝑒𝑘if 𝑠𝑖
and 𝑠𝑗have the same bit in the 𝑘th quantization position,
otherwise 𝛽𝑘(𝑖, 𝑗) = 𝑒𝑘. Since 𝛽𝑘(𝑖, 𝑗) = 𝛽𝑘(𝑗, 𝑖), we know
that the Π(𝑬) is a symmetric matrix. It is worth noting
that, as described in Section II-B, the LRAM storing channel
messages has different flipping probabilities compared with
the ones storing internal messages, which can be described
as
𝑷𝑘
𝑟= 𝑷0 ⋅Π(𝑬(𝛼𝑟(𝑘))).
(7)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
After the initialization, the density evolution executes its
iterations. Firstly, in the VNU nodes, the VNU to CNU
message PMF is updated by
𝑷𝑘
𝑣= 𝑷𝑘
𝑟⊗(𝑷𝑘−1
𝑐2𝑣)⊗(𝑑𝑣−1).
(8)
After the convolution operations, we shall combine the extra
elements of 𝑷𝑘
𝑣so as to ensure a length of 2𝑄−1. Secondly,
the messages pass through the unreliable VRAM, where the
PMF transfers to
𝑷𝑘
𝑣2𝑐= 𝑷𝑘
𝑣⋅Π(𝑬(𝛼0)).
(9)
Thirdly in the CNU nodes, the magnitude values of mes-
sages are mapped into log-domain by the function 𝜆(𝑥) =
−log(tanh(𝑥/2)). The corresponding PMF of the magnitude
values is mapped by Λ(𝑷𝑘
𝑣2𝑐). Further define
Γ𝑘
𝑣2𝑐= [sign(𝑷𝑘
𝑣2𝑐), Λ(𝑷𝑘
𝑣2𝑐)]⊗(𝑑𝑐−1),
(10)
then the PMF of CNU to VNU messages is updated by
𝑷𝑘
𝑐= sign(Γ𝑘
𝑣2𝑐) ⋅Λ(abs(Γ𝑘
𝑣2𝑐)).
(11)
Similarly, the extra elements of Γ𝑘
𝑣2𝑐shall be combined after
the convolution operations. In the next place, the messages
pass through the unreliable CRAM in the same way, where
the PMF is updated by
𝑷𝑘
𝑐2𝑣= 𝑷𝑘
𝑐⋅Π(𝑬(𝛼0)).
(12)
Finally, after the maximum iterations, the decoding decision
is made in the VNU nodes, where the PMF is calculated as
𝑷𝑘
𝑑= 𝑷𝑘
𝑟⊗(𝑷𝑘−1
𝑐2𝑣)⊗𝑑𝑣,
(13)
and the probability of residual error can be obtained by
𝑝𝑒= 1
2 ⋅𝑷𝑘
𝑑(2𝑄−1) +
2𝑄−1
∑
𝑖=2(𝑄−1)+1
𝑷𝑘
𝑑(𝑖).
(14)
We execute the discrete density evolution on a (4,32)
regular LDPC code with the 6 bits quantized decoder in this
paper. To analyze the various effects of quantized bits, we set
𝑬= {0, 𝛼0, 𝛼0, 𝛼0, 𝛼0, 𝛼0} for the one highest bit protected
memory error model, which means the sign bit is assumed
to be error-free. Similarly, several 𝑘highest bits protected
models can be defined. The decoding thresholds are obtained
by the discrete density evolution, as shown in Fig. 3. We can
see that, if the sign bit is protected, the threshold will not be
severely affected, while additional protection on the extra bits
can provide little gain.
IV. EMBEDDED CODING SCHEME
For LDPC decoders, the cost is overwhelming to protect
every message bit. However, as aforementioned, it is not
necessary since the sign bits are demonstrated to be the
most important. Thus, following the idea of unequal error
protection [16], we can simply set protection on the sign bits
to promise a low complexity.
Firstly, we notice that LDPC decoders are usually imple-
mented with a partially parallel architecture, as described
Fig. 3.
The thresholds of protecting various message bits
RAM
embedded 
encoder
. . .
. . .
messages
messages
magnitude
sign
embedded 
decoder
1
2
k
. . .
Fig. 4.
Coding on the sign bit blocks
in Section II-A. In other words, a group of messages are
produced simultaneously. It inspires us to put the sign bits
into blocks so that we can introduce efficient block coding
schemes instead of the traditional TMR, as shown in Fig.
4. Then, we propose an embedded Hamming product coding
on the blocks of sign bits. For the Hamming product code,
an iterative decoding algorithm is discussed, which achieves
good performance with low complexity. Moreover, based on
the error pattern analysis, we propose an enhanced decoding
algorithm to obtain better performance. Finally, we present
threshold analysis and Monte-Carlo simulations to demon-
strate the robustness of our proposed LDPC decoders.
A. Hamming product code
To protect the sign bit blocks, the ideal embedded code
should have the features of low coding complexity and
appropriate block length, as well as good error performance.
We introduce Hamming product codes as the embedded codes
based on the following advantages. Firstly, Hamming codes
have the simplest decoders and encoders among all of the
block codes, which only consist of several basic logic gates.
Secondly, the structure of product codes can permit more
choices of block length and coding rate, which can make
the embedded codes suitable for various storage error levels.
As the data is usually operated in bytes, which contains
8 bits. In order to make the embedded code suitable for the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 5.
The (8, 4) Hamming product code
data operations, we choose the modified Hamming product
code, which is (𝑛, 𝑘) = (48, 16) and has an integer number
of bytes in its block. As shown in Fig. 5, the dark points
are the information bits and the rest are the check bits. The
row and column subcodes are both (8, 4) Hamming codes,
except that the check’s check bits are removed. For the (8, 4)
Hamming code, the Hamming distance is 4, i.e., it can correct
any one bit error in one block. But if there are two bit errors,
the decoder can only declare a block error without locating
the error bits.
B. Decoding of the Hamming product code
Based on the Hamming codes’ characters of both error
correcting and detecting, we define two states for the output
bits of the Hamming product decoder: the fixed bits and the
erasure bits. The decoding algorithm of the Hamming product
code is described as follows.
∙Iterative Step: The row subcodes and the column sub-
codes execute their decoding algorithms iteratively. Dur-
ing the decoding, if the Hamming decoder cannot locate
the error bits, keep the block unchanged; otherwise,
update the block. After several iterations (we set it 2
iterations here), stop the iterative decoding.
∙Decision Step: Firstly, the error detecting is executed
by the Hamming decoders. Define ℛ⊂{1, 2, 3, 4}
as the set of indices where the row subcodes detect
block errors. Similarly, define index set 𝒞for the column
subcodes. Then, declare the bits located at (𝑖, 𝑗) in the
4×4 information bit matrix as erasure bits, where 𝑖∈ℛ
and 𝑗∈𝒞. The rest bits are declared as fixed bits.
We utilize a low-order approximation method to evaluate
the performance of the Hamming product code with the
proposed decoding algorithm. Since two states are defined
for the output bits, we use two parameters to describe the
decoding performance: the bit erasure ratio 𝑟𝑒and the bit
error ratio 𝑟𝑝. Both parameters can be approximately derived
by the most likely error patterns. The probability of the 𝑖th-
order error pattern can be derived as
𝑃(𝑖) = 𝛼𝑖(1 −𝛼)48−𝑖,
(15)
where 𝛼is the bit flipping probability of the RAM. As listed
in Table I, the error patterns with orders lower than 4 are
TABLE I
LOW-ORDER ERROR PATTERN ANALYSIS
Error pattern order
Bit erasures totalize
Bit errors totalize
1
0
0
2
0
0
3
256
16
4
13008
1680
Fig. 6.
The low-order approximation of 𝑟𝑒and 𝑟𝑝
analyzed. Apparently, if there are less than two bit errors
in a block of the Hamming product code, no erasure or
error bit exists. Therefore, only the error patterns with 3rd-
order and 4th-order are adopted to deduce the approximate
performance. Using the 3rd-order only, the error performance
can be derived by
˜𝑟𝑒(3) = 256
16 × 𝑃(3) = 16𝛼3(1 −𝛼)45,
(16)
˜𝑟𝑝(3) = 16
16 × 𝑃(3) = 𝛼3(1 −𝛼)45.
(17)
While using both the 3rd-order and 4th-order, the performance
is derived as follows
˜𝑟𝑒(3, 4) = 256
16 × 𝑃(3) + 13008
16
× 𝑃(4)
= 16𝛼3(1 −𝛼)45 + 813𝛼4(1 −𝛼)44,
(18)
˜𝑟𝑝(3, 4) = 16
16 × 𝑃(3) + 1680
16
× 𝑃(4)
= 𝛼3(1 −𝛼)45 + 105𝛼4(1 −𝛼)44.
(19)
Meanwhile, Monte-Carlo simulations for the decoding of
the Hamming product code are provided. The curves of the
performance are shown in Fig. 6. We can see that ˜𝑟𝑒(3, 4) and
˜𝑟𝑝(3, 4) are very close to the results of Monte-Carlo simula-
tions. Moreover, the Hamming product code outperforms the
traditional TMR scheme dramatically.
C. Enhanced decoding of the Hamming product code
In fact, the performance of the Hamming product code can
be further improved at the expense of complexity. In this
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(a) Error pattern
(b) Erasure pattern
Fig. 7.
The 3rd-order error patterns
section, an enhanced decoding scheme is proposed to obtain
better performance by introducing more decision logics.
As analyzed in section IV-B, the 3rd-order error pattern
has the most influence on the decoding performance of the
Hamming product code. Specifically, the most typical error
patterns for decoding erasure and error are depicted in Fig.
7. Without loss of generality, we can assume that the row
subcodes are decoded firstly in the iterative step. If there are
three check bit errors (denoted by the dark points in Fig. 7(a))
in one column subcode, one of the column subcode’s infor-
mation bits (denoted by the point marked with an asterisk)
will be incorrectly decoded. In such a case, when it comes
to the decision step, this incorrect information bit, together
with the other three incorrect check bits, will constitute a
valid codeword for the column subcode. Thus, it will result
in a decoding error. Similarly, as shown in Fig. 7(b), if
there are three errors (denoted by the dark points) located
respectively in the row subcode and the column subcode,
they will simultaneously disable the decoding of the row and
column subcodes. In such a case, the error in the intersection
position will be declared as an erasure bit according to the
decision logic of the aforementioned decoding algorithm.
As a matter of fact, the decoding erasure bits and error
bits caused by the 3rd-order error patterns are all occurred in
the similar ways mentioned above. Based on this analysis,
an enhanced decoding scheme is proposed by adding the
following two decision logics in the decision step:
∙3rd order error bit decision: After the error detecting,
if the index sets ℛ= {𝑖} and 𝒞= {𝑗} are both
single element sets, the bit located at (𝑖, 𝑗) is flipped
and declared as a fixed bit.
∙3rd order erasure bit decision: If one bit is decoded
into different values by the row subcode and the column
subcode, it is declared as an erasure bit.
The performance of the enhanced decoding scheme is shown
in Fig. 8. There is an improvement for both 𝑟𝑒and 𝑟𝑝. It
should be noted that, the additional decision logics are only
used to cope with the 3rd-order error patterns. In fact, more
decision logics for the higher-order error patterns can be
introduced to obtain better performance.
Fig. 8.
The performance of the enhanced decoding scheme
Fig. 9.
The thresholds of different schemes on the (4,32) LDPC code
Fig. 10.
The residual errors of different schemes on the (4,32) LDPC code
D. Theoretical analysis and Monte-Carlo simulations
The thresholds and residual errors for different protection
schemes are also analyzed by the discrete density evolution, as
shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, respectively. We can see that the
proposed Hamming product coding scheme outperforms the
TMR scheme especially when the memory error probability
is high, while the one without protection even can not work
when the memory error probability is larger than 0.001.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 11.
Finite length codeword simulations for the (8176,7154) code
Besides, Monte-Carlo simulations are executed on the finite
length codewords of LDPC. We utilize the (8176,7154) LDPC
code defined by CCSDS in [17], which is publicly available
and has outstanding performance. In the simulations, the
messages are quantized into 6 bits. The channel is assumed to
be the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, while
the parameter of the BSC model 𝛼0 is adjusted from 0.001 to
0.004. The results are shown in Fig. 11, where the maximum
number of iterations is set to 50. We can see that when the
memory error probability is 0.001, the proposed scheme has
the degradation of 0.1 dB for the decoding performance. It
has a gain of 0.1 dB to the TMR scheme. And when the
memory error probability is 0.004, the gain of our proposed
scheme becomes more than 0.4 dB compared with the TMR.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper considered the challenge of implementing LD-
PC decoders on unreliable memories. We explored the effects
of various message bits on finite-precision LDPC decoders,
where protecting the sign bits of the messages was shown to
be efficient enough for robust LDPC decoders on unreliable
memories. We proposed to put the messages into blocks
and introduced a Hamming product code to correct the sign
bits, as well as discussing two low complexity decoding
algorithms. The discrete density evolution analysis showed
that the proposed scheme had a smaller threshold degradation
and a lower residual error ratio compared with the traditional
TMR scheme. Moreover, Monte-Carlo simulations showed
that, the proposed scheme could obtain a gain of 0.1 −0.4
dB to the TMR scheme when the memory error probability
was from 0.001 to 0.004.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by NSFC 91538203, NSAF
U1530117 and NSFC 61471022.
REFERENCES
[1] K. S. Andrews, D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, J. Hamkins, C. R. Jones, and
F. Pollara, “The development of turbo and ldpc codes for deep-space
applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 11, pp. 2142–2156,
Nov. 2007.
[2] Q. Li, X. Qu, L. Yin, and J. Lu, “Generalized low-density parity-
check coding scheme with partial-band jamming,” Tsinghua Science
and Technology, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 203–210, April 2014.
[3] Z. Chen, L. Yin, Y. Pei, and J. Lu, “Codehop: physical layer error
correction and encryption with ldpc-based code hopping,” Science
China Information Sciences, vol. 59, no. 10, p. 102309, Mar 2016.
[4] D. Stone, A. Lindenmoyer, G. French, E. Musk, D. Gump, C. Kathuria,
C. Miller, M. Sirangelo, and T. Pickens, “NASA’s approach to commer-
cial cargo and crew transportation,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 63, no. 1,
pp. 192–197, Jan. 2008.
[5] L. R. Varshney, “Performance of LDPC codes under faulty iterative
decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 7,
pp. 4427–4444, July 2011.
[6] F. Leduc-Primeau and W. J. Gross, “Faulty Gallager-B decoding with
optimal message repetition,” in Communication, Control, and Comput-
ing (Allerton), 2012 50th Annual Allerton Conference on, 2012.
[7] C.-H. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B LDPC decoder with
transient and permanent errors,” IEEE Transactions on Communica-
tions, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 15–28, Jan. 2014.
[8] L. Song, Q. Huang, Z. Wang, M. Zhang, and S. Wang, “Two enhanced
reliability-based decoding algorithms for nonbinary ldpc codes,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 479–489, Feb.
2016.
[9] S. S. T. Yazdi, H. Cho, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B decoder on noisy
hardware,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 5, pp.
1660–1673, May 2013.
[10] C.-H. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, “Noisy belief propagation
decoder,” in Signals, Systems and Computers, 2014 48th Asilomar
Conference on, 2014.
[11] ——, “Belief propagation algorithms on noisy hardware,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 11–24, Jan. 2015.
[12] E. Dupraz, D. Declercq, B. Vasi´c, and V. Savin, “Analysis and design
of finite alphabet iterative decoders robust to faulty hardware,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 2797–2809,
August 2015.
[13] C. K. Ngassa, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, “Min-sum-based decoders
running on noisy hardware,” in 2013 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM), 2013.
[14] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and A. Burg, “Density evolution for min-
sum decoding of LDPC codes under unreliable message storage,” IEEE
Communications Letters, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 849–852, May 2014.
[15] J.-S. Lee and J. Thorpe, “Memory-efficient decoding of LDPC codes,”
in Proceedings. International Symposium on Information Theory, 2005.
[16] J. Huang, Z. Fei, C. Cao, M. Xiao, and D. Jia, “On-line fountain codes
with unequal error protection,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 21,
no. 6, pp. 1225–1228, June 2017.
[17] CCSDS, “Low density parity check codes for use in near-earth and
deep space applications,” Experimental Specification CCSDS, 2011.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:31:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
