Adaptive Package Coding on Unreliable Memories
for LDPC Decoders in Radiation Environment
Guangjun Ge∗‡, Liuguo Yin†‡
∗School of Aerospace, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
† Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, Beijing, China
‡ EDA Laboratory, Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
Email: yinlg@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—The commercial off-the-shelf technology, advanced
by NASA, has driven the utilization of commercial components
in aerospace, which results in severe fault problems for electronic
systems. This paper considers the implementation of LDPC
decoders on the unreliable memories, which introduce errors
to the iterative messages. Firstly, LDPC decoders are typically
implemented with the partially parallel architectures, where the
messages are synchronously produced in groups. Based on this,
we propose to put the messages into packages so as to permit an
efficient coding on the package instead of the single message.
Secondly, the sign bit of the message is shown to have the
most influence on the decoding, while the least significant bit
(LSB) is less important especially when the message has a large
magnitude. Thus, by evaluating the magnitude level, we introduce
an adaptive coding on the sign bits utilizing the LSBs. And
we utilize a majority logic decision to achieve the evaluation,
which makes the decoding execution more reliable. We develop a
discrete density evolution to analyze the performances of various
schemes, where the proposed scheme is shown to have a coding
gain of 0.2 dB to the existing scheme, as well as a residual error
that is nearly one order of magnitude lower. Moreover, the results
of finite length codeword simulations are well matched with the
density evolution analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Traditionally, space-grade components are utilized in the
spacecraft to prevent electronic systems from the unreliability
problems, which greatly increases the expense. The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has proposed
a concept of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) technology [1],
attempting to utilize commercial components in aerospace.
Commercial components have the advantages of low expense,
high speed and low power consumption, but also suffer from
a more severe fault problem caused by the radiation environ-
ment [2]. Among all of the radiation effects on commercial
components, single event upset (SEU) plays a rather important
role [3], which mainly gives rise to errors in memories. Low-
Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are adopted in deep-space
communications by the Consultative Committee for Space
Data System (CCSDS) [4]. For LDPC decoders, the unreliable
storage for messages will severely degrade the performance of
LDPC codes. Thus more and more interests are attracted on the
implementations of LDPC decoders with unreliable memories.
In the literature, many studies have concentrated on analyz-
ing the effects of faulty hardware on LDPC decoders. Varshney
studied the performance of LDPC with faulty computations
in the first place [5]. Extending analysis on the noisy bit-
flipping decodings were then developed [6], [7]. Moreover, the
sum-product decoding of LDPC codes on noisy hardware was
studied in [8], while the min-sum decodings were discussed in
[9] and [10], where the decoding thresholds and residual errors
were analyzed respectively. On the other hand, there have been
some works on the implementations of robust LDPC decoders
with unreliable memories. Huang, et al. introduced an adaptive
coding scheme for the faulty LDPC decoders [11]. They
adaptively used the last two LSBs of the message to protect
the sign bit when the magnitude value of the message was
large enough. This scheme greatly improved the robustness
of LDPC decoders without using any extra storage. However,
in this scheme, the coding had a limited performance as it
was applied inside the single message. Moreover, the decoding
might be incorrectly performed due to the magnitude value
errors.
In this paper, we propose an adaptive package coding
scheme to overcome the problems of the existing work. Firstly,
the existing scheme executes the adaptive coding on the single
message, where only simple coding schemes such as repetition
codes can be adopted. While we observe that the LDPC
decoders are always implemented with a partially parallel
architecture [12], [13], i.e., the messages are simultaneously
produced in groups. Therefore, we can put the parallel mes-
sages into packages, which enable larger bit blocks that are
suitable for efficient coding schemes. Secondly, in the existing
work, the execution of the adaptive coding is based on the
magnitude value, specifically the most significant bit (MSB)
of the message, which is subject to the storage errors as well.
In such a case, the decoding may be incorrectly performed,
which will result in additional errors. However, due to the con-
vergence behavior of LDPC messages, the magnitude values
almost grow in the same pace during the iterative decodings. It
means that the magnitude value can be evaluated by referring
to the overall level of the message package instead of a single
MSB. Therefore, in our proposed scheme, we introduce a
majority logic decision for the magnitude evaluation. In such a
case, the possibility of unexpected decoding will be degraded
dramatically. Moreover, We demonstrate our proposed scheme
by the density evolution analysis and finite length codeword
simulations. The results show that the proposed scheme has a
coding gain of 0.2 dB to the existing one, while the residual
978-1-74052-390-5/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CNU
VNU
0
m
,
e
v c
m
,v c
m
,
e
c v
m
,c v
m
. . .
. . .
v
m
RAM
Fig. 1.
Structure of LDPC decoders
error of our LDPC decoder is nearly one order of magnitude
lower compared with the former work.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
the system model and the existing scheme are introduced. Sec-
tion III provides the proposed adaptive package coding scheme
and the discrete density evolution method. The analysis results
are shown in Section IV. Section V concludes the entire paper.
II. SYSTEM MODELS AND THE EXISTING ADAPTIVE
CODING SCHEME
A. System models
As shown in Fig. 1, the LDPC decoder is consisting of
variable node units (VNU), check node units (CNU) and mem-
ories (RAM). When the LDPC decoder works, the channel
message 𝑚0 is firstly input to the VNU. Then, the VNU
and CNU process computations iteratively, during which the
internal messages 𝑚𝑣,𝑐and 𝑚𝑐,𝑣are produced. Between the
executions of the VNU and CNU, the messages will be stored
in the memories. After the maximum iterations, final decision
is made in the VNU, where the result 𝑚𝑣is produced. In this
paper, we consider the sum-product decoding algorithm for
LDPC codes.
When the LDPC decoders are implemented on digital
circuits, the messages have to be quantized and stored in
memories. Following the bit-level error models utilized in
[5] [7] and [9], a binary symmetric channel (BSC) with
the crossover probability of 𝛼is adopted for the message
memories in this paper, as shown in Fig. 2. The parameter
𝛼is exactly the upset probability of RAM cells. When the
quantized messages 𝑚𝑣,𝑐and 𝑚𝑐,𝑣are stored in the unreliable
memories, their bits are supposed to have passed the BSC
channels. We define the output messages as 𝑚𝑒
𝑣,𝑐and 𝑚𝑒
𝑐,𝑣,
respectively, as shown in Fig. 1. Moreover, as demonstrated
in [6] [11], the faulty messages from CNU to VNU have
little influence on the decoding performance. Therefore, in this
paper, we will not set protection on 𝑚𝑐,𝑣as the former works.
B. Existing adaptive coding scheme
The former study observed that when the iterative decoding
was just started and thus most messages had small magnitudes,
the LSBs had obvious influence on the decoding errors. While
BSC( )
D
BSC( )
D
BSC( )
D
RAM
. . .
Quantized Messages
CNU/VNU
Bit 0
Bit 1
Bit b
Fig. 2.
BSC memory error model
when the iteration round 𝑖was large enough and then the
magnitude values approached the maximum quantized value,
the residual errors were mainly affected by the sign bits.
Based on these observations, they utilized the last two LSBs to
protect the sign bit when the message had a large magnitude
value.
In detail, when the messages were written into RAMs, if
the MSB was 1, the last two LSBs were neglected, while the
corresponding memory addresses were used for a (3,1) repeti-
tion coding on the sign bit. Otherwise, the messages would be
stored in the RAMs directly. When the LDPC decoder read a
message from the RAMs, the MSB was checked. If the MSB
was read as 1, a decoding on the (3,1) code was executed to
obtain the sign bit, while the last two LSBs were selected from
{0, 1} randomly. Otherwise, the messages were assigned with
the read values.
The aforementioned scheme makes fully use of the LSBs in
the messages. It has efficiently protected the unreliable mes-
sages without using any storage redundancy. However, there
are some disadvantages for this protection scheme. Firstly, the
adaptive coding is executed inside the single message, which
is typically quantized with no more than 7 bits for the reason
of complexity [14]. Consequently, there are not enough bits for
the efficient coding schemes. For example, when the number
of quantization bits is from 4 to 6, only simple repetition codes
can be utilized. And this scheme is even unapplicable when the
messages are quantized into less than 4 bits. Secondly, whether
the adaptive coding is executed or not is totally based on the
MSB, which is also subject to the storage errors. In such a
case, the decoding of the adaptive code may be incorrectly
executed, which further degrades the performance of the sign
bit protection.
We demonstrate the exact error-correcting performance of
the sign bits for this coding scheme as follows. In the first
case that the MSB is 1, the encoding will be executed. If the
MSB is read correctly, the (3,1) code will be properly decoded
with an output error ratio of 3𝛼2 −2𝛼3. If the MSB is read
in error, the decoding will be neglected, which results in an
error rate of 𝛼for the sign bit. That means, the expectation
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
of the error rate for the sign bit is
𝑝𝑒(MSB = 1) = (1 −𝛼) × (3𝛼2 −2𝛼3) + 𝛼× 𝛼
= 4𝛼2 −5𝛼3 + 2𝛼4.
(1)
In the second case that the MSB is 0, similarly the error rate
should be calculated with two cases, which is derived by
𝑝𝑒(MSB = 0) = (1 −𝛼) × 𝛼+ 𝛼× [1
4(1 −𝛼) + 3
4𝛼]
= 5
4𝛼−1
2𝛼2.
(2)
Unfortunately, since the storage error probability 𝛼is small
enough, when the MSB is 1, this coding scheme cannot
achieve the error-correcting capability of the (3,1) repetition
code; while when the MSB is 0, the error probability of the
sign bit is even higher than the one without protection.
III. PROPOSED ADAPTIVE PACKAGE CODING SCHEME
AND DISCRETE DENSITY EVOLUTION
In this section, we firstly introduce the proposed adaptive
package coding scheme. Then, a discrete density evolution is
developed to analyze the residual errors and coding gains of
the sum-product LDPC decoders.
A. Adaptive package coding scheme
The former message protecting scheme executes coding
on the bits within a message. Yet we intend to put the
messages into packages in order to utilize more efficient block
coding schemes. Fortunately, since practical LDPC codes are
always designed as quasi-cyclic, the most popular hardware
architectures of LDPC decoders are the partially parallel ones.
It means a group of messages are produced and required
synchronously. Therefore, we can put the synchronous mes-
sages into packages. The size of the package is relevant to
the degree of parallelism, which is several dozen typically.
Thus, a classical (𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑑) linear block code can be applied
to protect the sign bits, where 𝑘is the number of messages
in one package. In fact, when 𝑘is large, block codes with
the rate of 1/2 are efficient enough for the error-correcting.
In other words, we can only utilize one LSB for the adaptive
coding on the sign bit, which will reduce the impacts on the
precision of messages.
Another problem of the existing study is that the execution
of coding is determined by the unreliable MSB. To overcome
this problem, we introduce a majority logic decision on the
MSB package, which gives rise to the robustness for the MSB
errors. Specifically, the execution of the adaptive coding can be
determined by checking the number of 1s in the MSB package.
When most message magnitude values are large enough, the
rest can hardly be very small due to the convergence character
of LDPC decoding. In such a case, executing the adaptive
coding will be necessary enough.
The structure of our proposed coding scheme is depicted in
Fig. 3 and described in detail as follows. Firstly, we combine
the 𝑘messages into a package. Define 𝑡𝑎= ⌊𝜂𝑘⌋as the
threshold for the majority logic decision, where 𝜂∈[0, 1].
When the message package is written into the memories, check
. . .
Message Package
sign
MSB
LSB
. . .
. . .
. . .
majority 
decision
message 1
message 2
message k
. . .
coding
Fig. 3.
Message package coding
that whether 𝑁(MSB = 1) > 𝑡𝑎is true. If so, remove the last
LSBs in the package, and use the corresponding memories to
construct a (2𝑘, 𝑘, 𝑑) block code with the sign bits. Otherwise,
store the message package directly. When the message package
is read from the memories, similarly, if 𝑁(MSB = 1) > 𝑡𝑎
holds, decode the (2𝑘, 𝑘, 𝑑) codeword for the sign bits and
assign the LSBs with random values. Otherwise, assign the
message package with what we read directly.
B. Discrete density evolution
We develop a discrete density evolution to analyze the
performance of our proposed coding scheme on the quantized
sum-product LDPC decoders. In the paper, we only consider
the regular (𝑑𝑣, 𝑑𝑐) LDPC codes to simplify the analysis.
Suppose that the messages are quantized into 𝑄bits, which
generates an alphabet of 2𝑄−1 symbols for the messages.
Thus, the probability mass function (PMF) of the message
can be represented by a vector with the length of 2𝑄−1,
which we define as 𝒑= {𝑝1, 𝑝2, ..., 𝑝2𝑄−1}, where 𝑝𝑖is the
probability of the 𝑖th quantization symbol. What’s more, it
has been proved that when the hardware errors are symmetric,
the symmetric conditions of density evolution still hold for
the faulty LDPC decoders [5]. As a consequence, all zero
sequences can be adopted for the analysis. In such a case,
the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the channel message, which
is derived by 𝐿𝐿𝑅(𝑚0) = ln 𝑃(𝑦∣𝑥=1)
𝑃(𝑦∣𝑥=0), obeys the distribution
𝑁(−2
𝜎2 , 4
𝜎2 ). Therefore, the PMF of 𝑚0 is initialized as
𝒑0 = {𝑝𝑖=
1
√
2𝜋⋅2/𝜎
∫𝑠𝑖
𝑠𝑖−1
exp(−(𝑡+ 2/𝜎2)2
2 × 4/𝜎2 )𝑑𝑡},
(3)
where 𝑠𝑖is the value of the 𝑖th quantization symbol. Moreover,
define 𝑠0 = −∞and 𝑠2𝑄−1 = +∞. Meanwhile, before the
decoding iterations, the message 𝑚𝑐,𝑣will be assigned with
0. It means 𝒑𝑐,𝑣should be initialized as
𝒑𝑐,𝑣= {0, 0, ..., 𝑝2(𝑄−1) = 1, 0, ..., 0}.
(4)
After the initializations, the VNU and CNU execute iterative
computations. Firstly, in the VNU nodes, the PMF of message
𝑚𝑣,𝑐is derived by
𝒑𝑣,𝑐= 𝒑0 ⊗(𝒑𝑐,𝑣)⊗(𝑑𝑣−1).
(5)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Secondly, the message 𝑚𝑣,𝑐goes through the unreli-
able memories. It is the place where we execute our pro-
posed schemes. To model the bit errors, we define 𝒆=
{𝑒1, 𝑒2, ..., 𝑒𝑄} as the error vector for the quantized messages,
where 𝑒𝑖is the error probability of the 𝑖th quantized bit (𝑒1
for the sign bit). Based on the error vector 𝒆, we further define
PMF transfer matrix:
𝑻(𝒆) = {𝑝𝑖𝑗=
𝑄
∏
𝑚=1
𝜖𝑖𝑗(𝑚)},
(6)
where 𝑝𝑖𝑗= 𝑃(𝑚𝑒
𝑣,𝑐= 𝑠𝑗∣𝑚𝑣,𝑐= 𝑠𝑖). In (6), 𝜖𝑖𝑗(𝑚) = 𝑒𝑚
if 𝑠𝑖and 𝑠𝑗have a different value for the 𝑚th quantized bit;
otherwise 𝜖𝑖𝑗(𝑚) = 1 −𝑒𝑚. Given 𝑻(𝒆), the update of the
PMF in unreliable memories can be obtained by 𝒑𝑒
𝑣,𝑐= 𝒑𝑣,𝑐⋅
𝑻(𝒆). Therefore, we need to acquire the error vector 𝒆for
our proposed coding scheme, which is derived as follows. The
probability of the MSB being 1 is calculated by
𝑝𝑀=
2(𝑄−2)
∑
𝑚=1
𝒑𝑣,𝑐(𝑚) +
2𝑄−1
∑
𝑛=3×2(𝑄−2)
𝒑𝑣,𝑐(𝑛).
(7)
Based on it, the probability of 𝑁(MSB = 1) > 𝑡𝑎is derived
by
𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑑=
𝑘
∑
𝑖=𝑡𝑎+1
(𝑘
𝑖
)
(𝑝𝑀)𝑖(1 −𝑝𝑀)𝑘−𝑖.
(8)
With the probability of 𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑑, we will execute coding on the
message packages, while with the probability of 1 −𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑑,
the messages will be written directly. We respectively discuss
these two cases as follows.
∙With package coding: The sign bits of the message
package is protected by (2𝑘, 𝑘, 𝑑), whose error upper
bound is derived as
𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑐=
2𝑘
∑
𝑖=⌊𝑑+1
2
⌋
(2𝑘
𝑖
)
(𝛼)𝑖(1 −𝛼)2𝑘−𝑖.
(9)
However, due to the storage errors of the MSBs, the
decoding may be neglected when the majority logic
decision fails, whose probability is
𝑝𝑒
𝑑𝑒𝑐𝐴=
𝑘
∑
𝑖=𝑡𝑎+1
𝑖
∑
𝑗=𝑖−𝑡𝑎
(𝑘
𝑖
)(𝑖
𝑗
)
×
(𝑝𝑀)𝑖(1 −𝑝𝑀)𝑘−𝑖(𝛼)𝑗(1 −𝛼)𝑖−𝑗.
(10)
In this case, the error vector 𝒆𝐴can be obtained:
𝒆𝐴=
{
𝑝𝑒
𝑑𝑒𝑐𝐴𝛼+ (1 −𝑝𝑒
𝑑𝑒𝑐𝐴)𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑐, 𝛼, ..., 𝛼, 1
2
}
. (11)
∙Without package coding: Similarly, due to the MSBs’
errors, the probability of executing decoding incorrectly
is
𝑝𝑒
𝑑𝑒𝑐𝐵=
𝑡𝑎
∑
𝑖=0
𝑘−𝑖
∑
𝑗=𝑡𝑎−𝑖+1
(𝑘
𝑖
)(𝑘−𝑖
𝑗
)
×
(𝑝𝑀)𝑖(1 −𝑝𝑀)𝑘−𝑖(𝛼)𝑗(1 −𝛼)𝑘−𝑖−𝑗.
(12)
Thus, the error vector 𝒆𝐵can be obtained:
𝒆𝐵=
{
𝑒1 = 𝑝𝑒
𝑑𝑒𝑐𝐵
2
+ (1 −𝑝𝑒
𝑑𝑒𝑐𝐵)𝛼, 𝛼, ..., 𝛼, 𝑒1
}
.
(13)
To sum up, the PMF in unreliable memories should be updated
by
𝒑𝑒
𝑣,𝑐= 𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑑⋅𝒑𝑣,𝑐⋅𝑻(𝒆𝐴) + (1 −𝑝𝑡ℎ𝑑) ⋅𝒑𝑣,𝑐⋅𝑻(𝒆𝐵). (14)
Thirdly in the CNU nodes, the update of the PMF is the
same with normal LDPC decoders, which is derived by
𝝀𝑣,𝑐= [sign(𝒑𝑒
𝑣,𝑐), Γ(𝒑𝑒
𝑣,𝑐)]⊗(𝑑𝑐−1),
(15)
and
𝒑𝑐,𝑣= sign(𝝀𝑣,𝑐) ⋅Γ(abs(𝝀𝑣,𝑐)),
(16)
where Γ(𝒙) is the mapping function to the log-domain. Next,
the messages pass unreliable memories again. The difference
is that we do not set protection here, as described in Section
II-A. It means
𝒑𝑒
𝑐,𝑣= 𝒑𝑐,𝑣⋅𝑻(𝒆(𝛼)).
(17)
Finally, after the maximum iterations, the decoding decision
is made, where the PMF is derived as
𝒑𝑣= 𝒑0 ⊗(𝒑𝑒
𝑐,𝑣)⊗𝑑𝑣.
(18)
And the residual error can be obtained by
𝑝𝑒=
2𝑄−1
∑
𝑖=2(𝑄−1)+1
𝒑𝑣(𝑖) + 𝒑𝑣(2(𝑄−1))
2
.
(19)
IV. ANALYSIS RESULTS
In this section, the residual error and coding gain are
analyzed by the discrete density evolution. Moreover, Monte-
Carlo simulations are executed on finite length codewords to
demonstrate the analysis.
A. Results of discrete density evolution
We utilize the discrete density evolution described in Sec-
tion III-B to obtain the residual errors and coding gains for var-
ious schemes. The (𝑑𝑣, 𝑑𝑐) = (6, 30) regular LDPC codes are
adopted. And a classical Gray code of (𝑛, 𝑘, 𝑑) = (24, 12, 8)
is utilized to protect the packages. The messages are quantized
with 5 bits, while majority logic threshold is set as 𝑡𝑎= 6. The
residual errors are depicted in Fig. 4, while the coding gains
with the bit error ratio (BER) of 1×10−6 are depicted in Fig.
5. We can see that, the proposed scheme can at most obtain
a gain of 0.2 dB to the existing work when 𝛼= 7.5 × 10−3.
Moreover, the residual error of the proposed scheme is almost
one order of magnitude lower than the existing scheme.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 4.
Residual error analysis of the (𝑑𝑣, 𝑑𝑐) = (4, 20) LDPC code
Fig. 5.
Coding gain at BER=1e-6 for the (𝑑𝑣, 𝑑𝑐) = (4, 20) LDPC code
Fig. 6.
Simulations for the (5100,4080) LDPC code. (𝛼= 0.0075)
B. Monte-Carlo Simulations
In addition to the theoretical analysis by density evolu-
tions, we further execute Monte-Carlo simulations on finite
length LDPC codewords, where a regular LDPC code of
(𝑛, 𝑘) = (5100, 4080) is adopted. The communication channel
is assumed to be the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
channel. The bit flipping probability of the memories is fixed
at 𝛼= 0.0075. Fig. 6 shows the results of decoding BERs,
where we can see that, the finite length simulations match well
with the theoretical analysis.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, an adaptive package coding scheme was pro-
posed to implement LDPC decoders with unreliable memories.
We put the messages into packages by taking advantage of the
partially parallel architecture of LDPC decoders. Moreover,
the sign bits were adaptively protected by the LSBs based on
the various importance. And we introduced a majority logic
decision to reduce the unexpected decodings. We developed
a discrete density evolution to analyze our proposed scheme,
where it is shown to have a coding gain of 0.2 dB compared
with the existing work, while the residual error is nearly
one order of magnitude lower. We also executed finite length
codeword simulations, the results of which supported the
density evolution analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (NSFC, 91538203), and the new
strategic industries development projects of Shenzhen City
(JCYJ20150403155812833).
REFERENCES
[1] D. Stone, A. Lindenmoyer, G. French, E. Musk, D. Gump, C. Kathuria,
C. Miller, M. Sirangelo, and T. Pickens, “NASA’s approach to commer-
cial cargo and crew transportation,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 63, no. 1,
pp. 192–197, 2008.
[2] R. Black and M. Fletcher, “Next generation space avionics: layered
system implementation,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Mag-
azine, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 9–14, 2005.
[3] P. Dodd, M. Shaneyfelt, J. Schwank, and J. Felix, “Current and future
challenges in radiation effects on CMOS electronics,” IEEE Transactions
on Nuclear Science, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1747–1763, 2010.
[4] CCSDS, “Low density parity check codes for use in near-earth and deep
space applications,” Experimental Specification CCSDS, 2011.
[5] L. R. Varshney, “Performance of LDPC codes under faulty iterative
decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 7,
pp. 4427–4444, 2011.
[6] S. S. T. Yazdi, H. Cho, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B decoder on noisy
hardware,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 5, pp.
1660–1673, 2013.
[7] C.-H. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B LDPC decoder with
transient and permanent errors,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 15–28, 2014.
[8] ——, “Belief propagation algorithms on noisy hardware,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 11–24, 2015.
[9] C. K. Ngassa, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, “Min-sum-based decoders
running on noisy hardware,” in 2013 IEEE Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM), 2013, pp. 1879–1884.
[10] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and A. Burg, “Density evolution for min-
sum decoding of LDPC codes under unreliable message storage,” IEEE
Communications Letters, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 849–852, 2014.
[11] C.-H. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, “Adaptive error correction coding
scheme for computations in the noisy min-sum decoder,” in Information
Theory (ISIT), 2015 IEEE International Symposium on, 2015, pp. 1906–
1910.
[12] Z. Chen, L. Yin, Y. Pei, and J. Lu, “Codehop: physical layer error
correction and encryption with ldpc-based code hopping,” Science China
Information Sciences, vol. 59, no. 10, p. 102309, Mar 2016.
[13] Q. Li, X. Qu, L. Yin, and J. Lu, “Generalized low-density parity-
check coding scheme with partial-band jamming,” Tsinghua Science and
Technology, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 203–210, April 2014.
[14] J.-S. Lee and J. Thorpe, “Memory-efficient decoding of LDPC codes,”
in Proceedings. International Symposium on Information Theory, 2005.
ISIT 2005., 2005, pp. 459–463.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:32:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
