A low-complexity stopping criterion for the decoder of parallel concatenated LDPC codes

Xu Xiaojian
Information Engineering University Zhengzhou,450002, P.R.China Email: xuxiaojian@plaieu.cn

Li Jin
NCRL, Southeast University Nanjing, 210096, P.R.China
Email: lijin@seu.edu.cn

Hu Hanying
Information Engineering University Zhengzhou,450002, P.R.China Email: huhanying@vip.sina.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel stopping criteria that based on the mean of the magnitude of the extrinsic information in the iterative decoder of parallel concatenated LDPC (LowDensity Parity-Check) codes. The proposed criterion has low computation complexity and few storage requirements. Simulations results proved that the MEM (Mean of Extrinsic information Magnitude) rules outperforms the other existing criterions in terms of BER and average number of super iterations.
1. Introduction
PCGCs (Parallel Concatenated Gallager Codes)[1] are a class of concatenated codes built from the direct parallel concatenation of LDPC codes[2] without interleavers. The motivation is to break the fairly complex decoding of a long code into steps while maintaining the information flow between the component decoders and minimizing any information loss between the decoding steps. The decoding of PCGCs follows the scenario of turbo decoding. A super iteration is defined as the process of exchanging extrinsic information between the two component decoders. In each super iteration, each component decoder performs a number of local iterations before passing any information to the other component decoder. In conventional decoder, the process of exchanging information between the component decoders will continue till both decoders converge to the valid codewords, or a fixed maximum number of super iterations is reached (called “FIXED” scheme hereafter). Because different ‘good’ (can be decoded) frames need different super iterations to converge, hence the presetting MNSI (Maximum Number of Super Iteration) in FIXED scheme is usually big to guaranty the convergence of all ‘good’ frames. But there exit a class of frames, called ‘bad’ frames hereafter, which can’t convergence with any further super iterations. Therefore, it is efficient way to reduce the computation complexity and the delay of the decoder if we can devise a criterion to stop the iterative decoding when the decoder approaches the limit of performance.
* This paper was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) of China under grant number 60472064.

2 σ2

y1p

2 σ2

ys

LDPC

L1(uk)

2 σ2

y2p

decoder
1 Le1(uk)

LDPC L2(uk)
decoder
2 Le2(uk)

Figure 1. Illustration of PCGC decoder Some stopping criterion had been presented[3]-[8], but most of them considered the decoding of Turbo code. In this letter, we will investigate the application of stopping criterion in the decoder of PCGCs, and present a new simple stopping criteria. The criteria is based on the statistic of extrinsic information exchanging between the component decoder. In section 2, we will introduce the application of some existing stopping criterions in the PCGC decoder. Then in section 3, we will propose a low-complexity stopping criteria, and the simulation results will be shown in section 4. In the last section, we will draw some conclusions.
2. Existing strategies
Several stopping criterion had been devised for turbo decoding, such as the CE (Cross-Entropy) criterion[3], the SCR (Sign-Change-Ratio) criterion[4], the HDA (Hard-DecisionAided) criterion[4] and the SDR (Sign-Difference-Ratio) criterion[5]. More work on the stopping criterions can be found in [6]-[8], and most of the existing criterions can also be used in PCGC decoder. The SCR, the HAD and the SDR criteria are simpler to implement compared with the CE rule, and the number of iterations they could save is about the same, or more for some conditions. So in this section, for simplicity, we just review the CE criteria and the SCR criteria.
At first, we introduce the structure of PCGC decoder. Let
uk , k ∈{1,.., N}, be the information bits, the code bits of which
are binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulated and transmitted through an N (0,σ 2 ) additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel. At receiver, ( ys , y1p , y2p ) are signals
corresponding to uk , where ys is the systematic signal, y1p

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
0-7695-2629-2/06/$20.00 (c) 2006 IEEE

and y2p are parity for LDPC code 1 and LDPC code 2,
respectively. They are sent to the soft-input soft-output (SISO) maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) decoders to produce
the estimates uˆk , as shown in Fig. 1.
At ith super iteration, let Lij (uk ) and Liej (uk ) denote the
log-likelihood ratio (LLR) and the extrinsic information of the
estimated bit uˆk delivered by decoder j, respectively, with
j=1,2. It is shown in [3] that

L1i

(uk

)䰉Lie䯹21

(uk

)䯷 2 σ2

yks䯷Lie1(uk )

(1)

Li2 (uk )䰉Lie1(uk )䯷σ22 yks䯷Lie2 (uk )

(2)

where (2 /σ 2 ) yks is the soft output value of the channel.
In the CE criterion, the cross entropy between the output a prior information of two sub-decoders at iteration i can be approximated by[3]

¦ T (i) ≈ k

Lie

2

(uk

)

−

Li −1 e2

(uk

)

2

e L1i (uk )

(3)

Hence the CE stopping rule compute T (i) at each iteration i

and stop further iterations when T (i) falls to a value in the

range (10−2  10−4 )T (1) . When T (i) is in this region, two

distri-bution are said to be close enough and the iterative process could be terminated with a minimal performance degradation. According to the results in [3], the CE rule saves a considerable amount of complexity in terms of iterations.
In the SCR method, it is shown that T (i) is directly related

to the number of sign changes C(i) in Le2 (uk ) from iteration
i-1 to iteration i. So the SCR rule stop the iterations in the
decoder if C(i) ≤ (0.005  0.03)N . The advantage of this

method is that the decoder only needs to count the number of sign changes of the extrinsic information between two consecutive iterations, so it requires less computation. In Section 4, we will show the performance of the CE method and the SCR method when they are used in PCGC decoder.

3. The proposed criterion
From repeated simulation, we observed that, as the number of super iteration increases, for a ‘good’ frame, the magnitudes of the LLR gradually become larger. Since the term
(2 /σ 2 ) yks in (1) and (2) is fixed for every super iteration, the increase of LLR Lij (uk ) is due to the increase in the

magnitudes of the extrinsic information Liej (uk ) . Hence, it is

conceivable that the performance gain reaches the limit if the

magnitudes of the extrinsic information do not continue

increasing. If the decoder terminates when the magnitudes of

the extrinsic information converge, the unnecessary

computation and the delay of the decoder can be avoided.

Based on the description above, we compute

¦ EA(i) =

N −1 0

Lie2 (uk )

(4)

N

at the end of each super iteration i to trace the magnitudes of the extrinsic information.

Through repeated simulation, we observed that the EA(i)

of ‘bad’ frames will increase at first and then fluctuate in small range when the number of super iteration increases. The
EA(i) of the most of ‘good’ frames will increase

monotonously till convergence to the valid codewords. But the
EA(i) of some ‘good’ frames do not increase monotonously.

It will falls in big amplitude sometimes. So we can design a stopping criterion that counts the number of the event “the
EA(i) fall in a small range” to distinguish the ‘bad’ frames

from the ‘good’ frames and stops the iteration when the counter reaches a preset value.
The detailed proposed scheme is: Initialization: Reset the counter C, and setup the parameter of the criterion, the threshold T and the fall ratio P;
Step 1: At the end of each super iteration i, compute EA(i) ;

Step 2: If EA(i) < EA(i − 1) and EA(i −1) − EA(i) <

P × EA(i −1) , C plus one;

Step 3: If C equals T, stopping the decoder, else begin the next super iteration and go to step 1.
Because the proposed criterion is based on the mean of extrinsic information magnitude, so we call it the MEM criterion.
The computation complexity and the storage requirement are important to the stopping criterion. Hence we compare the implementing requirement of the CE, the SCR and the MEM methods. At each super iteration i, the CE criterion requires (5N-1) real number operations and (N+2) real number memory
units for storing L1i (uk ) ,T(i) and T(1) [4]. The SCR criterion
needs (3N-1) integer operations and (N+2) integer memory
units for storing the signs of Lie2 (uk ) , C(i) and C(1) .
However, the MEM criterion only needs N real number
operation and 2 real number memory for storing EA(i) and

EA(i −1) . Then we can conclude that the MEM criterion has

low computation complexity and needs the least storage memory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
0-7695-2629-2/06/$20.00 (c) 2006 IEEE

4. Simulation results and comparison
For all simulations, the component encoders are rate onehalf, random generated LDPC encoder, both of dimensions 640 h1280. The MCW (Mean Column Weight) of the first encoder is 2 and the second is 2.667[1]. At the receiver, the frames are decoded by the algorithm in log domain[9]. The maximum number of local iteration in component decoder is 25 and the maximum number of super iteration is 15.
In Fig. 2 we show the performance in terms of bit error rate (BER) when PCGC decoder using the CE criterion and SCR criterion with different parameters. Both of the criterions result performance degradation at high signal-to noise ratios (SNR) region. Though the degradation directed by the SCR technique is smaller than the degradation resulted by the CE method, but at least 0.1dB loss exists. The best threshold of the CE and SCR method in the PCGC decoder is 0.001 and 0.005, respectively.
In Fig. 3 we show the BER curves of the PCGC decoder usind the MEM rule with different T and P. From the curves, we can find that there is negligible BER performances degradation when the decoder using MEM rule with T of 2 and P of 0.05, and a smaller T or bigger P are unfavorable though they can save more super iterations.
In Fig. 4 we compare the average numbers of super iteration against the SNR when the decoder uses different stopping criterions. We can observe that all the three stopping criterions can save super iterations efficiently at low to medium SNR. The CE method, while requires the most complexity computation and storage memory, saves more super iterations than the SCR method. But the proposed MEM method outperforms both of the CE criterion and the SCR criterion

Figure 3. BER performance for the MEM rule with various parameters

Figure 4. Average number of super iterations for various stopping schemes

Figure 2. BER performance for the CE criterion and the SCR criterion.

5. Conclusion
In this paper, we investigate how to reduce the computation complexity and the decoding delay of the PCGC decoder with stopping criterion, and propose a novel simple stopping criterion. The proposed MEM method is based on the statistic of the magnitude of the extrinsic information. The simulation results verify that the MEM rules needs less computation, least storage requirement, and results least performance degradation compared with two existing stopping criterions. Hence we can draw a conclusion that the MEM criterion can reduce the computation complexity of the PCGC decoder efficiently with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
0-7695-2629-2/06/$20.00 (c) 2006 IEEE

negligible performance loss, and has the advantage of hardware implementation.
References
[1] H. Behairy, S. C. Chang, “Parallel Concatenated Gallager codes”, Electron. Letter, 2000, 36(24), pp.2025-2026.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory. 1962, Jan, pp.21-28.
[3] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer and L. Papker, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 1996, 42, pp.429-445.
[4] R. Y. Shao, S. Lin and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Two simple stopping criteria for turbo decoding”, IEEE Trans. Commun., 1999, 47, pp.1117-1120.
[5] Y. Wu, B. D. Woerner and W. J. Ebel, “A simple stopping criterion for turbo decoding”, IEEE Commun. Lett., 2000, 4, (8).
[6] T. M. N. Ngatched, F. Takawira, “Simple stopping criterion for turbo decoding”, Electron. Lett., 2001, 37(22), pp.1350-1351.
[7] N. Y. Yu, M. G. Kis, Y. S. Kim and S. U. Chung, “Efficient stopping criterion for iterative decoding of turbo codes”, Electron. Letter, 2003, 39(1), pp.73-75.
[8] D. Bokolamulla, T. Aulin, “A new stopping criterion for iterative decoding”, in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2004, Jun., vol.1, pp.538-541.
[9] J. Li, X. H. You and Y. H. Kim, “Low complexity decoding algorithm of parallel concatenated LDPC code”, in Proc. IEEE Circuits and Systems Symposium on Emerging Technologies, 2004, May, vol.1, pp.289-291.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
0-7695-2629-2/06/$20.00 (c) 2006 IEEE

