ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ┬Ł 14, 2006

A Method for Constructing LDPC Codes with Low Error Floor

Eran Sharon and Simon Litsyn Department of Electrical Engineering Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978 Israel Email: {eransh,litsyn}@eng.tau.ac.il

AbstractŌĆö This paper describes a novel Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm for constructing LDPC codes with minimized block error probability over the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC). The constructed codes provide superior performance and lower error floor compared to codes generated by previously known algorithms. Furthermore, an upper bound on the expected block error probability in the error floor region of the generated code is derived.
I. INTRODUCTION
The performance under iterative decoding of a finite length LDPC code is governed by specific combinatorial configurations appearing in the codeŌĆÖs underlying graph. For the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) iterative decoding fails if the erasures encompass a subset of the variable nodes forming a stopping set [2]. For other channels the concept of stopping sets is replaced by trapping sets [7] or pseudo-codewords [3].
The conventional approach to constructing LDPC codes from a given ensemble is based on a random generation of the codeŌĆÖs graph. In order to improve the finite length performance and reduce error floor of the codes, it is customary to use a girth conditioning in the random construction process for eliminating short stopping or trapping sets. Since stopping sets constitute cycles in the graph, eliminating short cycles reduces the probability of small stopping and trapping sets. A simple greedy algorithm for generating graphs with large girth is the Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm [4], [1]. Graph generation algorithms which try to avoid short cycles having a small Approximate Cycle Extrinsic-Message-Degree (ACE) that are more susceptible to constitute small stopping and trapping sets are described in [9], [6].
In this paper we propose an improved Error Minimization Progressive Edge Growth (EMPEG) algorithm for constructing codes with good finite length performance and low errorfloors. Unlike previously known code constructing algorithms which optimize parameters such as the girth or ACE which influence the codeŌĆÖs performance indirectly, the proposed algorithm directly optimizes the codeŌĆÖs block error probability over BEC. We identify combinatorial structures in the codeŌĆÖs graph, named minimal cycle sets, which on one hand are easily enumerated and on the other hand can be used for determining the codeŌĆÖs expected block error probability over BEC. The EMPEG algorithm is a greedy algorithm which generates the codeŌĆÖs graph edges one by one. The edges are chosen such that their contribution to the expected block error probability is minimized. The expected contribution of an edge to the block error probability is computed based on enumeration of all the minimal cycle sets that are generated if the edge is

added to the graph. Moreover, we derive an upper bound on the expected block error probability of the constructed codes based on its cycle setsŌĆÖ spectrum. This upper bound can be used for choosing the best code from a set of generated codes without resorting to long Monte-Carlo simulations.

II. BACKGROUND AND BASIC DEFINITIONS

An irregular LDPC code is defined by a sparse undirected ir-

regular bipartite graph, consisting of variable and check nodes.

We denote the sets of variable nodes, check nodes and graph

edges by V , C and E respectively. The cardinalities of V and

C are N and M respectively. The ensemble of irregular LDPC

codes, or the ensemble of their corresponding irregular bipartite

graphs, is defined by the variable nodesŌĆÖ and check nodesŌĆÖ

degree distributions. Let ╬ø(x) =

dv i=2

╬øixi

and

P (x)

=

dc i=2

Pixi

be

the

generating

functions

of

the

degree

distribu-

tions for the variable and check nodes respectively, where ╬øi

is the number of degree-i variable nodes, and Pi is the number

of degree-i check nodes. We denote the ensemble of irregular

(╬ø(x), P (x))-bipartite graphs with N = ╬ø(1) variable nodes and M = P (1) check nodes by G(╬ø(x),P (x)). In this paper we consider right regular (╬ø(x), M xdc )-LDPC codes.

An extrinsic check node to a set of variable nodes is a

check node which is singly connected to the set. An intrinsic

check node to a set of variable nodes is a check node which

is connected to the set at least twice. The Extrinsic Message

Degree (EMD) of a set of variable nodes is the number of

extrinsic check nodes connected to the set. We say that a set

of variable nodes forms a cycle if there exists a path passing

through all variable nodes in the set, and no other, that connects

every node in the set to itself without traversing an edge twice.

EMD of a path is EMD of the set of variable nodes that forms

the path. EMD of a cycle is EMD of the set of variable nodes

that forms the cycle.

Definition 2.1 (Stopping Set): A stopping set S is a subset of

the set of variable nodes V , such that no extrinsic check nodes

are connected to S.

We consider a codeword transmitted over BEC to be erroneous

if there is a residual set of bits that remain erased after decoding

has been performed. Di et al. [2] showed that the residual set

of bits that remain erased after belief propagation decoding is

exactly the maximal size stopping set included in the set of

erased bits before decoding. Thus, in order to generate a code

with good finite length performance over BEC, small stopping

sets should be eliminated from the codeŌĆÖs underlying graph.

Unfortunately, this is an intractable problem. A much easier

task is eliminating short cycles from the graph [4]. Since the

1┬Ł4244┬Ł0504┬Ł1/06/$20.00 ┬®2006 IEEE

2569

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ┬Ł 14, 2006

induced graph of a stopping set always contains cycles (assuming no degree one variable nodes in the graph), eliminating short cycles also eliminates small stopping sets. However, not all short cycles are equally harmful. Tian et al. [9] noticed that short cycles having small EMD are more prone to induce small stopping sets. We quantify this observation in the next section. Algorithms for generating LDPC codes with good finite length performance by eliminating short cycles with small EMD were suggested in [9], [6], [1]. However, since EMD of a cycle is hard to track, it was suggested to use an approximate measure of the cycle EMD. If there are no variable nodes in a cycle that are connected to common check nodes outside of the cycle then the cycle EMD is vi (dvi ŌłÆ 2) where dvi is the degree of the iŌĆÖth variable node in the cycle. Otherwise, the cycle EMD is reduced through check node sharing. By neglecting check node sharing an Approximate Cycle EMD (ACE) can be easily computed.
The EMPEG algorithm described in this paper directly minimizes the expected block error probability of the generated code. This is done by choosing the edges in the graph such that combinatorial structures with high contribution to the expected block error probability are avoided. Next, we provide definitions of the combinatorial structures we will look for in the graph.
Definition 2.2 (Minimal Cycle): A set of variable nodes forms a minimal cycle if: 1) it forms a cycle 2) no subset of the variable nodes forms a cycle.
Definition 2.3 (Cycle Set): A (d, Žē, Žä ) cycle set is a set of d variable nodes which forms a minimal cycle and have Žē intrinsic check nodes and Žä extrinsic check nodes. The definition of a cycle set implies that the following properties hold for the set: 1) Every intrinsic check node of the set is connected to the set exactly twice. 2) Any variable node in the cycle set is connected to exactly two intrinsic check nodes. 3) The number of extrinsic check nodes of the cycle set is equal to
vi (dvi ŌłÆ2) where dvi is the degree of the iŌĆÖth variable node in the cycle set. I.e, using the terms of [9] for the induced cycle of a cycle set, EM D = ACE. 4) The number of intrinsic check nodes of a size d cycle set is always Žē = d. The first two properties hold since otherwise the cycle formed by the set is not minimal. The third and fourth properties hold due to the second property. Due to the fourth property of a cycle set we can parameterize it using only two parameters, thus a (d, d, Žä )-cycle set will be denoted as a (d, Žä )-cycle set.
Definition 2.4 (Minimal Cycle with respect to the edge e): A set of variable nodes forms a minimal cycle with respect to the edge e if: 1) it forms a cycle that contains e 2) no subset of the variable nodes forms a cycle that contains e.
Definition 2.5 (e-Cycle Set): A (d, Žē, Žä ) e-cycle set is a set of d variable nodes, which form a minimal cycle with respect to e and have Žē intrinsic check nodes and Žä extrinsic check nodes. Only the first property of a cycle set holds for an e-cycle set. Variable nodes in an e-cycle set can be connected to more than two intrinsic checks, however the intrinsic checks are always connected between consecutive variable nodes in the minimal cycle formed by the e-cycle set. Fig. 1 shows an example of an e-cycle set.

Fig. 1. a) (4, 5, 6) e-cycle set. Variable and check nodes are depicted as
circles and rectangles, respectively. The 6 extrinsic check nodes are shaded. b) Example of a cycle which does not form an e-cycle set since it is not a minimal cycle with respect to e.

III. EXPECTED CONTRIBUTION OF A CYCLE SET TO THE
BLOCK ERROR PROBABILITY

In this section we describe how to compute an upper bound on the expected contribution to the block error probability of a given (d, Žä ) cycle set or (d, Žē, Žä ) e-cycle set over BEC with erasure probability . These probabilities are denoted Pcyc(d, Žä ) or Pcyc(d, Žē, Žä ) respectively. The expectation is taken over the ensemble G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ) of length N = ╬ø(1) codes. We consider the ensemble definition in which a random permutation on the M dc check node sockets, chosen uniformly over all M dc! permutations, defines a graph from the ensemble by defining how the edges connect the variable and check node sockets. We use this ensemble definition since it is easier for analysis. However, under this ensemble definition multiple edges are allowed between two nodes. Assuming that the decoding algorithm does not treat multiple edges differently than regular edges, this ensemble includes ŌĆ£badŌĆØ graphs representing codes with high error floors over BEC. For example, a degree two variable node which is connected by a double edge to some check node can never be recovered if it is erased and this can occur with finite probability. In practice, double edges are avoided, hence the analysis of expected block error probability of the ensemble G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ) provides an upper bound on the expected block error probability of an expurgated ensemble without double edges.
We use the union bound for computing Pcyc. A similar approach was used in [2], [5] for computing the expected stopping set distribution of a given graph ensemble.

N
Pcyc(d,Žē,Žä) = Ns(d,Žē,Žä) s, Pcyc(d,Žä) = Pcyc(d,d,Žä) (1)
s=d
Here, Ns(d, Žē, Žä ) is the expected number of stopping sets of size s which contain the given (d, Žē, Žä )-cycle set. We compute Ns(d, Žē, Žä ) using the following equation:

M dcŌłÆ2ŽēŌłÆŽä

Ns(d, Žē, Žä ) =

A(s ŌłÆ d, ) ┬Ę B( , Žē, Žä ) (2)

=Žä

where, A(s ŌłÆ d, ) is the number of subsets of variable nodes of size s ŌłÆd emanating edges and B( , Žē, Žä ) is the probability that edges form a stopping set over the set of M check nodes

2570
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ┬Ł 14, 2006

from which Žē check nodes are the intrinsic check nodes of the given cycle set and Žä check nodes are the extrinsic check nodes of the given cycle set. The term A(s ŌłÆ d, ) can be computed using the following generator polynomial:

A(s ŌłÆ d, ) = coeff

(1 + yxi)╬øi , ysŌłÆdx

(3)

i

According to the definition of a cycle set its induced cycle cannot include multiple edges and every one of its Žē intrinsic check nodes is connected to it exactly twice, otherwise the induced cycle is not minimal. Thus, the term B( , Žē, Žä ) is:

In this section we derive an upper bound on the expected block error probability of optimized ensembles. The upper bound is based on the observation that the support set of every erasures pattern leading to a block error includes a stopping set which includes a cycle set. Thus, if for each cycle set, we sum the probabilities of all the erasure patterns with support set including the cycle set, we take into account every error pattern at least once. This leads to the following upper bound:
Theorem 4.1: The expected block error probability over a BEC with erasure probability of the optimized ensemble G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ,W ) is upper bounded by:

min{ ,Žä(dcŌłÆ1)} i=Žä

min{ j=0

ŌłÆi,Žē(dcŌłÆ2)}

╬▒(i,Žä

)╬▓

(j,Žē)╬│

(M

ŌłÆ

Žē

ŌłÆ

Žä

,

ŌłÆiŌłÆj)

M dc ŌłÆ 2Žē ŌłÆ Žä

N

E [P (G, G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ,W) B )] Ōēż

W(d,Žä) Ns|W (d, d, Žä ) s

(d,Žä )

s=d

The term ╬▒(i, Žä ) is the number of possibilities for connecting i edges to the Žä extrinsic check nodes such that each extrinsic check nodes is connected at least once. It can be computed using the following recursion:

min{i,dc ŌłÆ1}
╬▒(i, Žä ) =
j=1

dc ŌłÆ 1 j

╬▒(i ŌłÆ j, Žä ŌłÆ 1)

where ╬▒(i, 0) = ╬┤i,0. The term ╬▓(j, Žē) is the number of possibilities for connecting j edges to the Žē intrinsic check nodes. Since there is no limitation on the number of connected edges to an intrinsic check node, it is given by:

╬▓(j, Žē) =

(dc ŌłÆ2)Žē j

The term ╬│(MŌłÆŽēŌłÆŽä, ŌłÆiŌłÆj) provides the number of possibilities for connecting the remaining ŌłÆ i ŌłÆ j edges to the remaining M ŌłÆ Žä ŌłÆ Žē check nodes such that a check node is either
unconnected, or connected at least twice. It can be computed using the following recursion, initialized with ╬│(0, ) = ╬┤ ,0,

Ōēż

W(d,Žä)Pcyc(d, Žä )

(5)

(d,Žä )
where, PB(G, ) denotes the block error probability of an LDPC code represented by graph G Ōłł G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ,W ) over

a BEC with erasure probability .

The derived upper bound becomes tighter when the graph

conditioning is weaker (i.e. when the code is less optimized)

and as the BEC erasure probability decreases. Thus it tightly

predicts the error floor performance of non-optimized ensem-

bles as can be seen in Section VI. Unfortunately, for highly

optimized graphs Ns|W (d, d, Žä ) Ns(d, d, Žä ) the bound (5) is quite loose. However, it is still useful as an upper bound on

the expected block error probability in the error floor region.

Furthermore, it can be used for determining which graph is

expected to have the best performance among a set of graphs,

without resorting to long simulations.

The upper bound can also serve as a tool for predicting the performance of a specific code from G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ) with cycle

set spectrum W , based on the ensembleŌĆÖs concentration [8].

We rewrite (5) after the following manipulation:

min{dc, }

╬│(M, ) = ╬│(M ŌłÆ 1, ) +

╬│(M ŌłÆ 1, ŌłÆ j)

dc j

j=2

IV. EXPECTED BLOCK ERROR PROBABILITY OF A GRAPH

Let W = {ŌłĆ(d, Žä ) : W(d,Žä)} denote the spectrum of cycle sets of a graph, where W(d,Žä) is the number of (d, Žä )-cycle sets in the graph. We denote by G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ,W ) the expurgated ensemble of the ensemble G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ), containing all graphs with cycle sets spectrum W . We say that G(╬ø(x),Mxdc ,W ) is an
optimized ensemble if

ŌłĆ(d, Žä ) : Ns|W (d, d, Žä ) Ōēż Ns(d, d, Žä )

(4)

Here Ns|W (d, d, Žä ) is the expected number of stopping sets of size s that include a (d, Žä )-cycle set given that the graph has a cycle set spectrum W . The computation of (2) assumes no graph conditioning, i.e. we assume that the edges that are not connected to the cycle set are chosen randomly (without any optimization). If graph conditioning is used to optimize the graph then (4) should hold.

E [P (G, G(╬ø(x),Mxdc,W) B )] Ōēż

W(vd,Žä)Pcycle(d, Žä ) (6)

vŌłłV (d,Žä )

where, W(vd,Žä) is the number of (d, Žä ) cycle sets that contain

variable node v and Pcycle(d, Žä ) =

N s=d

1 s

Ns(d,

d,

Žä

)

s.

Since every size s stopping set is counted s times, once for every

variable node v that belongs to the stopping set, we can divide

Ns(d, d, Žä ) by s. Finding W(vd,Žä) for a given graph requires enumeration of all the cycle sets that include v. Unfortunately, this is intractable.

Instead, we identify the cycle sets that provide the highest

contribution to the block error probability and generate only a

reduced list with these ŌĆ£badŌĆØ cycle sets, which we call minimal

cycle sets. From (1) we can see that a (d, Žä )-cycle set has

higher contribution to the block error probability as d and Žä

decrease. However, for (d, Žä ) and (d , Žä ) cycle sets for which

d > d but Žä < Žä we cannot say a-priori without perform-

ing computation with a given channel erasure probability if

Pcyc(d, Žä ) > Pcyc(d , Žä ). In order to identify cycle sets for which we know a-priori that they have higher contribution to

2571
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ┬Ł 14, 2006

the block error probability than other cycle sets we define a partial order relation over cycle sets:

(d , Žä ) < (d, Žä ) iff (d , Žä ) = (d, Žä ) and d Ōēż d, Žä Ōēż Žä (7)

Based on it we define: Definition 4.2 (Minimal Cycle Set of v): A (d, Žä ) minimal
cycle set of a variable node v is a cycle set containing variable v, such there is no other (d , Žä ) cycle set containing v for which (d , Žä ) < (d, Žä ).
Unlike enumeration of all cycle sets, enumerating only minimal
cycle sets is much easier, as described in Section V. Hence, the
attractive property of minimal cycle sets is that on one hand they
can be easily enumerated and on the other hand they provide the
most essential contribution to the codeŌĆÖs block error probability
and determine its performance in the error floor region. Let W(vd,Žä) denote the number of (d, Žä ) minimal cycle sets that contain variable node v. We suggest the following two stage algorithm for computing the expected block error probability of a given graph G: 1) for each variable node v in G find W(vd,Žä) 2) compute

EG(╬ø(x),Mxdc,W) [PB(G, )]

W(vd,Žä)Pcycle(d, Žä ) (8)

vŌłłV (d,Žä )

V. EMPEG ALGORITHM

The weakness of previously known graph generation algorithms can be shown through an example. The standard PEG algorithm [4] would prefer an edge which closes a cycle of length 6 consisting of degree 2 variable nodes (i.e. having zero extrinsic check nodes) rather than an edge which closes a cycle of length 4 consisting of degree 8 variable nodes with 12 extrinsic check nodes. An ACE minimization algorithm [9], [6], [1] would prefer an edge which closes a cycle of length 6 with ACE of 8 over an edge which closes a cycle of length 8 with ACE of 6. Under certain channel conditions, both algorithms make poor choices with respect to the block error probability. Unlike these algorithms the suggested Error Minimization PEG (EMPEG) algorithm directly minimizes the block error probability. The EMPEG is a greedy progressive edge growth algorithm which generates the graph edges one by one, each time choosing the edge with the smallest contribution to the expected block error probability. More specifically, when generating an edge, for every possible edge e we need to: 1) enumerate all the e-cycle sets that will be formed by connecting the edge e 2) compute the expected contribution of the edge to block error probability 3) choose the edge with the smallest contribution.
Unfortunately, enumerating all e-cycle sets is hard. Instead, we use a similar approach to the one suggested in the previous section and generate a reduced list of ŌĆ£badŌĆØ e-cycle sets which provide the highest contribution to the block error probability, which we name minimal e-cycle sets. From (1) we can see that a (d, Žē, Žä ) e-cycle set has higher contribution to the block error probability as d and Žä decrease and as Žē increases. Actually, the effect of Žē on Pcyc(d, Žē, Žä ) is very small. Hence, for the sake of simplicity, we will ignore the exact number of intrinsic check

nodes in a cycle set and assume that it is always d. We will refer to a (d, d, Žä ) e-cycle set by the descriptor (d, Žä ) and we will use the notation Pcyc(d, Žä ) = Pcyc(d, d, Žä ) to denote the upper bound on its expected contribution to block error probability.
Now, we can use the partial order relation defined for cycle sets in (7) also for the e-cycle sets and based on it we define:
Definition 5.1 (Minimal e-Cycle Set): A (d, Žä ) minimal ecycle set is an e-cycle set, such there is no other (d , Žä ) e-cycle set for which (d , Žä ) < (d, Žä ). We can compute an estimate on the expected contribution of an edge e in a graph G to the block error probability over BEC
with erasure probability as follows:

PB(G, e, )

W(ed,Žä)Pcyc(d, Žä )

(9)

(d,Žä )

where, W(ed,Žä) is the number of (d, Žä ) minimal e-cycle sets. Enumeration of the minimal e-cycle sets is done in the
following way. When generating an edge incident to variable node vi, we span the current graph as a tree originating from vi and store the depth, EMD and multiplicity of all paths from vi to every check node cj that can result in a minimal e-cycle set. A path from variable node vi to node n can lead to a minimal e-cycle set if there is no path from vi to n of shorter length with smaller or equal EMD. We refer to such a path as a minimal
path. Minimal paths cannot be too long since as a path become
longer its EMD also tends to increase. Thus, as the depth of
the spanned tree increases the number of minimal paths that are
tracked rapidly decreases. Once all minimal paths are exposed
we can stop spanning the tree.
Computing EMD of a minimal path is simple due to the definition of the e-cycle set, based on the following equation: EM D = vi (dvi ŌłÆ|Si |), where Si is the set of check nodes that variable node vi shares with adjacent variable nodes in the minimal cycle formed by the e-cycle set.
Once the enumeration step is complete, we choose among all available check nodes the check node cj for which the edge e = (vi, cj) provides the smallest contribution to the block error probability PB(G, e, ) and add the edge e to the graph. We compute PB(G, e, ) using the following equation which is equivalent to (9):

PB(G, e, )

W(vdi,ŌåÆŽä)cj Pcyc((d + 1)/2, Žä ŌłÆ 2) (10)

(d,Žä )

where,

W(vdi

ŌåÆcj ,Žä )

,

which

is

computed

in

the

enumeration

step,

denotes the number of minimal paths from vi to cj of length d

and EMD Žä . If several check nodes with the same PB(G, e, )

exist, we choose randomly one with a minimal degree, in order

to generate an overall right regular code with constant (or

almost constant) check node degree.

The EMPEG algorithm can be generalized for generating

lifted graphs. LDPC codes based on lifted graphs have become

very popular lately and are used in many emerging industry

standards, mostly since they allow for low complexity high

throughput decoder implementation. A detailed description of

the EMPEG algorithm and its generalization for lifted graphs

appears in [8].

2572
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BLER BLER

ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ┬Ł 14, 2006

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
Fig. 2 shows Monte-Carlo simulation results of various length 512 irregular codes from the ensemble (╬ø(x) = 224x2 + 192x3 + 96x8, P (x) = 256x7), generated using various optimization techniques, together with their upper bounds computed using (8). We compared the following graph genera-

code generated using the EMPEG algorithm for lifted graphs [8]. The simulation results show that the EMPEG algorithm can
100 10ŌłÆ1 10ŌłÆ2

101

10ŌłÆ3

100

10ŌłÆ4

10ŌłÆ1

10ŌłÆ5

10ŌłÆ2

10ŌłÆ6

10ŌłÆ3

10ŌłÆ7

10ŌłÆ4

10ŌłÆ5

10ŌłÆ6

Non conditioned with multiple edges ŌłÆ UB Non conditioned with multiple edges ŌłÆ MC

Non conditioned ŌłÆ UB

Non conditioned ŌłÆ MC

10ŌłÆ7

PEG conditioned ŌłÆ UB

PEG conditioned ŌłÆ MC

ACE conditioned ŌłÆ UB

10ŌłÆ8

ACE conditioned ŌłÆ MC

EMPEG conditioned ŌłÆ UB

EMPEG conditioned ŌłÆ MC

10ŌłÆ9

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Channel erasure probability ŌłÆ ╬Ą

Fig. 2. Upper bounds and Monte-Carlo simulations of irregular LDPC codes over the BEC generated from the ensemble (╬ø(x) = 224x2 + 192x3 + 96x8, P (x) = 256x7) using various conditioning algorithms

tion techniques: Non-conditioned graphs with multiple edges allowed and removed, graphs conditioned using the improved PEG algorithm [4],[1], graphs conditioned using the ACE minimization algorithm [9], and graphs conditioned using the proposed EMPEG algorithm, optimized with erasure probability
= 0.1. We observed that there is a very small sensitivity to the actual value used for optimization.
The codes generated using the EMPEG algorithm provide superior performance compared to previously known code generation algorithms. It is interesting to see that while the PEG graphs do not contain cycles of length 4, the EMPEG graphs contain many cycles of length 4. This shows that the common belief that length 4 cycles are harmful and should be removed from the codeŌĆÖs graph is not always true.
The upper bound (8) is only tight for non-conditioned graphs and loose for the optimized graphs. However, there is a strong correlation between the performance predicted by the analytical upper bound and the simulated performance. I.e. when comparing two codes, the upper bound and the simulation results concur on which code is better.
Fig. 3 shows Monte-Carlo simulations results over BEC of irregular LDPC codes based on lifted graphs with lifting factor Z = 24 generated from the ensemble (╬ø(x) = 264x2 + 192x3 + 120x6, P (x) = 192x6 + 96x7). We compare two codes from this ensemble: 1) The [N = 576, M = 288, Z = 24] highly optimized code used in the IEEE802.16e emerging industry standard [10]. 2) A [N = 576, M = 288, Z = 24]

10ŌłÆ8

4 block errors

10ŌłÆ9

found among 5e8

simulated blocks

802.16e code ŌłÆ UB 802.16e code ŌłÆ MC EMPEG code ŌłÆ UB

EMPEG code ŌłÆ MC

10ŌłÆ10

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Channel erasure probability ŌłÆ ╬Ą

Fig. 3. Upper bounds and Monte-Carlo simulations over BEC of irregular LDPC codes based on lifted graphs with lifting factor Z = 24 generated from the ensemble (╬ø(x) = 264x2 + 192x3 + 120x6, P (x) = 192x6 + 96x7).

generate superior lifted graphs compared to other optimization
techniques, especially if low error floors are required. Even
though the EMPEG algorithm minimizes the codeŌĆÖs block error
probability over BEC, the generated codes work well for other
channels as well. For example, we repeated the simulation
over the AWGN channel and observed that the EMPEG code provides coding gain higher by 0.5dB at block error rate 10ŌłÆ7 compared to the IEEE802.16e standard code.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, ŌĆ£Improved Progressive-Edge-Growth (PEG) Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes,ŌĆØ IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715 - 717, Dec. 2004.
[2] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, ŌĆ£Finitelength analysis of low- density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570-1579, June, 2002.
[3] B.J.Frey, R.Koeter and A.Vardy, ŌĆ£Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans.Inform.Theory, vol. 47, No. 2, pp. 766-780, 2001.
[4] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, ŌĆ£Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs,ŌĆØ IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference 2001, vol. 2, pp. 995 1001, Nov 2529, 2001.
[5] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan and J. Zhang, ŌĆ£Stopping Set Distribution of LDPC Code Ensembles,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans.Inform.Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929-953, 2005.
[6] A. Ramamoorthy and R. D. Wesel, ŌĆØConstruction of Short Block Length Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,ŌĆØ Submitted to ICC 2004.
[7] T. Richardson, ŌĆ£Error-floors in LDPC Codes,ŌĆØ in Proc. of the 41st Ann. Conf. on Communivation, Control and Computing, pp.1426-1435, Sept. 2003.
[8] E.Sharon and S.Litsyn, ŌĆ£Block Error Minimization Progressive Edge Growth Algorithm for Lifted Graphs,ŌĆØ submitted to IEEE Trans. on Commun.
[9] T.Tian, C.Jones, J.D. Villasenor and R.D. Wessel, ŌĆ£Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,ŌĆØ in Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. Commu. 2003, pp. 3125-3129, 2003.
[10] ŌĆ£Draft IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks - IEEE P802.16e/D9,ŌĆØ June 2005.

2573
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

