ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ­ 14, 2006

Complexity-Optimized Irregular Decoders

Masoud Ardakani Dep’t of Elec. and Comp. Eng’g
University of Alberta Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4, Canada
Email: ardakani@ece.ualberta.ca

Pirouz Zarrinkhat John H. Chapman Space Centre
Canadian Space Agency Saint-Hubert, QC J3Y 8Y9, Canada Email: pirouz.zarrinkhat@ieee.org

Raman Yazdani Dep’t of Elec. and Comp. Eng’g
University of Alberta Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4, Canada Email: ryazdani@icoremail.ece.ualberta.ca

Abstract— Irregular decoding of low-density parity-check codes, i.e., using different algorithms in one iteration of the decoding of a single word, is studied. We formulate density evolution for irregular decoders. Using a one-dimensional representation of density evolution, we then jointly optimize irregular codes and irregular soft decoders for minimizing the decoding complexity. More specifically, for a given set of soft algorithms, a given channel, and a given code-rate, we find an irregular code-decoder pair which is capable of achieving a desired error performance with minimal decoding complexity. Robustness of irregular decoders when there exist channel estimation errors is also shown via an example.
I. INTRODUCTION
Efficient decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is based on message-passing algorithms [1]. There are many different message-passing algorithms with varying performances and complexities. Therefore, in a conventional LDPC decoder, depending on the desired performance and the affordable complexity, one of these algorithms is used. In hybrid decoders, however, we use more than one algorithm to decode a single word. The main purpose of hybrid decoding is to improve the performance for a given complexity, or to reduce the complexity for a given performance. This is achieved using the extra degree of freedom, i.e., the choice of algorithms. There are two main classes of hybrid decoders:
1) Gear-shift decoders [2], where different update rules can be used in different iterations, but within a given iteration, the update rule for all the nodes of the same type in the code’s factor graph remain the same[3].
2) Irregular decoders [4], where different update rules can be used by different nodes, but for a given node, the update rule is fixed throughout the decoding.
Gear-shift decoding dates back to Gallager’s seminal work on LDPC codes: Gallager’s decoding algorithm B [5, p. 50] is, in fact, a gear-shift hard algorithm proposed for improving the decoding threshold. Another instance of gear-shift decoding is the so-called “two-stage hybrid decoding” [6], where after several iterations of sum-product (algorithm), the decoder continues with a hard algorithm to reduce the decoding latency. In [2], a detailed study of the decoding latency reduction problem shows that for a given channel and a given code, the optimum decoder is a gear-shift decoder and it can be found through dynamic programming,
Irregular decoding of LDPC codes is introduced in [4] and is called “time-invariant hybrid decoding.” As mentioned, the

idea is to allow different update rules for different nodes. It is shown that the decoding threshold of a properly devised irregular hard algorithm is not worse than those of its constituents [4]. In [7], irregular codes and irregular decoders are used together, and through joint optimization, code-decoder pairs with optimum decoding thresholds are found.
In this work, our focus is still on the design of irregular code-decoder pairs. There are, however, three main differences between this work and [7]. (i) In this work, we optimize the decoding complexity (and not the decoding threshold). More specifically, we design irregular code-decoder pairs which provide minimal decoding complexities for given channels, given code-rates, and desired error performances. (ii) In this work, we allow (decoder’s) irregularity in both check and variable sides. In [7], as all the check update rules are the same, (decoder’s) irregularity is only on the variable side. (iii) In this work, we are not limited to hard algorithms. As a result, density evolution [1] can no longer be formulated in a closed-form. Besides, message alphabets can be incompatible. (Neither of these is an issue in [7].)
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we will briefly review some required backgrounds. In Section III, we will define our setup and will discuss the procedure of density evolution for our case. In Section IV, we will define our measures of complexity and will discuss our optimization goals. In Section V, we will describe our approach towards achieving those goals. In Section VI, we will present some numerical results. The paper is concluded in Section VII.
II. BACKGROUND
Decoding of LDPC codes is performed iteratively, using message-passing algorithms. A message-passing algorithm is defined by a message alphabet M and a pair of check and variable update rules. An update rule for a degree–d checknode is a mapping which inputs d − 1 incoming messages and outputs an outgoing message (all from M). An update rule for a degree–d variable-node, on the other hand, maps d incoming messages onto an outgoing message (all from M): the extra incoming message, the so-called “channel message,” is from the channel. Sum-product is the most accurate, and simultaneously the most complex, message-passing algorithm. In log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain implementation of sumproduct, M is the set of reals and the check and variable update rules are given by

1­4244­0504­1/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE

2393

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ­ 14, 2006

CHK(m1, m2, . . . , md−1) = 2·tanh−1

d−1

tanh

mi 2

, (1)

i=1

and
d−1

VAR(m0, m1, m2, . . . , md−1) = mi,

(2)

i=0

respectively. Other message-passing algorithms can all be viewed as simplifications of sum-product. For example, in minsum (algorithm), the check update rule is

d−1

CHK(m1, m2, . . . , md−1) = sgn

mi
i=0

· i:0m<iin<d{|mi|},

(3)

which can be shown to approximate (1) [3]. The algorithm is

otherwise the same as sum-product.

The standard analysis method for LDPC codes is density

evolution, which tracks the evolution of the probability density

function (pdf) of messages throughout the iterations. The

formulation of density evolution in closed-form is usually far

too complex to be of any practical use. Therefore, a numerical

approximation to density evolution is often used [8]. When

the pdf of messages can be described by a single parameter

(e.g., in hard algorithms), we can use simple curves to show

the precise decoding trajectory. This is similar to the extrinsic

information transfer (EXIT) chart analysis of [9].

Designing irregular LDPC codes under different decoding

algorithms has been studied extensively in literature (e.g.,

[8], [10], [11]), and almost always, it has been assumed that

all the bits are decoded using the same algorithm. In [7],

however, different hard-decision update rules are used for

different variable-nodes, and irregular code-decoder pairs are

jointly designed with the focus being on the optimization of the decoding threshold.1 In this work, we take a similar approach.

Our focus, but, is on the reduction of the decoding com-

plexity, i.e., by allowing different update rules with varying

complexities, we find decoding strategies that offer a desired

performance for less complexity, compared to the case of using

fixed update rules throughout the iterations.

III. IRREGULAR CODE-DECODER PAIRS

A. Definitions

In order to specify an ensemble of irregular LDPC code-

decoder pairs, we first define a check-node degree distribution

PdPeijg=raene{dPdΛiijsij,tr2dibe≤untoiotien≤thΛeD=fcr,a1c{tΛi≤oijn,sj2

≤ M} ≤i≤ of edges

and Dv, that

a variable-node 1 ≤ j ≤ N }: are adjacent to

those degree – i check- and variable-nodes which follow the

j th check and variable update rules, Dc and Dv represent the

maximum check- and variable-node degrees allowed in the

code, and M and N denote the number of different update

rules available in the check and variable sides, respectively.

We still need two more pieces of information to complete

1In [7], all the check-nodes have the same update rule and all the update rules in the variable side are majority-based decisions. Thus, all the designs result in the same decoding complexity per iteration.

our definition. First, we need to specify M and N message alphabets and update rules for the check- and variable-nodes, respectively. Second, if the message alphabets are not compatible, we need to define appropriate mappings from check message alphabets onto variable message alphabets and vice versa. Note that for the validity of degree distributions, we should have Λij ≥ 0, Pij ≥ 0, ∀i, ∀j, and

i

j Pij =

i

j Λji = 1.

Example 1: Consider a code-decoder pair specified by P = {P81 = 0.5, P82 = 0.3, P92 = 0.2} and Λ = {Λ31 = 0.3, Λ18 = 0.6, Λ115 = 0.1}, with all messages from the set of reals and with CHK1(·), VAR1(·), and CHK2(·) given by (1), (2), and (3), respectively. P and Λ specify an irregular code with degree–8 and –9 check-nodes, and degree–3, –8, and –15 variable-nodes. In the check side, 50% of the edges are incident to those degree–8 nodes that run the sum-product update rule, 30% are adjacent to those degree–8 nodes that run the min-sum update rule, and the remaining 20% are connected to the degree–9 nodes which run the min-sum update rule. In the variable side, all the nodes run the same update rule. •
In the above example, all the update rules share the same al-
phabet. In cases where message alphabets are not compatible,
appropriate mappers should be used.
Note that based on the newly defined degree distributions,
the rate of an irregular LDPC code can be found as

R=1−

/ i

j Pij /i

i j Λij /i .

B. Density Evolution for Irregular Decoders

In this subsection, we formulate density evolution for irregular decoders in a general framework. As mentioned earlier, the problem of incompatibility amongst the messages, arising from the involvement of different message-passing algorithms with different message alphabets in the decoding, has to be dealt with using appropriate mappers between the nodes. This, inevitably, complicates conventional formulation of density evolution, as we have to keep track of a large number of pdf’s (corresponding to messages from different alphabets). In order to simplify our formulation, we model our mappers in a slightly different way as follows. Consider a check-tovariable mapper µ between a check-node c and a variablenode v, which maps the outgoing messages of c (from an alphabet Mc) onto comprehensible incoming messages to v (from an alphabet Mv). We break this mapper into two parts. The first part maps the outgoing messages of c onto messages from a universal check-to-variable alphabet Mc. The second part maps messages from Mc onto comprehensible incoming messages to v. We do a similar thing for all other check-tovariable mappers and, after specifying a universal variable-tocheck message alphabet Mv, for all variable-to-check mappers. It is not difficult now to tailor density evolution to suit irregular decoders: instead of tracking a large number of pdf’s, it is enough to track only two pdf’s (corresponding to messages from Mc and Mv).

2394
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ­ 14, 2006

Let Ψc,i,j(·) be the distribution map2 associated with those degree–i check-nodes that run the j th update rule. Ψc,i,j takes a pdf Dv→c (defined over Mv), corresponding to the nodes’ incoming messages, and returns a pdf Dc(,i),j (defined over Mc), corresponding to the nodes’ outgoing messages. This
is (symbolically) shown by

Dc,i,j = Ψc,i,j (Dv→c) .

(4)

Clearly, the pdf of the variable-nodes’ incoming messages (defined over Mc) is given by

Dc→v =

i

j Pij · Dc,i,j .

(5)

Letting Ψv,i,j(·) be defined analogous to Ψc,i,j(·), one can see that similar to (4), the pdf of the incoming messages to those degree–i variable-nodes that run the j th update rule
and the pdf of the nodes’ outgoing messages are related via

Dv,i,j = Ψv,i,j (D0, Dc→v) ,

(6)

where the pdf D0 corresponds to the nodes’ channel messages. Also, the pdf of the check-nodes’ incoming messages (defined over Mv) is given, similar to (5), by

Dv→c =

i

j Λji · Dv,i,j .

(7)

We can now find the pdf of the messages in any iteration if we recast (4)-(7) as a recursion and properly initiate it.

C. One-Dimensional Representation of Density Evolution

In [12], a one-dimensional (1–D) representation of density evolution is used for designing complexity-optimized LDPC codes. We will use similar 1–D representations in this work to design complexity-optimized irregular code-decoder pairs. In the following, we briefly describe the main ideas behind such 1–D representations.
Let us assume that we have performed L iterations of density evolution for a given channel. We can now think of a function f (·) that relates p( ), the message error-rate in iteration , to p( −1), the message error-rate in iteration
− 1, for = 1, 2, . . . , L. This function, which is known at L points, and if necessary, can be approximated at middle points using interpolation techniques, represents the decoder’s convergence behavior. Note that plotting p( ) versus p( −1) resembles the conventional EXIT charts of [9]. The new EXIT chart, however, is not based on the Gaussian approximation of the messages. It is not difficult to see that our EXIT chart is, in fact, a linear combination of a number of “elementary” EXIT charts. The reader can refer to [12] for details in the case where the decoder is regular. The extension to irregular decoders is quite straightforward and is omitted here. For these decoders, we have

f (p, P, Λ) = i j Λji · fij(p, P, Λ),

(8)

where fij’s are the elementary EXIT charts. It is shown in [12] that for regular decoders, in the neighborhood of a given

2Refer to [1] for the formal definition of distribution maps.

Λ˘, the dependency of fij(p, P, Λ) on Λ can be dropped with almost no effect on the accuracy of the analysis. A similar
thing can easily be shown for irregular decoders. Therefore,
we can rewrite (8) as

f (p, P, Λ) = i j Λij · fij(p, P ).

(9)

For a fixed P , the above formulation reduces the problem

of code design to the problem of shaping a 1–D curve

out of a number of pre-computed elementary 1–D curves. More importantly, the design parameters (i.e., Λij’s) appear as linear coefficients in the formulation. As a result, in the neighborhood of a given Λ˘, the effects of changing these

coefficients can easily be investigated without the need for

running density evolution, which is rather computationally

intense. Note that this discussion is only valid in the close vicinity of Λ˘, and all fij(p, P )’s should be recomputed if Λ undergoes a big change.

IV. PROBLEM DEFINITION
In the previous section, we discussed how an irregular codedecoder pair is defined and how density evolution is formulated to allow performance analysis of irregular decoders. The problem in hand, now, is given a channel, a target coderate Rt, and a target message error-rate pt, how to find the degree distributions of a complexity-minimizing irregular code-decoder pair. This problem is rigorously defined in the following two subsections.

A. Hardware Complexity Optimization

Let us first consider the following scenario. The decoding
latency is not an issue, i.e., we are allowed to run as many
iterations as required, but we would like to minimize the
hardware complexity (e.g., the circuit area or the circuit power
consumption). In this case, the goal is to find, for a given channel, the degree distributions of a rate–Rt code, capable of achieving a message error-rate of pt, whose implementation requires minimal hardware cost. Assuming a fully parallel structured decoder3 and letting Xc,i,j and Xv,i,j denote the (known) hardware complexities of those degree–i check- and variable-nodes that run the j th update rule, respectively, the optimization goal will be equivalent to minimizing

i

j Pij /i · Xc,i,j +

i

j Λij /i · Xv,i,j ,

(10)

subject to the validity of the degree distributions, the fixed

code-rate Rt, i.e.,

1−

/ i

j Pij /i

i j Λij /i = Rt, (11)

and also a guaranteed convergence of message error-rate to the target pt, which can be verified using density evolution. This optimization problem can be solved, but compared to conventional code-design problems, the process can be quite slow. This is especially because the size of the design parameters is considerably larger here. Later, we will discuss an efficient approach to solving this problem.

3Similar formulations can be derived for other decoder structures. Our assumption here is only for the purpose of illustration.

2395
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ­ 14, 2006

B. Overall Complexity Optimization
Another important scenario is when the goal of optimization is to minimize the overall (decoding) complexity. In this scenario, for a given channel, we wish to minimize the complexity per iteration times the required number of iterations. If we let Xc,i,j and Xv,i,j denote the (known) complexities per iteration of those degree–i check- and variable-nodes that run the j th update rule, respectively, then the goal is to minimize

i

j Pij /i · Xc,i,j +

i

j Λij /i · Xv,i,j ·Lpp0t , (12)

where Lpp0t represents the required number of iterations for achieving the target message error-rate pt if we start with a message error-rate p0. The minimization, of course, is subject to the the validity of the degree distributions and the fixed code-rate Rt.
One can choose different measures for the complexity per iteration (e.g., the completion time of an iteration, the circuit power consumption during an iteration, or the number of basic computations in an iteration). Nevertheless, our optimization requires a good estimate of the required number of iterations. It is shown in [12] that the required number of iterations (to achieve a desired target message error-rate) is related, in a closed-form, to the codes’ degree distributions. This, as will be seen, will be the cornerstone of our approach to optimizing the overall complexity.

V. SOLUTION FORMULATION
In this section, we formulate efficient solutions to our (hardware and overall) complexity optimization problems. Throughout the section, it is assumed that the EXIT chart representation of the decoder’s convergence behavior, discussed in Section III, is available. In other words, we assume that for a given channel and a fixed P , fij(p, P )’s are known for all i’s and j’s of interest and over the interval [pt, p0], where pt and p0 are the target and initial message error-rates, respectively. This, as will be seen, will substantially simplifies our optimization problems.

A. Solution to Hardware Complexity Optimization

Consider the hardware complexity optimization problem.

For a given channel, assuming a (valid) fixed P and hence

a fixed check-induced hardware complexity in (10), the goal

is to minimize

i

j Λji /i · Xv,i,j ,

(13)

subject to the validity of Λ, the fixed code-rate constraint given in (11), which we can rewrite as

i j Λi/i =

/ i

j Pij /i

1 − Rt ,

(14)

and also a guaranteed convergence of message error-rate to the target pt. Using 1–D representations, this last constraint can simply be rewritten as

f (p, Λ, P ) = i j Λji · fij(p, P ) < p, ∀p ∈ [pt, p0]. (15)

It can be seen that (13) - (15) define a linear program (LP). However, for the above formulation to remain valid, we have to avoid drastic changes in Λ. Therefore, we recast our optimization as an iterative LP where we limit, in each iteration, the amount of changes that Λ can undergo. To do so, we add a new constraint to our LP as follows. Letting θ be the angle between the vectors Λ, a potential solution, and Λ˘, the initial distribution, we want to have cos θ ≈ 1, or equivalently, for some small ε, we want to have

Λ, Λ˘ ≥ Λ · Λ˘ · (1 − ε),

(16)

where ·, · denotes the inner product of two vectors. Assuming, justifiably, that Λ ≈ Λ˘ , we can rewrite (16) as

i j Λji · Λ˘ ji ≥ Λ˘ 2 · (1 − ε),

(17)

which is a linear constraint in Λij’s. So, we end up with an LP that has to be solved iteratively: every time a solution Λ∗ is found to this LP, we update fij(p, P )’s and initiate the next iteration with Λ∗. This efficient procedure will hopefully optimize Λ for a fixed P . But how to find the optimum P ? The obvious answer is by search! Fortunately, the check sides of
the codes are, usually, less irregular and are, usually, concen-
trated on one or two degrees [1]. Therefore, the optimization of P can indeed be done using a search-based method. (Note that the sheer size of the search space for Λ prohibits the use of search-based methods for optimizing Λ.)

B. Solution to Overall Complexity Optimization

If f (p), defined over [pt, p0], is the EXIT chart of an iterative decoder for a given channel, then starting form p0, the required number of iteration to achieve pt is closely approximated by [12]

Lpp0t (f ) =

p0

dp

pt p · log (p/f (p)) .

(18)

Note that the EXIT chart representation of the decoder provides us with the required function f (p) in (18).
We now have all the necessary tools for overall complexity
optimization. Following our general methodology, we first fix P . Using density evolution, we then calculate, for a given Λ˘ , f (p) and fij’s. Afterwards, we plug f (p) = i j Λij · fij(p, P ) in (18), and subsequently, we replace Lppt0 in (12) by (18). As a result, (12) can explicitly be expressed as a function of the design parameters (i.e., Λji ’s). Now, Λ can be optimized similar to the case of hardware complexity optimization. It
should be noted, however, that because of the nonlinear form
of (18), the overall complexity optimization problem does not simplify to an LP. Also, P is optimized using search-based methods (e.g., the steepest descent method).

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we present two examples which demonstrate the superiority of irregular decoders over regular ones. In both examples, all the messages are from the set of reals and the available update rules are the same as in Example 1.

2396
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2006, Seattle, USA, July 9 ­ 14, 2006

TABLE I COMPLEXITY VALUES NORMALIZED TO THE COMPLEXITY OF ADDING TWO REALS, OBTAINED ON A 2GHZ INTEL PENTIUM 4 PROCESSOR.

TABLE II COMPLEXITY-OPTIMIZED RATE–1/2 CODES FOR THREE BIPLGC WITH
NOISE STANDARD DEVIATIONS σ = 0.80, 0.86, AND 0.90.

Xv,2,1 4

Xc,6,1 162

Xc,7,1 189

Xc,8,1 216

Xc,5,2 40

Xc,6,2 60

Xc,7,2 77

Example 2: Consider a binary-input power-limited Gaussian

channel (BIPLGC) whose inputs are from {−1, 1}, and let Rt, pt, and Dv be equal to 1/2, 10−7, and 30, respectively.
We wish to find the overall (computational) complexity min-

imizing degree distributions for the noise standard deviations

σ = 0.80, 0.86, 0.90. The complexity values used in our

optimizations are reported in Table I. Other Xv,i,1’s are assumed to be linear in i. (This is an accurate assumption if we

add, in a degree–i variable-node, all the incoming messages

and perform one subtraction for each outgoing message.)

The optimization results are summarized in Table II.

Interestingly, only variable-node degrees of up to 12 have

been used. Note that for σ = 0.80 and 0.9, (regular) min-sum

and sum-product provide the minimum overall complexities,

respectively. For σ = 0.86, however, it is an irregular decoder

which provides the minimum overall complexity.

•

Example 3: Consider a BIPLGC with inputs from {−1, 1},

whose noise standard deviation σ is equal to 0.8709. Over

this channel and under sum-product, the message error-rate for

the ensemble of (3, 6)–regular LDPC codes converges to zero

with iterations, as the decoding threshold in this case is σ∗ =

0.8809. However, if our estimation of the channel condition

is erroneous, then there is no guarantee that the decoding will

be successful. For instance, if the “discrepancy” factor, defined

by σe2st / σa2ct, is equal to 1.25, meaning that the actual channel is, in fact, considerably better than the estimated one, then a

regular decoding under sum-product will fail (due to the error

in the channel LLRs computation). A regular decoding under

min-sum will also fail (due to the poor decoding threshold of
min-sum). But the irregular decoder specified by P61 = 0.8 and P62 = 0.2 will succeed: it can achieve an error-rate of 10−6 after 87 iterations! More importantly, the same decoder will

also succeed for all discrepancy factors in the interval [1, 1.25].

This shows the remarkable robustness of this irregular decoder

when there exist channel estimation errors.

•

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We studied irregular decoding of LDPC codes, and using a 1–D representation of density evolution for irregular decoders, we formulated both hardware and overall complexity optimizations for irregular code-decoder pairs. We also presented cases where an irregular decoder was optimum in minimizing the overall (computational) complexity and where an irregular decoder was more robust to channel estimation erros.
Irregular decoders can easily be incorporated into hardware for parallel decoders. For fully serial decoders (when only one processing unit is used to serially update the decoder

P and Λ
P62 P71
Λ21 Λ31 Λ14 Λ51 Λ16 Λ71 Λ81 Λ19 Λ110 Λ111 Λ112

σ = 0.80
1.0000 −
0.0603 0.8626 0.0093 0.0640 0.0022 0.0004
− − − 0.0012 −

σ = 0.86
0.7 0.3
0.1705 0.6322 0.0007
− 0.0004 0.0008 0.0750 0.1195
− − 0.0009

σ = 0.90
− 1.0000
0.1378 0.5595 0.0005
− − 0.0004 0.0005 0.0016 0.2941 0.0041 0.0015

messages) irregular decoding imposes extra complexity and is
not an attractive idea. Most decoders, however, have a degree
of parallelism, and hence appropriate for irregular decoding. While our discussions in this paper was limited to LDPC
codes, a similar idea can be applied to similarly-structured
codes (e.g., irregular repeat-accumulate codes [13]).
REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Gear-shift decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., accepted for publication.
[3] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[4] P. Zarrinkhat, A. H. Banihashemi, and H. Xiao, “Time-invariant and switch-type hybrid iterative decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” Ann. Te´le´commun. / Ann. Telecommun., vol. 60, n◦ 1-2, pp. 103– 131, Jan.-Feb. 2005.
[5] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. ser. Research Monographs, no. 21, Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hybrid decoding of irregular ldpc codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int’l Symp. Inform. Theory ’05, Adelaide, Australia, Sept. 2005, pp. 312–316.
[8] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[9] S. ten Brink, “Iterative decoding trajectories of parallel concatenated codes,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE / ITG Conf. Source and Channel Coding, Munich, Germany, Jan. 2000, pp. 75–80.
[10] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[11] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] M. Ardakani, B. Smith, W. Yu, and F. R. Kschischang, “Complexityoptimized LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Computing, Allerton, IL: UIUC, Sept. 2005.
[13] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. Int’l Symp. Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France: ENST de Bretagne, Sept. 2000, pp. 1–8.

2397
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

