IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

1235

Gear-Shift Decoding
Masoud Ardakani, Member, IEEE, and Frank R. Kschischang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper considers a class of iterative messagepassing decoders for low-density parity-check codes in which the decoder can choose its decoding rule from a set of decoding algorithms at each iteration. Each available decoding algorithm may have a different per-iteration computation time and performance. With an appropriate choice of algorithm at each iteration, overall decoding latency can be reduced significantly, compared with standard decoding methods. Such a decoder is called a gear-shift decoder because it changes its decoding rule (shifts gears) in order to guarantee both convergence and maximum decoding speed (minimum decoding latency). Using extrinsic information transfer charts, the problem of finding the optimum (minimum decoding latency) gear-shift decoder is formulated as a computationally tractable dynamic program. The optimum gear-shift decoder is proved to have a decoding threshold equal to or better than the best decoding threshold among those of the available algorithms. In addition to speeding up software decoder implementations, gearshift decoding can be applied to optimize a pipelined hardware decoder, minimizing hardware cost for a given decoder throughput.
Index Terms—Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, iterative decoders, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
CODES defined on graphs together with iterative message-passing algorithms are capable of approaching the capacity of many channel types, e.g., [1]–[7]. There are many different message-passing algorithms with different performance and complexity. High-complexity decoding algorithms, such as the sum-product algorithm [8], can correct more errors created by the channel noise, so they are very attractive when complexity and computation time are not an issue. Low-complexity decoding algorithms, however, are more attractive when fast decoders are required for delay-sensitive applications or high-throughput systems.
Low-complexity decoding rules, however, have two main drawbacks. First, they have a worse threshold of decoding compared with high-complexity algorithms, so, to ensure convergence, a lower code rate should be used. Second, due to their relatively poor performance, more iterations of such algorithms are required to achieve a given target bit-error rate. Hence, it is not obvious if the overall computations are any less.
Paper approved by C. Schlegel, the Editor for Coding Theory and Techniques of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received March 14, 2004; revised August 2, 2005.
M. Ardakani was with the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4, Canada (e-mail: ardakani@ece.ualberta.ca).
F. R. Kschischang is with the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada (e-mail: frank@comm.utoronto.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.877971

Consider, now, the following scenario: a long-length (4,8)

regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) code1 is used with

binary antipodal

signaling for data transmis-

sion over an additive white Gaussian noise channel whose

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) (defined as

where is the

per-sample noise variance) is 2.5 dB. Four different decoding

algorithms: sum-product, min-sum, Algorithm E (a ternary

message-passing algorithm) [1] and Gallager’s Algorithm B

[1], [9] are implemented in software. Based on these implemen-

tations, the computation time of these algorithms are 5.2, 2.8,

0.9, and 0.39 s per bit per iteration ( s/b/iter), respectively.

A routine analysis shows that nine iterations of sum-product

decoding are required to achieve a target message-error rate of

less than . That is to say, the decoding time is 46.8 s/b.

Using min-sum decoding, density-evolution (DE) analysis

shows that 20 iterations are required, hence, the decoding time

would be 56.0 s/b. It can be easily verified that decoding

will fail if Algorithm E or Gallager’s Algorithm B are used.

Notice that although min-sum is a lower complexity algorithm,

its overall decoding time is, in fact, greater than that of the

sum-product algorithm.

Now assume that the decoder is allowed to vary its decoding

strategy at each iteration. Using DE, one can verify that by per-

forming four iterations of the sum-product algorithm, followed

by five iterations of Algorithm E, followed by four iterations of

Algorithm B, the decoder will achieve the same target error rate

with a computation time of just 26.9 s/b. This is less than 60%

of the time required by a sum-product decoder, and is more than

twice as fast as a min-sum decoder. It also makes use of Algo-

rithms E and B, which are very fast decoding algorithms, but

which could not be used on their own (in the initial iterations)

with this level of channel noise.

We call the strategy of switching from one algorithm to an-

other “gear-shift decoding,” as the decoder changes gears (its

algorithm) in order to speed up decoding. In this paper, given

a set of decoding algorithms and their computation time, we

show that the optimum combination of algorithms (in the sense

of minimizing the decoding time) can be found via dynamic pro-

gramming. We also show that, with some modifications, gear-

shift decoding can be used to design pipeline decoders with

minimum hardware cost for a given throughput.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In

Section II, we formulate the gear-shift decoding optimization

problem, and then we show that using extrinsic information

transfer (EXIT) chart analysis, the problem can be solved

through dynamic programming. The minimum hardware de-

sign problem is defined and solved in Section III. Section IV

presents some examples, and Section V concludes the paper.

1i.e., a code in whose Tanner graph all variable nodes have degree 4 and all check nodes have degree 8.

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:38:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1236

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

II. GEAR-SHIFT DECODING

Gear-shift decoding, simply put, means allowing the decoder to change its decoding algorithm during the process of decoding. Gear-shift decoding for LDPC codes, interestingly, dates back to Gallager and his original work on LDPC codes [9]. For binary message-passing decoders, Gallager noticed that by allowing a decision threshold to be changed during the process of decoding, the decoder’s performance and convergence threshold improves significantly. This gear-shifting algorithm of Gallager is referred to as Algorithm B in [1]. A version of gear-shift decoding termed “two-stage hybrid decoding” also appears in [10, Sec. IV-D], where the authors combine several sum-product decoding iterations with hard-decision majority-logic decoding of finite-geometry LDPC codes. The authors indicate that decoding latency can be improved significantly using this method. Although not, strictly speaking, a gear-shift decoder, another related decoding strategy involving several different binary message-passing algorithms is the “hybrid decoding” approach of [11], in which the variables of an LDPC decoder are partitioned into several subsets, with the nodes in different subsets implementing a different update rule. This results in an overall behavior which can be better than the convergence behavior of every single algorithm.
Although gear-shift decoding can improve the decoding threshold for certain binary message-passing decoders, such improvements are not expected when the sum-product algorithm is available, since, as is well known, sum-product decoding minimizes error probability when the factor graph of the code is cycle-free. The point of introducing gear-shift decoding in this case is not to improve the decoding threshold, but rather to reduce the decoding complexity. As we will show in this paper, complexity reductions can be quite significant.
In order to formulate the gear-shift decoding problem, we assume that an EXIT chart analysis is accurate enough for the purpose of comparing the performance of different algorithms. Different measures of decoding complexity can be used. In this paper, we first assume a software decoder and consider decoding latency, i.e., the time needed to decode a received word, as the complexity measure to be minimized. Later, we will also consider a pipeline-structured hardware decoder implementation, and use circuit area as the complexity measure.

Fig. 1. EXIT chart for a (3,6) regular LDPC code on a Gaussian channel at an SNR of 1.8 dB, comparing the predicted trajectory with the actual results for a code of length 200 000.
applications, EXIT charts are very accurate indeed (see, e.g., [12] and [16]). Methods of obtaining EXIT charts for turbo codes and LDPC codes are discussed in detail in [12]–[16].
In the remainder of this paper, to compare the performance of different decoding algorithms, we use EXIT charts that track the extrinsic message-error rate, i.e., the (expected) fraction of messages that convey an incorrect belief about their corresponding variable. Such EXIT charts are described in detail in [16]. For the purposes of this paper, it is enough to think of an EXIT chart as a function
(1)
where is the intrinsic message-error rate (i.e., the expected fraction of incorrect received symbols), is the extrinsic message-error rate at the input of the iteration, and is the extrinsic message-error rate at the output of the iteration. If the decoder is to make progress (reducing the fraction of messages conveying an incorrect belief) from iteration to iteration, one clearly needs

A. EXIT Chart Analysis of Iterative Decoders

for all

(2)

Message-passing iterative decoders can be analyzed using a technique called DE [2]. DE tracks the evolution of the probability density function (pdf) of extrinsic messages iteration by iteration. This analysis becomes intractable when the constituent codes are complex, e.g., in turbo codes. Even in the case of LDPC codes with the simplest constituent code (simple parity checks), this algorithm is quite computationally intensive. Another approach for analyzing iterative decoders, including codes with complicated constituent codes, is to use EXIT charts [12]–[15].
In EXIT chart analysis, the idea is to track the evolution of a single parameter of the message pdf iteration by iteration [12]–[15]. Clearly (unless the message density truly is charac-

EXIT charts are usually plotted, for a fixed , with both and its inverse shown on the same graph. This makes it easy to visualize the decoder’s progress, as the output from one iteration transfers to the input of the next, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Each arrow in Fig. 1 represents one iteration of decoding. EXIT charts therefore allow one to study how many iterations are required to achieve a target message-error rate.
If the “decoding tunnel” of an EXIT chart is closed, i.e., if for some (2) is not satisfied, convergence does not happen. In such cases, we say that the EXIT chart is closed. The so-called convergence threshold is defined as the worst intrinsic message-error rate for which the tunnel is open, i.e.,

terized by a single parameter, as in an erasure channel), EXIT chart analysis is not as accurate as DE; however, for many

for all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:38:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARDAKANI AND KSCHISCHANG: GEAR-SHIFT DECODING

1237

Fig. 1 shows the EXIT chart for a (3,6) regular LDPC code of , whose computation time is less than that of all other

length

on a Gaussian channel under sum-product de- admissible gear-shift sequences; i.e., is admissible, and if

coding, and compares it with the actual results. This compar- is also admissible, then

.

ison shows that such analyses can be highly accurate, at least We will begin by assuming that the output messages of each

for long codes.

algorithm are compatible with the input of each algorithm so

B. Definitions

that, in principle, each decoding algorithm in

may

be followed by any other decoding algorithm in

.

Consider now a set of different decoding algorithms numbered from 1 to , the th of which has an EXIT chart given as
. The computation time for one iteration of algorithm is denoted , and is assumed to be independent of and .

Later in the paper, we also consider restrictions in the choice of algorithms; for example, allowing coarsely quantized messagepassing algorithms to succeed finely quantized algorithms, but not vice versa.

A gear-shift decoder can be described by a gear-shift se-

quence, i.e., a sequence of integers

,

where denotes the number of iterations, and where

for all

. The gear-shift sequence

indicates that Algorithm is used

in the first iteration, Algorithm is used in the second iter-

ation, and so on. We will sometimes use a more compact no-

tation for gear-shifting schedules:

is the

gear-shifting schedule in which iterations of Algorithm

are followed by iterations of Algorithm

iterations

C. Equally Complex Algorithms

The simplest case arises when all the available decoding al-

gorithms have equal computation time, i.e., is a constant. In

[17], it is rigorously proved that when all the decoding rules have

the same complexity, the optimum gear-shift decoder chooses

the algorithm that gives the best performance at each iteration,

i.e., the one with smallest

(where is the extrinsic

message-error rate from the previous iteration). Gallager’s Al-

gorithm B for LDPC codes is a good example for this case.

of Algorithm , etc. The gear-shift decoder with gear-shift sequence will be referred to as gear-shift decoder .
The total computation time for gear-shift decoder is given by

D. Dynamic Programming for Optimizing Gear-Shift Decoders
When the computation times of different algorithms are not equal, it is not clear which combination of algorithms will re-

sult in the fastest decoding. Choosing the algorithm with the best

performance may cost a lot of computation, while for the same

amount of computation, another algorithm might produce better

results. In this section, we formulate the problem of finding the

Since the initial extrinsic message-error rate is equal to , up sequence of algorithms with the minimum computational com-

to the accuracy of the EXIT chart analysis, the output message- plexity as a dynamic program. We first define the problem.

error rate of gear-shift decoder after iterations is

We use the general setup of Section II-B. At a fixed , for

each EXIT function

, we define a quantized version

whose domain and range is set at

.

(3)

Here, is the intrinsic message-error rate, , and is equal to , the target message-error rate. For

To avoid pathological cases, we make the reasonable assump-

we define

tion that EXIT charts are increasing functions of for a fixed , since, for most algorithms, having a greater , i.e., having
more extrinsic message errors at the input of an iteration, will

if otherwise

result in more message errors at the output of the iteration, i.e., a

greater . We also make the reasonable assumption that EXIT

charts are nondecreasing functions of , i.e., for all , we have

that

implies

for all

.

In this case, from (3), it is obvious that

where

is the largest integer for which

. This way, is a pessimistic approximation

of ; hence, an admissible gear-shift decoder based on is

guaranteed to achieve .

As illustrated in Fig. 2, we form a trellis, termed the gear-

implies

shifting trellis, whose vertices are labeled by the elements of

(4) , and whose edges are determined by

. This trellis

has one vertex at depth 0, corresponding to the intrinsic mes-

for any gear-shifting sequence , i.e., providing a better initial sage-error rate . From each vertex at depth in the trellis, we

channel to a gear-shift decoder is never harmful to its output construct edges directed to states at depth . In particular,

message-error rate.

for each

, a trellis state at depth , associated

For a given target message-error rate , we say that gear-shift with quantized extrinsic message-error probability

, is

decoder is admissible if

. From (4), we see that connected by an edge to the trellis state at depth

, asso-

if is admissible for an intrinsic message-error rate , then it ciated with

. Associated with this edge is the weight or

is admissible for all intrinsic message-error rates

. The “cost” . Also included in such a trellis is a “null algorithm” of

optimum gear-shift decoder has admissible gear-shift sequence zero cost used to tie together the terminal states labeled .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:38:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1238

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

labeled

, we allow edges corresponding only to algo-

rithms in Class 1, leading to a vertex at depth

labeled

. Thus, once an algorithm in Class 1 has been used in a

gear-shifting sequence, the algorithms in Class 0 become un-

available. Once more, an optimum constrained gear-shifting se-

quence can be found by dynamic programming using the ex-

panded gear-shifting trellis.

E. Convergence Thresholds

For equally complex algorithms, it is clear that the conver-

Fig. 2. Simple gear-shifting trellis with P of size six and three algorithms.
Notice that some vertices have fewer than three outgoing edges; this happens when some algorithms have a closed EXIT chart at this message-error rate, or when two algorithms result in a parallel edge (in which case, only the lower complexity algorithm is retained).

gence threshold of the gear-shift decoder is equal to or better than the best of the available decoders. Note that the decoder chooses the most open EXIT chart at each iteration. The resulting EXIT chart is then the lower hull of all the EXIT charts, and hence, has an equal or even better threshold.

In the case of algorithms with different complexities, the op-

timum gear-shift decoder chooses the algorithms based on their

Clearly, every gear-shifting sequence corresponds to a path

in the gear-shifting trellis starting at the depth-zero vertex, and

the total computation time is obtained as the sum of the

weights of the edges along that path. Furthermore, a path that

ends at the vertex associated with corresponds to an ad-

missible gear-shifting sequence. An optimum gear-shifting se-

quence is, therefore, associated with a path of minimum total

cost starting at vertex and ending at vertex in the gear-

shifting trellis. Such a path can easily be found by dynamic pro-

gramming (e.g., via the Viterbi algorithm).

Notice that the number of edges in the gear-shifting trellis is

given as

, so increasing (in order to reduce the quan-

tization error) results in a corresponding linear increase in the

number of trellis edges. Since it is computationally quite fea-

sible to handle gear-shifting trellises having even a few thou-

sand edges, the set of quantized probability values can easily

have several thousand elements. In practice, we use

logarithmically spaced probability values in the range of – .

Since we are interested only in the minimum-weight path

from to , we can remove all branches that connect a vertex

at depth to a vertex at time

when

, as

such branches correspond to gear shifts that are harmful to de-

coder progress. This further simplifies the dynamic program.

We may also expand the gear-shifting trellis to account for

constraints that may be imposed on the gear-shifting sequence.

For example, we may wish to impose the constraint that an iter-

ation of highly quantized message passing such as Gallager-B

or Algorithm E may follow an iteration of the sum-product or

complexity and performance. Hence, it might use an algorithm

with a worse performance due to its lower complexity. There-

fore, it is not obvious how this might affect the threshold of con-

vergence. The following theorem shows that even in this case,

the threshold of convergence can only be improved by gear-shift

decoding.

Theorem 1: The convergence threshold of the gear-shift de-

coder is better than or equal to the best threshold among those

of the available decoding algorithms.

Proof: Let us denote the best convergence threshold of

available algorithms with . We need to show that when the

intrinsic message-error rate is better than , the optimum

gear-shift decoder can converge successfully.

Since is the convergence threshold of at least one algo-

rithm, say algorithm , at least this algorithm has an open EXIT

chart at

. In other words, for all

,

we have

. Therefore, in the

gear-shifting trellis, there is a path between and , and

hence, there is a path of minimum cost between them.

Notice that if for some , all decoding rules except algo-

rithm have a closed EXIT chart, they all result in a

. Therefore, in the gear-shifting trellis, we can remove the

branches associated with them at this particular . Hence, the

optimum gear-shift decoder chooses the only existing branch,

i.e., algorithm , towards convergence. This is also true when

other decoding rules have a tight EXIT chart. As we see in later

examples, in tight regions, the optimum gear-shift decoder uses

more complex decoders.

min-sum algorithms, but not vice-versa. In this case, there are two algorithm classes (Class 0 and Class 1, say), and so we

III. MINIMUM HARDWARE DECODING

can expand the number of vertices in the gear-shifting trellis In the previous section, we studied the case of minimum de-

by a factor of two. A vertex labeled in the unconstrained coding latency, which, in particular, is attractive for software

gear-shifting trellis is split into two vertices labeled

and decoders. In this section, we show that gear-shift decoding may

, respectively. Here, the second component of the vertex also be attractive to optimize a pipeline-structured hardware de-

label is a Boolean variable indicating whether (or not) an al- coder implementation, using throughput (rather than decoding

gorithm in Class 1 has been used. The initial vertex is labeled latency) as the measure of optimality.

. From every vertex at depth labeled

, we allow Consider the pipelined decoder structure shown in Fig. 3.

edges corresponding to each available algorithm, leading to a In this figure, the block labeled

is the th stage of

vertex at depth

labeled

for some if the algorithm the pipeline system, which performs iterations of algorithm

is in Class 0, and labeled

for some if the algorithm number . Our goal in this section is to show how one can min-

is in Class 1. On the other hand, from every vertex at depth imize the cost of hardware by proper choice of and at each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:38:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARDAKANI AND KSCHISCHANG: GEAR-SHIFT DECODING

1239

Fig. 3. Pipelined decoder architecture, where gear shifting means allowing different algorithms to be used at each pipeline stage.

block. This is another form of gear-shift decoding, specifically

designed for minimum hardware. We assume the system should

achieve a target message-error rate or and a throughput of

b/s or greater. We also assume that the decoding latency

is not an issue. If minimum latency is required, the optimum

gear-shift decoder studied in the previous section is the answer,

despite its hardware cost.

For a code of rate and length to have a throughput of

b/s, the maximum time available for decoding a codeword

is

s. If is the time for one iteration of algorithm , a

maximum of

Algorithm E is defined in [1]. Since the version of Algorithm

E that we use is slightly different, we review this algorithm and

mention the points of difference. In this algorithm, the message

alphabet is

. A message can be thought as a vote

for a 1 variable node, a message is a vote for a 0 variable

node, and a 0 message is an undecided vote. Assuming that the

all-zero codeword is transmitted, the error rate of this algorithm

can be defined as

, to be used for plotting

the EXIT chart.

Following the notation of [8], the update rules of this algo-

rithm at a check node and a neighboring variable node are

as follows:

(5) (6)

iterations of algorithm can be performed in the same hard-

ware block. Since decoding latency is not an issue, we let all the

blocks that use algorithm iterate times. Having the max-

imum number of iterations in a block further reduces the mes-

sage-error rate and minimizes the need for extra hardware. As a

result, without any extra hardware cost, all the blocks in Fig. 3

are changed to blocks of form

, where is given in

(5). This provides the minimum output error rate for the same

hardware cost.

Now assume that the hardware cost of algorithm is . Our

goal is to find a minimum-cost solution to achieve the target

error rate . This problem is equivalent to the problem of

minimum-latency gear-shift decoding, except that the decoding

time is now replaced with the hardware cost and single-iteration

algorithms are replaced with multi-iteration ones. Therefore,

to find the optimum solution, we need to form a similar

gear-shifting trellis. A trellis edge is now associated with

iterations of algorithm and its weight is , and an optimal

gear-shift decoder can be found via dynamic programming.

Note that this optimization is oblivious to the internal imple-

mentation of each block in the pipeline, i.e., the internal im-

plementation of each block can be fully parallel, fully serial,

or a combination of both (see, e.g., [18] and [19]). Although

we are able to find a pipeline structure that achieves a given

throughput with minimum hardware complexity, it is possible

that some non-pipelined architecture (beyond the scope of this

paper) may be able to achieve the same throughput with even

smaller complexity.

IV. EXAMPLES
In this section, we solve some examples to show the effect of gear-shift decoding on decoding latency and hardware cost. In all examples, we assume that four different decoding rules are available, namely: sum-product, min-sum, Algorithm B, and Algorithm E, numbered as Algorithms 1–4, respectively.

(7)

In (6),

is the set of all the neighbors of except .

Similarly, in (7),

is the set of all the neighbors of

except . Here

represents a message from a variable node

to the check node

represents a message from a check

node to the variable node

is the channel message to

the variable node , and is a weight. The optimum value of

for a (3,6) code is

for the first iteration, and

for other iterations [1]. For other codes, the optimum value of

can be computed through dynamic programming. The fact that

in the first iteration the extrinsic messages are not reliable makes

it reasonable to have a higher weight in early iterations, and

a lower one in late iterations.

In our version of Algorithm E, the weight is always chosen

to be 1. This is mainly because, in most cases of study, Algo-

rithm E is used in late iterations when the extrinsic messages

have a relatively low error rate. Nevertheless, this slightly sim-

plified version of Algorithm E serves our purpose of showing

the impact of gear-shift decoding.

Another issue is the compatibility issue. Since the message

alphabets of the above-mentioned algorithms are not the same,

when a transition from one algorithm to another occurs, the

output of one algorithm must be made compatible with the input

of the next algorithm. Table I shows how we change the mes-

sages at the output of one algorithm for different transitions. The

“not-compatible” entries refer to transitions that are not allowed.

We normally avoid transitions from highly quantized (hard) al-

gorithms E and B to unquantized (soft) algorithms, because it

requires us to use a new EXIT chart for the soft algorithms, as

they are now fed with hard information; however, such transi-

tions may be considered under suitable message mappings. (One

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:38:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006
TABLE I MESSAGE MAPPINGS AT THE TRANSITION FROM ONE ALGORITHM TO ANOTHER

TABLE II
K EXTENDED MESSAGE MAPPINGS RESOLVING THE “NOT COMPATIBLE” ENTRIES OF TABLE I. IS A SCALING FACTOR

has an open decoding tunnel. The EXIT chart of Algorithm B is closed everywhere, even when the error rate of the extrinsic messages is very small, and hence, is not plotted.

Based on our implementations for a (3,6) code, one itera-

tion of sum-product, min-sum, and Algorithm E takes 4.1 s/b,

1.7 s/b, and 0.5 s/b, respectively. These numbers were ar-

rived at using a Pentium IV processor clocked at 1 GHz, and

are intended as illustrations only. Quantizing from

to

in 4000 points uniformly spaced on a

logarithmic scale, the optimum gear-shift decoder has decoding

schedule

, i.e., two iterations of min-sum fol-

lowed by five iterations of sum-product, followed by ten itera-

tions of min-sum. The whole decoding takes 40.9 s/b.

Using only sum-product, a routine DE analysis shows that 15

iterations are required to achieve the same message-error rate, and

hence, the decoding takes a total of 61.5 s/b. This is more than

50% longer than the optimum gear-shift decoder. Using only min-

sum, we would need 31 iterations, which takes 52.7 s/b, which

is more than 28% longer than the optimum gear-shift decoder.

Another important benefit of the gear-shift decoder over the

min-sum decoder is the decoding threshold. If the channel SNR

is overestimated by only 0.05 dB, the min-sum decoder would

fail to converge no matter how many iterations of decoding we

were to allow. However, as Fig. 4 suggests, when the decoding

Fig. 4. EXIT charts for a (3,6) regular LDPC code under different decoding algorithms when the channel is Gaussian with SNR=1.75 dB.

tunnel of the min-sum decoder is very tight (or even closed due to overestimation of channel SNR), the gear-shift decoder switches to sum-product. Hence, the gear-shift decoder is more

robust to channel estimation, while its decoding latency is also

possibility is suggested in Table II.) Performance of the soft de- significantly less.

coder after such transitions is very sensitive to the mapping used If we use Table II with

to resolve the “not-compat-

for messages.

ible” entries of Table I, the resulting optimum gear-shift decoder

Example 1: In this example, we consider a (3,6) regular has decoding schedule

. The decoding

LDPC code, used to achieve a message-error rate of

on time is 40.5 s/b, which is only 1% better than that of the pre-

a Gaussian channel with SNR

dB. The channel SNR vious example. Since for variable nodes of degree 3, Algorithms

is almost 0.65 and 0.05 dB better than the threshold of this E and B both have poor performance, even at low extrinsic

code under sum-product and min-sum decoding, respectively. message-error rates, they did not have an impact on the speed

It is also more than 1.3 and 3.1 dB worse than the threshold of the gear-shift decoder. Nevertheless, the gear-shift decoding

under Algorithms E and B, respectively, i.e., these algorithms by only sum-product and min-sum is dramatically better than

could not by themselves be used at this SNR level. We seek the using single-algorithm decoding.

minimum decoding-latency decoder.

Example 2: In this example, we apply the gear-shift decoding

Fig. 4 shows the EXIT charts of this code under sum-product, concept in a pipelined hardware decoder implementation. Since

min-sum, and Algorithm E decoding. It also shows a decoding we do not have the actual hardware implementations of these

trajectory using different decoding algorithms. To avoid confu- codes; and a comparison of decoding time and hardware cost

sion, each EXIT chart is plotted only in the regions in which it for different decoding rules on a single code is, to the best of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:38:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ARDAKANI AND KSCHISCHANG: GEAR-SHIFT DECODING

1241

our knowledge, not available, we set up the problem with some any other intrinsic message-error rate

. Gear-shift de-

assumptions.

coders may be more robust than decoders that use just a single

A good measure for hardware cost is the area used by the cir- low-complexity decoding rule, as the gear-shift decoder can

cuit. In [19], which describes a five-bit implementation of an switch to a more effective decoding procedure in regions where

LDPC sum-product decoder, 42% of the chip area is used for the “decoding tunnel” is tight.

memory, another 42% is used for interconnections, and the re- Notice that irregular LDPC codes are usually highly opti-

maining 16% is used for logic. The size of memory scales lin- mized for a certain fixed decoding algorithm, with no consider-

early with the number of bits, and if the interconnections are ation given to decoding complexity. It has been noticed in many

done fully in parallel, their area also scales linearly with the papers, e.g., [3], [4], [7], that the EXIT chart for such highly op-

number of bits. The size of the logic scales approximately as the square of the number of bits. Using these facts, for an eight-bit decoder, the area used for memory, interconnections, and logic is about 38%, 38%, and 24%, respectively. Now, if the area of an eight-bit sum-product decoder is , the area required for implementation of Algorithm E with two-bit messages is about , and for Algorithm B is about . For min-sum decoding, only the logic is simpler than sum-product. Assuming that its logic is

timized irregular codes is very tight for all ’s. In such a situation, depending on the value chosen for , the optimum gearshift decoder may degenerate to just using the given algorithm for all iterations. When decoding complexity is a consideration, it remains an interesting open problem to optimize the structure of an irregular LDPC code specifically for a gear-shift decoder.
We note also that the idea of gear-shift decoding is very general, and can be used for other codes with iterative decoders.

even half of sum-product, it requires an area no less than

.

In terms of decoding time, since the propagation delay is pro-

portional to the length of the wires, or approximately to the

square root of the area, we make the assumption that the de-

coding time of each algorithm is proportional to the square root

of its required area. If the decoding time for sum-product is ,

then for min-sum, it is about

, for Algorithm E is about

, and for Algorithm B is about

.

Now, consider an eight-bit sum-product decoder for a (4,8)

regular code whose throughput is 1.6 Gb/s per iteration. As-

suming that a decoder with a throughput of 0.4 Gb/s is required,

a sum-product unit in the pipeline structure of Fig. 3 can per-

form four iterations. A min-sum decoder also can perform a

maximum of four iterations. An Algorithm E unit can perform

eight iterations, and an Algorithm B unit can perform 12 itera-

tions. Given the hardware cost (required area) of each algorithm

and the performance of the multi-iteration versions of these al-

gorithms, the optimum hardware with a throughput of 0.4 Gb/s

is one block of sum-product followed by one block of Algo-

rithm E, followed by one block of Algorithm B, to achieve a

target error rate of . The area required for this combina-

tion is . This can be compared with a pipeline system that

has only sum-product decoding blocks, and needs three blocks

whose hardware cost is . So in this example, using gear-shift

decoding, the hardware cost is reduced to less than 44%.

V. CONCLUSION
Allowing an iterative decoder to shift gears, i.e., to switch between a set of available algorithms at each iteration, is a promising method for reducing decoding latency with no sacrifice in the decoding threshold or code rate. Gallager’s Algorithm B [9], [20] is a good example of a gear-shift decoder.
For long-block-length LDPC codes, the “optimum” (minimum latency) decoder can be found from the EXIT charts of the available algorithms by solving a computationally tractable dynamic program. Gear shifting can also be applied in hardware implementations as a means of optimizing a pipelined decoder. Various examples show that significant improvements in decoding latency or hardware complexity are available.
Since EXIT charts are increasing functions of , a gear-shift decoder optimized for a target error rate and for a given intrinsic message-error rate is guaranteed to achieve for

REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] A. Shokrollahi, “New sequence of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Appl. Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms, Error-Correcting Codes, 1999, pp. 65–67.
[4] A. Shokrollahi, IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications. New York: Springer, 2000, vol. 123, pp. 153–166.
[5] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[6] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[7] S. ten Brink, “Rate one-half code for approaching the Shannon limit by 0.1 dB,” Electron. Lett., vol. 36, pp. 1293–1294, Jul. 2000.
[8] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[9] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[10] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[11] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hybrid decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 503–506.
[12] S. Ten Brink, “Iterative decoding trajectories of parallel concatenated codes,” in Proc. 3rd IEE/ITG Conf. Source, Channel Coding, Munich, Germany, Jan. 2000, pp. 75–80.
[13] S. Ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[14] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Low complexity turbo-like codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Sep. 2000, pp. 73–80.
[15] H. El Gamal and A. R. Hammons, “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 671–686, Feb. 2001.
[16] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “A more accurate one-dimensional analysis and design of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2106–2114, Dec. 2004.
[17] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Gear-shift decoding,” in Proc. 21st Biennial Symp. Commun., Kingston, ON, Canada, Jun. 2002, pp. 86–90.
[18] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[19] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhang, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:38:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

[20] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Properties of optimum binary message-passing decoders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 3658–3665, Oct. 2005.
[21] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
Masoud Ardakani (S’00–M’05) received the B.Sc. degree from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1994, the M.Sc. degree from Tehran University, Tehran, Iran, in 1997, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 2004, all in electrical engineering.
He was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Toronto from 2004 to 2005. From 1997 to 1999, he was with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Research Center, Isfahan, Iran. He is currently an Assistant Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, where he holds an Informatics Circle of Research Excellence (iCore) Junior Research Chair in Wireless Communications. His research interests are in the general area of digital communications, codes defined on graphs associated with iterative decoding, and MIMO systems.

Frank R. Kschischang (S’83–M’91–SM’00–F’06) received the B.A.Sc. degree (with honors) from the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, in 1985 and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1988 and 1991, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
He is a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Canada Research Chair in Communication Algorithms at the University of Toronto, where he has been a faculty member since 1991. During 1997–1998, he spent a sabbatical year as a Visiting Scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge. His research interests are focused on the area of coding techniques, primarily on soft-decision decoding algorithms, trellis structure of codes, codes defined on graphs, and iterative decoders. He has taught graduate courses in coding theory, information theory, and data transmission. Dr. Kschischang was the recipient of the Ontario Premier’s Research Excellence Award. From October 1997 to October 2000, he served as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY. He also served as Technical Program Co-chair for the 2004 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:38:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

