IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

1149

Transactions Letters

Kikuchi Approximation Method for Joint Decoding of LDPC Codes and Partial-Response Channels
Payam Pakzad and Venkat Anantharam

Abstract—In this letter, we apply the Kikuchi approximation method to the problem of joint decoding of a low-density parity-check code and a partial-response channel. The Kikuchi method is, in general, more powerful than the conventional loopy belief propagation (BP) algorithm, and can produce better approximations to an underlying inference problem. We will first review the Kikuchi approximation method and the generalized BP algorithm, which is an iterative message-passing algorithm based on this method. We will then report simulation results which show that the Kikuchi method outperforms the best conventional iterative method.

In this letter, we propose using a more powerful iterative algorithm, known as the generalized BP (GBP) algorithm based on the Kikuchi approximation method. We will briefly introduce the Kikuchi approximation method and the GBP algorithm in Section II. Readers are referred to [8] and [12] for more details. We will then apply this method to a particular turbo equalization problem, which was addressed using conventional methods in [4]. We will show that the Kikuchi-based GBP algorithm outperforms the best iterative method based on the BP algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION
I TERATIVE decoding techniques, such as the decoding algorithms for turbo codes (see [2]) and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes (see [3] and [5]), have enjoyed much attention in the recent years due to their apparent ability to efficiently produce good approximations to the optimal maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates. In applications such as magnetic storage, where a target bit-error rate (BER) needs to be achieved, these codes can operate at much lower signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) than any other practical error-correcting approach. Operation at lower SNRs, in turn, translates to achieving higher bit densities on the same storage device. At high densities, any efficient decoding technique must properly model and address the issue of intersymbol interference (ISI). The ISI in magnetic recording channels are conventionally described using partial-response (PR) models, in which the channel is modeled as a finite impulse response (FIR) filter. “Turbo equalization” is an iterative technique in which information is passed back and forth between soft decoders for the ISI channel, and a preceding error-correcting code. As we will see later in Section III, this corresponds to an implementation of the well-known belief propagation (BP) algorithm of [9] on a graph with cycles.
Paper approved by W. E. Ryan, the Editor for Modulation, Coding, and Equalization of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received June 21, 2004; revised June 6, 2005 and December 19, 2005. This work was supported in part by ONR/MURI under Grant N00014-1-0637, in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant SBR-9873086, in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Grant F30602-00-2-0538, in part by the California Micro Program, in part by Texas Instruments, in part by Marvell Technologies, and in part by STMicroElectronics.
P. Pakzad was with the School of Computer and Communication Engineering, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland. He is now with Digital Fountain, Inc., Fremont, CA 94538 USA (e-mail: payam@digitalfountain.com).
V. Anantharam is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: ananth@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.877944

II. KIKUCHI APPROXIMATION METHOD

We will now give a short description of the Kikuchi ap-

proximation method for calculating the desired marginals of a

product distribution. Let

, where for each

is a variable taking value in

, with

.

Let be a collection of subsets of ; we call each

a

region. We assume that each variable index

appears in

at least one region

.

Associated with each region

is a nonnegative kernel

function,

, depending only on the variables that appear

in . Then the corresponding -decomposable (Boltzmann)

product distribution is defined as

(1)

Here is the normalizing constant, and is called the par-

tition function. For a subset

, we denote by

the -marginal of

. We are

interested in finding one or more of the

’s for

,

and/or the partition function ; for example, as is the case

in later parts of this letter,

can be the joint a posteriori

probability density on the variables, which factorizes as a

product of conditional probabilities and parity-check terms.

The key idea behind the Kikuchi approximation method is

to convert the above marginalization problem into a constrained

optimization problem, and then approximate the objective func-

tion and the constraint set to obtain an approximation to the

desired marginals. To that end, let denote a probability

distribution on , and denote its marginals by

for each

. We define the variational free energy for the problem

as

(2)

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

where

is the average energy and

is the entropy of the system.

It can be shown that is uniquely minimized when

equals the Boltzmann distribution

of (1), and we have

product distribution than the beliefs obtained from the conventional BP algorithm; see, e.g., [8] for discussion and examples.
A. Graphical Representations of the Kikuchi Problem

(3)
The Kikuchi approximation method proposes to solve a related constrained minimization problem of the following form (see [8] for details):
(4)
Here is a set of local constraints to enforce consistency between the ’s, and is defined as

s.t.

and

(5)

Also,

, known as the Kikuchi free energy, is an ap-

proximation to the variational free energy (2), and is defined as

(6)

where ’s are constants known as the overcounting factors, and

are uniquely defined given the collection of regions. More

precisely, we set

for the maximal regions of , i.e., the

regions that are not contained in any other region. For any other

region

, we define recursively as

(7)

The standard technique to solve a constrained optimization

problem such as that of (4) is to form the Lagrangian, where

for each constraint of (5), a multiplier will be defined. Viewing

these multipliers (or a function of them) as “messages” in an iter-

ative message-passing algorithm, one can construct algorithms

whose fixed points coincide with the solutions of the Kikuchi

constrained optimization; see, e.g., [8] for details. We will de-

scribe one such algorithm called GBP in Section II below.

As with the BP algorithm, graphical models can be used to

represent a Kikuchi problem and serve as the basis for an itera-

tive message-passing algorithm to solve that problem. We there-

fore define a graphical representation of a Kikuchi problem as

a graph, whose vertices correspond to the regions

, and

whose edges correspond to the consistency constraints that de-

fine . Viewing as a partially ordered set (poset)1 with re-

spect to set inclusion, it is easy to see that the standard Hasse

diagram2 of the poset is one such graph. As we will see in the

next section, we then associate with each edge of the graphical

representation, a message

. The belief function

at a node is defined in terms of the messages in a local neigh-

borhood of the corresponding node, and at each iteration of the

algorithm, a message is updated in a way that the the be-

liefs

and

become consistent, i.e.,

.

We restrict our attentions to the graphical representations

whose edges are a subset of the edges of the Hasse diagram.

Clearly, such representations are not unique, since redundant

constraints (and the corresponding edges) may be freely added

or removed. It is, therefore, advantageous to find the minimal

such graphical representation, by removing a maximal set of

redundant edges; algorithms on such minimal graphs have

the fewest messages and are, hence, the least complex per

each iteration. As discussed in full detail in [8], although

these minimal graphical representations are not unique in the

graph-theoretic sense, all such realizations are equivalent in

representing the same Kikuchi free energy approximation, and

their corresponding algorithms have the same fixed points.

In [8], we discuss in detail why this choice of overcounting fac- B. GBP Algorithm

tors is reasonable; in short, as is evident from the definition of

above, these factors balance the approximation of (6), in the

sense that, considering the multiplicities, the terms containing a

subset of variables appear exactly once in the second sum in

(6), which is the approximation to the entropy function .

We will refer to the constrained minimization problem of (4)

as the Kikuchi approximation problem, where it is understood

that the desired marginals

are approximated by the

minimizers

.

As discussed in [11], the standard BP is an algorithm that

tries to solve a simple class of Kikuchi approximation problems

known as the Bethe case. When using a more suitable choice of

the collection of the regions, the Kikuchi beliefs

of

(4) can better approximate the true marginals

of the

GBP is a message-passing algorithm that tries to solve the

Kikuchi constrained minimization problem (4). As suggested by

the name (due to [11]), it is a generalization of the standard BP,

and given a good choice of the collection of Kikuchi regions, it

is expected to approximate the marginals better than BP.

Let be a graphical representation of the Kikuchi problem

(4). We associate with each (region) vertex of a belief func-

tion

. We also associate with each (directed) edge

R  1A poset is a set, like here, together with a relation, e.g., set-inclusion ,
such that the relation is transitive, reflexive, and antisymmetric. See, e.g., [10]
for more details.

2Hasse diagram of a poset is a directed graph, with nodes that correspond to

r ! s r the set elements, and where an edge (

) exists if and only if (iff) is the

s s  r t 2 R s  t  r cover of , i.e.,

and there is no other

such that

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

1151

of a message function

, which is initialized to

. For each

, define its descendants

, and its -parents,

an edge in .

For each

, the belief function

is defined in terms

of a local neighborhood of messages, as follows:

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the serial concatenation of an LDPC code and a PR channel.

(8)

where constant is chosen to normalize so it will sum to 1,

and

. Note that the beliefs need

only be calculated upon the termination of the algorithm.

At each iteration of the algorithm, the message

cor-

responding to an edge

of the is updated to satisfy the

edge constraint

, as shown in (9)

at the bottom of the page, where is any convenient constant.

Note that the common terms from the numerator and denomi-

nator of (9) can be cancelled, but we will not write the explicit

general form here.

As shown in [12] and [8], the fixed points of (8) and (9) are

precisely the stationary points of the constrained minimization

problem (4). Also, it should again be noted that if the poset

of Kikuchi regions has only two levels, the above algorithm co-

incides exactly with the standard BP algorithm on the graphical

representation of .

As is the case with the conventional BP algorithm, the con-

vergence behavior of the algorithm may depend on the schedule

chosen to update messages according to (9). However, the fixed

points of (8) and (9) are clearly independent of the updating

schedule, as long as each message is scheduled to be updated

frequently. Possible updating schedules include fully parallel

updating, where at each iteration, all messages are updated si-

multaneously based on the values of the messages at the pre-

vious iteration; and fully serial updating, where a full iteration

consists of a sequential updating of all the messages according

to a predefined order. In either case, the algorithm is run up to a

maximum number of iterations, or until an explicit test of con-

vergence of the messages is satisfied, e.g., until a distance func-

tion between the beliefs from one iteration to the next is smaller

than a fixed constant.

III. JOINT DECODING OF LDPC CODE AND PR CHANNEL
Consider a PR channel precoded by an LDPC code, as depicted in Fig. 1.

We identify the LDPC code by its parity-check matrix

where is the blocklength of the code, and is the number of

parity checks. Therefore,

is a codeword iff

it satisfies

in modulo 2 arithmetics. The PR channel

is identified by a transfer polynomial

,

where is the degree (memory) of the channel. For example, the

EPR4 channel depicted is identified by

. Therefore, the output of the channel is related to its input by

in the Z-transfer domain. We will assume

an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with variance .

The objective is to find the maximum-likelihood estimates of

the transmitted code symbols ’s given the noisy observations

.

It is clear that this problem can be described as that of finding

the marginals of a product function, in this case, a joint distri-

bution , as posed in Section II.

Let

denote the joint distribution of the codewords

given the observations. Then

(10)

(11)
where denotes the th row of the parity-check matrix ; is the indicator function, taking value if its argument is true, and , otherwise; and is the probability density of the noise. In particular, for the AWGN of variance , we have
. The best-performing method discussed in [4] was the state-based message-passing algorithm. This corresponds to the standard BP/GBP algorithm performed on a junction graph of the type pictured in Fig. 2, where the BP algorithm on the upper bubble corresponds to the Gallager–Tanner decoding of the LDPC code (see [3]), and on the lower bubble, it amounts to the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) decoding of the PR channel (see [1]). There are four classes of nodes in this graph: • the bit nodes corresponding to the bits of the LDPC
code; the regions associated with these nodes are for ;

(9)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

Fig. 2. Junction-graph model for joint BP decoding of the LDPC/PR problem.

PR-state regions

, and

. In addition,

there are five other intersection regions, which are either in-

tersections of a check-node and a PR-node region, or that of

two check-node regions.3 These nontrivial intersections are

, and

.

The full graph in Fig. 4 depicts the complete Hasse diagram

for this poset. Here we have also indicated the “redundant”

Fig. 3. Simple LDPC code for Example 1.

edges with dashed lines; these are the edges that can be removed without changing the fixed point of the Kikuchi problem, to

obtain a “minimal graphical representation” for the problem.

• the check nodes corresponding to the parity checks of the

LDPC code; the corresponding regions are

for

;

• the PR-state nodes corresponding to the states of the PR

channel; the associated regions are

for

where is the memory of the channel;

• and the PR-intersection nodes, depicted by small solid

squares, corresponding to the intersection of neighboring

PR-state nodes.

To apply the Kikuchi approximation method for this problem,

we used the poset obtained by the cluster variation method, see

[12]. Specifically, we appended all the intersections of the above

regions to form the collection of regions; as we discuss in

[8], such collections that are closed under pairwise intersections

have nice balance properties that are expected to improve the ap-

proximation. Notice that good LDPC codes do not have small

loops of size four, in which case, no two check nodes can in-

tersect in more than one index. However, the check nodes can

have nontrivial intersections with the PR-state nodes. Indeed, it

is precisely due to these nontrivial intersections that the Kikuchi

free energy approximation is expected to improve upon the con-

ventional BP approximation.

Example 1: Consider the simple LDPC code of Fig. 3,

with seven bits and four parity checks, in conjunction

with a PR channel with memory

. Fig. 4 depicts

the Hasse diagram for the associated Kikuchi problem.

Specifically, we start with the four check-node regions

, and

; and five PR-state

node regions,

, and

. We then add the seven bit-node regions

.

Note that for simplicity, we have omitted the terminating bits

in this example. Finally, we complete the poset by appending

Finally, we report the overcounting factors for this simple

example. As always, the largest nodes, here, the check nodes

and the PR-state nodes, have overcounting factors equal to one.

Using straightforward calculation according to (7), for the in-

tersection regions, we obtain

and

; and finally for the

bit-node regions, we have

and

.

We considered a specific example from [4], with a rate-7/8

LDPC code with block length

, and with an EPR4

channel. The resulting poset had 495 bit-node regions (single-

tons), 62 check-node regions (each of size 24, since the LDPC

code is regular with 24 bits per check), 495 PR-state node re-

gions (each of size 4, since the channel is EPR4), and a total of

659 nontrivial intersection regions, with nonzero overcounting

factors. Of these 659 regions, 494 correspond to the intersec-

tions of neighboring PR-state node regions (each of size 3). The

remaining 165 regions (with sizes 2 or 3) are the new regions

that make the difference from the BP algorithm.

Simulation results are reported in Fig. 5. “BCJR+LDPC” data

points are averaged over 500 simulation runs, with 8 iterations

between the BCJR and LDPC algorithms, where the LDPC al-

gorithm consisted of 20 iterations. GBP data points are averaged

over 50 simulation runs, with 8 iterations of the GBP algorithm

with a fully serial updating schedule for each run. For each case,

the BER was calculated based on the belief function after the

stated number of iterations of the corresponding algorithm.

These results suggest that, as expected, the GBP algorithm

considered performs better than the BCJR+LDPC method. Our

new technique appears to be particularly well-suited to the

low-SNR regime, which is the one that is most important for

current magnetic recording applications.

all the intersections of these regions; here there are four PR-in- 3Here the LDPC code does have cycles of length four, so two check nodes tersection regions, which are the intersections of neighboring can have nontrivial intersections.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

1153

Fig. 4. Graphical representation of Kikuchi regions for Example 1.

has 1711 vertices and 2951 edges. For comparison, the corresponding graph for the problem, before addition of the intersection regions, which corresponds to the loopy BP algorithm, has 2476 edges. Therefore, each iteration of the GBP algorithm entails about as many message updates as the standard BP, although GBP update rules of (9) are admittedly more complex than those of the BP.

Fig. 5. Simulation results for joint decoding of LDPC/PR.
We conclude this letter with a few remarks on the complexity of the GBP as compared with the standard BP. Clearly, the complexity of GBP depends on the number of edges of the graphical representation. A full comparison would have to include a study of convergence rate of GBP versus BP, as well as the expected number of edges of the minimal graphical representation for a given marginalization problem. At the same time, one needs to develop low-complexity approximations to the full algorithm presented here, which may be more suitable for implementation. All this is beyond the scope of this letter. Here, we content ourselves with reporting the complexity of the specific example which was described above.
The full Hasse diagram for the above problem had 1711 vertices and 3973 edges. The minimal graph for this collection, obtained by removing the redundant edges as prescribed in [8],

REFERENCES
[1] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, no. 2, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] B. Kurkoski, P. Siegel, and J. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[6] R. J. McEliece and M. Yildrim, “Belief propagation on partially ordered sets,” in Mathematical Systems Theory in Biology, Communications, Computation, and Finance. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2003, pp. 275–300.
[7] P. Pakzad and V. Anantharam, “Belief propagation and statistical physics,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., 2002, Paper No. 225, CD-ROM.
[8] P. Pakzad and V. Anantharam, “Estimation and marginalization using Kikuchi approximation methods,” Neural Comput., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1836–1873, Aug. 2005.
[9] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[10] R. Stanley, Enumerative Combinatorics. Monterey, CA: Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole, 1986, vol. I.
[11] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Generalized belief propagation,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 13, pp. 689–695, Dec. 2000.
[12] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms” Mitsubishi Elect. Res. Lab. (MERL) Rep. TR2004-40, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

