3168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006

Mean Field and Mixed Mean Field Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Juntan Zhang and Marc Fossorier, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, the mean field (MF) and mixed mean field (MMF) algorithms for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are considered. The MF principle is well established in statistical physics and artificial intelligence. Instead of using a single completely factorized approximated distribution as in the MF approach, the mixed MF algorithm forms a weighted average of several MF distributions as an approximation of the true posterior probability distribution. The MF decoding algorithm for linear block codes is derived and shown to be an approximation of the a posteriori probability (APP) decoding algorithm. The MF approach is then developed in the context of iterative decoding and presented as an approximation of the popular belief propagation decoding method. These results are extended to iterative decoding with the MMF algorithm. Simulation results show that the MF and MMF decoding algorithms yield a good performance–complexity tradeoff, especially when employed for decoding LDPC codes based on finite geometries.
Index Terms—A posteriori probability (APP) decoding, belief propagation decoding, Euclidean geometry (EG), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, mean field (MF) decoding, mixed mean field (MMF) decoding, projective geometry (PG).
I. INTRODUCTION
THE use of probabilistic methods in artificial intelligence and machine learning has recently gained enormous popularity. Particularly, probabilistic graphical models [1], [2] have become a preferred method for knowledge expression and reasoning. Graphical models provide a convenient formalism to represent and manipulate conditional independence statements. Using these independence statements, probabilistic inference algorithms for graphical models compute conditional probabilities of interest. There exist provably efficient exact algorithms which provide solutions to inference and learning problems in many cases (e.g., graphical model with sparse connectivity). However, these algorithms are generally slow when applied to densely connected networks [3]. Furthermore, in large networks, exact algorithms are intractable as they typically require summing over an exponentially large number of hidden states
Manuscript received November 4, 2004; revised July 23, 2005. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-04-30576. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 42nd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, September 2004.
J. Zhang was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA. He is now with Availink Inc., Germantown, MD 20874 USA (e-mail: jzhang@availink.com).
M. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@spectra.eng.hawaii. edu).
Communicated by Ø. Ytrehus, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2006.876238

[4]. A variety of approximation schemes including variational method have been proposed to exploit such situations. One particular form of variational approximation is mean field (MF) theory [5], [6] which approximates an intractable graphical model by a tractable one via a variational procedure that chooses the parameters of the tractable model to minimize the selected measure of error. MF approximation originated in statistical physics [7]. In a graphical model of statistical physics, a node can represent localized magnetic moment and it is affected by a local magnetic field which is expressed as a function of neighboring nodes. In certain cases, this field can be approximated by its mean value while ignoring fluctuations. This is the reason why this approximating inference algorithm is called MF theory. Despite its simplicity, MF theory provides satisfactory approximations in some cases and has been widely used in practical situations to circumvent computational difficulties. In other cases, however, it provides poor solutions and one possible reason is the strong assumption of the MF method [8]. To improve the MF approximation in such cases, a mixed mean field (MMF) method [9]–[11] was proposed in artificial intelligence. The basic idea of MMF theory is to form a weighted average of several MF solutions, instead of selecting one particular MF solution. The mixture weighting factors are determined in an iterative way and are optimal under certain assumptions. Empirical results of MMF have been presented in [9]. In experiments with random sigmoid belief networks, the mixture approximation has been shown to be better than single MF solutions. Moreover, the MMF approximation improves monotonically with the number of components in the mixture.
Probabilistic graphical models and inference algorithms have been increasingly used in communication systems, including error control coding area. For example, in [12], Bayesian belief networks and Pearl’s belief propagation (BP) algorithm have been shown to be closely connected with turbo codes [13], [14] and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [15]–[20]. These codes are considered as an exciting and potentially important development in modern coding theory due to their near-Shannon limit performance. Bayesian belief networks are directed acyclic graphs whose nodes represent variables while the links represent causal influences. The BP algorithm [1] is a distributed algorithm to compute posterior beliefs for tree-structured Bayesian networks. As pointed out in [12], turbo codes as well as LDPC codes can be represented as belief networks and their iterative decoding can be viewed as instances of the BP algorithm. It is known that the underlying graphs of turbo and LDPC codes generally contain cycles while Pearl’s BP algorithm is only guaranteed to converge to the correct marginal posterior probabilities in tree-like graphical

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3169

models. Experimentally, BP has been shown to work relatively well in loosely connected graphs with no -cycles. For some cases, however, the performance of BP remains away from that of maximum-likelihood decoding (MLD). One such example is that of some LDPC codes based on finite geometries, whose parity-check matrices are constructed following concepts from Euclidean geometry (EG) and projective geometry (PG) [21], [22]. The motivation of this work is to apply the MF and MMF algorithms to these codes. Applications of similar principles in error control coding were discussed in [23]–[27].
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a brief review of the MF and MMF algorithms in general probabilistic graphical models. Section III addresses the MF decoding algorithm for linear block codes. Section IV discusses the relationship between MF decoding and a posteriori probability (APP) decoding algorithms. Section V presents MMF decoding methods for linear block codes. Section VI compares the MF and MMF decoding algorithms. Section VII reviews the conventional iterative BP decoding algorithm and develops the MF and MMF approaches in the context of iterative decoding. As LDPC codes are more suitable to be decoded in space, all decoding algorithms discussed in Section VII are derived in space, instead of in space as in the previous sections. Section VIII reports simulation results of various decoding schemes for different codes, as well as the impact of the number of component MF distributions in the MMF decoding algorithm. Section IX concludes this paper with some remarks.

II. MF AND MMF THEORY

Let be the graph corresponding to a probability distribu-

tion

over variables,

. For each

, the random variable can take a finite number

of discrete states

. Let assume that part of these variables,

, are observed while others,

, are

hidden. In inference and learning problems, we wish to eval-

uate

, the likelihood of the evidence and the pos-

terior probability

. In many interesting problems,

however, the exact computation of

and

are

intractable. Therefore, we introduce a tractable approximation

which is defined on the same domain as the pos-

terior probability

. For any possible approximation

distribution

, using Jensen’s inequality [28], we ob-

tain the following inequality about log likelihoods [29]:

Therefore, minimizing the divergence between the true poste-

rior probability distribution and the approximating distribution

is equivalent to maximizing the lower bound on the log like-

lihood in (1). It is known that the KL divergence is positive

and is zero only if the approximating distribution

equals the true posterior distribution

. The smaller

the KL divergence, the better the approximation. Although the

preceding inequality and statements are valid for any possible

approximating probability distribution, we must select proper

forms of distributions which introduce simplified assumptions

that enable us to evaluate the KL divergence efficiently.

A. MF Theory

The simplification in MF theory comes from independence

properties. The MF theory assumes that, given , all the unob-

served variables

are independent of each other. More

precisely, the approximation probability distribution can be ex-

pressed in a completely factorized form

(3)

where

is the marginal distribution of variable

, for

. The next step in MF theory is to minimize

KL

in an iterative way. Because

the marginal distributions in

can be

adjusted independently, we can optimize KL

with respect to one marginal component at a

time. More precisely, we can improve the approximation of

by minimizing KL

with respect to one marginal

, and assuming the

other marginals

fixed. Let us

define

Let denote the expectation with respect to the distribu-

tion . For notational simplicity, we drop the dependence of

on . By using a Lagrange parameter corre-

sponding to the normalization constraint

,

we minimize KL

with respect to

, from

KL

(4)

(1) The terms in KL in explicit forms with respect to

It is readily verified that the difference between the left-hand side and the right-hand side of (1) is the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence (cross entropy)
KL
(2)

Then the divergence KL KL

can be expressed as follows:
becomes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006

(5)

It is straightforward to check that only the first and third terms

in the right-hand side of (5) depend on

and have partial

derivatives

(6)

and

. Let

be the marginal

of variable corresponding to the component approximation

probability distribution

, for

, and

. Thus, for

, the component dis-

tribution

is factorized as

(11)

and the mixture distribution is

(7)

(12)

After introducing the normalization constraints, we obtain the MF equation [10]
(8) where is the local normalization constant
(9)

As in MF theory, the KL divergence KL

is used as a criterion about the goodness of

the approximation

to the true posterior dis-

tribution

. The MMF algorithm minimizes

KL

under the normalization con-

straints

, and

. Note that the

divergence KL

has the form

KL

(the objective function is first minimized as unconstrained and

the optimized

is checked to satisfy the constraint

). Although the iteration equations of MF theory are

computationally tractable, they are found to generate unsatis-

factory results in some cases [8]. The origin of the discrepancy

lies in the strong assumption of a completely factorized distribution in the approximation used in the MF method. The intuition behind the completely factorized approximation is that each node in the graphical model interacts with other nodes and these interactions are relatively weak, so that the total interaction is roughly additive. Therefore, each node can roughly be characterized by its mean value. This assumption is valid only in case the interactions in the graphical model are not strong, so that each node fluctuates independently about its mean value. In

The difficulty of this optimization comes from the average of the log of the mixture distribution over all configurations of the unobserved variables. In many models of interest, this computation is intractable as it involves an exponential number of possible configurations. In [11], a further variational method is used to overcome this problem. For brevity, we omit the general detailed optimization procedures here and discuss them for the decoding problem in Section V.

case higher order moments play an important role, the MF algorithm generally fails to provide satisfactory results. One possible

III. MF DECODING OF A LINEAR BLOCK CODE

method to cope with these situations is to form a weighted average of several MF solutions, instead of using only one single MF solution. The constituent distributions of the mixture approximation are factorized as in naive MF (thus, only reflect influences of mean values), but the overall distribution is hopefully able to reflect higher order interactions.

Consider an

linear binary block code with length

and dimension . Let the

matrix be the gener-

ator matrix for . Let

be the mes-

sage block consisting of information bits. Then the corre-

sponding codeword is

.

Assume binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) signaling with unit

B. MMF Theory
The MMF theory assumes a mixture distribution as the approximation to the true posterior distribution
[11]

energy, which maps a codeword into a transmitted sequence

, according to

, for

. Suppose the code is used for error control over

an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with zero

mean and power spectral density . If

is a codeword in

and

is the corresponding transmitted sequence, then

(10) the received sequence is

, with

,

for

. The values are statistically independent

where each tion

is the total number of component distributions. For , the corresponding component distribu-
is a totally factorized MF distribution and the

Gaussian random variables with zero mean and variance . The task of a decoder is to infer given the observation
and the knowledge . The posterior probability of is

corresponding weighting factor is . The weighting factors are

constrained to be positive and to sum to one, i.e,

for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3171

where

(18)

Assume the bits in the message block

let

, for

are independent and . Hence, we have
(13)

In order to compute the forth term in [15], we introduce some

definitions. We denote

and

. We also denote

as the set

with

excluded. Similarly, we denote

as the set

with

excluded. Let

Blockwise MAP decoding [30], [31] aims to find the vector

that maximizes (13). When is large, the exhaustive search

over the possible blocks is intractable. We now use the MF

method to find a tractable approximation

to the posterior and

probability

. In its simplest form, MF theory assumes

that variables fluctuate independently around their mean values.

Hence, we express the approximation in a factorized form

The forth term in (15) becomes (14)

where

.

As explained in Section II-A, we use the KL divergence as a

measure of goodness of the approximation and from (13), obtain

KL

The first term in (15) becomes
The second term in (15) becomes The third term in (15) becomes

(15)
(19) (16)
Recall the following lemma in [15]: Consider a sequence of independent bits in which the th bit is with probability . Then the probability that the bits sum to is
(20)
Using the above lemma we have (17)
(21)
(22)
Then (19) becomes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006

In order to obtain the optimal

that mini-

mizes KL

, we resort to iterative methods

for minimizing the objective function. We optimize the KL di-

vergence one marginal component at a time while keeping the

other components fixed

KL (23)

for

. Applying condition (23) to (15), we have

(24)

Define the log-likelihood ratio (LLR)

(25)

for

. For an AWGN channel with zero mean

and power spectral density , the LLR of the channel transition

probability of the th symbol is

(26)

for

. Define the LLR of the approximated pos-

terior probability as

(27)

if if

Step 2: If

is reached, stop the decoding iteration

and go to Step 3. Otherwise, set

and

go to Step 1.

Step 3: Output as the decoded message block.

Although it is well known that the KL divergence is a convex

function of

, it is not necessarily jointly convex with

respect to the individual marginals ’s. By optimizing ’s

independently, we cannot expect the global optimal

. It

is reasonable to introduce an additional annealing parameter

to prevent the algorithm from converging to a local minimum.

However, the corresponding complexity becomes higher.

Furthermore, annealing does not seem to make much differ-

ence to the performance of the reestimation algorithms [24].

Therefore, we do not use the annealing approach. In [24], a

free energy minimization algorithm which is very similar to

MF was applied to decoding on the binary-symmetric channel

(BSC). Instead of using (20), a Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv

(BCJR)-like forward–backward approach was introduced in

the decoding procedure, which requires more computations.

However, the results obtained for Gallager codes did not seem

very promising compared to BP [17, Appendix D]. A similar

decoding algorithm in different form can also be found in [23].

Furthermore, in [27] an MF algorithm is suggested based on

MF free energy minimization.

IV. RELATION BETWEEN MF, APP, AND BP DECODING ALGORITHMS

for

. Define the approximated marginal prob-

ability and the LLR of this probability at iteration as

and , respectively, for

. Using the relation

, the updating rule of MF

decoding based on (24) becomes

(28)

The MF decoding algorithm is then carried out as follows.

Initilization: Set ations to . Step 1: For

, and the maximum number of iter, process

A. MF as an Approximation of Iterative APP

Assume there are no overlaps, except for position , among

the rows that intersect on position (these rows are called or-

thogonal on position ). Let be the LLR sent to the th

constraint from the th message bit at the th iteration. For the

BP algorithm, we have for

the equation at the bottom

of the page (see Appendix I). A simplified version of BP is the

iterative APP [32], [33], in which the LLR sent from the th

message bit to any constraint is the same. Then at the th itera-

tion, we have (29) at the top of the following page (notice that

the summation domain changes). Let us consider the function

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3173
(29)

Since

and

expansion of this function is

, the Taylor series where

Using this approximation, we have

(30)
We express the approximate distribution corresponding to as

(33) (31)
As in MF theory, we obtain the updating equation

Then the iterative APP algorithm becomes the MF algorithm as from (29)

Recall that in BP, with

, we have the expression at

(32) the bottom of the page. Using the Taylor series approximation

(30), we have

where

. As iterative APP can be viewed as an ap-

proximation of BP in which the differences between the out-

going belief messages from bits to different check sums are ig-

nored [33], MF can be viewed as an approximation of iterative

APP in which the higher order terms in the Taylor expansion of

the check-to-bit updating rule are ignored.

Then BP becomes the MF algorithm based on BP concept, which is referred to as MF-BP in the remainder of this paper.

B. MF-BP as an Approximation of BP

Up to this point, an iterative use of the MF approach has not

been considered. If we use the principles of BP in which the

messages sent out by a node in the graph representation of the

code should not include the input message to this node along the

same path, we can obtain a version of MF based on the concept

of BP. Consider the posterior probability of given the obser-

vation

and knowledge

, where represents the th

column of . Let

. We have

V. MMF DECODING OF A LINEAR BLOCK CODE

The iterative updating of the MF equations converges to one

of typically many local minima of KL

.

In order to obtain a better approximation of the distribution

, it might be more advantageous to form a mixture

of several MF distributions. From (10), the corresponding ap-

proximation, denoted by

, is given by

(34)

Let be the posterior probability that takes value

under the approximation probability distribution

, for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006

and factorized as
We have

. Then

is decoding. The KL divergence of

and

can be rewritten as

KL (35)

(36)

The KL divergence between the MMF approximation

and the true posterior probability

becomes

KL

Recall that the mutual information between any two random variables and is [28]
(38)

The KL divergence becomes

KL

KL

(39)

(37)

Using a smoothing function method [11] to deal with the intractable first item of (37), and a similar way as in naive MF for the remaining terms, we obtain the MMF decoding algorithm with component distributions, which is carried out as follows (see Appendix II).

Initialization: Set

, and the maximum number

of iteration to . For each , set

, where is the realization of a random vari-

able uniformly distributed over . For each , set

.

Step 1: For

and

, up-

date

based on (60),

(61), (62), (64), and (67), respectively, and

generate

if if

Step 2: If

is reached, stop the decoding iteration

and go to Step 3. Otherwise, set

and

go to Step 1.

Step 3: Output as the decoded message block.

VI. COMPARISON OF MF AND MMF DECODING ALGORITHMS
The motivation of MMF is to combine different component MF solutions with proper weighting factors and hopefully the overall distribution becomes a better approximation of the true posterior distribution. From this viewpoint, the principle of MMF is reasonable intuitively. Following a similar approach as in [11], in this section the advantage of MMF over naive MF is discussed more precisely in the context of linear block codes

The first term of the right-hand side of (39) is a linear combi-

nation of the KL divergences between the true posterior prob-

abilities and the constituent MF distributions. A minimization

procedure of the first term only sets all the weighting factors to

zero except for the one corresponding to the component mean

field distribution which has the smallest KL divergence to the

true posterior distribution. Hence, it reduces to the naive MF

and the linear combination term alone provides no improve-

ment over the naive MF theory. However, the mutual informa-

tion term in (39) allows the MMF model to provide an improved

approximation to the true distribution over the single model in

MF method. Recall that for any two random variables, the mu-

tual information between them is nonnegative. As a result, the

mutual information term characterizes the potential decrease of

the KL divergence in the mixed model over the single model. It

is reasonable to expect a smaller KL divergence in the mixture

scheme than that in the single scheme. As the KL divergence is a

kind of indicator of the distance between two distributions, the

MMF algorithm generally provides a better approximation to

the true posterior distribution than the naive MF algorithm. Note

that

, where is the total number of the com-

ponent MF distributions. Hence, the KL divergence between the

MMF approximation distribution and the true posterior distribu-

tion can be decreased at most logarithmically in the number of

components.

For the decoding problem, the true posterior distribution is

likely to be highly concentrated in a single hypothesis. As a re-

sult, an MF approach searches for a unimodal distribution and

in an iterative framework, it may be hard to escape from a local

minimum. One possible solution is to slightly modify the initial

condition and repeat MF decoding times, expecting one of the

tries to be successful. The MMF approach provides a better so-

lution as it performs these tries jointly at each iteration and

therefore obtains additional information between them via the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3175

mutual information term in (39). Indeed, eventually, one dis- iterative APP and BP algorithms, respectively. Based on this re-

tribution dominates but not necessarily that dominating early lationship, Step 1 of the MF decoding algorithm in space is

iterations.

carried out as follows.

VII. ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES IN H SPACE A. BP Decoding of LDPC Codes

Step 1: For

, process (44)

Assume

is the parity-check matrix which de-

fines the LDPC code considered. We denote the set of bits that

participate in check by

. Simi-

larly, we denote the set of checks in which bit participates as

.

Let be the LLR of bit and initially set to

.

Let and be the LLR of bit which is sent from check node to bit node , and from bit node to check node , respectively, at the th iteration. Let denote the a posteriori LLR of bit at the th iteration. Based on [17], the standard LLR BP algorithm is carried out as follows:

Initialization: Set

, and the maximum number of

iteration to . For each , set

.

Step 1: i) Horizontal Step, for

and

each

, process

(40)

The MF-BP algorithm is the same as the standard BP decoding algorithm except that the horizontal steps (40) and (41) are modified as
(45)

Similarly, the MMF decoding in space with component distributions is carried out as follows (see Appendix III).

Initialization: Set

, and let the maximum number

of iteration to . For each , set

, where the realization of a random variable

uniformly distributed over . For each , set

.

Step 1: For

, and

, up-

date and generate

based on (68)

(41)

(46)

ii) Vertical Step, for , process

and each
(42) (43)

Step 2: If

or

is reached, stop the de-

coding iteration and go to Step 3. Otherwise,

set

and go to Step 1.

Step 3: Output as the decoded codeword.

It is worth mentioning that various simplified versions of the BP algorithm, including UMP BP-based [33], normalized BP-based [35], and inaccurate BP algorithms [36][37] can be applied to the MMF approach presented in this section.

Step 2: Hard decision and stopping criterion test:

i) Create

such that

if

, and

if

.

ii) If

or

is reached, stop

the decoding iteration and go to Step 3.

Otherwise set

and go to Step 1.

Step 3: Output as the decoded codeword.

C. Computation Complexity

From the updating rules presented in Section VII-B, the com-

putational complexities of MF and MF-BP are lower than that of

BP since these algorithms simplify the updating rules in bit node

and check node processing. The complexity of a direct calcula-

tion at one iteration of the MMF decoding procedures presented

in Appendix III is of the order of

. Nevertheless, this

B. MF and MMF Decoding for LDPC Codes

complexity can be considerably reduced with the employment of preprocessing and forward–backward recursions. Notice that

LDPC codes are more suitable to be decoded in space. the terms

appear in the calcu-

However, we did not find any rigorous derivation of MF and lations of both and . Thus, we can first calculate and store

MMF decoding algorithms in space and instead, use the link a matrix

with

established between algorithms in Section IV to obtain the for-

mulations in space. We have shown in Section IV that MF

for

and MF-BP decodings are the first order Taylor series of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006
TABLE I DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR ONE ITERATION OF THE MMF DECODING ALGORITHM WITH
J COMPONENT DISTRIBUTIONS AND A (d ; d ) REGULAR LDPC CODE OF LENGTH N

Fig. 1. WER of regular (1008; 504)(3; 6) LDPC code with MF, MF-BP, MF-BP with 50 independent decodings, BP and MMF-BP (J = 50) decoding algorithms, and at most 2000 iterations.

This calculation requires

additions and

mul-

tiplications. The storage of the matrix needs a memory of

size . We also observe that the terms

The decoding complexity with the preprocessing of the matrix

for one iteration of the MMF decoding algorithm with

components and a

regular LDPC code of length has

been summarized in Table I. This complexity is of the order

of

. Hence, it remains linear in the code

length and for

, the complexity increase with

respect to MF-BP or BP decoding is proportional to .

appear in the calculations of

, and . This term can

VIII. SIMULATION RESULTS

be calculated either based on the forward-backward principle or A. Impact of Graph Connectivity as
1) Gallager-Type LDPC Codes: Fig. 1 depicts the word error

rate (WER) for iterative decoding of the

reg-

ular Gallager code [38] with the MF, MF-BP, MF-BP with 50

independent decodings, BP and MMF-BP

decoding

algorithms, and at most 2000 iterations (this number was chosen

unnecessarily large to ensure that convergence is reached for all

algorithms. For each algorithm, the average number of iterations

is much smaller and decreases as the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3177

Fig. 2. WER of a (73; 45) PG-LDPC code with with BP, MF, MF-BP, and MMF (J = 6) decoding algorithms with I = 50.}.

increases). We observe that for Gallager codes, i.e., LDPC codes

constructed randomly, the MMF-BP does not provide signifi-

cant improvement in performance over standard BP algorithm.

The reasons of this behavior are elaborated in Section VIII-A.3

2) Finite-Geometry (FG) LDPC Codes: Fig. 2 depicts the

WER for iterative decoding of the

PG-LDPC code with

the BP, MF-BP, MF, and MMF with

(the effect of varying

will be discussed in Section VIII-B), and at most 50 iterations.

This code and the following two PG-LDPC codes belong to the

class of PG-LDPC codes constructed from the two-dimensional

PG

for various [21]. It has been shown in [34] that itera-

tive BP decoding using redundant parity-check matrices of these

codes provides good performance. The number of check sums

in the parity-check matrix used in these simulations is equal to

the codeword length (i.e, for this code, is a

matrix).

We observe that for the

PG-LDPC code, MF decoding

provides a performance comparable to that of BP decoding (es-

pecially MF-BP). We also observe that MMF with six compo-

nent distributions outperforms the BP algorithm and approaches

the lower bound on MLD at high SNR values.

Fig. 3 depicts the WER for iterative decoding of the

PG-LDPC code with the MF, MF-BP, standard BP

and MMF-BP (

) algorithms, and at most 200 iterations.

We observe that at the WER , the MMF-BP algorithm

outperforms by about 0.3 dB the standard BP algorithm. We

also observe that at this WER, the performance of MMF-BP is

very close to the lower bound on MLD.

Fig. 4 depicts the WER for iterative decoding of the

PG-LDPC code with the BP, MF, MF-BP, inac-

curate BP (IBP) [36]1 and MMF based on IBP (MMF-IBP)

algorithms, and at most 500 iterations. Using a similar prin-

ciple as that in IBP, MMF-IBP replaces the accurate function

in the fourth term in (68) by a less accurate

one. We observe that at the WER , the MMF-IBP with

six component distributions outperforms by about 0.2 dB the

standard BP algorithm. However, no MLD errors were recorded

for SNR values larger than 3.2 dB.

Fig. 5 depicts the WER for iterative decoding of the

EG-LDPC code with the BP, MF, MF-BP, and MMF

algorithms, and at most 100 iterations. The

EG-LDPC

code is the

th-order EG code constructed based on

EG

[21]. The decoding algorithms are performed with a

parity-check matrix which contains many -cycles.

We observe that the MF provides a performance comparable to

that of the BP decoding. We also observe that the MMF with

six component distributions outperforms the BP algorithm and

approaches the lower bound on MLD.

1In IBP, the check processing step is simplified by replacing the functions f (x) = tanh(x=2) and f (x) = 2 tanh (x) by two less accurate ones, f (x) and f (x), respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006

Fig. 3. WER of (273; 191) PG-LDPC code with MF, MF-BP, BP, and MMF-BP(J = 6) decoding algorithms with I = 200.

Fig. 4. WER of (1057; 813) PG-LDPC code with MF,BP, MF-BP, IBP, and MMF-IBP(J = 6) decoding algorithms with I = 500. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3179

Fig. 5. WER of ; (63 48) EG-LDPC code with BP, MF, MF-BP, and MMF(J = 6) decoding algorithms with I = 100.

Fig. 6. WER of ; (255 127) EG-LDPC code with BP, normalized BP-based, and MMF NBP-based(J = 8;  = 8) decoding algorithms with I = 500.

Fig. 6 depicts the WER for iterative decoding of the of -cycles. We observe that at the WER

, the MMF

EG-LDPC code with the BP, normalized BP-based NBP-based with eight component distributions outperforms

(NBP-based) and MMF NBP-based algorithms, and at most by about 0.5 and 1.0 dB the NBP-based and the standard BP

500 iterations. This code is also the

th-order EG code algorithms, respectively.

and constructed based on EG

. The decoding algorithms 3) Discussion: The previous simulation results show that the

are performed with a

parity-check matrix rich MMF approach has more potential for decoding FG LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3180

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006

Fig. 7. Impact of the number of component distributions in MMF-NBP for decoding (255; 127) EG-LDPC code at hboxSN R = 3.0 dB with I = 500.

codes than Gallager-type LDPC codes. One possible reason may be due to the difference in densities between the matrices of these two types of LDPC codes. As stated before, the main principle of the MF approach is that in the graph representation of the code, each node is assumed to be subject to influences from a large enough number of other nodes to approximate the exact inference value by its mean. Furthermore, it is assumed that each node interacts independently around its mean value. This, in turns, implicitly implies a unimodal distribution. As a result of these assumptions in conjunction with the law of large number, an MF approach seems more suitable for a dense graph than for a sparse graph. Therefore, when applied to FG LDPC codes with relatively high density matrices , the MF and MMF algorithms achieve a better error performance than for decoding Gallager-type LDPC codes, whose parity-check matrices are typically much sparser.

probability distribution as the number of component distributions increases. Furthermore, we observe that as increases, the performance improvement decreases rapidly, as expected from the logarithmic nature of this bound in .

C. Impact of Cooperation Between Component Distributions in MMF

Fig. 8 depicts the WER for iterative decoding of the

PG-LDPC code with MF-BP, MMF-BP with six

components and MF-BP with six independent decodings (and

the same six initial conditions as MMF-BP

). We

observe that MMF-BP decoding outperforms independent

MF-BP decodings with the same number , as expected from

Section VI. A similar behavior is observed for the

LDPC code, as depicted in Fig. 1.

B. Impact of Number of Component Distributions in MMF

IX. CONCLUSION In this paper, MF and MMF decoding algorithms have been

Fig. 7 depicts the impact of the number of the component proposed. Despite its computational tractability, the naive MF

distributions in the MMF algorithm for decoding the

method has been found to fail to provide satisfactory results in

EG-LDPC code at the SNR 3.0 dB and at most 500 iterations. some cases. The problems of the naive MF probably origin from

We observe that the performance of the MMF algorithm in- the strong assumption of the complete independence between

creases with the number of component distributions. As ex- all the hidden variables. In the context of error control coding,

pected, the larger this number, the better the performance of the it has been shown that by keeping only the first-order terms of

MMF decoding algorithm. This observation is expected from the Taylor expansion of its check processing function, the APP

the mutual information bound, which suggests a smaller KL di- algorithm becomes the MF algorithm. The MF algorithm can

vergence between the MMF distribution and the true posterior therefore be considered as an approximation of the APP method

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3181

Fig. 8. WER of the (273; 191) PG-LDPC code with MF-BP, MMF-BP (J = 6), and six separate MF-BP decoding algorithms with I = 200.

by simplifying the constraint processing procedure. This ap-

and

.

proximation was extended in the context of iterative decoding, We have

providing the MF-BP algorithm. Similarly, the MMF approach

was investigated for iterative decoding, as for the decoding,

problem considering a mixture of distributions seems inter-

esting in an iterative context only.

The computational complexity of the MF-BP method is lower

than that of the BP algorithm, since in the most time-consuming

check-to-bit step, the MF-BP decoding algorithm simplifies the

BP updating rule. On the other hand, the complexity of MMF

(in the order of

) is higher than that of BP

(in the order of

) as many intermediate variables

have to be updated at each iteration, but remains linear in the

code length. This complexity analysis also applies to simplified

versions of BP and their MMF versions. In term of practical im-

plementation, simplified versions of the MMF approach such as

keeping the weighting factors constant or reducing the number

of MF component distributions with iterations can be applied to

decrease the complexity of MMF. This is an interesting topic of

future research beyond the scope of this paper.

APPENDIX I DERIVATION OF THE BP DECODING ALGORITHM OF A LINEAR
BLOCK CODE IN SPACE

Then

The encoding process is described by

. For

each

, we have

Let

be the corresponding event that

. Assume the APPs satisfy

(47)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3182
We have

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006
The first term in (37) is the most difficult to calculate because it is not a linear function of the component distributions

For so that For

, (47) becomes

(48) (50)

For

, we introduce another smoothing factorized

distribution function to improve the convexity of the objective

function [29]

(51)

For

, we have

(49)

Assume all rows intersecting on position are orthogonal on position . Using the updating rule of BP in which the belief sent out by a node should not include the input belief to this node along the same path, we obtain the expression at the bottom of the page.

APPENDIX II

(52)

DERIVATION OF THE MMF DECODING ALGORITHM OF A

LINEAR BLOCK CODE IN SPACE with
In Section V, the second term in (37) becomes

(53)

The third term in (37) becomes

Following Section III, the second term in (52) becomes

(54)

Similarly, using the assumption (37) becomes

, the forth term in The third term in (52) is

(55) Using the relation [29]
(56)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3183

we introduce a variational parameter for each

and we denote

. We have

Next we minimize KL

with respect

to

for

and

.

For

, the unconstraint fixed-point condition to

KL

is

Let From the above calculations, we have

which satisfies is
(57)

(60) . Similarly, the fixed-point condition of

(61) and the fixed-point condition of is

(62) For simplicity, let

(58)

Let

KL

KL

(59)

where KL

(63)

Using Lagrange multipliers and the constraint

,

we obtain the fixed-point condition of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(64)

3184

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 52, NO. 7, JULY 2006

Finally, we minimize the divergence with respect to and let

so that

(65) (68)

respectively. The detailed derivations of these formulas are given in [39].

(66) ACKNOWLEDGMENT

and the fixed-point condition is

The authors wish to thank the reviewers for their constructive
comments which improved the content and presentation of this
paper. (67)

REFERENCES

APPENDIX III FIXED-POINT CONDITIONS OF MMF DECODING IN SPACE
In the MMF decoding algorithm in space, the fixed-point conditions (60), (61), (62), (63), and (65) become

[1] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[2] F. V. Jensen, An Introduction to Bayesian Networks. London: UCL, 1996.
[3] C. S. Jensen, A. Kong, and U. Kjaerulff, “Blocking Gibbs sampling in very large probabilistic expert systems,” Int. J. Human Computer Studies (Special Issue on Real-World Applications of Uncertainty Reasoning), vol. 42, pp. 647–666, Jun. 1995.
[4] R. Neal, “Connectionist learning of belief networks,” Artificial Intell., vol. 56, pp. 71–113, 1992.
[5] C. Peterson and J. R. Anderson, “A mean field learning algorithm for neural networks,” Complex Syst., vol. 1, pp. 995–1019, 1987.
[6] L. K. Saul, T. Jaakkola, and M. I. Jordan, “Mean field theory for sigmoid belief networks,” J. Aritificial Intell. Res., vol. 4, pp. 61–76, 1996.
[7] G. Parisi, Statistical Field Theory. Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1988.
[8] C. C. Galland, “The limitation of deterministic Boltzmann machines,” Network: Computation in Neural Systems, vol. 4, pp. 355–379, 1993.
[9] C. Bishop, N. Jaakkola, and M. Jordan, “Approximating posterior distributions in belief networks using mixtures,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing System 10, M. I. Jordan, M. J. Kearns, and S. A. Solla, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
[10] H. Haft, R. Hofmann, and V. Tresp, “Model-independent mean-field theory as a local method for approximate propagation of information,” Network, vol. 10, pp. 93–105, 1999.
[11] N. Jaakkola and M. Jordan, “Improving the mean field approximation via the use of mixture distributions,” in Learning in Graphical Models, M. I. Jordan, Ed. Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1998.
[12] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[13] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near-optimum error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[14] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[15] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[16] ——, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND FOSSORIER: MEAN FIELD AND MIXED MEAN FIELD ITERATIVE DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

3185

[18] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[19] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[20] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[21] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[22] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[23] G. Battail and R. Sfez, “Suboptimum decoding using Kullback principle,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, B. Bouchon, Ed. et al. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1983, vol. 313, pp. 93–110.
[24] D. J. C. MacKay, “Free energy minimization algorithm for decoding and cryptanalysis,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 446–447, 1995.
[25] J. S. Yedidia, 2003, private communication. [26] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, Characterization of Be-
lief Propagation and its Generalizations. Mitsubishi Electric Res. Lab. (MERL), Tech. Rep. TR-2001-15, 2000. [27] ——, Constructing free energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms Mitsubishi Electric Res. Lab. (MERL), Tech. Rep. TR-2004-040, 2004. [28] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991. [29] M. Jordan, Z. Ghahramani, N. Jaakkola, and L. Saul, “An introduction to variational methods for graphical models,” in Learning in Graphical Models, M. I. Jordan, Ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.

[30] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[31] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[32] J. L. Massey, Threshod Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MAT Press, 1963.
[33] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[34] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of onestep majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931–937, Jun. 2000.
[35] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[36] J. Chen, “Reduced Complexity Decoding Algorithms for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes and Turbo Codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, 2003.
[37] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X. Hu, “Reduced complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[38] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data. html.
[39] J. Zhang, “Iterative Decoding Algorithms for Low Density Parity Check Codes and Turbo Codes,” Ph.D dissertation, Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:34:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

