IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

1215

A Low-Cost Parallel Scalable FPGA Architecture for Regular and Irregular LDPC Decoding
François Verdier and David Declercq

Abstract—We present in this paper an architectural model for implementing parallel and scalable low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders. This model has been developed for targeting field-programmable gate array devices and system-on-chip (SoC) platforms. We present first the motivations of investigating a new hardware model for regular and irregular LDPC decoders. The code flexibility, the memory usage optimization, and an easy hardware integration have been taken into account. The construction of a specific class of codes (hardware-constrained LDPC codes) is then presented. Parallelization and pseudorandomness constraints of codes are particularly detailed. A complete description of our parallel and scalable hardware model suitable for reprogrammable architectures is then given. Simulation results are presented showing the efficiency of this model with both (3,6) regular and irregular codes.
Index Terms—Field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), hardware-constrained low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, parallel implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
WE ARE concerned in this paper with the development of methodologies for designing highly integrated architectures dedicated to digital communications. The very large integration level must be understood here as putting all digital blocks of a wireless transmitter/receiver together on a single electronic chip. This means that both high-level processing functions (source coding/decoding, front-end interface, application-specific programs) and signal processing functions (matched filtering, channel coding/decoding, etc.) should interact closely and efficiently. In the scope of highly integrated architectures, we present a solution for a simple integration of a parallel channel decoder using low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The first motivation of this work relies on the fact that today’s demand for small and powerful digital communication appliances creates more and more complicated constraints to meet. For example, future generations of smart phones or personal digital assistants will require more and more processing needs, and will be, in the same way, integrated in very restricted silicon surfaces and powered by constantly decreasing battery voltages. Moreover, flexibility seems to be an important capability of such systems. Small, mobile, and low-power communication devices delivered with
Paper approved by E. Ayanoglu, the Editor for Communication Theory and Coding Application of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 11, 2003; revised August 5, 2004.
The authors are with the ETIS Laboratory, CNRS UMR 8051/University of Cergy-Pontoise/ENSEA, 95014 Cergy-Pontoise Cedex, France (e-mail: Francois.Verdier@ensea.fr; David.Declercq@ensea.fr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.877980

very short delays are now available with system-on-chip (SoC) and platform-based design methodologies. Both SoCs and platform-based concepts try to fill the gap between common hardware “platforms” and flexible (programmable) applications.
The second motivation of our work is that error-correcting methods based on LDPC codes, presented by Gallager in 1963 [1] and rediscovered by MacKay and Neal in 1995 [2], have been widely studied, and significant works have shown their potential closeness to the Shannon limit. LDPC codes are decoded iteratively by belief propagation (BP) on their associated factor graph [3]. Both the high performance of these codes and the simplicity of decoding (iterative) algorithms are attractive, and LDPC solutions have recently been proposed as error-correcting codes in several communication standards (DSL [4], magnetic storage [5], digital video broadcast [6]). A significant advantage of LDPC decoders over competitors’ turbo codes [7] resides in their possible parallel implementation, and several hardware solutions have already been published. The reader can refer to [8] for a good introduction to the many aspects of implementing LDPC architectures and the tradeoffs between performance and hardware costs.
Unfortunately, many proposed hardware solutions of LDPC decoders suffer from a serious lack of flexibility. Some of them constitute fully parallel implementations of the LDPC factor graph in the form of a huge number of simple processing units (PUs) connected through complex routing networks [9]–[11]. Among the most significant works are an application-specified integrated circuit (ASIC) realization reaching a 1-Gb/s throughput [12] and a 54-Mb/s field-programmable gate array (FPGA) decoder [11]. The main advantage of such approaches is a very short decoding duration with the drawback of very complex (pseudorandom) and unflexible routing networks. Neither modification of codes nor scalability can be achieved with these solutions.
Both scalability and flexibility, however, could be achieved when implementing the decoding algorithm on partly parallel structures. Code construction and hardware resources must, therefore, be optimized jointly. Partly parallel architectures have been studied for both regular [13], [14] and irregular [15] LDPC codes. The work of Hocevar [16] [17] is a good example of such a solution. Starting from a structured decoding matrix
and a matrix expansion technique, only a small number of functional units can implement the whole decoding computation. However, good scalability and flexibility properties are not clear when programmable code lengths and rates are expected.
Other approachs exist with simultaneous code, algorithmic, and architectural optimizations [18], [19], and give very good

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

performance and speed results. Turbo-like algorithms are used for decoding, but are far from the context of our work.
The aim of this paper is to illustrate a methodology for designing hardware solutions exploiting reconfigurability of new available architectures for an efficient integration of LDPC decoders in SoC systems. We propose a low-cost reconfigurable and scalable parallel realization of a hardware LDPC decoder. This parallel architectural model does not depend on the decoding algorithm, because it relies only on the LDPC parity-matrix structure. Actually, all iterative decoding algorithms derived from the BP algorithm (min-sum and its modified versions [20]) can be considered with our model. This paper presents the motivation and details of this architectural model. Our architectural model and the LDPC code family it implements have been optimized jointly under realistic hardware constraints. The resulting subclass of LDPC codes has been denoted hardwareconstrained LDPC (HC-LDPC) and is presented in this paper. Theory and fundamentals of HC-LDPC codes can be found in [21].
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents signal processing aspects of the LDPC decoder and gives details about the BP decoding algorithm as an example. The problem of facing the pseudorandomness of the codes and our solution for parallelizing LDPC decoders is also presented in this section. Then we present in Section III the architectural model and how it has been implemented in hardware. Section IV gives some performance results, and a discussion is given in Section V.
II. ARCHITECTURAL ISSUES OF LDPC DECODERS

Fig. 1 Representation and notations for nodes and messages. Arrows represent the message flow.

is used to indicate the fraction of edges to data nodes of degree , and

that are connected

(2)
gives the fraction of edges connected to check nodes of degree . A degree data node (respectively, a degree check node) is a node connected to exactly resp. edges. Quantities
and are the upper bounds of edge connectivity. The decoding matrix is typically constructed at random, leading to a random topology of the corresponding graph.

For the sake of clarity, we present first the notations that will A. BP Decoding Algorithm be used throughout this paper. A regular or irregular LDPC code

is defined by a block of symbols (the codeword) and a set

of parity-check equations. Each parity function applies to

a subset of symbols of the codeword. In the case of a regular

LDPC code, all symbols participate exactly to the same number

of parity functions, and all parity functions apply to the same

number of symbols. In the case of an irregular LDPC code, these

quantities are conveniently expressed by two polynomials

and , detailed later. The codeword of length contains

information symbols and redundancy symbols.

The rate of this code is at most

.

An LDPC code is represented by its sparse parity-check ma-

trix of size

and of density defined as

(

is the number of nonzero values in the matrix). A value

indicates that the th symbol is used in the th parity function.

A regular LDPC code is defined by a matrix containing exactly

the same number of ones in each row and the same number of

ones in each column. The decoding matrix may also be repre-

sented by a bipartite graph with symbols (or data nodes) and

parity (or check) nodes. Using the notation of [22], the con-

nectivity of these nodes are expressed by the polynomials

and , where

Several approaches exist for decoding LDPC codes, all derived from the BP algorithm [20]. Insisting on the fact that our model does not depend on the decoding solution, we will only present the BP algorithm in the log domain (log-BP).
Decoding a LDPC code with log-BP consists of propagating messages along all the edges of the factor graph. We denote as the data to check messages and as the check to data messages. Messages represent probabilities (or “beliefs”) of symbols on parity-check values and parity-check values on symbols, respectively. In addition to these quantities, a log-likelihood ratio (LLR) is associated with each data node. This ratio feeds the decoding algorithm and comes from the channel receiver.
The following notations are used for the description of the log-BP algorithm.
• The binary codeword to be transmitted on the channel is .
• The output of the modulation is BPSK . • The transfer function of the channel is modeled by
, where is an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN).

• The decoding algorithm is fed by the LLR

.

(1) The decoding algorithm consists of three computing steps, computed iteratively (see Fig. 1 for the notations).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERDIER AND DECLERCQ: A LOW-COST PARALLEL SCALABLE FPGA ARCHITECTURE

1217

Fig. 2 Partitioning of the bipartite representation of a regular or irregular LDPC code. Each partition is associated with an independent PU.

1) The data-node process (data update) computes messages from and LLRs. For each data node ( being the degree of the node and the LLR entering this node)
(3)
2) The check-node process (check update) computes messages. For each check node ( being the degree of the node)
(4)
3) The hard-decision process that computes the estimated value of each symbol of the code. For each data node
(5)
Note that steps 1 and 3 could easily be done simultaneously. Step 3 needs a full sum of incoming messages (plus a sign calculation), while step 1 needs extra partial differences. Two math functions are used in step 2 for transposing the initial needed convolution in the log-Fourier domain. These functions are defined as
(6)
(7) A complete description of the log-BP algorithm can be found in [20].
An important point that must be considered when implementing LDPC decoders in hardware consists of optimizing resource usage (gate count, memory sizes). We discuss in the following how to manage memory needs by parallelizing hardware implementation. B. The Problem of Handling Randomness

the and messages propagated along this connection. In

this model, edges are numbered in a natural order from

to

(from the data-nodes side of the graph). Equiv-

alently, the ones in the decoding matrix are numbered from top

to bottom by columns first.

Decoding this LDPC code thus relies on the iteration of two

processing steps:

1) the data-to-check process (data update), which calculates

messages from data nodes to check nodes using (3);

2) the check-to-data process (check update), which calculates

messages using (4).

As long as all messages are contained in memories, the two pro-

cessing steps are equivalent to reading from (and writing to) spe-

cific memory locations. More precisely, due to the edge num-

bering, the first step consists of accessing memories in a natural

order (from 0 to

), while the second step accesses mem-

ories in a pseudorandom order. Any graph topology can then

be obtained by a unique interleaving set

of size ,

where is the th check-node connection number (i.e., the th

memory location) treated by the check-node process. A partic-

ular regular or irregular LDPC code is then completely defined

by the set of parameters

. The two irreg-

ularity profiles and reduce to the two numbers

and

for regular codes.

The interleaver may be implemented, for example, by using

a memory containing all values. For large block-length

codes, this solution is very expensive in terms of memory

cost. Optimizing the interleaver complexity is then a major

challenge when considering hardware implementation of large

block-length codes. Parallelization of such large codes is a

possible solution to this critical issue if the interleaver size

could be kept constant when the length of the code increases. In

this context, we developed a subclass of LDPC codes, namely,

HC-LDPC codes, well adapted for the parallelization of LDPC

decoders.

In the next section, we present a brief overview of HC-LDPC

code construction, and introduce the general concepts and no-

tations useful for the rest of the paper. For a more detailed pre-

sentation of the HC-LDPC code construction, we refer readers

to [21].

Let an LDPC code be represented by its bipartite graph, as C. Regular and Irregular HC-LDPC Codes Construction shown in Fig. 2. In this representation, each connection between a data node and a check node can be represented by a unique The construction of an HC-LDPC code parallelized on number , which is the address in two memories containing partitions starts with a highly structured block-diagonal rect-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1218

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

The number of partitions thus defines the maximum

number of different data- and check-node degrees in the

HC-LDPC code. At this point, the parallel code is the “con-

catenation” of independant partitions (disjoints graphs)

that can be mapped independently on a set of PUs (for the

messages computations) and memories (for storing messages),

as illustrated in Fig. 2.

The next step consists of connecting these graphs with inter-

partition edges. This is done by moving a subset of ones from

the diagonal matrices to the other partitions. In order to re-

spect both column and row weights (data and check degrees),

as well as the number of edges in all partitions, these moves

must be done in the following way. A subset of values inside

Fig. 3 Example of the two-step construction (diagonal construction followed by moving nonzero values) with an irregular parallel HC-LDPC code implemented on N = 4 partitions. The HC-LDPC code is irregular in column weight only in this example.

the interleaving sequence are tagged by a circular partition shift . Given a particular value of the sequence and its tag in the partition , this edge is moved into the partition number
. Fig. 3 illustrates some moves in this construc-

tion.

 TABLE I
BEST CODES OF RATE R 0:5 WITH (x) = x AND N = 8 PARTITIONS.  IS THE CODE THRESHOLD COMPUTED BY DE, C
IS THE CHANNEL CAPACITY

By construction, the resulting decoding matrix has exactly the given irregularity profiles and as pointed out in [21]. The performance of the code built this way depends on the number of moved edges. This number is chosen to be a

proportion of the number of edges in each partition, so

that the distribution of ones in the resulting matrix is as uniform

as possible.

It is obvious to say that this method applies on any number

of partitions and any code block-length multiple of .

This parallel construction of the code applies to irregular

codes, as well as to regular ones. The only limitation of

this construction resides in the restriction on the irregularity

profiles. More precisely, the number of different (data) node

degrees is limited to the number of partitions. For the rest of

this paper, we restrict the irregular examples to the codes that

have irregular profiles in column degrees only (with regular

polynomials ). Table I shows, however, that such codes

have very good performance even with a limited number of

partitions. The coding rates have been chosen for a comparison

angular matrix

(see Fig. 3).

The

matrix meets the following constraints: 1)

each submatrix has strictly regular connections both data-wise

and check-wise; 2) the total number of ones in is uni-

formly divided onto the submatrices (all matrices have

the same number of ones

); and 3) each submatrix struc-

ture leads to the same interleaver

. In the particular

case of a regular code, all submatrices are identical. For irreg-

purpose with the regular

LDPC code. Thresholds have

been computed by applying an approximate density-evolution

(DE) method (in floating-point precision) and with codes of

infinite lengths (refer to [23] for a detailed presentation of a

finite precision version of DE).

We present in the next section the hardware implementation

of the HC-LDPC decoder that we propose based on all these

architectural issues.

ular codes, submatrices have different sizes, column, and/or row degrees according to the polynomials and .

III. PARALLEL HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION

Note that with this method, we suppose that the LDPC matrix is bit-irregular, but check-regular. Moreover, there are certain A. Architectural Model for HC-LDPC Decoders

issues in designing irregular HC-LDPC codes, and especially Our architectural solution consists of a representation of the

the condition 3) is sometimes rather difficult to fulfill. Since the decoding graph where all messages are located in specific sepa-

interleaver is build at random and is very constrained (it must rate memories and PUs are in charge of all decoding functions.

be equal for different degrees and submatrices sizes), our algo- This model implements a sequential scheduling of all node op-

rithm often gets stuck because of edge conflicts. However, the erations, and is valid for any iterative message-passing algo-

number of constraints involved in 3) is limited to the number of rithm. The sequential scheduling is known to be expensive in

different degrees in the LDPC irregularity profile. In our simu- terms of memory requirements, but leads to simple and highly

lations, with only four different degrees (see Table I), our con- optimizable (pipelined) data paths. Pseudorandom topologies

strained interleaver construction succeeds 40% of the time.

are here realized through address calculations instead of routing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERDIER AND DECLERCQ: A LOW-COST PARALLEL SCALABLE FPGA ARCHITECTURE

1219

Fig. 4 Parallel hardware model of an HC-LDPC decoder. Code is divided into multiple partitions with independent PUs associated with a couple of local memories
(U and V ). Memory accesses are routed by using two communication networks configured by an address generator.

networks. Scalability could also be achieved by raising memory only by changing the PUs. However, the use of our parallel

sizes (and PU numbers).

architecture requires a specific scheduling (namely, the flooding

In this architectural model, both hardware complexity (in schedule), and therefore, one can not directly apply a modified

terms of memory requirements) and execution time are mainly scheduling (as in [24]).

proportional to the number of ones in the decoding matrix. Fig. 4 illustrates the overall parallel architecture for a

In order to cope with large codeword lengths, we propose a partitions decoder. The four PUs are mainly similar and com-

parallel architecture based on the same sequential scheduling posed of two independent data paths: the data-node processor

of operations and a partitioning of the whole codeword into (DP) and check-node processor (CP). The two processors work

several partitions. Motivations for such a parallel model are alternatively, and sequentially compute data updates [(3)] and

twofold:

check updates [(4)]. Interpartition edges are realized through

• if some specific synchronization constraints are met, the two identical interconnection networks configured by the tag

decoding duration should be divided by the number of part of the interleaver. A unique address generator is in charge

available PUs (the number of partitions);

of delivering and memory addresses (address part of the

• implementing irregular codes is done by partitioning the interleaver), network configurations, and control signals. For ir-

factor graph into several regular partitions. All data (resp. regular codes, the DPs are working on partitions with different

check) nodes belonging to the same partition have the same column degrees. Therefore, a dedicated first-in, first-out (FIFO)

connectivity degree.

memory is inserted in the write paths for latency harmonization.

Based on the factor-graph representation of an LDPC code (see All CP structures are exactly similar when row degrees are uni-

Fig. 2), we propose an architectural model for an efficient LDPC form.

decoder suitable for FPGA implementation.

Figs. 5 and 6 show, respectively, DP and CP structures. Com-

The key points of the architecture we have presented are sum- putations are done in a two-step process:

marized below.

1) a complete sum of incoming messages is first performed

• The decoder uses a minimal amount of memory for storing

in the accumulator

(for DP), and

messages and interleaver. This constraint is a critical issue

(for CP). The last accumulation is done

when targeting FPGA architectures. Both memory hier-

in the register;

archy and fixed-point representations have been optimized. 2) partial substractions within the second register give the

• This model allows a parallel implementation and reduces

outgoing messages

(for DP) and

the decoding duration by a factor of (the number of

(for CP).

available processors) without the need of extra memory. The two processors are designed to work in a pipeline fashion,

• The whole architecture is able to operate in a pipelined thus leading to a message being written in memory at each clock

fashion for a minimal decoding duration. A complete it- cycle.

eration of decoding a codeword with edges is done in Although the two mathematical functions and are

clock cycles ( is the time overhead needed identical, the pipeline structure needs two distinct look-up tables

for filling the pipeline stages).

(LUTs) for simultaneous calculation of incoming and outgoing

• A unique interleaver sequence of minimal size distributes messages. Signs are treated in a separate data path. Write la-

addresses for all partitions. The memory size needed for tencies of a -degree DP and a -degree CP are, respectively,

the interleaver is also reduced by a factor of .

given by

and

. All DP message-write

• The parallel implementation our model is suitable for both cycles can be strictly synchronized by inserting a second FIFO

regular and irregular LDPC codes.

memory of depth

, where

is the maximum

This model could be used in conjunction with any of the data-node degree in the code.

BP-based decoding algorithms presented in the literature. More precisely, our architectural model is independent on the data B. Interconnection Networks

and check update equations, since different message-passing In the construction of an HC-LDPC code, the moving of

algorithms (BP, logBP, Min-Sum, etc.) could be implemented edges from local partitions to interpartition connections is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

Fig. 5 Architecture of the DP unit. A first FIFO memory whose depth depends on the data-node degree is present for accumulation of incoming messages. A second FIFO memory is added for latency harmonization.

Fig. 6 Architecture of the CP unit. Absolute values and signs (produced by the ABS module) are treated separately according to (4). The FIFO memories in this CP unit allow only regular connections on the check nodes. Two D-type flip-flops (DFF) are used to balance latencies between the absolute values (upper) and signs (lower) data paths.

equivalent to finding a path between memories to PUs or dresses are delivered through a memory during the second step

PUs to memories. These paths are realized through two sep- (check update). The address-calculation unit also produces all

arate (and identical) interconnection networks. The networks control signals needed by the PUs. The size of the interleaving

are configured by the tag value in the interleaving sequence memory depends only on the number of edges in each parti-

associated with each address. Unmoved edges are considered tion, and on the number of partitions. Let an HC-LDPC de-

as local accesses between PUs and and memories. When coding matrix with ones be implemented on partitions.

a moved edge is concerned, the interconnection networks are Each partition contains

edges, and tags are coded on

configured, and all memory accesses are done in a similar way.

bits. Interleaving memory thus contains

words

Networks are used only during the check-update step and work with

bits for addresses and

bits for tags.

as circular shift connections. When using dual-port memories The memory size is then given by

with separate input and output data busses, the two networks

may be easily implemented with tri-state buffers.

The address calculation unit is realized by a finite-state ma-

chine associated with a memory containing the interleaving se-

quence (and tags). During the first step of the algorithm (data That is, the size of the interleaver memory is exactly divided by

update), adresses are delivered by a simple binary counter. Ad- a factor equal to the number of processors.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERDIER AND DECLERCQ: A LOW-COST PARALLEL SCALABLE FPGA ARCHITECTURE

1221

C. Finite Precision Computation

Some attention has been given to data representation in LDPC

decoders [25], [26]. Among other results, it has been shown that

the number of bits used in a fixed-point representation has a

great impact on code performance. We have shown in [23] that

both the error floors and decoding thresholds depend directly on

the number of bits used for coding integer and fractional parts of

messages when a log-BP algorithm is used. In particular, it has

been shown that the number of bits used for coding the integer

part of the messages has a direct consequence on the error-floor

level, and the number of bits for the fractional part influences the

code threshold. Actually, the more bits are used for the integer

part of the messages, the lower the error floor is, and the more

bits are used for the fractional part of the messages, the closer

is the decoding threshold to the Shannon limit.

The same behavior has been observed for regular as well as

for irregular HC-LDPC codes. This error-floor effect caused by

quantization is similar for other types of LDPC codes, as shown in [20]. We also have theoreticaly studied by discrete DE the impact of a reduced-precision computation of the two math func-

Fig. 7 Compared decoding performances for two regular codes and one irregular code. 50 decoding iterations have been applied, with fractionals coded in two’s complement with 8 b (Q4.4).

tions and . A modification of the logarithm base com-

pensates part of the performance loss due to the finite-precision coding. We have determined through DE the optimal log-bases for different coding precisions, by choosing the bases which exhibit the lowest decoding threshold [23]. Note that the optimal bases depend both on the code structure (irregularity profile) and the decoding precision.
Simulations and results presented in the next section are all obtained with optimal log-bases and fractionals coded in two’s complement on 8 b (4 b for the fractional part, 4 b for the integer part). Of course, using more bits would yield better results, but an 8-b coding seems to be a good compromise between memory cost and decoding performance.

An interesting remark can be made about the error-floor level.

This floor level has been discussed in our previous work [21],

[23], and proved to be dependent on the number of bits used for

coding the fractional part of messages. Simulations show that

this floor level is preserved, whatever the parallelization degree.

Two important behaviors are preserved when parallelization is

applied: 1) a lower decoding threshold when block length in-

creases (

versus

); and 2) better perfor-

mances when irregular codes are used.

By using the fact that our parallelization model strictly di-

vides the overall decoding time by the number of available PUs,

we can see a significant performance gain when allocating more

IV. RESULTS

resources (see Fig. 8). In particular, one can gain 1.5 dB at a

bit-error rate (BER) of

when using two PUs instead of

A. Simulations

one (and 0.5 dB more with four PUs). At the same time, BER at 2 dB is lowered by more than two decades when four PUs are

We present here simulation results for two differents codes

with log-BP decoding. The first is a (3,6) regular code with two

different sizes (

and

) implemented on 1

(single PU) and 2, 4, 8, and 16 PUs and logarithm base 1.27. The

second is the irregular code “Code43” of size

and of

rate

with an irregular column degree and a regular

row degree (see Table I). Due to its particular irregular profile,

this code can be implemented on four partitions or any multiple

of four. Only four and eight parallelization degrees are presented

for this code. The logarithm base used for this irregular code is

1.28. All simulations have been done with fixed-precision mes-

allocated instead of a single one. However, the decoding algorithm reaches its performance limit near the fortieth iteration in the case of this particular regular code. In order to take into account this limit in our discussion, we chose to present the BER at a given signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) with respect to the actual decoding time. The decoding time can be defined as the total number of iterations divided by the number of PUs (see Fig. 9). We can see that although the performance of the code at SNR
dB saturates, the limit is reached more rapidly when allocating more PUs. In particular, five iterations are needed with 16 PUs, while 15 iterations are necessary when two PUs are used.

sages coded with 8 b (4 b for the integer part, and 4 b for the

fractional part).

B. FPGA Implementation Results

Fig. 7 shows that the number of partitions has no significant Based on the model described, several regular and irregular

impact on performance for these three codes. We have also made HC-LDPC decoders were implemented on an APEX 20 Ke AL-

extensive simulations to compare the performance of HC-LDPC TERA FPGA device (EPXA10). A high level of flexibility was

codes with a completely random matrix. The results reported in possible by specifying the whole architecture in VHDL, and

[21] show that the two types of codes perform equally, as long as only minor modifications of the code were necessary for the

a reasonable number of PUs are considered (typically less than exploration of different code lengths, rates, and parallelization

[24]).

factors.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

Fig. 8 Compared decoding performances of the (4128,-,3,6) regular decoder at constant decoding time.

V. CONCLUSION
HC-LDPC codes are codes optimized under specific hardware considerations encompassing optimal bit coding of messages and decoding performances under the log-BP technique. Using this class of codes, we presented in this paper an architectural model for implementing parallel regular and irregular HC-LDPC decoders. Parallelization is done by splitting the sparse decoding matrix into several partitions treated simultaneously. In addition to an easy implementation model, the simulations of HC-LDPC decoders exhibit very good performances.
By applying parallelization on iterative LDPC decoding algorithms, the resulting hardware model avoids some critical drawbacks present in other LDPC decoders. Our architecture does not rely on a particular code; changing the interleaver memory content is equivalent to using a new code in the transmission. Moreover, only simple interconnect networks are needed, instead of very complex routing networks. Scalability is also achievable for either handling very long block-length codes or reaching better decoding speeds. This simple scalable parallel model of LDPC decoders is, in our opinion, the first solution for an easy integration of channel-decoding coprocessors in future low-cost communication devices (next-generation mobile phones, smart PDAs).
Although our architectural model is independent of a particular technology (VLSI or FPGA), it has been successfully implemented on an SoC platform (an ALTERA Excalibur-ARM FPGA device) for regular and irregular HC-LDPC codes. Benchmarks have been applied and give results comparable to the simulations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank F. Tulars and A. Segard for their valuable contributions to this work during the FPGA design, implementation, and test.

REFERENCES

Fig. 9 BER at SNR = 2:0 dB as a function of decoding time. The x axis represents decoding time (number of iterations divided by number of available processors).

Implementation results of a rate-0.531, 2048-b irregular de-

coder with a parallelization factor of four PUs running log-BP

are the following: 978 logic cells (LCs) are used for the imple-

mentation of the four PUs (2.5% occupation), 71 LCs for the

two inteconnection networks (barrel shifters), 542 LCs for the

sequential logic, and a total of 164 224 memory bits for LLR,

messages, and interleaver. The negligible amount of LCs used

by the routing networks and the 24 960 memory bits needed for

storing the interleaver, thus the decoding matrix, confirm that a

high parallelization degree can be reached without combinato-

rial or routing penalty.

A decoding iteration is completed in

clock cycles where

represents the accumulated CP and

DP latencies. The maximum working frequency of this decoder

is 37.89 MHz, thus allowing a maximum channel throughput of

1 Mb/s with only four PUs.

[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[4] E. Eleftheriou and S. Ölçer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Apr.–May 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1752–1757.
[5] H. Song, R. Todd, and J. Cruz, “Performance of LDPC codes on magnetic recording channels,” in Proc. Turbo-Codes Conf., Brest, France, 2000, pp. 395–398.
[6] ETSI Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broadband satellite applications (DVB-S2), EN 302 307, ETSI, Apr. 2005.
[7] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[8] E. Yeo, B. Nikolic´, and V. Anantharam, “Architectures and implementations of low-density parity-check decoding algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Scottsdale, AZ, May 2002, vol. III, pp. 437–440.
[9] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. Kschischang, “Decoder-first code design,” in Proc. Turbo Codes Conf., Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 459–462.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VERDIER AND DECLERCQ: A LOW-COST PARALLEL SCALABLE FPGA ARCHITECTURE

1223

[10] V. Sorokine, F. Kschischang, and S. Pasupathy, “Gallager codes for CDMA applications —Part II: Implementations, complexity, and system capacity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 1818–1828, Nov. 2000.
[11] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “An FPGA implementation of (3,6)-regular low-density parity-check code decoder,” EURASIP J. Appl. Signal Process., no. 6, pp. 530–542, May 2003.
[12] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[13] A. Selvarathinam, G. Choi, K. Narayanan, A. Prabhakar, and E. Kim, “A massively scaleable decoder architecture for low-density paritycheck codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Bangkok, Thailand, May 2003, vol. II, pp. 61–64.
[14] S. Ölçcer, “Decoder architecture for array-code-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, Dec. 2003, pp. 2046–2050.
[15] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Design of VLSI implementation-oriented LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., Orlando, FL, Oct. 2003, pp. 670–673.
[16] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Anchorage, AK, May 2003, pp. 2708–2712.
[17] Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, “An FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., San Francisco, CA, Dec. 2003, pp. 113–117.
[18] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A novel design methodology for high-performance programmable decoder cores for AA-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., 2003, pp. 29–34.
[19] ——, “High-thoughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[20] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[21] F. Verdier and D. Declercq, “An LDPC parity check matrix construction for parallel hardware decoding,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 235–238.
[22] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation Digital Equipment Corp. Sys. Res. Center, Berkeley, CA, Tech. Rep. TR-97-044, 1997 [Online]. Available: urlciteseer.nj. nec.com/luby99improved.html
[23] D. Declercq and F. Verdier, “Optimization of LDPC finite precision belief propagation decoding with discrete density evolution,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 479–482.

[24] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf., Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2002, pp. 8–15.
[25] L. Ping and W. Leung, “Decoding low density parity check codes with finite quantization bits,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 62–64, Feb. 2000.
[26] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low density parity check codes decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Circuits Syst., Sydney, Australia, May 2001, vol. 4, pp. 202–205.
François Verdier received the M.S. degree in 1990, and the Ph.D. degree with distinction in 1995, both in electrical engineering and computer science, from the University of Paris-Orsay, Paris, France.
During his Ph.D. study, he participated in the development of an automatic architecture synthesis environment dedicated to real-time image-processing applications. He is currently an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science with the University of Cergy-Pontoise, Cergy-Pontoise, France, where he also leads the Architecture group of the ETIS laboratory. His research interests are architectures for LDPC decoding, dynamically reconfigurable system-on-chip architectures, and embedded operating systems for real-time signal- and image-processing architectures.
David Declercq received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering in 1998 from the University of Cergy-Pontoise, Cergy-Pontoise, France.
He is currently a full Professor with the ENSEA, a graduate school in electrical and computer engineering, and teaches digital signal processing and communication theory. He is associated with the ETIS Laboratory in Cergy-Pontoise, France, and is the Head of the signal processing group since 2003. His research interests are mainly statistical model estimation and coding theory for digital communication. In particular, he is interested in designing good binary and nonbinary LDPC codes for various types of realistic channels (OFDM, multiuser, etc.).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:32:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

