IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 7, JULY 2006

1349

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Electrical Dispersion Compensation Equalizers in Optical Direct- and Coherent-Detection Systems
G. Katz, D. Sadot, and J. Tabrikian
Abstract—We study the performances of several electrical dispersion compensation (EDC) equalizers in the presence of chromatic dispersion and polarization mode dispersion for optical coherent- and direct-detection on–off keying systems. The EDCs that are analyzed include decision-feedback equalizer, linear equalizer, and maximum-likelihood sequence estimator (MLSE). We present an inclusive quantitative analysis of the performance difference between the various techniques. The MLSE gives a good indication of the best possible performance.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be’er-Sheva 84105, Israel.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.877939
Reduced-Complexity Receiver Structures for Space–Time Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation Systems

weight of the corresponding codes. To enhance the performance of such sys-

tems, we propose that use of optical AND gate receiver, which, in an ideal

case, e.g., in the absence of any noise source except the optical multiple-ac-

cess noise, is optimum. Using some basic laws on probability, we present

direct and exact solutions for OOCs with = 1 2 3 . . . , with op-

tical AND gate as receiver. Using the exact solution, we obtain empirical

solutions that can be easily used in optimizing the design criteria of such

systems. From our optimization scheme, we obtain some fresh insight into

the performance of OOCs with

1. In particular, we can obtain some

simple relations between P

(minimum error rate),

(minimum

required OOC length), and

(maximum number of interfering users

to be supported), which are the most desired parameters for any optical

CDMA system design. Furthermore, we show that in most practical cases,

OOCs with = 2 or 3 perform better than OOCs with = 1, while

having a much bigger cardinality. Finally, we show that an upper bound on

the maximum weight of OOCs are on the order of 2 L where L is the

length of the OOCs used in systems.

The authors are with the Optical Network Research Laboratory, Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.877941

Inkyu Lee and Carl-Erik W. Sundberg

PN Code Tracking Using Noncommensurate Sampling

Abstract—Transmission efficiency in radio channels can be considerably improved by using multiple transmit and receive antennas, and employing a family of schemes called space–time coding. Both extended range and/or improved bandwidth efficiency can be achieved, compared with a radio link with a single transmit and receive antenna. Bit-interleaved coded modulation schemes give diversity gains on fading channels with higher order modulation constellations combined with conventional binary convolutional codes, also for the case of a single transmit and receive antenna radio link. In this paper, we study a family of flexible bandwidth-efficient space–time coding schemes which combine these two ideas in a narrowband flat-fading channel and single-carrier modems. We address receiver complexity for the case of a large number of transmit antennas and higher order modulation constellations. Especially, we focus on practical configurations where the number of transmit antennas is greater than that of receive antennas. Simplified receivers using tentative decisions are proposed and evaluated by means of simulations. Tradeoffs between complexity reduction and performance loss are presented. We emphasize systems that are of particular interest in applications where the number of transmit antennas exceeds the number of receive antennas. A system with four transmit antennas with an eight-fold complexity reduction and a performance loss of about 1 dB is demonstrated.
I. Lee is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.
C.-E. W. Sundberg is with SundComm, Chatham, NJ 07928 USA. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.877937

Kevin J. Quirk and Meera Srinivasan
Abstract—The use of a noninteger symbol to sample time ratio, noncommensurate sampling, in pseudonoise (PN) code-tracking loops is investigated. A noncoherent PN code-tracking loop using noncommensurate sampling and single-bit quantization is presented. An analysis method is developed to characterize the system and determine the steady-state error variance of the timing estimate. The performance of an equivalent analog code-tracking loop is derived and compared with the digital loop to investigate the degradation incurred through sampling and quantization.
K. J. Quirk is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0407 USA.
M. Srinivasan is with the Digital Signal Processing Research Group, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.877940
Analysis of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Based on EXIT Functions
Eran Sharon, Alexei Ashikhmin, and Simon Litsyn

Code-Division Multiple-Access Techniques in Optical Fiber Networks—Part III: Optical AND Gate Receiver Structure
With Generalized Optical Orthogonal Codes
Saeed Mashhadi and J. A. Salehi

Abstract—We exploit extrinsic information tranfer functions of single parity-check and prepetition codes over the binay input additive white Gaussian noise (biAWGN) channel, for asymptotic performance analysis of belief propagation decoding of low-density parity-check codes. The approach is based on a Gaussian approximation (GA) of the density evolution algorithm using the mutual information measure. We show that our method allows more accurate prediction of the decoding threshold in the biAWGN channel than the earlier known GA methods.

Abstract—In this paper, we present a deep insight into the behavior of

optical code-division multiple-access (CDMA) systems based on an inco-

herent, intensity encoding/decoding technique using a well-known class of

codes, namely, optical orthogonal codes (OOCs). As opposed to parts I and

II of this paper, where OOCs with cross-correlation = 1 were consid-

ered, we consider generalized OOCs with 1

, where is the

E. Sharon and S. Litsyn are with the Department of Electrical EngineeringSystem, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel.
A. Ashikhmin is with Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.877935

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:37:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

