IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1999

1449

Transactions Letters

Comparison of Constructions of Irregular Gallager Codes
David J. C. MacKay, Simon T. Wilson, Associate Member, IEEE, and Matthew C. Davey

Abstract— The low-density parity check codes whose performance is closest to the Shannon limit are “Gallager codes” based on irregular graphs. We compare alternative methods for constructing these graphs and present two results. First, we find a “super-Poisson” construction which gives a small improvement
N in empirical performance over a random construction. Second,
whereas Gallager codes normally take 2 time to encode, we investigate constructions of regular and irregular Gallager codes that allow more rapid encoding and have smaller memory requirements in the encoder. We find that these “fast encoding” Gallager codes have equally good performance.
Index Terms—Channel coding, error correction coding, Gaussian channels, graph theory, iterative probabilistic decoding, random codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

GALLAGER codes [3], [4] are low-density parity check codes constructed at random subject to constraints on the

weight of each row and of each column. The original regular

Gallager codes have very sparse random parity check matrices

with uniform weight per column and per row. (We will

also use the term “regular” for codes that have nearly uniform

weight columns and rows—for example, codes which have

some weight 2 columns and some weight 3 columns.) These

codes are asymptotically good and can be practically decoded

with Gallager’s sum–product algorithm giving near Shannon

limit performance when large block lengths are used [6]–[8].

Regular Gallager codes have also been found to be competitive

codes for short block-length code-division multiple-access

(CDMA) applications [10].

Recent advances in the performance of Gallager codes

are summarized in Fig. 1. The rightmost curve shows the

performance of a regular binary Gallager code with rate 1/4.

The best known binary Gallager codes are irregular codes

whose parity check matrices have nonuniform weight per

column [5]; the performance of one such code is shown by

the second curve from the right. The best known Gallager

codes of all are Gallager codes defined over finite fields

[1], [2]. The remaining two solid curves in Fig. 1 show the

performance of a regular Gallager code over

[2] and

Paper approved by S. B. Wicker, the Editor for Coding Theory and Techniques of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 11, 1998; revised January 27, 1999. This paper was presented in part at the 1998 Allerton Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing, Allerton House, IL, September 1998.
The authors are with the Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, U.K. (e-mail: mackay@mrao.cam.ac.uk; stw11@mrao.cam.ac.uk; mcdavey@mrao.cam.ac.uk).
Publisher Item Identifier S 0090-6778(99)07784-3.

Fig. 1. Empirical results for Gaussian channel, rate 1/4 left–right: irregular
LDPC, GF (8) blocklength 24 000 bits; JPL Turbo, blocklength 65 536 bits; regular LDPC, GF (16), blocklength 24 448 bits; irregular LDPC, GF (2), blocklength 64 000 bits; regular LDPC, GF (2), blocklength 40 000 bits.
(Reproduced from [1].)

an irregular code over

with bit-error probability of

at

dB [1]. In comparing this code with

the rate 1/4 turbo-code shown by the dotted line, the following

points should be noted. 1) The transmitted blocklength of the

irregular Gallager code is only 24 000 bits, whereas that of the

turbo-code is 65 536 bits. 2) The errors made by the Gallager

codes were all detected errors, whereas turbo-codes make

undetected errors at high signal-to-noise ratio. This difference

is not caused by a difference in the decoding algorithm: both

codes are decoded by the sum–product algorithm [9]. Turbo-

codes make undetected errors because they have low-weight

codewords. For Gallager codes, the rate of occurrence of

undetected errors is extremely small because they have good

distance properties (the minimum distance scales linearly with

the blocklength) [4]. In all our experiments with Gallager

codes of block length greater than 1000 and column weight at

least 3, undetected errors have never occurred.

The excellent performance of irregular Gallager codes is the

motivation for this paper, in which we explore ways of further

enhancing these codes.

The irregular codes of Luby, Mitzenmacher, Shokrollahi,

and Spielman [5] have parity check matrices with both nonuni-

form weight per row and nonuniform weight per column. It has

not yet been established whether both of these nonuniformities

are desirable. In our experience with codes for noisy channels,

performance is more sensitive to the distribution of column

weights. In this paper, we concentrate on irregular codes with

the weight per row as uniform as possible.

We can define an irregular Gallager code in two steps.

First, we select a profile that describes the desired number

of columns of each weight and the desired number of rows of

0090–6778/99$10.00 © 1999 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:22:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1999

Fig. 2. Upper panels: constructions of regular and irregular codes. Lower panels: performance of these codes. The construction types shown are regular, ( ; ), Poisson ( ), sub-Poisson ( ), super-Poisson ( ), and super-Poisson ( ). Notation for upper panels for all constructions except : an integer represents a number of permutation matrices superposed on the surrounding square. Horizontal and vertical lines indicate the boundaries of the permutation blocks. Notation for the Poisson construction : integers “3” and “9” represent column weights. The integer “7” represents the row weight. Lower panels show the performance of several random codes of each construction. Vertical axis: block error probability. Horizontal axis: Eb=N0 in dB. All codes have N = 9972 and K = M = 4986. All errors were detected errors, as is usual with Gallager codes.

each weight. The parity check matrix of a code can be viewed as defining a bipartite graph with “bit” vertices corresponding to the columns and “check” vertices corresponding to the rows. Each nonzero entry in the matrix corresponds to an edge connecting a bit to a check. The profile specifies the degrees of the vertices in this graph.
Second, we choose a construction method, that is, a pseudorandom algorithm for putting edges between the vertices in a

way that satisfies the constraints. (In the case of nonbinary Gallager codes, we also need to choose an algorithm for assigning values to the nonzero entries in the matrix.)
This paper has two parts. In the first part (Section III), we compare alternative construction methods for a fixed profile in order to find out whether the construction method matters. In the second part (Section IV), we examine regular and irregular constructions which lend themselves to rapid encoding. One

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:22:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1999

1451

motivation for this second study is that the only drawback of

regular Gallager codes compared to turbo-codes for CDMA

applications appears to be their greater encoding complexity

[10].

In the experiments presented here, we study binary codes

with rate 1/2 and blocklength about

10 000. We simulate

an additive white Gaussian noise channel in the usual way

[2] and examine the block error probability as a function

of the signal-to-noise ratio. The error bars we show are one

standard deviation error bars on the estimate of the logarithm

of the block error probability defined. Thus, when we

observe failures out of trials,

where

.

II. CONSTRUCTIONS
We compare the following methods. Poisson: The edges are placed “completely at random,” subject to the profile constraints and the rule that you cannot put two edges between one pair of vertices, which would correspond to a double entry in the parity check matrix. One way to implement a Poisson construction is to make a list of all the columns in the matrix, with each column appearing in the list a number of times equal to its weight, then make a similar list of all the rows in the matrix, each row appearing with multiplicity equal to its weight, and then map one list onto the other by a random permutation, taking care not to create duplicate entries [5]. A variation of this construction is to require that no two columns in the parity check matrix have an overlap greater than one, i.e., forbid cycles of length 4 in the graph. (Similar to construction 1A in [8].) A second variation requires that the graph have no cycles of length less than some 1. (Similar to construction 1B in [8].) This constraint can be quite hard to enforce if the profile includes high weight rows or columns. Permutations: We can build parity check matrices by superposing random permutation matrices [4]. The convenience of this method depends on the profile. There are many ways of laying out these permutation matrices to satisfy a given profile. We will distinguish “super-Poisson” and “sub-Poisson” constructions.
• In a super-Poisson construction, the distribution of high weight columns per row has greater variance than a Poisson distribution.
• In a sub-Poisson construction, the distribution of high weight columns per row has smaller variance than a Poisson distribution.

III. COMPARING POISSON, SUPER-POISSON, AND SUB-POISSON CONSTRUCTIONS

A. Profiles and Constructions Studied in this Paper

1) Regular Codes— and : As our baseline, we study

regular Gallager codes with weight per column exactly

and weight per row exactly

. We construct parity check

matrices satisfying this profile from permutation matrices in

two ways, labeled “ ” and “ ,” shown diagrammatically in

the upper panels of Fig. 2. In the figure, a square containing

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. (a) Comparison of one representative of each of the constructions: (regular), (Poisson) and (super-Poisson). (b) Representatives of all
six constructions in Fig. 2. Vertical axis: block error probability. Horizontal axis: Eb=N0 in dB.

TABLE I THE TWO PROFILES STUDIED IN THIS PAPER

an integer (for example, “3”) denotes the superposition inside

that square of that number of random permutation matrices.

The matrices are generated at random subject to the constraint

that no two nonzero entries coincide.

2) Irregular Codes—

, and : We chose

the profile “ ” shown in Table I. It has columns of weight

9 and of weight 3; all rows have weight 7. Note that this

profile only differs from the regular profile “ ” in that some

extra 1’s are added to 1/12 of the columns. We emphasize that

this profile has not been carefully optimized, so the results of

this paper should not be taken as describing the best that can

be done with irregular binary Gallager codes. We chose this

profile because it lends itself to interesting experiments.

We will refer to the bits that connect to nine checks as

“elite” bits. We use four different constructions that match this

profile, named as follows. These constructions are depicted

diagrammatically in the upper panels of Fig. 2.

Poisson— : In this construction, while most checks will

connect to one or two elite bits, a fraction of them will connect

to more than two elite bits, and some will connect to none.

Sub-Poisson— : This construction allocates exactly one

or two elite bits to each check.

Super-Poisson: and are, respectively, moderately

and very super-Poisson. In , one third of the checks are

connected to four elite bits, one third are connected to one,

and one third are connected to none.

B. Results
1) Variability Within Each Construction: For each construction, we created several codes in order to assess the variability of performance within each ensemble. All codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:22:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1999

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4. (a) Comparison of irregular with regular code. Vertical axis: median number of iterations. Horizontal: Eb=N0 in dB. (b) Histogram of
0 number of iterations for code at Eb=N0 = 1:4. (c) Log/log plot of iterations histogram showing that the tail of the distribution is well approximated
by a power law. The straight line has slope 8.5. Above 50, iterations were binned into intervals of 5.

studied were of rate 1/2, with blocklength

. The

results are shown in Fig. 2. We see no significant variability

among the

(Poisson) or (sub-Poisson) codes.

But among the super-Poisson codes, and , there is

some variability with some codes showing an error floor.

2) Explanation of Error Floors: In both cases, the error

floor has a simple cause. The most frequent error under these

conditions is a reconstructed transmission which differs from

the correct codeword in exactly three bits—the same three bits

every time. These bits, which have weight 3 columns in the

parity check matrix, are connected to just five checks with the

topology shown below

(1)
If the three bits shaded grey are flipped into the wrong state, then the syndrome vector changes sign in the fifth check only. The sum–product algorithm is unable to extricate itself from this state. As the block length of the code is increased, the probability of this topology’s occurrence falls. It is also possible to modify the construction algorithm for Gallager codes such that cycles of length 4, like this are forbidden (as
(2)
in construction 1A of [8]). This modification is sufficient to prevent the topology shown in (1) from occurring. In principle, it is possible for a code to have a minimum distance of 4 even when the minimum cycle length is 6. However, for randomly constructed codes, the minimum distance increases linearly with the blocklength, for almost all codes [4].
We discard the two codes with error floors in the subsequent comparisons.
3) Comparison of Constructions: The six families are compared with each other in Fig. 3. There are no detectable differences between the regular codes and . There is a

Fig. 5. Upper panel: general form of a fast-encoding Gallager code. Hori-
B C 2 0 2 zontal stripes indicate low-weight rows. The diagonal line is a line of 1’s.
The matrices and are of dimension M< (N < M ) and M< M<,
respectively. Lower panel: the fast encoding method to generate a codeword and its computational cost, assuming an appropriate representation of the sparse matrix.
clear ranking of the other constructions, as follows:

Thus, we find that at least for the profile, sub-Poisson

constructions are inferior to Poisson constructions, and super-

Poisson constructions are significantly superior. In the case of

, we see an improvement of about 0.05 dB.

4) Decoding Times: Not only do these irregular codes out-

perform the regular codes, they require fewer iterations as

illustrated in Fig. 4(a), which compares the median number of

iterations of the irregular code and the regular code .

Note that requires 7/6 times more operations per iteration

due to the increased weight of the matrix, so the total decoding

times are similar.

Fig. 4(b) and (c) shows that the distribution of decoding

times is heavy tailed. At

, the tail is well

approximated by the power law:

, where is

the number of iterations. At

, the distribution is

heavier tailed, and we have

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:22:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1999

1453

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. (a) Upper panels: construction methods and . As in Fig. 2, an integer represents a number of permutation matrices superposed on the

surrounding square. A diagonal line represents a line of 1’s. Horizontal and vertical lines indicate the boundaries of the permutation blocks. Lower picture:

variability of performance among and

codes. Vertical axis: block error probability. Horizontal axis: Eb=N0 in dB. All codes have N = 9972 and

K = M = 4986. (b) Example of a parity check matrix with N = 144 made using construction .

5) Unequal Error Protection: We can compare the bit-

error rate of elite bits with that of standard bits. We find that

when decoding fails, elite bits are more likely than standard

bits to be correctly decoded. In the case of construction ,

we found that at

dB, the probability of an

elite bit being in error, given that the block was incorrectly

decoded, was 0.012 whereas standard bits had an error rate

of 0.065. Differences remain at small

. For example, at

dB, the error rates are 0.035 and 0.097.

IV. FAST-ENCODING GALLAGER CODES
One of the possible drawbacks of Gallager codes is that their encoding time generally scales as . Inspired by Spielman’s work [11], we have investigated constructions of Gallager

codes whose profiles are similar to or identical to the and

profiles above, but which are fast-encoding. The general

form of parity check matrix for a fast-encoding Gallager code

is shown in Fig. 5. The parity check matrix has an almost

lower-triangular structure which allows all but a small number

of the parity bits to be computed using sparse operations.

The final

parity bits can be computed in

binary

operations. If were as small as , then the codes would

be linear-time encodable.

We introduce two constructions, and

(“ ” for

linear), shown diagrammatically in Fig. 6(a). Construction

has profile identical to construction . Construction

has

a profile identical to the codes and is most similar to

. Fig. 6(b) shows an example of a matrix made using

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:22:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 10, OCTOBER 1999

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. (a) Comparison of with an ordinary code. (b) Comparison

of

with the best super-Poisson code. Vertical axis: block error

probability. Horizontal: Eb=N0/dB.

The discovery that we can make fast-encoding Gallager

codes whose performance is just as good as ordinary Gallager

codes may have immediate practical importance for mobile

communications where computer power consumption must

be minimized. Both the memory requirements and the CPU

requirements at the encoder of our fast-encoding codes are

substantially smaller. The static memory required for encoding

is proportional to

, where is the typical weight per

row in the parity check matrix. This compares to

for storing the generator matrix. The particular constructions

used in this paper would allow encoding using roughly 36

times fewer computational operations, since we chose

. This reduction would be more than sufficient to cancel

out the factor of 14 encoding complexity disadvantage with

respect to turbo-codes of the example mentioned in [10]. The

smaller the ratio

, the greater the reduction in encoding

cost. It will be interesting to investigate how small can

be made without deterioration in performance.

construction

, and Fig. 6(a) shows the variability of

performance of these codes.

Fig. 7 shows that the fast-encoding codes have almost the

same performance as the ordinary-encoding codes.

V. DISCUSSION
The detection of error floors in some Gallager codes reminds us that it is a good idea, though not essential, to avoid cycles of length 4 when building these codes, as was standard practice in [3], [6], and [8]. This is not so easy to enforce in irregular Gallager codes with high weight columns, but the present results indicate that what is really important is to ensure that no pairs of low weight columns (with weights less than 4) have overlaps greater than one.
The improvement of 0.05 dB of the super-Poisson construction compared with a Poisson construction of irregular codes may not be viewed as practically useful, but we think it is important to be aware of all the methods available for enhancing code performance, especially when these methods involve no added cost at the encoder or decoder. It will be interesting to see how beneficial the super-Poisson concept is for other irregular profiles. We are currently investigating the creation of irregular turbo-codes, which make use of superPoisson constructions (work in progress with B. J. Frey).

REFERENCES

[1] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes

over GF(q),” in Proc. IEEE 1998 Information Theory Workshop, June

1998, pp. 70–71.

[2]

, “Low density parity check codes over GF(q),” IEEE Commun.

Lett., vol. 2, pp. 165–167, June 1998.

[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[4]

, Low Density Parity Check Codes (Research Monograph Series

no. 21). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[5] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman,

“Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and

belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT),

1998, p. 117.

[6] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Feb. 1999.

[7] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse

matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding: 5th IMA Conf. (Lecture Notes

in Computer Science, no. 1025), Colin Boyd, Ed. Berlin, Germany:

Springer, 1995, pp. 100–111.

[8]

, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check

codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.

Reprinted Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.

[9] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as

an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[10] V. Sorokine, F. R. Kschischang, and S. Pasupathy, “Gallager codes

for CDMA applications—II: Implementations, complexity and system

capacity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., submitted for publication.

[11] D. A. Spielman, “Linear-time encodable and decodable error-correcting

codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, Nov. 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:22:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

