IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 5, MAY 1999

673

Transactions Papers

Reduced Complexity Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based on Belief Propagation
Marc P. C. Fossorier, Member, IEEE, Miodrag Mihaljevic´, and Hideki Imai, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— In this paper, two simplified versions of the belief propagation algorithm for fast iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes on the additive white Gaussian noise channel are proposed. Both versions are implemented with real additions only, which greatly simplifies the decoding complexity of belief propagation in which products of probabilities have to be computed. Also, these two algorithms do not require any knowledge about the channel characteristics. Both algorithms yield a good performance–complexity tradeoff and can be efficiently implemented in software as well as in hardware, with possibly quantized received values.
Index Terms—APP decoding, belief propagation, block codes, four-density parity check codes, iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, proposed by Gallager [1], [2], appear as a class of codes which can yield very good performance on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) as well as on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Recently, it was shown that the belief propagation (BP) algorithm [3] provides a powerful tool for iterative decoding of LDPC codes, by noting that the original Gallager’s iterative probabilistic decoding of LDPC codes is a particular BP-based decoding approach [5]–[8]. As in [4], this probabilistic decoding algorithm is based on evaluating the likelihood ratios associated with each information bit from information provided by disjoint parity check equations. Iterative decoding techniques in general have received significant
Paper approved by J. Huber, the Editor for Coding and Coded Modulation of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received May 25, 1998; revised September 9, 1998 and November 23, 1998. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant NCR-94-15374 and Grant CCR-97-32959 and by the Japan Society for Promotion of Science (JSPS) under Contract JSPS-RFTF-96P00604.
M. P. C. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@aravis.eng. hawaii.edu).
M. Mihaljevic´ is with the Mathematical Institute, Academy of Science and Arts, Belgrade, Yugoslavia.
H. Imai is with the Institute of Industrial Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 106, Japan.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0090-6778(99)03899-4.

attention recently and various results have been reported (see

[5]–[18], for example).

The aim of this paper is to develop an iterative decoding

algorithm for LDPC codes as an approximation of the stan-

dard BP decoding procedure, so that the modified algorithm

performs close to the standard BP but with a significant

reduction of complexity. Accordingly, a goal of this paper

is to obtain a good performance–complexity tradeoff. First,

a simplified version of the BP algorithm is considered. This

modified algorithm, which corresponds to the approach taken

in [12]–[14], is then further simplified so that it performs

real value additions only. This second simplification, which is

equivalent to the approximation presented in [19] for majority

logic decoding based on the APP algorithm of [4], simply

consists of expressing all the steps of the algorithm with

respect to logarithms of probabilities rather than probabili-

ties. The same standard approximation was used to derive

the Max-Log-MAP algorithm from the MAP algorithm [10],

[11]. This simple algorithm allows the processing of low-

complexity iterative decoding of LDPC codes, but at the

expense of about 1-dB degradation in error performance with

respect to the BP algorithm at the bit error rate (BER) 10 .

A second simplified algorithm is then considered. For this

algorithm, the standard approximation is directly applied to

the BP algorithm. Although not as straightforward as in the

previous case, due to the fact that for the BP algorithm the

probability values considered at iteration- do not necessarily

correspond to the hard decisions made at iteration-

, the

application of the standard approximation achieves a better

tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity,

with real value additions only and a performance degradation

of few tenths of a decibel at the BER 10 for the LDPC

codes simulated.

The paper is organized as follows. The characteristics of

LDPC codes and their decoding based on BP are briefly

reviewed in Section II. Then the two reduced-complexity BP-

based decoding algorithms are described in Section III. Finally,

these algorithms are compared with BP in Section IV and

concluding remarks are given in Section V.

0090–6778/99$10.00 © 1999 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

674

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 5, MAY 1999

II. BACKGROUND

A. Low-Density Parity Check Codes

LDPC codes are specified by a parity-check matrix contain-

ing mostly zeros and only a small number of ones. A binary

LDPC code has block length and a parity-check

matrix with exactly ones in each column and ones in

each row, assuming

and

. In the following,

we refer to the elements of an LDPC codeword

as

bits, and the rows of the parity-check matrix

,

as checks. Accordingly, in a binary LDPC code, every code

bit is checked by precisely parity checks, and every parity

check involves precisely code bits. The typical minimum

distance of these codes increases linearly with for a fixed

rate and fixed . For

and a sufficiently low rate, a simple

decoding procedure exists such that the error rate decreases at

least exponentially with a root of the block length, assuming

a BSC [1], [2].

B. Standard Belief Propagation-Based Decoding

This section summarizes, according to [6] and [7], the itera-

tive decoding of LDPC codes based on the BP algorithm. The decoding problem consists of finding the most likely vector

(represented as a column matrix) such that mod

.

The likelihood of is given by

, with

,

so that

. We denote the set of bits that

participate in check by

. Similarly,

we define the set of checks in which bit participates as

excluded by excluded by

. We denote a set

with bit

, and a set

with parity check

. The cardinalities of the sets

and

are denoted by

and

, respectively.

The iterative decoding algorithm has two alternating parts,

in which certain quantities and , associated with each

nonzero element in the matrix , are iteratively updated. The

quantity

is meant to be the probability that bit of

is , given the information obtained via checks other than

check . The quantity

is meant to be the probability

of check is satisfied if bit of is considered fixed at

and the other bits have a separable distribution given by

the probabilities

. The algorithm would

produce the exact posterior probabilities of all the bits if the bipartite graph1 defined by the matrix contained no cycles
[3].

The standard iterative decoding algorithm based on the BP

approach consists of the following main steps.

• Initialization: The variables and to the values and , respectively.
• Iterative Processing

are initialized

1) Step 1: Define

and for each ,

, and for

, compute

(1)

2) Step 2: For each and , and for

, update (3)

where

is chosen such that

.

For each and

, update the “pseudopos-

terior probabilities” and given by

(4)

where is chosen such that

.

3) Step 3:

a) create

such that

if

,

and

if

,

b) do the following:

—If

then the decoding algorithm halts,

and is considered as a valid decoding result.

—Otherwise, the algorithm repeats from Step 1.

—A failure is declared if some maximum number of iteration stages (e.g., 100) occurs without a valid decoding.

III. TWO REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING ALGORITHMS

In the following, we assume that the binary

LDPC code considered is used for error control over the

AWGN channel, with BPSK signaling. Let

represent

the image of under the usual componentwise mapping

from {0, 1} to { 1}. If

is a codeword in and

is the corresponding transmitted sequence,

then the received sequence is

, with

, where for

, ’s are statistically

independent Gaussian random variables with zero mean and

variance

.

A. APP-Based Decoding Algorithm

Define as the a priori probability that bit is in error.

Then the probability that for check sum

, the

sum of all bits

mismatches the transmitted bit

is given by [4, p. 53]

(5)

In other words, represents the probability of having an odd

number of errors in the hard decisions of the bits of

. For

, define as the result of check sum- evaluated

from the hard decisions corresponding to , and as its

modulo-2 complement. Note that is computed based on

the whole symbol set

. Furthermore, define as the a

posteriori probability that bit is in error based on the results

of the check sums intersecting in position- . It follows that

(2)

G 1 A bipartite graph is defined as a graph whose vertices can be partitioned V V G V V into two subsets 1 and 2 such that every edge of joins 1 to 2.

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FOSSORIER et al.: REDUCED COMPLEXITY ITERATIVE DECODING

675

or equivalently
(7)
As proposed in [12]–[14], all check sums can be re-evaluated based on the hard decisions corresponding to the values , which are used as new a priori probabilities . Consequently, we obtain an iterative decoding algorithm, which as mentioned in [7], can be viewed as a simplified version of BP since instead of (3), only (4) needs to be updated.
For the AWGN channel model considered, the probability can be expressed as
e (8)
e

3) Step 3:

a) If

, then

.

b) Set

and repeat Step 1 after the same

termination procedure as in Section II-B.

Since this algorithm does not depend on and therefore

does not require any a priori information about the AWGN

channel, it is referred to as the uniformly most powerful (UMP)

APP-based iterative decoding algorithm. This algorithm can be

viewed as an iterative implementation of the algorithm pre-

sented in [19], which uses the same standard approximation.

It also represents a simplified version of the iterative decoding

algorithm presented in [14] for the AWGN channel.

B. BP-Based Decoding Algorithm

In this section, we investigate how to simplify the BP

algorithm based on the same approximation as in Section III-

A. To this end, for

we first rewrite based on

(1) and (2) as

where

represents the log-likelihood ratio

associated with the hard decision value based on . By ap-

proximating

,

(5) becomes

e

(9)

e

where

. The effects of the

relative errors introduced by approximation (9) on the overall

error performance become less and less significant as the SNR

(i.e., ) increases. By substituting (9) into (6), we obtain

(10)

After normalizing (10) by the factor

, we derive the

following algorithm for computing

:

• Initialization: The hard decisions are initialized to the

hard decisions of the received symbols , and denote the

a priori log-likelihood ratio of error by

.

• Iterative Processing

1) Step 1: For each and each

, evaluate

mod

(11)

and identify (12)
2) Step 2: For each , compute (13)

(14)

which is of the same form as (5). Consequently, by considering

(3) and (14) in conjunction with (9), the same simplification

as in Section III-A seems possible. However, particular care

has to be brought to the following problem. In Section III-

A, all check sums described by (11) are evaluated at Step

1 of each iteration stage based on the same hard decision

values . On the other hand, after the first iteration stage, for a

given , the values used by the BP algorithm to compute

(1) may define hard decision values

different from the

value corresponding to for some

. In other

words, it is possible to obtain

and

, or

inversely, at the same iteration stage. As a result, the same

check sum may take different values depending on whether

for

, the hard decision values corresponding to

the values or the hard decision values corresponding

to the values are considered. At Step 3 of the UMP APP-

based decoding algorithm, the value at the th stage of the

iterative process (referred to as iteration- in the sequel of the

paper) is updated based on the value obtained at iteration-

. Consequently, a different updating rule has to be chosen

in simplifying the BP decoding algorithm as for each , the

values

, and obtained at iteration-

are not necessarily equal in general. Since iteration-1 is the

only iteration stage for which all check sums are evaluated

based on the same hard decisions, the hard decision values

and have to be updated at iteration- based on the initial

hard decisions

corresponding to

for all

. Hence, iteration-1 becomes the reference for all

subsequent iteration stages. Based on this important remark,

we derive the following algorithm:

• Initialization: For all and each

, the hard

decisions and are initialized to the hard decisions

of the received symbols and recorded by

; also

and for each

,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

676

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 5, MAY 1999

Fig. 1. Error performance for iterative decoding of the (504, 252) LDPC codewith BP, UMP BP-based, and UMP APP-based decoding algorithms, and at most 50 and 200 iterations.

• Iterative Processing 1) Step 1: For each the check sums

and each

Note that in (15), the initial decision is always used to

, evaluate evaluate . Although surprising, this is easily justified by

the fact that once all

with

, evaluated at the

previous iteration stage are correct,

if is initially

in error. In that case, (17) and (18) can be rewritten as

mod

(15)

(19)

, and identify

(20)

2) Step 2: For each and each For each , compute

(16) , compute
(17)
(18)

respectively. It follows that the hard decisions

and

evaluated at Step 3 from (19) and (20) are correct, unless the

reliability associated with the initial decision about bit is

still larger than the sum of the reliabilities associated with

each check sum intersecting on bit .

As in Section III-A, since this algorithm does not depend on

, it is referred to as the UMP BP-based iterative decoding

algorithm. The UMP property is advantageous since in [20], it

is shown that a poor estimate of the noise characteristics may

result in some performance degradation for the BP algorithm.

3) Step 3:

a) Create and

such that

if

,

if

.

b) For each

, create

such

that

if

, and

if

.

c) For each

, set

and re-

peat Step 1 after the same termination procedure

as in Section II-B.

IV. COMPARISONS WITH THE BP ALGORITHM In this section, we compare the two algorithms presented in Section III with the BP algorithm with respect to the tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity.
A. Error Performance In the following, simulation results for the (504, 252) and
(1008, 504) LDPC codes taken from [7] are presented. Figs. 1 and 2 depict the bit error performance for iterative decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FOSSORIER et al.: REDUCED COMPLEXITY ITERATIVE DECODING

677

Fig. 2. Error performance for iterative decoding of the (1008, 504) LDPC codewith BP, UMP BP-based, and UMP APP-based decoding algorithms, and at most 50 and 200 iterations.

Fig. 3. Error performance after the first, third, and fifth iterations for iterative decoding of the (1008, 504) LDPC code with BP and UMP BP-based decoding algorithms.

of the (504, 252) and (1008, 504) LDPC codes, respectively, with the BP, UMP BP-based, and UMP APP-based decoding algorithms, and at most 50 and 200 iterations. The results are obtained by Monte Carlo simulations, with at least 1000 bit errors for each recorded point. For both codes, we observe that at the BER 10 , the UMP APP-based algorithm performs at least 1 dB worse than the BP algorithm. On the other hand, for both 50 and 200 iterations, only about 0.15 and 0.25 dB

separate the error performance curves of the BP and UMP BPbased algorithms for the (504, 252) and (1008, 504) LPDC codes, respectively, at the BER 10 . Finally, we observe that while for both the BP and UMP BP-based algorithms, a nonnegligible error performance improvement is achieved at medium to high SNR values by increasing the maximum number of iterations from 50 to 200, approximatively no improvement is made for the UMP APP-based algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

678

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 5, MAY 1999

Fig. 4. Average number of iterations for iterative decoding of the (1008, 504) LDPC code with BP and UMP BP-based decoding algorithms, and at most 50 and 200 iterations.

Fig. 3 depicts the error performance after the first, third, and fifth iterations for iterative decoding of the (1008, 504) LDPC code with BP and UMP BP-based decoding algorithms. A similar figure was obtained for the (504, 252) LDPC code. Based on this figure, we observe that at very low SNR values, the error performance of the BP algorithm improves as the number of iterations increases, while it becomes worse for the UMP BP-based algorithm. Due to these different behaviors, the gap in error performance increases with the number of iterations considered in this figure at SNR values corresponding to BER values used in practice. Finally, for the same number of iterations, both curves seem to converge at high SNR values. Based on these observations, a slower convergence (or equivalently a higher number of iterations) is expected for the UMP BP-based algorithm with respect to the BP algorithm. On the other hand, the decoding complexity associated with each iteration of the UMP BP-based algorithm is significantly smaller than that of the BP algorithm, as shown next.

TABLE I
N DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR ONE ITERATION OF THE BP DECODING
ALGORITHM AND A RATE—1/2 ( ,J , 2J ) LDPC CODE
TABLE II DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR ONE ITERATION OF THE UMP APP-BASED
DECODING ALGORITHM AND A RATE—1/2 (N , J , 2J ) LDPC CODE
TABLE III DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR ONE ITERATION OF THE UMP BP-BASED
DECODING ALGORITHM AND A RATE—1/2 (N , J , 2J ) LDPC CODE

B. Decoding Complexity

The decoding complexities associated with the BP, the UMP

APP-based, and the UMP BP-based decoding algorithms are

summarized in Tables I–III, respectively. In these tables, all

operations associated with modulo-2 arithmetic have been

neglected as conventionally done. The decoding complexity

associated with BP is evaluated based on the clever forward

and backward recursions proposed in [7] to compute both

and for

. Based on Table I, for a rate-

1/2

LDPC code, the total complexity associated

with one iteration of BP consists of

real mul-

tiplications,

real divisions, and

real

additions. This is larger than the

complexity proposed

in [7], which can be achieved by computing only either

(instead of both

and ), or equivalently, the

probabilities of each bit being in error (as described in Section

III-A), so that no normalization by

is needed. However,

it is not clear at that time whether this modified algorithm

will perform as well as the algorithm considered in Section

II-B and [7], especially when the probabilities are limited to

prevent overflow problems.

The minimum values

associated

with each check sum- of both the UMP APP-based and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FOSSORIER et al.: REDUCED COMPLEXITY ITERATIVE DECODING

679

the UMP BP-based decoding algorithms can be determined

by identifying the two minimum values corresponding to this

check sum. This method is more efficient than ordering the

entire set of reliability values for small values of and

can be achieved in a straightforward manner with at most

comparisons, or with at most

comparisons with the help of a binary tree, as described in

[21]. Note finally that if quantized values are considered,

then the cost for ordering becomes negligible [22]. Then the

decoding complexity associated with the UMP APP-based

directly follows from the description of the algorithm given

in Section III-A. Consequently, this algorithm requires at

most

real additions, as shown

in Table II. For the UMP BP-based decoding algorithm, the

values

and are evaluated simultaneously based on

the forward and backward recursions of [7]. Consequently,

as summarized in Table III, the UMP BP-based decoding

algorithm is performed with at most

real additions. Based on these tables, it follows that

both algorithms described in Section III require real additions

only and, therefore, achieve significant computations savings

with respect to the BP algorithm. Also, the UMP BP-based

decoding algorithm requires only about twice as many real

additions as the UMP APP-based algorithm as well as about

twice the decoding delay of the UMP APP-based algorithm

due to the forward and backward recursions associated with

each check sum.

Fig. 4 depicts the average number of iterations for itera-

tive decoding of the (1008, 504) LDPC code with BP and

UMP BP-based decoding algorithms, and at most 50 and

200 iterations. Again, a similar figure was obtained for the

(504, 252) LDPC code. Based on this figure, we conclude

that the UMP BP-based algorithm requires significantly more

iterations (of smaller decoding cost) than the BP algorithm,

especially at medium SNR values. This conclusion confirms

the observations made in Section IV-A.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, two simple iterative algorithms for decoding

LDPC codes have been proposed. Both algorithms require

real additions only, and therefore achieve a good tradeoff

between error performance and decoding complexity as well

as fit hardware implementation with quantized received values.

In particular, for the LDPC codes considered, the UMP BP-

based decoding algorithm performs within a few tenths of

a decibel of the BP algorithm at the BER 10 . Based on

these results, we conclude that the UMP BP-based decoding

algorithm provides an attractive solution to implement iterative

decoding of LDPC codes.

The UMP BP-based decoding algorithm has been derived

from the BP algorithm by considering only the dominant

contribution when evaluating the reliability associated with

each check sum. Therefore, the performance of this algorithm

can be further enhanced by adding correction values, as

described in [23]–[25] for MAP-based decoding algorithms.

Furthermore, since for an

LDPC code, each check

sum consists of bits, with small, this approach provides

an alternative way to implement the BP algorithm as at most correcting values have to be added. This method
becomes attractive for hardware implementation of the BP algorithm since the corrective terms can be stored in a ROM [23]–[25].

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank D. J. C. MacKay for providing the generator matrices of the LDPC codes used in this paper by allowing access to his website, as well as the reviewers for improving the presentation of the paper.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1968.

[2]

, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T.

Press, 1963.

[3] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of

Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[4] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press,

1963.

[5] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound

codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.

[6] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of

low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458,

Mar. 1997.

[7] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[8] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as

an instance of Pearl’s ‘Belief Propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[9] G. Battail, “A conceptual framework for understanding turbo codes,”

IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 245–254, Feb. 1998.

[10] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of block and

convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445,

Mar. 1997.

[11] P. Jung, “Novel low complexity decoder for turbo-codes,” Electron.

Lett., vol. 31, pp. 86–87, Jan. 1995.

[12] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, “On iterative soft-decision

decoding of linear binary block codes and product codes,” IEEE J.

Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 276–298, Feb. 1998.

[13] W. Meier and O. Staffelbach, “Fast correlation attacks on certain stream

ciphers,” J. Cryptol., vol. 1, pp. 159–176, 1989.

[14] M. Mihaljevic´, “An iterative probabilistic decoding algorithm for binary

linear block codes beyond the half minimum distance,” Lecture Notes in

Computer Science, Applied Algebra, Algorithms and Error Correcting

Codes—AAECC 12, vol. 1255, pp. 237–249, 1997.

[15] H. Nickl, J. Hagenauer, and F. Burkert, “Approaching Shannon’s ca-

pacity limit by 0.27 dB using simple Hamming codes,” IEEE Commun.

Lett., vol. 1, pp. 130–132, Sept. 1997.

[16] B. Radosavljevic´, E. Arikan, and B. Hajek, “Sequential decoding of

low-density parity-check codes by adaptive reordering of parity checks,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 38, pp. 1833–1839, Nov. 1992.

[17] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.

[18] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[19] V. D. Kolesnik, “Probability decoding of majority codes,” Prob.

Peredachi Inform., vol. 7, pp. 3–12, July 1971.

[20] D. J. C. MacKay and C. P. Hesketh, “Performance of low density parity

check codes as a function of actual and assumed noise levels,” IEEE

Trans. Commun., to be published.

[21] J. Snyders, “Reduced lists of error patterns for maximum likelihood

soft decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-37, pp. 1194–1200,

July 1991.
[22] B. G. Dorsch, “A decoding algorithm for binary block codes and J-ary

output channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 391–394,

May 1974.

[23] S. S. Pietrobon, “Implementation and performance of a serial MAP

decoder for use in an iterative turbo decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.

Information Theory, Whistler, B.C., Canada, Sept. 1995, p. 471.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 47, NO. 5, MAY 1999

[24] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal decoding algorithms in the log domain,” in Proc. ICC, Seattle, USA, June 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[25] A. J. Viterbi, “An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 260–264, Feb. 1998.
Marc P. C. Fossorier (S’90–M’95) was born in Annemasse, France, on March 8, 1964. He received the B.E. degree from the National Institute of Applied Sciences (I.N.S.A.) Lyon, France, in 1987 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Hawaii at Manoa in 1991 and 1994, all in electrical engineering.
He is currently with the Department of Electrical Engineering of the University of Hawaii at Manoa, where he has been an Assistant Professor since January 1996, and worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow in 1995. His research interests include decoding techniques for linear codes, communication algorithms, ISI channels, and statistics. He coauthored (with S. Lin, T. Kasami, and T. Fujiwara) Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms (Kluwer, 1998).
Dr. Fossorier is a member of the IEEE Information Theory, Communications, and Magnetics Societies. Since 1996, he has served as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, and is currently the Treasurer of the IEEE Information Theory Society.
Miodrag Mihaljevic´ received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering from University of Belgrade, Yugoslavia, in 1979 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 1981 and 1990, respectively.
He is currently a Research Associate Professor and a Project Leader at the Mathematical Institute, Academy of Science and Arts, Belgrade. His research area is information processing including cryptology, computer security, and coding theory.

Hideki Imai (M’74–SM’88–F’92) was born in Shimane, Japan, on May 31, 1943. He received the B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1966, 1968, and 1971, respectively.
From 1971 to 1992 he was on the faculty of Yokohama National University. In 1992 he joined the faculty of the University of Tokyo, where he is currently a Full Professor in the Institute of Industrial Science. His current research interests include information theory, coding theory, cryptography, spread spectrum systems, and their applications. Dr. Imai received Excellent Book Awards from IEICE in 1976 and 1991. He also received the Best Paper Award (Yonezawa Memorial Award) from IEICE in 1992, the Distinguished Services Award from the Association for Telecommunication Promotion in 1994, the Telecom System Technology Prize from the Telecommunication Advancement Foundation and Achievement Award from IEICE in 1995. In 1998 he was awarded the Golden Jubilee Paper Award by the IEEE Information Theory Society. He was elected an IEEE Fellow for his contributions to the theory of coded modulation and two-dimensional codes in 1992. He chaired several committees of scientific societies such as the IEICE Professional Group on Information Theory. He served as the Editor of several scientific journals of IEICE, IEEE, etc. He chaired many international conferences such as the 1993 IEEE International Theory Workshop and the 1994 International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA’94). He has been on the board of IEICE, the IEEE Information Theory Society, Japan Society of Security Management (JSSM), and the Society of Information Theory and Its Applications (SITA). At present, he serves as President of the IEICE Engineering Sciences Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:17:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

