IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

399

Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices
David J. C. MacKay

Abstract— We study two families of error-correcting codes defined in terms of very sparse matrices. “MN” (MacKay–Neal) codes are recently invented, and “Gallager codes” were first investigated in 1962, but appear to have been largely forgotten, in spite of their excellent properties. The decoding of both codes can be tackled with a practical sum-product algorithm.
We prove that these codes are “very good,” in that sequences of codes exist which, when optimally decoded, achieve information rates up to the Shannon limit. This result holds not only for the binary-symmetric channel but also for any channel with symmetric stationary ergodic noise.
We give experimental results for binary-symmetric channels and Gaussian channels demonstrating that practical performance substantially better than that of standard convolutional and concatenated codes can be achieved; indeed, the performance of Gallager codes is almost as close to the Shannon limit as that of turbo codes.
Index Terms— Error-correction codes, iterative probabilistic decoding, low-complexity decoding, nonlinear codes, Shannon limit.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Background
IN 1948, Shannon [58] proved that for any channel there exist families of block codes that achieve arbitrarily small probability of error at any communication rate up to the capacity of the channel. We will refer to such code families as “very good” codes. By “good” codes we mean code families that achieve arbitrarily small probability of error at nonzero communication rates up to some maximum rate that may be less than the capacity of the given channel. By “bad” codes we mean code families that can only achieve arbitrarily small probability of error by decreasing the information rate to zero. (Bad codes are not necessarily useless for practical purposes.) By “practical” codes we mean code families which can be encoded and decoded in time and space polynomial in the blocklength.
Shannon’s proof was nonconstructive and employed random codes for which there is no practical encoding or decoding algorithm. Since 1948, it has been proved that there exist very good cyclic codes (nonconstructively) [45], and that very good codes with a short description in terms of permutations
Manuscript received June 29, 1997; revised July 27, 1998. This work was supported by the Royal Society Smithson research fellowship and by the Gatsby charitable foundation.
The author is with Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, U.K. (email: mackay@mrao.cam.ac.uk).
Communicated by A. Vardy, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(99)01395-4.

can be produced [1]; and an explicit algebraic construction

of very good codes for certain channels was given in 1982

[19]. But no practical decoding algorithm is known for any of

these codes, and it is known that the general linear decoding

problem (find the maximum-likelihood source vector in the

equation

, where is a generator matrix,

is a noise vector, and is the received vector) is NP-

complete [10]. Convolutional codes (which can be viewed

as block codes with memory) can approach the Shannon

limit as their constraint length increases but the complexity

of their best known decoding algorithms grows exponentially

with the constraint length. For a long time a generally held

view was that for practical purposes a channel’s effective

capacity was a rate “ ” which is smaller than the Shannon

capacity, if convolutional codes were used; and many believed

this conjecture applied to all codes, speculating that practical

communication beyond was impossible. Forney proved

that there do exist very good “concatenated” codes that are

practical [23]; but the proof was also nonconstructive [45].

When it comes to practical, constructive codes, construc-

tions have been demonstrated of codes based on concatenation

that are good, though not very good, but most known prac-

tical codes are asymptotically bad [45]. Goppa’s algebraic-

geometry codes, reviewed in [66], appear to be both practical

and good (with practical decoding proven possible up to the

Gilbert bound), but we believe that the literature has not

established whether they are very good. The best practical

decoding algorithm that is known for these codes [22] appears

to be prohibitively costly

to implement, and algebraic-

geometry codes do not appear to be destined for practical

use.

Thus the conventional view is that there are few known

constructive codes that are good, fewer still that are practical,

and none at all that are both practical and very good. It seems

to be widely believed that while almost any random linear

code is good, codes with structure that allows practical coding

are likely to be bad [45], [15]. Battail expresses an alternative

view, however, that “we can think of good codes, and we can

decode them” [6]. This statement is supported by the results

of the present paper.

In this paper we study the theoretical and practical properties

of two code families. Gallager’s low-density parity-check

codes are defined in terms of a very sparse random parity-

check matrix [26], [27], [41]. “MN codes” are also defined

in terms of very sparse random matrices, and were first

presented in [40]. (MN stands for MacKay–Neal; MacKay and

Neal generalized MN codes to Gallager codes, then realized

0018–9448/99$10.00 © 1999 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

that they had rediscovered Gallager’s work.) MN codes are

unconventional in that redundancy can be incorporated in the

transmitted codewords not only by using a

generator

matrix with transmitted blocklength greater than the source

blocklength , but also by using a source that is itself

redundant.

These code families both have two important properties.

First, because the codes are constructed from sparse matrices,

they have simple and practical decoding algorithms which

work, empirically, at good communication rates. Second, we

prove that in spite of their simple construction these codes

are very good—that is, sequences of codes exist which, when

optimally decoded, achieve information rates up to the Shan-

non limit of the binary-symmetric channel. We further prove

that the same codes are in fact good for any ergodic symmetric

channel. Our proof may be viewed as a semiconstructive proof

of Shannon’s noisy channel coding theorem (semiconstructive

in the sense that, while the proof still relies on an average over

a set of codes, the set of codes in question is unusually small).

It is indeed easy to think of good codes.

B. Definitions

For a glossary of symbols used in this paper, please see

Table III.

A binary variable will be termed a bit. The unit of infor-

mation content of a random bit with

will

be termed the shannon. The input and output alphabets of

the binary-symmetric channel (BSC) will be denoted

.

We will denote the error probability of the binary-symmetric

channel by , where

.

Definition 1: The binary entropy functions

and

are

(1) (2)

We will write natural logarithms as

.

Definition 2: The weight of a binary vector or matrix is the number of ’s in it. The overlap between two vectors is the number of ’s in common between them. The density of a source of random bits is the expected fraction of bits. A source is sparse if its density is less than . A vector is very sparse if its density vanishes as its length increases, for example, if a constant number of its bits are ’s.

Definition 3: A code with blocklength and rate satisfies the Gilbert–Varshamov minimum-distance bound if the minimum distance between its codewords satisfies

(3)

This is the rate beyond which the expected computational

cost of decoding a convolutional code with vanishing error

probability using sequential decoding becomes infinite.

The Gilbert bound

is

(6)

This is the maximum rate at which one can communicate with a code which satisfies the Gilbert–Varshamov minimumdistance bound, assuming bounded distance decoding [43].

Definition 5: A model that defines a probability distribution

over strings of any length

has mean entropy

if for any

and

there exists an such that

for all

(7)

For example, a memoryless binary-symmetric channel’s noise

has mean entropy

, where is the density of the

noise; the proof of this statement, by the law of large numbers,

is well known [16]. We will prove that the codes presented in

this paper are good codes not only for the binary-symmetric

channel but also for a wide class of channels with memory.

Definition 6: A binary channel with symmetric stationary

ergodic noise is a binary-input, binary-output channel whose

output in response to a transmitted binary vector is given by

, where , the noise vector, has a probability

distribution that is a) independent of and b) stationary and

ergodic.

For example, burst noise might be modeled by a stationary

and ergodic Markov process. Such a process has a mean

entropy, though the evaluation of this quantity may be chal-

lenging. The standard Gaussian channel with binary inputs is

also equivalent to a binary channel with stationary ergodic

noise.

We will concentrate on the case of a binary channel with

symmetric noise (see Definition 6) in the body of this paper.

Channels like the Gaussian channel whose inputs are binary

and whose outputs are in some more general alphabet are

addressed in Appendix A.

1) Linear Codes: A linear error-correcting code can be

represented by an by binary matrix (the generator

matrix), such that a -bit binary message is encoded as the

-bit vector

. (Note that we have chosen to use

column vectors so the generator matrices act to the right rather

than the left.) The generator matrix is in systematic form if it

can be written as

Definition 4: The capacity

of a binary-symmetric

channel with noise density is, in shannons per channel use,

(4)

The computational cutoff rate

is

(8)

where is the

identity matrix, and is a binary

matrix. The channel adds noise to the vector with the

resulting received signal being given by

(5)

(9)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

401

The decoder’s task is to infer given the received message , and the assumed noise properties of the channel. The optimal decoder returns the message that maximizes the posterior probability

(10)

It is often not practical to implement the optimal decoder;

indeed, the general decoding problem is known to be NP-

complete [10].

If the prior probability of is assumed uniform, and

the probability of is assumed to be independent of

(c.f. Definition 6), then it is convenient to introduce the

parity-check matrix , which in systematic

form is

. The parity-check matrix has the property

, so that, applying to (9)

(11)

Any other

matrix whose rows span the same

space as is a valid parity-check matrix.

The decoding problem thus reduces, given the above as-

sumptions, to the task of finding the most probable noise vector

such that

(12)

where the syndrome vector

.

C. Description of the Two Code Families

We define two code families. We explain the more conven-

tional Gallager codes first.

1) Construction of Gallager Codes: A Gallager code is a

code which has a very sparse random parity-check matrix.

(Very sparse, but not systematic.) The parity-check matrix

can be constructed as follows. We will describe variations on

this construction later.

A transmitted blocklength and a source blocklength

are selected. We define

to be the number of parity

checks. We select a column weight , which will initially be

an integer greater than or equal to . We create a rectangular

matrix ( rows and columns) at random with

exactly weight per column and a weight per row as uniform

as possible. If

is chosen to be an appropriate ratio

of integers then the number per row can be constrained to

be exactly

; in this case, we call the resulting code a

regular Gallager code because the bipartite graph defined by

the parity-check matrix is regular.

We then use Gaussian elimination and reordering of columns

to derive an equivalent parity-check matrix in systematic form

. There is a possibility that the rows of the original

matrix are not independent (though for odd , this has small

probability); in this case, is a parity-check matrix for a

code with the same and with smaller , that is, a code with

greater rate than assumed in the following sections. Redefining

to be the original matrix with its columns reordered as in

the Gaussian elimination, we have the following situation.

The matrix

is composed of two very sparse

matrices and as follows.

The matrix is a square

matrix that is very sparse

and invertible. The inverse

of this matrix in modulo

arithmetic has been computed during the Gaussian elimination

which produced the matrix

. (The expression

is the product (modulo ) of the two matrices

and .) The inversion takes order

time and is

performed once only.

The matrix is a rectangular

matrix that is very

sparse.

Encoding. We define the generator matrix of the Gallager code

to be

(13)

where is the 2) Variations:

identity matrix.

a) When generating the matrix , one can constrain all pairs of columns in the matrix to have an overlap . This is expected to improve the properties of the ensemble of codes, for reasons that will become apparent in Section II-C.
b) One can further constrain the matrix so that the topology of the corresponding bipartite graph does not contain short cycles. This is discussed further in Section IV-C.

3) The Decoding Problem for Gallager Codes: A source

vector of length is encoded into a transmitted vector

defined by

. If a systematic generator

matrix has been computed explicitly (which takes

time) then the transmitted vector can be computed by explicit

multiplication in

time. However, encoding might be

possible in less time using sparse matrix methods.

The received vector is

, where the noise is

. In the case of a binary-symmetric channel, is assumed

to be a sparse random vector with independent and identically

distributed bits of density . We will discuss more general

channels later.

By construction, is a parity-check matrix for —that is,

—so the decoding problem is to recover by

finding the most probable that satisfies the equation

(14)

where is the syndrome vector

, computation

of which takes time of order , if the sparseness of is

exploited.

The optimal decoder, in the case of a binary-symmetric

channel, is an algorithm that finds the sparsest vector that

satisfies

. From we obtain our guess for the

transmitted signal

, the first bits of which

are the optimal guess for the original message.

Both the matrix and the unknown vector are sparse. One

might therefore hope that it is practical to solve this decoding

problem (though perhaps not right up to the theoretical limits

of the optimal decoder). We will demonstrate a practical

decoder later.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

4) Construction of MN Codes: Having created the matri-

ces

and , we can define the generator matrix of

an MN code by the nonsystematic matrix

.

The novel idea behind MN codes is that we can constrain

the source vectors to be sparse and exploit this unconventional

form of redundancy in the decoder [40]. We will discuss prop-

erties and possible applications of MN codes in Section VI. As

explained in that section, the decoding of these codes involves

a problem similar to the Gallager codes’ decoding problem

(14).

5) Overview: The theoretical effectiveness of Gallager and

MN codes as error-correcting codes depends on the properties

of very sparse matrices in relation to the solvability of the

decoding problem (14). We address the question, “how well

would these codes work if we had the best possible algorithm

for solving the decoding problem?”

The practical effectiveness of Gallager and MN codes

depends on our finding a practical algorithm for solving (14)

that is close enough to the optimal decoder that the desirable

theoretical properties are not lost.

We show theoretically in Section II that there exist Gallager

and MN codes for which the optimal decoder would achieve

information rates arbitrarily close to the Shannon limit for a

wide variety of channels. In Section III we present a “sum-

product” decoding algorithm for Gallager codes and MN

codes, first used by Gallager [26]. We give an analysis of the

decoding algorithm in Section III-C. These results lead us to

conjecture that there exist Gallager and MN codes which are

not only good but which also achieve error rates approaching

zero at a nonzero information rate when decoded using a prac-

tical algorithm. In Section IV we describe empirical results

of computer experiments using the sum-product algorithm to

decode Gallager codes. Our experiments show that practical

performance significantly superior to that of textbook codes

can be achieved by these codes on both binary-symmetric

channels and Gaussian channels. In Section V we give a

pictorial demonstration of the iterative decoding algorithm for

a couple of Gallager codes. In Section VI we present MN

codes and give theoretical and experimental results for them.

II. LIMITS OF OPTIMAL DECODING

We prove properties of Gallager and MN codes by studying

properties of the decoding problem

where the

unknown vector is sparse and is very sparse. We make

use of two standard tools: we prove properties of the optimal

decoder by proving properties of a slightly suboptimal “typical

set decoder” which is easier to analyze; and we average the

performance of this decoder over an ensemble of very sparse

matrices . A “good” average performance proves that there

exist “good” matrices —indeed, that any random matrix

from the ensemble is likely to be “good.” As in all proofs

of goodness of coding systems, we employ a blocklength that

can be increased to a sufficiently large value that an error

probability smaller than a desired is achieved. To prove that

Gallager and MN codes are very good we will also increase

the weight per column, , of the matrix , but only in such a

way as to keep the matrix very sparse, i.e.,

.

Previous work on low-density parity-check codes has already established some good properties of Gallager codes. Gallager [26], [27] proved that his codes have good distance properties. Zyablov and Pinsker [73] proved that Gallager codes are good and gave a practical decoder, but only for communication rates substantially below the Gilbert bound. Our approach in terms of an ideal decoder allows us to prove that the codes are good not only for the binary-symmetric channel but also for arbitrary ergodic symmetric channel models; we also prove that Gallager codes are very good, a result not explicitly proven in [26], [27], and [73].

A. Ensembles of Very Sparse Matrices

The properties that we prove depend on the ensemble of matrices that is averaged over. We find it easiest to prove the desired properties by weakening the ensemble of matrices from that described in Section I-C. We introduce the following ensembles which we believe are ordered such that the later ensembles define Gallager and MN codes that have smaller average probability of error, though we do not have a proof of this statement.

1) Matrix generated by starting from an all-zero matrix

and randomly flipping not necessarily distinct bits in

each column.

2) Matrix generated by randomly creating weight

columns.

3) Matrix generated with weight per column and (as

near as possible) uniform weight per row.

4) Matrix generated with weight per column and

uniform weight per row, and no two columns having

overlap greater than 1.

5) Matrix further constrained so that its bipartite graph

has large girth.

6) Matrix

further constrained or slightly

modified so that is an invertible matrix.

Our proofs use the first ensemble. Our demonstrations use

matrices from ensembles 4), 5), and 6).

The properties of the decoding problem

also

depend on the assumed noise model. We will give theoretical

results for three cases. First, we give a general theorem

for a broad class of symmetric noise models with memory

(Definition 6). Second, we discuss a popular special case, the

memoryless binary-symmetric channel, corresponding, in the

case of Gallager codes, to a vector of uniform density .

Third, the generalization to channels with continuous outputs

is discussed in Appendix A.

B. Decodability for Arbitrary

To avoid confusion between Gallager and MN codes when

discussing their common decoding problem

, we

refer to the number of columns in as and the number of

rows as . (For a glossary of all symbols used in this paper,

see Table III.) In the case of Gallager codes, is a sample

from the noise model,

. In the case of MN codes, is

the concatenation of the vectors and , and the probability

of is separable into

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

403

Let the ratio of the length of to the length of be

. The decoding problem is equivalent to playing

a game in which a vector is drawn from a probability

distribution , and the vector

is revealed;

the player’s task is then to identify the original vector , given

the “encoding” , the matrix , and the known distribution .

The optimal decoder is an algorithm that identifies the vector

that maximizes

subject to the constraint

.

There is a Shannon limit for this game beyond which we

cannot hope to recover from reliably. The maximum

information content of is clearly shannons. We assume

that the probability distribution of the noise is stationary

and ergodic so that a mean entropy can be defined for

the distribution . Then the Shannon limit says reliable

recovery of from is only possible if

, i.e.,

(15)

If there are matrices for which we can play the decoding

game well at a value of

close to this limit, then there

exist Gallager codes which can communicate correspondingly

close to the Shannon limit of a noisy channel whose noise

distribution is given by .

For brevity we introduce the following definition.

Definition 7: A satisfactory

matrix for the

distribution

is a matrix having rows and

columns with weight or less per column, with the following

property: if is generated from , the optimal decoder

from

back to achieves a probability of block

error less than .

The following theorems will be proved.

Theorem 1—Good Codes: Given an integer

and a

ratio

, there exists an entropy

such that,

for any

of mean entropy

, and a desired

block error probability , there exists an integer and a

satisfactory

matrix for the distribution .

Theorem 2—Very Good Codes: Given a distribution

of mean entropy

and a desired

, there

exists an integer

such that for any desired block

error probability

, there is an integer

such that

for any

, there is a satisfactory

matrix for the distribution .

Implications of Theorems 1 and 2 for Gallager codes. The

first theorem effectively states that Gallager codes with any

value of

are good, i.e., for any channel with appropriate

entropy, there are Gallager codes which can achieve virtually

error-free transmission at rates up to some nonzero rate

, if the blocklength is made sufficiently large.

The second theorem effectively states that Gallager codes

are very good—if we are allowed to choose , then we can get

arbitrarily close to capacity, still using very sparse matrices

with

arbitrarily small.

In Section II-C we prove these theorems, that is, we derive

expressions for a function

satisfying Theorem 1,

and a function

satisfying Theorem 2. We also give

numerical results relating to these theorems. Let the largest

function for which the first theorem is true be

.

In Section II-D we evaluate a tighter numerical lower bound

for

. These are worst case results, true for any

source of mean entropy . In Section II-E we give numerical

results for the case of the binary-symmetric channel, where

considerably more optimistic bounds can be derived.

We also prove the following minimum distance theorem for

Gallager codes which uses the function

of Theorem 1.

Theorem 3—Good Distance Properties: Given an integer

, a fraction

, and a such that

,

there exist integers and

and a matrix having

rows and columns with weight or less per column,

such that the Gallager code with parity-check matrix has

minimum distance at least .

We can also prove that the Gilbert minimum-distance bound

can be attained as

, still with very sparse.

Theorem 4—Gilbert Minimum Distance Bound Attainable:

Given a fraction

, and a such that

,

there exists a and an

such that for any

there is a matrix having rows and

columns

with weight or less per column, such that the Gallager code

with parity-check matrix has minimum distance at least .

Implication of Theorem 3 contrasted with Theorem 1. If

one only aims to decode noise patterns of weight up to half

of the minimum distance

(as is conventional in much

of coding theory), then one can only handle noise levels up

to

. But in fact the optimal decoder can decode (with

vanishing probability of error) at noise levels up to

.

Thus Gallager codes can serve as good codes at noise levels

twice as great as the maximum noise level that is attainable

if one restricts attention to bounded distance decoding. The

intuition for this result is that in a very-high-dimensional

binary space, while two spheres of radius whose centres are

a distance apart have a nonzero volume of intersection for

any greater than , the fractional volume of intersection

is vanishingly small as long as is less than .

Gallager codes, as Gallager showed [26] and we will show

later, can in practice be decoded beyond their minimum

distance.

C. Proof of Theorem 1

Consider the problem, given and , of inferring , where

, and has probability distribution

with

mean entropy . We consider the probability of error of

a typical set decoder [16], averaging it over all very sparse

random matrices . We establish the existence of a function

such that the probability of error can be bounded

by a sum of terms which decrease as inverse powers of , if

.

Typical set decoder. We consider the typical set

(16) where is a small constant to be fixed later. Since

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

the number of elements in this typical set, , satisfies (17)

for

where

for (22)

We now consider decoding procedure:

by the following

if there is a unique

such that

produce as the decoding of ;

else report decoding failure.

then

There are two failure modes for this decoder, with proba-

bilities and

such that

Block error

(18)

I. Original vector not typical. This failure occurs with pro-

bability

. Because is assumed to have

a mean entropy , this probability vanishes as

(see Definition 5, Section I-B).

II. is typical but at least one other typical vector has

the same encoding We now concentrate on the proba-

bility of a decoding error arising this way, and denote

the average of

over drawn from ensemble 1)

(Section II-A) by .

We define the indicator function

to have the value

if the proposition is true and otherwise. We can bound

by

(19)

In (19) the second sum is the number of typical vectors that have the same encoding as . We now average over codes .
(20)

The term in brackets only depends on the weight of the

difference

. The probability that

is the

probability that columns of the very sparse matrix sum to

zero. Because is constructed by flipping bits per column

at random with replacement, this is the probability that

steps of the random walk on the -dimensional hypercube,

starting from the origin, bring us back to origin. We denote

this probability

and define

to be the number of

typical vectors such that the difference

has weight

, for the given . Then we have

(21)

In Appendix E we give an expression for the function ; this function is zero for all odd , and is a decreasing function of even . It will be convenient to introduce an upper bound on
which is equal to it for even and which is a decreasing function. We define this function, , in (87). In Appendix E we also derive various upper bounds on and from which we will use the following two:

(23)

These bounds are tightest for

and

, respec-

tively. Both these bounds are decreasing functions of .

We now have

(24)

We pause to dissect the product

The first factor is typically a rapidly increasing function of

up to some peak (which in the case of a binary-symmetric

channel of density is located at

). The

second factor

is largest for

and falls initially as

a power law

(see (22)) decreasing to an equilibrium

value of

(see (23)), corresponding to an equilibrium

distribution uniform over (half of) the states of the hypercube.

We want the product of these two factors to be vanishingly

small (in increasing ) for all .

Intuitively, if the product were large at small , then type

II errors would arise because there would be a small subset

of columns in that sum to zero such that it is possible to

confuse vectors and that differ in only a few bits (and

which could therefore both be typical). If the product is large

at large , then type II errors would arise because there are

two completely different vectors

which have the same

encoding. Gallager codes and MN codes are good because we

can indeed make the product vanishingly small for all .

1) Worst Case Analysis: Up to this point we have not men-

tioned any form for

, which determines the function

in (24). We now proceed with a worst case assumption

for the function

.

We know that

Also

is bounded above by the maximum number of

distinct vectors of weight

. Finally, is a decreasing

function of . So we can replace the function

in (24)

by the worst case function

which has the maximum

value at small

(25)

where write

is chosen to satisfy

. If we (26)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

405

where is a small quantity satisfying

and

,

then

(27)

as long as is sufficiently small and is sufficiently large

that

. (Here we have used (73) from

Appendix D.) Notice that the only dependence that the function

has on the source distribution

is the cutoff value

, which is controlled by . Thus

(28)

(29)

We now seek conditions under which can be made arbitrarily small by increasing . Here first is a sketch of our proof. Consider the logarithm of the term inside the summation in (29) as a function of . Using (73) again

(30)

We want to show that for all less than some

that

grows linearly with ,

, the above term becomes

increasingly large and negative as increases. We need all

the terms in the sum in (29) to go to zero, and we need almost

all of them to do so faster than , so that the sum itself

goes to zero. To aid the intuition, the two terms

and

(a tight numerical upper bound on

) are

plotted in Fig. 1 as a function of for a variety of values of

, for

. The function

is an increasing function

of (if

) reaching a maximum value of

at

; the function

is a decreasing function of

reaching a minimum value of

asymptotically. For

, the right-hand side of (30) is certainly positive

since

. For small , on the other hand (starting at

), the sum is negative, if , as we now prove. There

therefore exists a

such that, for all

, the sum is

negative. This defines the critical value of which, via (26),

proves the existence of the function

that we seek.

We continue from (29), using (22) and inequality (85) and

assuming

.

M ewt Fig. 1. Plot of a numerical upper bound 1 log q( ) on the function

M e 0wt e fu1Hncl2oti(gownq=0(L0)),H, a2fso(wra=lafLrug)necistMiaolnsoaonsfhdowwfo=nrL. vT, ahrfeiooriunstervsa=elcuteios2n.opFfooitrn;t

and the function convenience, the of the two curves

0 e M ewt H2 (w=L) and 1 log q( ) defines a value of w3 which gives a lower

bound on the achievable information rate for Gallager and MN codes. This

graph gives an informal proof of Theorems 1 and 2 for the case  = 2.

0 e The content of Theorem 1 is that for any t the solid line H2 (w=L) lies

M ewt above the dotted line 1 log q( ) for all w=L up to some nonzero value.

! 1 The content of Theorem 2 is that as t

, the first point of intersection of

e the two curves approaches the point at which H2 (w=L) = log 2.

where

satisfies

if

, and

Now as a function of ,

is a decreasing function

for

, as is easily confirmed by differentiation, so if we

constrain by

, we can bound the last

terms by times the third term

(31) (35)

Thus the average probability of error for this ensemble of

(32) codes vanishes with increasing as

if

and

faster if

. There therefore exists a given by

such that if

, or equivalently, if

, then (33)

(34)

as

(36)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

This establishes the existence of the function if we define

, since

(37)

then, for any

, we can set , , and such

that

and

.

This completes the proof of Theorem 1. We note that the

value of

given above is not the largest such function

that satisfies the theorem. By using tighter bounds

on

we can prove the theorem for larger values of

. We use a numerical bound to obtain graphs of lower

bounds on

in Section II-D.

Comment. It is instructive to study the terms which dom-

inate the sum over . The terms with small decrease as

inverse powers of as long as

for all

, i.e., as long as

. The

term, the largest,

decreases as

. We can get a stronger decrease of

with if we assume that each column has exactly ones

in it. Then we can omit the

term, which corresponds

to the probability of there being a zero column in . By the

further step of ensuring that no two columns of the matrix

are identical, we can rule out the

term from the sum.

By adding further constraints when generating the code, that

the girth of the corresponding bipartite graph must be large,

we can make the probability of this sort of “small ” error

even smaller. This is the motivation for the code Constructions

1B and 2B that we introduce later on.

2) Proof of Theorem 3: A code with parity-check matrix

has minimum distance if and only if any

columns of are linearly independent, and there exist

linearly dependent columns. We can prove the existence of a

matrix with linearly independent columns easily starting

from (36). Here is the desired minimum distance. We

set

and note that the assumption of the theorem,

implies that the quantity

vanishes with increasing .

The quantity

is the expected number of

linear dependences of up to columns in a randomly

generated matrix . Since this expected number is less than

(indeed, it goes to zero), there must be at least one in the

ensemble such that the number of linear dependences is zero

(indeed, nearly all in the ensemble must satisfy this).

3) Proof of Theorem 2: We now show that if we are free

to choose then Gallager and MN codes can get arbitrarily

close to the Shannon limit. We prove that for a desired

and any source with mean entropy such that

,

and any

, there exists a and an

such that

for any

, the corresponding decoding problem

can be solved with probability of failure less

than , averaged over the first ensemble of matrices .

We start from (29), which bounds the type II probability of

error thus

(38)

where is given by

(39)

and

. From (30),

(40)

If we can set and such that the term in parentheses is neg-

ative for all

then goes to zero as increases. For

large it is evident (c.f. Fig. 1) that

attains its largest value at

. So, substituting upper

bound (23) for

, our condition for vanishing is

(41)

Substituting in (39), we require

so that if we set such that

(42) and such that

then vanishes with increasing , so an

can be

found such that the average error probability of the ensemble

of matrices is below any desired error probability .

4) Proof of Theorem 4: This theorem follows from The-

orem 2 as Theorem 3 followed from Theorem 1. Briefly,

since we can find a such that

vanishes with

increasing for any

satisfying

, this

implies that, for sufficiently large , we can find a matrix with

at least linearly independent columns for any satisfying

.

D. Numerical Bounds on

: Worst Case

Theorem 1 proved the existence, for a given ratio , of an

entropy

such that there exist good Gallager and MN

codes with rates defined by for any channel with symmetric

stationary ergodic noise (Definition 6) with mean entropy up to

. We define

to be the largest function for

which the theorem holds. In Fig. 2(a) we show a numerically

obtained bound on this function. The graph shows a lower

bound on

as a function of ; the Shannon limit

provides the upper bound

. This graph was

obtained as follows. Using the expansion of in (86), the

condition for to vanish is that for all

and all

the quantity

(43)

should be negative. We use the inequality

and maximize as a function of

and

. We

repeat this procedure iteratively to locate the critical value of

such that is zero. This gives the bound.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

407

(a) Fig. 3. Lower bounds on achievable information rate (in shannons) versus
binary-symmetric channel’s noise level f for Gallager codes (ensemble 1) with t from 3 to 6. The solid line shows the channel capacity.

(b)

Fig. 2. Lower
(b) assuming P

(bxo)uncodrsreosnponHdixmngaxto(b;int)ar(ya-)syfmormaertbriitcracrhyansonuelr,cefoPr m(xa)triacneds

A with t from 3 to 6. As the weight per column t increases, the achievable

rates rise towards the Shannon limit Hx = 1.

(a)

E. Numerical Upper and Lower Bounds: Uniform Noise Model

We now assume that the channel under discussion is the

binary-symmetric channel and obtain numerical upper and

lower bounds on the achievable rate of Gallager codes, assum-

ing the optimal decoder. The method here is as in the previous

section, with the worst case function

replaced

by the

appropriate to the uniform noise case, as detailed

in Appendix F. The resulting lower bounds on

are

shown in Fig. 2(b).

1) Achievable Rate for Gallager Codes over Binary-Sym-

metric Channel: From the lower bound on the noise entropy

plotted in Fig. 2(b) we can compute a lower bound on the

achievable communication rate using Gallager codes (given

an optimal decoder), as a function of the noise level of the

binary-symmetric channel. This rate is shown in shannons in

Fig. 3 for

and compared with the capacity. As

the weight per column increases the bounds rise towards the

capacity.

2) Upper Bounds on the Communication Rate over a Binary-

Symmetric Channel Fig. 4(a) and (b) addresses the question

“what information rate is definitely not achievable for a given

and noise level ?” This is a relatively easy question to

answer, and it gives insight into what is lost in the above

proof by switching from the constrained ensemble of random

matrices with weight per column and

per row to

the unconstrained ensemble of matrices. It also gives insight

(b)
Fig. 4. Upper bound on the achievable information rate in shannons versus binary-symmetric channel’s noise level, for Gallager codes, compared with
the channel capacity. (a) This bound was obtained assuming that matrices A
were drawn from the ensemble having uniform weight per row as well as per column (Ensemble 3). (b) This bound was obtained assuming that matrices
A were drawn from the ensemble having uniform weight per column only
(Ensemble 2). The graphs differ significantly at high noise levels.

into why Gallager codes with fixed are only good codes and

not very good codes.

Consider the decoding problem

, where has

density and length , and has length . It is clearly

impossible to solve the problem of deducing reliably from

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

Fig. 5. The vectors x and z viewed as nodes in a belief network. White circles denote bits xl. Black dots denote checks zm. We illustrate the case t = 4; tr = 8. (a) This figure emphasizes with bold lines the four connections from one bit and the eight connections to one check. Every bit xl is the parent of four checks zm, and each check zm is the child of eight bits. (b)–(e) Certain topological structures are undesirable in the network defined by the matrix A: in (b) there is a cycle of length 4 in the network; we can forbid this topology by saying that the overlap between two columns of A must not exceed 1; in
(c), (d), and (e) more complex topologies are illustrated. Many of our experiments have used matrices A in which these topologies are also forbidden—we
eliminate bits that are involved in structures like the “doublet” (e), of which (c) and (d) are special cases. This means that every bit’s “coparents” (other bits that are parents of its children) consist of t nonoverlapping sets of bits as shown in (f). (g) A fragment of an infinite belief network with t = 4 and tr = 8 and no cycles. In Section III-C2 we analyze the flow of information up this network.

if the information content of ,

shannons, is more

than the information content of . We get the Shannon bound

by noting that

, in shannons, is less than or equal to its

length . But we can get upper bounds lower than this by

tightening the bound on

.

Probability distribution of the random variable . We

refer to the elements corresponding to each row

of as checks and to the elements of as bits. Let

be the sum of bits of density . We define

to be

the probability that

. Starting from

, we can

use the recurrence relation

(44)

to obtain [26]

(45)

We use this result to obtain tighter bounds on the achievable

communication rate.

Bound for constrained matrices . Consider the ensemble

of random matrices with weight per column and as near

as possible per row (Ensemble 3 in Section II-A). In the

general case where

is not an integer, the information

content per check of is bounded above by the average of

the marginal information content of one check, averaged over

the ensemble, that is,

(46)

This gives the bound shown in Fig. 4(a), which was created

as follows. For a selected value of and , a search was made

over for a value such that the upper bound on the information

content per check of is just above

, using (46). The

graph is then a plot of

versus .

Bound for unconstrained matrices . Now what if we

remove the constraint per row, reverting to Ensemble 2 of

Section II-A? Intuitively we can see that

will decrease.

Some checks will be sums of more than

bits of , and

some will be sums of fewer than . The former checks will

have a value of slightly closer to , whereas the latter will

have values of further from . Some checks may be the

sum of no bits at all (with probability

), so that they

convey no information. The convexity of the relevant functions

produces a net decrease in the information content of . To

work out a bound for the unconstrained ensemble, we sum

over all possible weights of a row , evaluate

, and

weight by the probability of , which is a Poisson distribution

with mean . The resulting upper bound is shown in Fig. 4(b).

We see that the bound is lower than that for the constrained

matrices, and looks similar to the lower bound in Fig. 3. It

thus seems plausible that, were we to change from Ensemble

2 to Ensemble 3 in the main proof of the paper, we would be

able to prove the achievability of somewhat larger rates for

any given .

This concludes our discussion of what would be achievable

given an optimal decoder. We now move on to practical

decoding algorithms.

III. PRACTICAL DECODING BY THE SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

We have developed a “sum-product decoder,” also known

as a “belief propagation decoder” [51], [33] for the decoding

problem

. In this work, we have rediscovered a

method of Gallager [27]. See [68], [24], and [46] for further

discussion of the sum-product algorithm.

We refer to the elements corresponding to each row

of as checks. We think of the set of bits and

checks as making up a “belief network,” also known as a

“Bayesian network,” “causal network,” or “influence diagram”

[51], in which every bit is the parent of checks , and

each check is the child of bits (Fig. 5). The network of

checks and bits form a bipartite graph: bits only connect to

checks, and vice versa.

We aim, given the observed checks, to compute the marginal

posterior probabilities

for each . Algorithms

for the computation of such marginal probabilities in belief

networks are found in [51]. These computations are expected

to be intractable for the belief network corresponding to our

problem

because its topology contains many

cycles. However, it is interesting to implement the decoding

algorithm that would be appropriate if there were no cycles, on

the assumption that the errors introduced might be relatively

small. This approach of ignoring cycles has been used in

the artificial intelligence literature [4] but is now frowned

upon because it produces inaccurate probabilities (D. Spiegel-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

409

halter, personal communication). However, for our problem

the end product is a decoding; the marginal probabilities are

not required if the decoding is correct. Also, the posterior

probability, in the case of a good code communicating at an

achievable rate, is expected typically to be hugely concentrated

on the most probable decoding. And as the size

of the

code’s matrix is increased, it becomes increasingly easy to

produce matrices in which there are no cycles of any given

length, so we expect that, asymptotically, this algorithm will be

a good algorithm. We have obtained excellent results with

equal to

and

. The algorithm often gives useful

results after a number of iterations much greater than the

number at which it could be affected by the presence of cycles.

A. The Algorithm

We have implemented the following algorithm (for back-

ground reading see [51]). The algorithm is appropriate for

a binary channel model in which the noise bits are in-

dependent—for example, the memoryless binary-symmetric

channel, or the Gaussian channel with binary inputs and real

outputs (the connection to real-output channels is explained in

Appendix A).

We denote the set of bits that participate in check

by

. Similarly, we define the set of

checks in which bit participates,

.

We denote a set

with bit excluded by

. The

algorithm has two alternating parts, in which quantities

and associated with each nonzero element in the matrix

are iteratively updated. The quantity is meant to be the

probability that bit of has the value , given the information

obtained via checks other than check . The quantity is

meant to be the probability of check being satisfied if bit

of is considered fixed at and the other bits have a separable

distribution given by the probabilities

.

The algorithm would produce the exact posterior probabilities

of all the bits after a fixed number of iterations if the bipartite

graph defined by the matrix contained no cycles [51].

Initialization. Let

(the prior probability

that bit is ), and let

. In the case

of a Gallager code and a binary-symmetric channel, will

equal . In the case of an MN code, will be either or ,

depending on whether bit is part of the message or the noise.

If the noise level varies in a known way (for example, if the

channel is a binary input Gaussian channel with a real output)

then is initialized to the appropriate normalized likelihood.

For every

such that

the variables and

are initialized to the values and , respectively.

Horizontal step. In the horizontal step of the algorithm, we

run through the checks and compute for each

two probabilities: first, , the probability of the observed

value of arising when

, given that the other bits

have a separable distribution given by the

probabilities

, defined by:

and second, , the probability of the observed value of

arising when

, defined by

(48)

The conditional probabilities in these summations are either

zero or one, depending on whether the observed matches

the hypothesized values for and the .

These probabilities can be computed in various obvious

ways based on (47) and (48). The computations may be done

most efficiently (if

is large) by regarding

as the final state of a Markov chain with states and ,

this chain being started in state , and undergoing transitions

corresponding to additions of the various , with transition

probabilities given by the corresponding

and . The

probabilities for having its observed value given either

or

can then be found efficiently by use of the

forward–backward algorithm [7], [65], [5].

A particularly convenient implementation of this method

uses forward and backward passes in which products of the

differences

are computed. We obtain

from the identity

(49)

This identity is derived by iterating the following observation:

if

, and and have probabilities

and

of being and , then

and

. Thus

Finally, note that

, and hence

and

.

Vertical step. The vertical step takes the computed values

of and and updates the values of the probabilities

and . For each we compute

(50)

(51)

where is chosen such that

. These products

can be efficiently computed in a downward pass and an upward

pass.

We can also compute the “pseudoposterior probabilities”

and at this iteration, given by

(52)

(47)

(53)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

These quantities are used to create a tentative decoding , the

consistency of which is used to decide whether the decoding

algorithm can halt.

At this point, the algorithm repeats from the horizontal step.

Decoding. If the belief network really were a tree without

cycles, the values of the pseudoposterior probabilities and

at each iteration would correspond exactly to the posterior

probabilities of bit given the states of all the checks in a

truncated belief network centred on bit and extending out to

a radius equal to twice the number of iterations. Our decoding

procedure is to set to if

and see if the checks

are all satisfied, halting when they are, and

declaring a failure if some maximum number of iterations

(e.g., 200 or 1000) occurs without successful decoding. When

there is a failure, the partial decoding may serve as a useful

starting point for another decoding algorithm [47].

We note in passing the difference between this decoding

procedure and the widespread practice in the turbo code

community, where the decoding algorithm is run for a fixed

number of iterations (irrespective of whether the decoder

finds a consistent state at some earlier time). This practice

is wasteful of computer time. In our procedure, “undetected”

errors would only occur if the decoder found an satisfying

which was not equal to the true . “Detected”

errors occur if the algorithm runs for the maximum number

of iterations without finding a valid decoding. The alternative

practice mentioned above blurs this distinction between unde-

tected and detected errors. Undetected errors are of scientific

interest because they reveal distance properties of a code and in

engineering practice, it would seem preferable for the detected

errors to be labeled as erasures if practically possible.

B. Relationship to Other Algorithms
Meier and Staffelbach [47] implemented an algorithm similar to this sum-product decoder, also studied by Mihaljevic´ and Golic´ [49], [50]. The main difference in their algorithm is that they did not distinguish between the probabilities and
for different values of ; rather, they computed and , as given above, and then proceeded with the horizontal step with all set to and all set to . Another related algorithm is the variational free-energy minimization decoder [37]. We describe the application of this decoder to Gallager and MN codes in Appendix C. Its performance is not as good as the sum-product decoder’s.

C. Analysis of Decoding Algorithms
We analyze a simple decoding algorithm, following Gallager [27] and Meier and Staffelbach [47]. (The same algorithm has been used by Spielman [60].) We also study the sum-product decoder in the limit of large using Monte Carlo methods. Although an explicit positive statement of the sum-product decoder’s capabilities remains elusive, the important message of our analysis that follows is that the algorithms have “correction effects” which are independent of the blocklength for large . These results lead us to the following conjecture.

and MN codes with rates close to capacity, that can achieve negligible probability of error, for sufficiently large .

1) Analysis of Correction Effect in a Simple Decoder: We introduce a simple decoder to iteratively solve for such that
.

Simple decoder:

Set

.

: Evaluate

. This is the check pattern

that remains to be explained.

if

, end.

Evaluate the “vote” vector (not

), which counts,

for each bit , the number of unsatisfied checks to which

it belongs. The bits of that get the most votes are viewed

as the most likely candidates for being wrong. The biggest

possible vote that a bit can receive is , since each bit

participates in checks.

Flip all bits of that have the largest vote.

go to .

This decoding algorithm is not guaranteed to reach a stable

state, but it is easy to analyze whether the first iteration of

the decoder produces a “correction effect” or not. We say that

there is a correction effect if the Hamming distance between

and the true vector decreases. We expect this decoding

algorithm to have similar properties to those of the sum-

product algorithm—at least for the first iteration—because, in

the case of a binary-symmetric channel, the vote for a bit is

directly related to its pseudoposterior probability.

Expected change in Hamming distance. We will assume

that the weight of each row of is an integer , i.e., that

bits participate in each check. We consider the flipping

of a single bit whose vote is (the largest possible vote),

and evaluate the probability that this reduces the Hamming

distance. If the expected change in Hamming distance is

negative, then we might hope that decoding algorithms of this

type would work.

Consider a bit that has value , and a check in which

it participates (i.e., an such that

). The probability

that

, given that is , is

, as defined in

Section II-E2. So the probability that a bit receives vote

is the binomial probability

(54)

Similarly, the probability that

, given that is , is

. So the probability that a bit receives vote is

(55)

Now, given that a bit has vote , the probabilities that it is a or a bit are, by Bayes’ theorem

(56)

Thus the expected change in Hamming distance when a bit with vote is flipped is

Conjecture 1: Given a binary-symmetric channel with

(57)

noise density , there exist practical decoders for Gallager

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

411

(a)

(b)
Fig. 6. Analysis of practical decoding algorithms. (a) Time course of the decoding process in an infinite belief network with t = 4, tr = 8. Graph shows average entropy of a bit as a function of number of iterations, as estimated by a Monte Carlo algorithm using 10 000 samples per iteration. Density f increases by steps of 0:005 from bottom graph (f = 0:010) to top graph (f = 0:100). There is evidently a transition atabout f = 0:075, above which the algorithm cannot determine x. (b) Rates achievable by Gallager codes according to two analyses, for t = 3; 4; 5; 6 as a function of noise level. Dotted lines show estimates of decodability based on the first iteration of the simple decoder. Below the dotted line there is a correction effect; above the line, this decoder gives no correction effect. Points show theoretical success of decoding in infinite belief networks with various values of t = 3; 4; 5; 6, computed by Monte
2 Carlo simulations of up to 29 iterations, as in part (a). Point styles diamond, square, triangle, and plus represent values of (f; R) at which complete decoding
occurred after a number of iterations less than 29. Point style denotes no decoding after 29 iterations.

If this is negative then there is a correction effect. We assume,

rather simplisticly, that if there is no correction effect on the

first iteration then reliable communication is not achievable

using the code; that is, we assume that this analysis predicts

a bound on the achievable communication rate.

For any given and (and hence ), we can locate

numerically the above which there is no correction effect.

The lower dotted curves in Fig. 6(b) show the corresponding

information rate

of a Gallager code as a function

of for a variety of values of and , compared with the

capacity. It is interesting that (at least for

) as

increases, the bound on the achievable rate given by this

simple analysis decreases. Thus in contrast to the results for

the optimal decoder, where large is best, we find that codes

with small

are best for practical decoding.

2) Analysis of Decoding of Infinite Networks by Monte Carlo

Methods: The sum-product decoder’s performance can be

analyzed in terms of the decoding properties of an infinite

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 7. Schematic illustration of (a) Construction 1A for a Gallager code with t = 3, tr = 6, and R = 1=2, (b) Construction 2A for a Gallager code with rate 1=3, (c), (d) two constructions similar to Construction 1A. Notation: an integer represents a number of permutation matrices superposed on the surrounding square. A diagonal line represents an identity matrix. A rotating ellipse imposed on a block within the matrix represents random permutation of all the columns in that block.

network without cycles (of which Fig. 5(g) shows a fragment).

The larger the matrix , the closer its decoding properties

should approach those that we now derive.

We consider an infinite belief network with no loops, in

which every bit connects to checks and every check

connects to bits. We consider the iterative flow of

information in this network, and examine the average en-

tropy of one bit as a function of number of iterations. At

each iteration, a bit has accumulated information from its

local network out to a radius equal to the number of iter-

ations. Successful decoding will only occur if the average

entropy of a bit decreases to zero as the number of iterations

increases.

We have simulated the iteration of an infinite belief network

by Monte Carlo methods—a technique first used by Gallager

[27]. Imagine a network of radius (the total number of

iterations) centred on one bit. Our aim is to compute the

conditional entropy of the central bit given the state of

all checks out to radius . To evaluate the probability that

the central bit is given a particular observation involves

an -step propagation from the outside of the network into the

center. At the th iteration probabilities at radius

are

transformed into ’s and then into ’s at radius

in a way

that depends on the states of the unknown bits at radius .

In the Monte Carlo method, rather than simulating this network

exactly, which would take a time that grows exponentially

with , we create for each iteration a representative sample

(of size , say) of the values of

. In the case of a

regular network with parameters each new pair

in

the list at the th iteration is created by drawing the new

from its distribution and drawing at random with replacement

pairs

from the list at the

th iteration;

these are assembled into a tree fragment and the sum-product

algorithm is run to find the new value associated with the

new node.

As an example, the results of runs with ,

, and

noise densities between and , using 10 000 samples

at each iteration, are shown in Fig. 6(a). It can be seen that

runs with low enough noise level collapse to zero entropy after

a small number of iterations, and those with high noise level

decrease to a stable entropy level corresponding to a failure

to decode.

The results of many such runs with various values of and

are summarised by the points in Fig. 6(b), where the time to

reach virtually zero entropy is indicated by the point style on a

graph of rate versus noise level of the corresponding Gallager

code, with denoting “no decoding after 29 iterations.”

Regions in the graph where there are points corresponding

to 1–29 iterations define values of the crossover probability

and rate such that successful communication is possible

with Gallager codes, according to the Monte Carlo analysis.

The two analyses, using the simple decoder and using Monte

Carlo methods, appear to give similar predictions as to the

maximum achievable rate as a function of .

We note that when the entropy drops to zero the decoding

error probability falls to zero with a terminal convergence that

is faster than exponential. The vertical step involves the multi-

plication of probabilities, so we believe the probability of

decoding error falls asymptotically as

where

is the number of decoding iterations and is a constant.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS USING THE SUM-PRODUCT DECODER
Choice of ensemble. In early experiments using matrices from ensemble 4) of Section II-A, we examined some of the decoding errors made by the free-energy minimization decoder to be described in Appendix C and found that they tended to occur when the vector was such that another slightly different typical vector had a similar (but not identical) encoding . In terms of the random walk on the hypercube (Section II-C), these errors correspond to walks that after a small number of steps return close to the starting corner. They were possible because of rare topologies in the bipartite graph corresponding to the matrix such as the topology illustrated in Fig. 5(c). We can eliminate the possibility of these errors by modifying the ensemble of matrices so that the corresponding graph does not have short cycles in it. We made new matrices by taking matrices from Ensemble 4 and deleting columns until there were no short loops of the type shown in Fig. 5(e). These matrices, having fewer columns,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

413

TABLE I
RESULTS OF SUM-PRODUCT DECODING EXPERIMENTS FOR TWO GALLAGER CODES ON BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNELS.
ML “trials” = NUMBER OF BLOCKS DECODED; “ers” = NUMBER OF BLOCK ERRORS. p = MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD + ESTIMATE OF BLOCK ERROR PROBABILITY. p IS UPPER ERROR BAR FOR BLOCK ERROR PROBABILITY (APPENDIX B)

correspond to codes with slightly lower rates. They also have

nonuniform weight per row.

We report results for codes with a variety of rates whose

low density parity-check matrices are created in the following

ways.

Construction 1A. An by matrix ( rows,

columns) is created at random with weight per column

(e.g., ), and weight per row as uniform as possible, and

overlap between any two columns no greater than . Fig. 7(a)

shows the construction schematically for a rate code with

.

Construction 2A. Up to of the columns are designated

weight columns, and these are constructed such that there

is zero overlap between any pair of columns. The remaining

columns are made at random with weight , with the weight

per row as uniform as possible, and overlap between any

two columns of the entire matrix no greater than . Fig. 7(b)

shows the construction schematically for a rate code.

(This irregular construction using weight columns was

introduced because we guessed that it might give better

practical performance; we used

such columns because

this was the maximum number of weight columns for which

it was easy to make “good” matrices; if more than

columns of weight are introduced at random then there

is a risk that the corresponding code will have low weight

codewords.)

Construction 1B and 2B. A small number of columns are

deleted from a matrix produced by Constructions 1A and 2A,

respectively, so that the bipartite graph corresponding to the

matrix has no short cycles of length less than some length ,

here

.

Another way of constructing regular Gallager codes is to

build the matrix from nonoverlapping random permuta-

tion matrices as shown in Fig. 7(c), (d). Fig. 7(c) shows the

construction used by Gallager [26]. For practical purposes,

codes constructed in these ways appear to have very similar

properties to codes made with Construction 1A, as long as

cycles of length are forbidden.

A. Rate of Codes Defined by These Matrices

The above constructions do not ensure that all the rows of

the matrix are linearly independent, so the

matrix

created is the parity-check matrix of a linear code with rate at

least

, where

. We report results on

(a)
(b) Fig. 8. Performance of Gallager codes applied to binary-symmetric channel and decoded by sum-product decoder. Comparison of empirical decoding results with calculated performance of Reed–Muller codes (diamonds) and
BCH codes (squares), and the Shannon limit. BSC’s with (a) fn = 0:076 (b) fn = 0:16 are assumed. Arrows show the values of R0(fn) and n GV (f ) for the channels. (a) Horizontal axis: information rate R. Vertical
axis: block error probability. Curve: Shannon limit on achievable (rate, bit error probability) values. Results shown are for a code of Construction 1B whose parity matrix has M = 10 000 rows and N = 19 839. The weight
per column is t = 3. (b) A BSC with fn = 0:160 is assumed. Horizontal
axis: information rate R. Vertical axis: bit-error probability. Results shown are for a code of Construction 1A whose parity matrix has M = 10 000 rows and 13 336 columns, and for three codes derived from this code by shortening, i.e., deleting columns from the parity matrix. These codes have N = 13 298; 13 119; 12 955. The weight per column is t = 3.
the assumption that the rate is . The generator matrix of the code can be created by Gaussian elimination.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

(a)

(b)
Fig. 9. Gallager codes’ performance over Gaussian channel (solid curves) compared with that of standard textbook codes and state-of-the-art codes (dotted curves). Vertical axis shows empirical bit error probability. It should be emphasised that all the block errors in the experiments with Gallager codes were detected errors: the decoding algorithm reported the fact that it had failed. Panel (a) shows codes with rates between about 1=2 and 2=3; panel (b) shows codes with rates between 1=4 and 1=3. Textbook codes: The curve labeled (7; 1=2) shows the performance of a rate 1=2 convolutional code with constraint length 7, known as the de facto standard for satellite communications [29]. The curve (7,1/2)C shows the performance of the concatenated code composed of the same convolutional code and a Reed–Solomon code. State of the art: The curve (15,1/4)C shows the performance of an extremely expensive and computer intensive concatenated code developed at JPL based on a constraint length 15, rate 1=4 convolutional code (data courtesy of R. J. McEliece.) The curves labeled Turbo show the performance of the rate 1=2 Turbo code described in [12], [11] and the rate 1=4 code reported in [21]. Gallager codes: From left to right the codes had the following parameters (N; K; R). Panel (a): (65389; 32621; 0:499) (1B); (19839; 9839; 0:496) (1B); (29331; 19331; 0:659) (1B). Panel (b): (40000; 10000; 0:25) (Construction 2A); (29507; 9507; 0:322) (2B); (14971; 4971; 0:332) (2B); (15000; 5000; 0:333) (2A); (13298; 3296; 0:248) (1B).

B. Empirical Results for Gallager Codes: Binary-Symmetric Channel

In the following experiments we performed up to 1000 iter-

ations of the algorithm when decoding each , halting earlier

if a consistent decoding was found. Most of the successful

decodings took 20 iterations or fewer to be completed, which,

for a code with blocklength

, corresponds to a few

seconds on a Sparc I workstation. We found that the results

were best for

and became steadily worse as increased.

We compare Gallager codes with

with Bose–

Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes, which are described

in [52] as “the best known constructive codes” for memoryless

noisy channels, and with Reed–Muller (RM) codes. These

are multiple random error-correcting codes that can be

characterized by three parameters

. The blocklength is

, of which bits are data bits and the remainder are parity

bits. Up to errors can be corrected in one block.

Fig. 8 compares two Gallager codes with BCH and RM

codes on two binary-symmetric channels. To compute the

probability of error for BCH codes we evaluated the prob-

ability of more than errors in bits. Similarly, for RM

codes of minimum distance , performance was computed

assuming that more than

errors cannot be corrected.

(See Appendix B for discussion of how the presented results

were computed.)

The mean number of iterations of the algorithm to obtain

a successful decoding is displayed for a selection of codes

and different densities in Table I. In rare cases as many

as 800 iterations took place before a successful decoding

emerged.

C. Gallager Codes for the Gaussian Channel
We originally conceived MN codes as codes for the memoryless binary-symmetric channel. It turns out, however, that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

415

Fig. 10. (a) Median number of iterations of sum-product algorithm taken to obtain a successful decoding. Bars show 5th, 25th, 75th, and 95th percentiles. (b) Corresponding bit error probability.

Fig. 11. Short-blocklength Gallager codes’ performance over Gaussian channel (solid curves) compared with that of standard textbook codes (dotted curves). Vertical axis shows empirical bit error probability. It should be emphasised that all the block errors in the experiments with Gallager codes were detected errors: the decoding algorithm reported the fact that it had failed. Textbook codes: as in Fig. 9. Gallager codes: From left to right the codes had the following parameters (N; K; R): (1008; 504; 0:5) (Construction 1A); (504; 252; 0:5) (1A).

Gallager and MN codes have a much broader applicability. As

we proved in Section II, Gallager codes are very good for any

symmetric stationary ergodic noise model (including arbitrary

correlations and memory—Definition 6) as long as a mean

entropy can be defined for it. Here we report investigations

of nonuniform noise corresponding to communication over a

Gaussian channel with binary inputs.

Fig. 9 compares the performance of Gallager codes with

rates between and with textbook codes and with

state-of-the-art codes. As before, the best results are obtained

by making the weight per column as small as possible

(Constructions 2A and 2B). Unsurprisingly, codes with large

blocklength are better.

In some cases we modified the matrices so as to eliminate

short cycles. The original matrices, by construction, had no

cycles of length , a constraint which was found to be

beneficial. We deleted columns so as to remove cycles of

length

expecting that this would further improve

performance. However, we found that these modifications

made little difference.

For the codes with blocklengths and

and

in Fig. 9 the median number of iterations taken to complete

a successful decoding is shown in Fig. 10(a) as a function

of

. The line shows the median number of iterations

and the bars show the 5th, 25th, 75th, and 95th percentiles.

Fig. 10(b) shows the corresponding bit error probabilities,

reproduced from Fig. 9.

D. Results for Small Blocklengths
To double-check our results against Gallager’s we replicated experiments with codes of blocklength and . Our random code constructions are not identical to Gallager’s, and we ran the decoder for more iterations (up to 500), but the

results for Construction 1A appear much the same as those in his book [27, fig. 6.7].
V. PICTORIAL DEMONSTRATION OF GALLAGER CODES
Figs. 12–15 illustrate visually the conditions under which Gallager’s low-density parity-check codes can give reliable communication over binary-symmetric channels and Gaussian channels. These demonstrations may be viewed as animations on the world wide web [39].
A. Encoding
Fig. 12 illustrates the encoding operation for the case of a Gallager code whose parity-check matrix is a matrix with three ’s per column. The high density of the generator matrix is illustrated in (b) and (c) by showing the change in the transmitted vector when one of the 10 000 source bits is altered. Of course, the source images shown here are highly redundant, and such images should really be compressed before encoding. Redundant images are chosen in these demonstrations to make it easier to see the correction process during the iterative decoding. The decoding algorithm does not take advantage of the redundancy of the source vector, and it would work in exactly the same way irrespective of the choice of source vector.
B. Iterative Decoding
After the transmission is sent over a channel with noise level %, the received vector is as shown in the upper left of
Fig. 13. The subsequent pictures in Fig. 13 show the iterative probabilistic decoding process. The sequence of figures shows the best guess, bit by bit, given by the iterative decoder, after 0, 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, and 13 iterations. The decoder halts

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

2 Fig. 12. Demonstration of encoding with a rate 1=2 Gallager code. The encoder is derived from a very sparse 10000 20000 parity-check matrix with
three 1’s per column. (a) The code creates transmitted vectors consisting of 10 000 source bits and 10 000 parity-check bits. (b) Here, the source sequence
has been altered by changing the first bit. Notice that many of the parity-check bits are changed. Each parity bit depends on about half of the source
bits. (c) The transmission for the case s = (1; 0; 0; 1 1 1 ; 0). This vector is the difference (modulo 2) between transmissions (a) and (b). (Dilbert image Copyright©1997 United Feature Syndicate, Inc., used with permission.)

after the 13th iteration when the best guess violates no parity checks. This final decoding is error free.

C. Gaussian Channel

In Fig. 14 the first picture shows the transmitted vector and

the second shows the received vector after transmission over

a Gaussian channel with

. The greyscale repre-

sents the value of the normalized likelihood,

.

This signal-to-noise ratio

is a noise level at

which this rate Gallager code communicates reliably (the

probability of error is

). To show how close we are to

the Shannon limit, the third panel shows the received vector

when the signal-to-noise ratio is reduced to

, which

corresponds to the Shannon limit for codes of rate .

Fig. 15 shows the analogous vectors in the case of a code

with rate about .

VI. MN CODES

A. The Ideas Behind MN Codes

It is conventional to define a linear error-correcting code to

have transmitted blocklength

, and to use signals of

density

. Conventionally, the code is systematic, so

the first transmitted bits are the source bits. The

extra bits are parity-check bits, which produce redundancy in

the transmitted vector . This redundancy is exploited by the

decoding algorithm to infer the noise vector .

MN codes [40] are based on a different approach. We

first assume that the source may itself be redundant, having

, the expected density of , less than . Consecutive

source symbols are independent and identically distributed.

Redundant sources of this type can be produced from other

sources by using a variation on arithmetic coding [70], [57];

one simply reverses the role of encoder and decoder in a

standard arithmetic coder based on a model corresponding to

the sparse messages (see Appendix G). Now given that the

source is already redundant, we are no longer constrained to

have

. In MN codes, may be less than , equal

to , or greater than . We distinguish between the “symbol

rate” of the code,

, and the “information rate” of the

code,

. Error-free communication may be

possible if the information rate is less than the capacity of the

channel. For example, consider a binary-symmetric channel

having

, and assume that we have a source with

density

. Then we might construct a code with

, i.e., a square linear code with symbol rate [Fig. 16(b)].

The information rate, , is less than the channel capacity,

, so it is plausible that we might construct a sequence of

codes of this form achieving vanishing probability of error.

The key idea behind MN codes is that we construct the

generator matrix in terms of an invertible matrix, in such

a way that the sparse source and the sparse noise can be

treated symmetrically in the decoding problem—in contrast to

conventional syndrome decoding where only the noise vector

appears in the problem.

1) Code Construction: MN codes make use of the same

matrices and that were constructed in Section I-C1.

These matrices will now be denoted by

(the square

invertible matrix) and

. We redefine and

such that is an

matrix and is an

matrix.

2) Encoding: A source vector of length is encoded

into a transmitted vector defined by (Fig. 17(a))

(58)

This encoding operation takes time of order

. The mapping from source bits to transmitted bits

is a linear mapping, however, MN codes are nonlinear codes

in the sense that the codewords that have high probability do

not form a complete linear subspace of

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

417

Fig. 13. Iterative probabilistic decoding of a Gallager code. The sequence of figures shows the best guess, bit by bit, given by the iterative decoder, after 0, 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, and 13 iterations. The decoder halts after the 13th iteration when the best guess violates no parity checks. This final decoding is error free. (Dilbert image Copyright©1997 United Feature Syndicate, Inc., used with permission.)

3) The Decoding Problem: The received vector is
(59)
where the noise is assumed to be a sparse random vector with independent and identically distributed bits, density . (See Appendix A for discussion of other channels.)
The first step of the decoding is to compute
(60)
which takes time of order . Because

where is the by

matrix

. This decoding

problem is shown schematically in Figs. 17(b) and 18 for MN

codes with symbol rates

and .

We emphasize two properties of (61).

1) There is a pleasing symmetry between the sparse source vector and the sparse noise vector , especially if .
2) Both the matrix and the unknown vector are sparse (the bits of have density or ), so the decoding

problem is identical to the syndrome decoding problem

for Gallager codes.

the decoding task is then to solve for

the equation

B. Theoretical Results for MN Codes The theoretical properties of optimal decoding derived in

(61) Section II imply that good MN codes exist. Fig. 19 shows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

Fig. 14. Demonstration of a Gallager code for a Gaussian channel. (a) A data transmission consisting of 10 000 source bits and 10 000 parity-check bits.

(b1) The received vector after transmission over a Gaussian channel with x= = 1:185. (Eb=N0 = 1.47 dB.) The greyscale represents the value of the

normalized data shown

likelihood. This transmission can in (a). The empirical probability

be of

perfectly decoding

decoded by the failure is about

s1u0m0-5pr. o(dbu2c)t

decoder, that is, the decoder’s The probability distribution of

output is identical to the original
the output y of the channel with

x= = 1:185 for each of the two possible inputs. (c1) The received transmission over a Gaussian channel with x= = 1:0, which corresponds to the

Shannon limit. (c2) The probability distribution of the output y of the channel with x= = 1:0 for each of the two possible inputs. (Dilbert image

Copyright©1997 United Feature Syndicate, Inc., used with permission.)

the communication rates proved achievable with MN codes

communicating over a binary-symmetric channel with

.

This figure was produced by the same method as Fig. 3.

encoding a sparse source with

gave a

similar error probability at

2.31 dB. MN codes seem

to be inferior to Gallager codes in terms of

, but it may

be that their novel properties offer compensating benefits.

C. Experimental Results: One MN Code Can be Used for Channels with a Range of Noise Levels

1) Binary-Symmetric Channel: We initially made experi-

ments in which a sparse source communicated over a binary-

symmetric channel, with

. Results for two codes with

symbol rates about and about are shown in Table II and

Fig. 20(a).

We then explored cases with

, using the same

encoder with

and

. Fig. 20 shows that

a single encoder can be used to transmit quite near to capacity

over two channels with substantially different noise levels

(15.3% and 11.4%), simply by changing the density of the

source stream. Contrary to our expectations, the performance

appeared to get better when the symmetry between the source

and the noise in the decoding was broken; in the case with

and

, the performance is beyond .

2) MN Codes for the Gaussian Channel: We have simu-

lated MN codes with dense sources and sparse sources. The

rate code with a dense source gave a probability of bit

error less than

at

1.81 dB. The same code,

VII. DISCUSSION
This paper has given a semiconstructive proof of the noisy channel coding theorem using low-density parity-check codes. Gallager and MN codes are good not only for the binarysymmetric channel but also for any channel models for which the optimizing input distribution is symmetrical and the law of large numbers holds. It is a surprise to us that a single code can be good for any channel. We had anticipated that to achieve very good performance on a new channel (such as a bursty noise channel), a new custom-designed code would be needed. This expectation is shared by Golomb, Peile, and Scholtz, who state that “the optimal code for a given set of channel conditions may not resemble the optimal code for another” [29, p. 369]. But theoretically, the same encoder family can be used for any channel—all that needs to be changed is the decoding algorithm.
The practical performance of Gallager’s 1962 codes, using Gallager’s 1962 decoding algorithm, would have broken practical coding records up until 1993. The decoder works

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

419

Fig. 15. Demonstration of a rate 1=4 Gallager code for a Gaussian channel. (a) A data transmission consisting of 3296 source bits and 10 002 parity check

bits. (b1) The received vector after transmission over a Gaussian channel with x= = 0:84. (Eb=N0 = 1.5 dB.) This transmission can be perfectly decoded

1by00th5e.

sum-product decoder, that is, the (b2) The probability distribution

decoder’s output is identical to the of the output y of the channel with

original x= =

data shown in 0:84 for each

(a). The empirical probability of decoding failure is about of the two possible inputs. (c1) The received transmission

over a Gaussian channel with x= = 0:64, which corresponds to the Shannon limit. (b2) The probability distribution of the output y of the channel with

x= = 0:64 for each of the two possible inputs. The crocodile image is the insignia of the Cavendish Laboratory.

(a)

(b)

(a)

Fig. 16. (a) A conventional code. The source vector s, of length K, is dense. The transmitted vector t is of length N > K. Here N = 2K, so the symbol rate and information rate are both K=N = 0:5 shannons. (b) Square code for
' a sparse source, having N = K. The symbol rate  is 1, but if the density
of the source fs is 0:1 then the information rate is H2(0:1) 0:5 shannons,
the same as that of the conventional code.

beyond the minimum distance of the code, beyond the Gilbert bound, and beyond the rate that was widely believed to be the “effective capacity” .
As far as we know, the only traditional code that can match the performance of Gallager codes is the code for Galileo developed at JPL, which employs a rate , constraint length
convolutional code surrounded by a Reed–Solomon code, giving an effective blocklength of about 8000 bits (R. J. McEliece, personal communication). This system can only be decoded using expensive special-purpose hardware, and the details of the code are unpublished outside JPL [61].

(b)
Fig. 17. Pictorial representation of MN Code with symbol rate  = 1. (a) Encoding, transmission and reception. The vectors s and n are sparse. The matrices Cs and C n are very sparse. (b) Decoding. The vector z is given by z = Cnr mod 2. We attempt to solve for s and n.

A. Comparison with Turbo Codes

We heard about turbo codes [12], [11], which outperform

Gallager’s codes in terms of

, towards the end of

this work. There are some similarities between the codes.

The turbo decoding algorithm may be viewed as a sum-

product algorithm ([69], [68], [46]). Turbo codes also have

a construction in terms of sparse random trellises. Indeed, as

Fig. 18. The decoding situation for an MN code with symbol rate  = 1=3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

TABLE II
RESULTS OF SUM-PRODUCT DECODING EXPERIMENTS FOR TWO MN CODES ON BINARY-SYMMETRIC CHANNELS. “trials” = NUMBER
ML OF BLOCKS DECODED; “ers” = NUMBER OF BLOCK ERRORS. p = MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATE OF BLOCK ERROR + s n PROBABILITY. p IS UPPER ERROR BAR FOR BLOCK ERROR PROBABILITY (APPENDIX B). HERE, f = f = f . SEE ALSO FIG. 20(a)

Fig. 19. Lower bounds on achievable information rate in shannons versus

(a)

noise level f for MN codes with t from 3 to 6. The solid line shows the

channel capacity. The lines are lower bounds on rates achievable by MN codes.

This achievable region was obtained using the first ensemble of matrices A.

As the weight per column t increases the achievable region rises towards the

fundamental limit, the capacity.

shown schematically in Fig. 21, turbo codes are low-density

parity-check codes. However, few “goodness” properties have

been proved for turbo codes.

At error probabilities of about , Gallager and MN codes

are not able to get quite so close to the Shannon limit as turbo

codes (Fig. 9). However, turbo codes as originally presented

are known to have an error “floor” at about

due to low-

weight codewords (B. J. Frey, personal communication); the

error probability of these turbo codes no longer decreases

rapidly with increasing

below this floor. We have

seen no evidence of such a floor in Gallager codes; and

theoretically we do not expect Gallager codes to have the low-

weight codewords that could give rise to this behavior. So it is

possible that at very low-bit error probabilities, Gallager codes

outperform turbo codes. It should also be emphasised that all

the errors made by Gallager codes that we have observed

are detected errors, whereas the turbo codes’s errors that

are caused by low-weight codewords are undetected errors.

Gallager codes may also have an advantage over turbo codes

in terms of their decoding complexity.

B. Computational Complexity
In a brute-force approach, the time to create a Gallager code scales as , where is the block size. The encoding time

(b)
Fig. 20. One MN code with fixed generator matrix can communicate at good rates over two binary-symmetric channels with substantially different noise
levels by changing the source density. In (a) fn = 0:153 and the source is sparse with density fs = 0:153; in (b) fn = 0:114, and a dense source is used (fs = 0:5). The empirical decoding results are compared with calculated
performance of Reed–Muller codes (diamonds) and BCH codes (squares), and the Shannon limit (solid curve). Horizontal axis: information rate R. Vertical
axis: block error probability . Arrows show the values of R0 and GV (fn).
The MN code has N = 10000; K = 3296; and t = 3 (Construction 1B).

scales as , but encoding involves only binary arithmetic, so

for the blocklengths studied here it takes considerably less

time than the simulation of the Gaussian channel. We are

currently investigating the performance of low-density parity-

check codes which can be encoded in linear time [42].

Decoding involves approximately

floating-point mul-

tiplies per iteration (assuming a model of computation where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

421

not found any useful improvement in performance. However, turbo code researchers have found similar tweaks to the sumproduct algorithm are helpful [21].)
The encoding and decoding software and the parity check matrices used in this paper are available from http://wol.ra.phy. cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/.
(a)

C. Descriptive Complexity

The descriptive complexity of these codes is much smaller

than the descriptive complexity of arbitrary linear codes, which

is

bits. A Gallager

code has a descriptive

complexity of about

bits, since for every one

of columns we have to select bits from

.

(b)
Fig. 21. Convolutional codes and turbo codes are low-density parity-check codes. Schematic pictures of the parity-check matrices of (a) a systematic recursive convolutional code with (binary) generator polynomials (10001=11111) and (b) a rate 1=3 turbo code formed by combining two such convolutional codes. Notation: A band of diagonal lines represent a band of diagonal 1’s. Horizontal and vertical lines indicate the boundaries of the blocks within the matrix. In (a) the left-hand band is 10001, corresponding to the numerator polynomial, and the right-hand band, 11111, corresponds to the denominator. In (b) the first K bits are the systematic bits, the next K are the parity bits from the first convolutional code, and the last K are the parity bits from the second convolutional code, which receives the systematic bits in a permuted order. The weight per row of the turbo code’s parity-check matrix is 7 for almost all rows, and the weight per column is 4 or 5.

D. Distance Properties
We have proved minimum distance properties of Gallager codes in Section II-C2 (the Gilbert bound can be attained), but we do not view this as a primary result. We view distance properties as a secondary attribute compared with the block error probability. The minimum distance of a code may be viewed as a convenient measure of how “good” it is, but in fact it is not possible to distinguish between good and very good codes by their minimum distance, and bounded distance decoders are well known to be unable to achieve the Shannon limit [43]. We have proved that Gallager and MN codes can (when optimally decoded) achieve capacity. Moreover, we have demonstrated error correcting abilities at rates well above the Gilbert rate.

the cost of elementary operations does not grow with ),

so the total number of operations per decoded bit (assuming

20 iterations) is about

, independent of blocklength.

For the codes presented here, this is about 800 operations.

This is not at all excessive when compared with textbook

codes—the constraint length convolutional code used by

Voyager requires 256 operations per decoded bit. The turbo

codes of [12] require about 3800 operations per decoded bit

(B. J. Frey, personal communication).

Strictly, a constant number of iterations (taken above to be

20) is not sufficient to achieve negligible probability of error

for any blocklength [26]. Assuming the truth of the conjecture

of Section III-C2 that the bit error probability decreases as

where is the number of decoding iterations

and is a constant, in order for this probability to decrease

as with increasing , we need the number of decoding

iterations to grow as

.

The decoding algorithm involves no adjustable parameters,

except those associated with the handling of overflows. After

each vertical step we prevented all the probabilities from going

greater than

or less than

. (One could view the

“update schedule,” i.e., the order in which the quantities and

are updated, as an adjustable aspect of the algorithm [24]; we

have not explored this option. We have briefly examined two

modifications of the algorithm, making the prior probabilities

more extreme if a decoding has not emerged, and making the

propagated probabilities more (or less) extreme, but we have

E. Discussion Specific to MN Codes

In a conventional linear

code, the codewords form

a complete linear subspace of

, and it is conventional

to assume that its generator matrix might as well be put

in systematic form. In designing MN codes we made the

assumption instead that the source is sparse, so the codewords

that have high probability are only a small subset of a complete

linear subspace. In this sense, MN codes are nonlinear codes,

even though the transmitted vector is a linear function of

a source vector . The generator matrix may not be put in

systematic form. The systematic form for a code with symbol

rate

would simply be an identity matrix, giving no

error protection at all. We think the MN code’s sparse source

is an interesting idea which could have a variety of spinoffs.

For example, MN codes offer the potentially useful property

that the rate of the code can be changed without changing the

generator matrix.

F. Application of MN Codes to Multiple-User Channels

Consider a multiple-user linear binary channel whose out-

put, each cycle, is

,

where is the bit transmitted by user , and is noise. The

information-theoretic bound on the total information that the

users can communicate is the capacity

.

We can create multiple-user codes for this channel di-

rectly from MN codes that encode sparse source bits

into transmitted bits. The columns of the matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

are divided up between the users, with user receiving

columns, forming a matrix . All users know the

sparse matrix , and the decoder knows the entire matrix

. In each block cycle, user

encodes a vector of bits with density into a vector

of length bits,

, and transmits this

vector.

The properties proved for MN codes immediately carry

over to these multiple-user codes. In particular, the Shannon

limit for the multiple-user linear channel can be achieved,

given an optimal decoder. Such a system, if appropriately

controlled, would allow the users dynamically to change their

rate of communication by changing their densities without

changing their encoder.

G. Conundrum: Why Were Gallager Codes Forgotten?
Why was Gallager’s work mostly forgotten by the information theory community?
There are very few citations of Gallager’s [26], [27] work on low-density parity-check codes. A search on BIDS returns the following citations: [14], [25], [28], [63], [44], [49], [48], [54], [53], [55], [59], [64], [71], [72]. Of these, it seems that the only author who pursued the practical implementation of Gallager codes (and variations on them) was Tanner [63]. An independent rediscovery of Gallager’s work has been made by Wiberg [69], [68]. We regret that we initially misunderstood Gallager’s work: in [40], we incorrectly asserted that Gallager’s codes were “bad” owing to a confusion with their duals, low-density generator matrix codes, which are bad; we also confused the decoding algorithms of Gallager and Meier and Staffelbach.
In 1963, the cost in memory for explicit storage of the generator matrix would have been unattainable, so computational resources were (temporarily) a problem. R. G. Gallager (personal communication) has suggested that Gallager codes were generally forgotten because it was assumed that concatenated codes [23] were superior for practical purposes.

H. Future Work

Generalization to -ary alphabets. Gallager and MN codes

can also be defined over -ary alphabets consisting of the

elements of GF . The generator matrix of a Gallager code

over GF takes the form

, where the matrix

is a very sparse matrix with its nonzero elements

drawn from the nonzero elements of GF . The inversion

and multiplication operations are carried out in the algebra

of GF . The decoding can be performed with a belief

propagation algorithm, as with the binary Gallager codes.

We are investigating the application of these codes (with

) to the -ary symmetric channel—and to the

binary-symmetric channel and binary Gaussian channel, since

there is no obvious reason to believe that the

Gallager

codes are the best Gallager codes for binary channels. Our

results show that Gallager codes over GF and GF

perform better than comparable Gallager codes over GF

in the case of the binary-symmetric channel and the Gaussian

channel [17].

Constructions. By introducing Constructions 2A and 2B,

we pushed the performance of Gallager codes a little closer

to capacity. Are there further useful changes we could make

to the code construction? We are currently investigating the

possibility of systematic construction of matrices whose

corresponding graphs have large girth [44], [8], [35].

In this paper we have mainly considered regular low-density

matrices, that is, matrices in which the weight per column is

constant and the weight per row is constant, or nearly constant.

It is obviously a disappointment that, whereas the way to ob-

tain very good codes is to increase the density, the sum-product

algorithm performs worse for denser matrices. There is a way

out of this dilemma however: we obtained better performance

by using slightly irregular matrices with weight two and weight

three columns (see Fig. 9); Luby, Mitzenmacher, Shokrollahi,

and Spielman [36] have recently extended this idea, investigat-

ing highly irregular Gallager codes. Their results indicate that

significant enhancements in performance can be obtained. We

have applied this idea to Gallager codes over GF and have

discovered an irregular Gallager code with blocklength 24 000

bits whose performance equals that of the best turbo codes

[18]. The choice of construction of Gallager code remains a

productive area for further research.

Bursty channels and fading channels. Since Gallager

codes are, given an optimal decoder, good codes for any

channel in a wide class, we are optimistic that they will

be excellent codes for channels with bursts and fades. We

anticipate that the sum-product algorithm can be generalized

to handle simultaneous equalization and decoding. Only if we

model and infer the channel variations will we be able to get

close to the Shannon limit of such time-varying channels. In

contrast, many codes handle bursts by interleaving, that is,

reordering the bits so that the bursts look like uniform noise.

Our results on MN codes serve as initial results describing

the performance of Gallager codes for decoding in the presence

of bursts. Consider a two-state channel which flips between a

high noise state with

and a low noise state with

. The rate code of blocklength 13 298 bits can

communicate reliably over this channel if the burst periods

are identified, as long as the fraction of time spent in the high

noise state is less than 25%.

In contrast, if we used a traditional interleaving method

to cope with the bursts, the effective noise level would be

, for which the capacity

is

. It seems unlikely that there is a practical rate

interleaved code that can communicate reliably under these

conditions.

Cryptanalysis. This work grew out of an interest in a

problem in cryptanalysis [3], the inference of the state of a

linear feedback shift register given its noisy output sequence,

which is also equivalent to the decoding of a cyclic code.

The free energy minimization algorithm was found to be an

improvement over Meier and Staffelbach’s algorithm in [38].

We anticipate that the sum-product decoder might perform

even better on these cryptanalysis problems. We are at present

investigating this possibility.

Statistical Physics. Consider a set of spins

among which there are couplings of order

such that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

423

the Hamiltonian is

where is zero-mean Gaussian noise of variance . The

effective probability for a in bit of the noise vector

(based on

) is then

(63)

(62)

We have assumed that spins are coupled together in groups

of eight in order to obtain a relationship to a matrix with

weight per row. If we identify

and set up

the functions

to correspond to the ’s in the matrix ,

then the decoding problem maps onto the task of finding the

ground state of this energy function in the limit of small .

We have found that the sum-product decoder is a better

algorithm than the free energy minimization algorithm (Ap-

pendix C) for solving this problem. A difference between the

algorithms is that the free energy minimization algorithm (also

known as “mean field theory”) shows spontaneous symmetry

breaking, whereas the sum-product algorithm only breaks

symmetry if the energy function itself breaks symmetry. Prior

work related to this concept is found in [65].

It is possible that further benefits may be obtained by

applying sum-product concepts in statistical physics or to other

optimization problems where mean field methods have been

found useful [30], [2].

Decoding algorithms. We conjecture that as we get closer

to the Shannon limit, the decoding problem gets harder. But we

do not understand what aspects of the problem determine the

practical limits of our present decoding algorithms. It would be

interesting to obtain a convergence proof for the sum-product

algorithm and to develop ways of reducing the inaccuracies

introduced by the approach of ignoring the cycles present in

the belief network.

(Note that this probability can be greater than , in keeping

with the arbitrary nature of the choice of

.) In any given

realization of the noise we can thus deduce an effective binary

noise distribution

for an equivalent time-varying binary-

symmetric channel. Whether the decoding problem is solvable

depends on the entropy of this distribution. We thus need to

add to our list of error types (Section II-C) a third possibility:

III. The distribution

has entropy greater (by some )

than the mean entropy. Let the probability of this event

be .

This failure mode occurs with a probability determined by the distribution of large deviations of the channel. This probability obviously must vanish with increasing blocklength for our codes to be good.

A. Extension of Proofs to Channels with Nonbinary Outputs and Temporal Correlations
Gallager and MN codes are good for channels that are stationary and ergodic, that have vanishing and that satisfy this symmetry property:

Definition 8: A temporal binary-input channel is symmet-

ric1 if the optimizing distribution

of the channel is a

uniform distribution

.

If this symmetry property is satisfied then it is evident

that the decoding problem is equivalent to the decoding of

a symmetric stationary ergodic binary channel (Definition 6).

APPENDIX A REAL-OUTPUT CHANNELS

In the main body of the paper our theorems and discus-

sions have focussed on binary-input, binary-output channels

of two types: the memoryless binary-symmetric channel and

the more general symmetric stationary ergodic binary channel

(Definition 6). We proved that MN codes and Gallager codes

are good for such channels. The same codes are also good for

channels with other output alphabets as long as they satisfy

simple symmetry and law-of-large-numbers properties. We

have in mind binary-input channels with real outputs such as

the additive white Gaussian noise channel and fading channels.

We start by discussing the simple case of a channel with

inputs of

and real-valued outputs. Here, an implicit

noise vector can be envisioned on the basis of an arbitrarily

selected received vector , with

being perhaps the most

convenient choice, since it simplifies the computation of the

syndrome

and (63) below. For independent

noise, the bits of are probabilistically independent, with the

probability of a bit being being determined by the likelihood

ratio for the received signal. For a Gaussian channel with

inputs of

, the received signal is

,

B. Gaussian Channel Definitions

We simulated the following Gaussian channel. The binary

inputs are

and the real output has a conditional

distribution that is Gaussian with mean and variance

(64)

For convenience we set

and varied to change

the signal-to-noise ratio. The capacity of the channel can be

defined in a couple of ways. If we were allowed to use arbitrary

input values with the same mean power as the binary inputs

, the capacity would be

(65)

1 Our definition of a “symmetric” channel differs from that of Cover and Thomas [16]. For them, a channel is “symmetric” if the rows of p(y j x) are permutations of each other and the columns are permutations of each other; a channel is “weakly symmetric” if the rows of p(y j x) are permutations of each other and the column sums are equal. This definition of a symmetric
channel is too restrictive, as it cannot even encompass a Gaussian channel.
The definition given here may conversely be viewed as too broad.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

TABLE III

GLOSSARY

The symbol “ ” between two matrices denotes concatenation, for example

a systematic parity check matrix might be written

.

Symbol Meaning

Transmitted blocklength of a code

Source blocklength of a code

Generator matrix of a code

Parity-check matrix of a code

Parity block within a systematic generator matrix or parity

check matrix, e.g.,

Source string, length

Transmitted string, length .

Noise vector

Received string

Syndrome vector

Very sparse matrix of dimension

.

Type
Integer Integer Binary matrix Binary matrix Binary matrix
Binary vector Binary vector Binary vector Binary vector Binary vector Binary matrix

Very sparse matrix of dimension

Very sparse square matrix of dimension

Number of columns in . In Gallager codes

. In MN

codes

Number of rows in . In Gallager codes

. In

MN codes

Number of 1’s per column in (Gallager’s )

Number of 1’s per row in (Gallager’s )

Ratio

. Symbol rate of MN code.

Ratio .

.

possibly sparse vector of length

vector of length such that

weight of vector

; equivalently, the number of columns

of that might be linearly dependent

Probability that random walk on -dimensional hypercube

returns to starting corner on step

Upper bound for

indices running from to

index running from to

in the eigenvalue expansion of

Binary matrix Binary matrix Integer
Integer
Integer or real Integer or real Real Real Binary vector Binary vector Integer
Real
Real Integer Integer

Density of

Noise density

Source density

Number of steps in random walk on -dimensional hyper-

cube.

.

.

Probabilities in sum-product algorithm

Traditional labels for blocklength, source blocklength, and maximum number of errors that can be corrected. N.B., above is different. Minimum distance of a code.

Real Real Real Real Real Integer
Real
Integers
Integer

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

425

If we accept the constraint that only the defined binary inputs are allowed, then the capacity is reduced to
(66)

APPENDIX C DECODING BY FREE ENERGY MINIMIZATION
MacKay [38], [37] derived a continuous optimization algorithm for solving the discrete decoding problem

(70)

where

(67) where is a given binary

matrix and is a received

vector of length . The vectors and are assumed to have

a prior distribution that is separable thus

(68)

which may be evaluated numerically. If one communicates The algorithm is only practically useful for matrices that over the Gaussian channel using a code of rate then it is are sparse. Problems of the form

conventional to describe the signal-to-noise ratio by

(71)

and to report this number in decibels as
APPENDIX B REPORTING OF EMPIRICAL RESULTS

(69) .

can also be solved using the free energy minimization algorithm by solving a sequence of problems of the general form (70) with the fictitious noise level of the vector decreasing to zero.
The algorithm works by approximating the complicated posterior probability of given by a simpler separable distribution

A. Error Bars

The experiments result in a certain number of block de-

coding failures out of a number of trials . We report the

maximum-likelihood estimate of the block error probability,

, and a confidence interval

, defined thus: if

then

This distribution’s parameters

(one parameter for

each bit of ) are then adjusted so as to minimize a measure

of the divergence between the approximating distribution

and the true distribution

, the variational free energy

(72)

where

else if

and

. When

reporting the bit error probability we use the error bars

derived from the block error probability; we do not bother

including the additional uncertainty in the bit error rate within

erroneous blocks, which is expected to be much smaller than

the uncertainty in the block error probability.

B. Comparison with Other Codes

Performances of RM and BCH codes were computed as-

suming for an RM code of minimum distance that more

than

errors cannot be corrected. For BCH codes it

was assumed that more than errors cannot be corrected, as

specified in the

description of the code. In principle,

it may be possible in some cases to make a BCH decoder that

corrects more than errors, but according to Berlekamp [9],

“little is known about how to go about finding the solutions”

and “if there are more than

errors then the situation gets

very complicated very quickly.” All relevant BCH codes listed

in [56] are included (block sizes up to ).

The evaluation of this objective function and its gradient is possible in time linear in the weight of . There is also an update algorithm for each component such that is guaranteed to decrease. This iterative procedure is obviously not the optimal decoding algorithm, but it is practical. We originally developed MN codes with this decoding algorithm in mind, so we report some experimental results. However, this decoder has been superseded by the sum-product algorithm of Section III. Sum-product decoding is less complicated because there is no need to have an annealing schedule for a temperature parameter.

A. Empirical Results: Free Energy Minimization, Ensemble 4

A value of

was selected for experiments with

Gallager codes having rate

and

, using

Construction 1A.

We found that as the block size was increased the

performance improved. The block error probabilities for rate

codes with block lengths of 2000, 4000, 8000, and 20 000

were

and

. We also found that

with larger and smaller values of than

, the code did

not work as well when decoded by free energy minimization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

B. Insights into the Source of Errors
We examined some of the errors made by the free energy minimization decoder and found that they tended to occur when the vector was such that another slightly different typical vector had a similar (but not identical) encoding . In terms of the random walk on the hypercube (Section II-C), these errors correspond to walks that after a small number of steps return close to the starting corner. They were possible because of rare topologies in the network corresponding to the matrix such as the topology illustrated in Fig. 5(c). We can eliminate the possibility of these errors by modifying the ensemble of matrices so that the corresponding network does not have short cycles in it.

Proofs of Inequalities (73) and (74): Proof of right-hand inequality: consider the multinomial distribution
(75)

Set

. Then evaluate the probability, which we know

is less than

(76)

(77)

C. Empirical Results: Free Energy Minimization, Construction 1B

We made new matrices by taking matrices from Ensemble

4 with

and deleting columns until there were no

short loops of the type shown in Fig. 5(e). These matrices,

having fewer columns, correspond to codes with slightly lower

rates. They also have nonuniform weight per row, which may

make them slightly suboptimal. We found that the topological

modifications gave codes which were able to communicate

at slightly higher rates over slightly noisier channels with a

smaller probability of error. A summary of our results is that

in terms of block error probability for a given communication

rate, Gallager and MN codes, when decoded by free energy

minimization, can be superior to Reed–Muller codes, and

Gallager codes can outperform BCH codes by a small margin.

Significantly better results were obtained using the sum-

product decoder described in the main body of this paper.

The left-hand inequality in (73) is proved by considering again the quantity
(78)

If

then

all . So

is greater than or equal to

for

(79)

(80) Similarly, we may prove that, for

D. Contrast with Sum-Product Algorithm
We believe the reason the sum-product algorithm performs much better than the variational free energy minimization (mean field) algorithm is that the mean field algorithm exhibits spontaneous symmetry breaking. It is possible for a cluster of bits, whose state has not been determined by the influence of the data, to collapse into a locally consistent state. The sum-product algorithm (at least in the ideal case of a graph without cycles) does not show any such spontaneous symmetry breaking.

(81)

Proof: Consider the sum of binomial terms

(82)

Setting

, we examine the factor

. Because

, this factor is greater than .

So, dividing each term in the sum by

an appropriate

number of times

APPENDIX D

(83)

INEQUALITIES

We prove the following inequalities:

In general, if then

(73)

(84)

and

We also note the following inequalities:

or equivalently

(85) (74)
The proof is straightforward by integration of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

427

APPENDIX E BOUNDS ON RANDOM WALK’S RETURN PROBABILITY
We derive several upper bounds on the probability that the random walk on the -dimensional hypercube returns to its starting corner on the th step. We use the result from [31] that

B. Bound that is Tight for

We consider the logarithm of one term in the sum over in

(87). We obtain a bound on the maximum value over that

this quantity can assume. We define

and

.

(96)

(86)

See [13], [20], [32], [34], and [62] for further information

about this random walk, which is also known as the Ehrenfest

Urn model. Equation (86) is an eigenvalue expansion, where

the eigenvalues of the Markov process are labeled by

and have value

. For every positive eigenvalue

there is an opposite negative eigenvalue. We note that for odd

is zero, and that for even

is a decreasing function

of . For convenience we can obtain a monotonic upper bound

on by restricting the sum over to the positive eigenvalues

and including a leading factor of .

(97)

At (96) we use inequality (73) and at (97) we use the inequality

We differentiate and find that

the maximum of this function is at

, so that we can

bound every term as follows for any :

(98)

We thus conclude that for any

(87)

(99)

We now derive various bounds valid for all

; some

bounds are tight for

and some for

. We also

evaluate a numerical bound that is useful for all .

(100) (101)

A. Bound that is Tight for

This bound illustrates the important power law decrease of for small . The logarithm of this bound is

(102) (88)
(103)

At (89) we have used the inequality note that and obtain
The logarithm of this bound is

(89) The leading factor of in (101) is the undesirable side-effect of two of the inequalities.

(90) . We (91)
(92) (93) (94)
(95)

C. Bound That Is a Factor of Tighter for

The above bound is tight enough to prove the main theorems

of the paper for

but not for , because of the leading

factor of , so we now improve on it.

We count the number of walks of length (where is even)

that return to the origin. A walk that returns to the origin

can be created as follows. First we select (with replacement)

directions from the axes of the hypercube as the

directions that will be traversed twice. The number of different

selections is equal to the number of ways of putting

indistinguishable objects in bins, which is the number of

distinct ways of ordering

indistinguishable partitions

and indistinguishable objects, which is

. Then

having decided which are the directions we will traverse, the

number of distinct walks that can be created is less than or

equal to the number of distinct orderings of pairs of

indistinguishable objects, , with equality in the case where

all directions are traversed twice or zero times. Thus the total

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

number of walks of length that return to the origin, is bounded by

, where is the solution of

(104) or, equivalently,
and so, since the total number of walks of length is

(115) (116)

(105)

We loosen this bound into a slightly more convenient form,

introducing a largest value of ,

, for which we plan

to use this bound. We will set at our convenience to a value

independent of .

for

We can solve this equation numerically by iteration, starting

(for example) from

, and setting equal to , the

value of the right-hand side, repeating until convergence

is established. Convergence, which can be slow, may be

accelerated by setting equal to

.

For large and

, the

term is of small order

and we neglect it in our numerical computations, using

For our proof we set

for so that
for

(106)

(117)

(107) (108)

E. Another Good Bound for Large
Using the same method as in Appendix E-D, we can obtain an explicit bound

This bound decreases monotonically in up to

,

where

(found by differentiation), so, since we know

is bounded by a decreasing function, we obtain

where

The logarithm of is

(109)

(118) Now is a convex function, so it is upper-bounded by its tangent. For any choice of , and for all
(119)
So

for

(110)

D. Numerical Bound Useful for All We continue from (96) and derive a numerical bound

(120)
We differentiate with respect to to find the maximum value of this quantity, which is at

(111)

(121)

We differentiate with respect to to find the maximum value of this quantity; then we can bound the sum by the number of terms in the sum times the maximum value of the summand. Thus
(112)

then we can bound the sum by the number of terms in the sum times the maximum value of the summand, choosing to have any convenient value. Based on what we have learned from the previous bound, we choose
(122)

or, equivalently,

and obtain (after straightforward algebra) (113)

The five bounds

and

(114) in the large limit in Fig. 22.

(123) are plotted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

429

by setting to its largest value (assuming that the density ). Thus

(127)

where The function
approximated by

.

is an increasing function of for

, where it has a sharp maximum. It is well

, where

and

Fig. 22.

Plot

of

five

bounds

on

the

function

1
M

log p0(r0),

for

large

M,

as

a function of r=M.

0 0 Bound 0 Bound  0 0 0 Bound 0 3 0 3 Bound

b: c: d: f:

qMqM1d1(f(rr)ll)oo=gg=qq(c(b(43rrM))Mr==e)xrp12(=e[(2

2r=M log 2).
r=M + r=M log(r=M)). for r r = 
 M , where M log 2 + M H2e( (r))




=

4
3e

.

2r (r)] where

3

(r)

=

1 1+exp(

.
)

Numerical

bound

1
M

log qe(r)

computed

as

described

in

Appendix

E-D.

.

APPENDIX F EVALUATION OF UPPER AND LOWER BOUNDS ON ACHIEVABLE INFORMATION RATE IN CASE OF NOISE OF UNIFORM DENSITY
We start from (21). In the case of uniform density, depends only on the weight of , which we will denote .

(124)

We obtain a numerical lower bound on the achievable rate of

Gallager codes by computing as a function of a bound on

, the number of pairs

that give

rise to an

of weight .

First consider the number of pairs such that has weight

, has weight , and

has weight . This quantity

can be written in terms of

and

as

(128)

The step to (128) made use of inequality (74). We find

achievable rates by finding values of and such that the

maximum value over and of

is

just less than zero (see Appendix E-D).

APPENDIX G ARITHMETIC CODING FOR CREATION OF SPARSE SOURCES

A redundant source having density less than , with con-

secutive source symbols that are independent and identically

distributed, can be produced from a dense source by using a

variation on arithmetic coding [70], [57]; one simply reverses

the role of encoder and decoder in a standard arithmetic coder

based on a model corresponding to the sparse messages. The

following pseudocode gives an algorithm for this task, but

ignores issues of initialization and termination.

Loop to read a dense stream and output a sparse stream with

density .

loop

At this point,

and

.

while

next input bit end while

if

then

output “ ” bit

(125)

where it is understood that

whenever any of the terms

in the denominator has

. We arrive at this expression

by considering the number of ways of subdividing bits into

four blocks: the bits found in but not ; the bits found

in but not ; the bits common to and ; and the bits

common to and .

The number of pairs

is bounded

by the number of terms in the sum times the maximum value

(126)

We can bound the maximum by minimizing the products

and

in the denominator.

The first product is minimized by setting

; the second

else output “ ” bit

end if

end loop

Loop to reconstruct the original dense stream from its

encoding as a sparse stream.

loop

At this point,

and

.

while

if

then

else

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 45, NO. 2, MARCH 1999

if

then

output a “ ” bit followed by else
output a “ ” bit followed by endif

“ ” bits “ ” bits

end if

end while if next input bit then else

end if end loop
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Radford Neal made immense contributions to this work, including writing Appendix G and giving detailed input throughout; collaborating with him is a privilege.
I thank Roger Sewell, Robert McEliece, Dave Forney, and David Aldous for helpful discussions and M. D. MacLeod and the Computer Laboratory, Cambridge University for kind loans of books. I thank Geoff Hinton for generously supporting my visits to the University of Toronto.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Ahlswede and G. Dueck, “Good codes can be produced by a few permutations,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-28, pp. 430–443, May 1982.
[2] S. V. B. Aiyer, M. Niranjan, and F. Fallside, “A theoretical investigation into the performance of the Hopfield model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 204–215, 1990.
[3] R. J. Anderson, “Searching for the optimum correlation attack,” in Fast Software Encryption—Proceedings of 1994 K.U. Leuven Workshop on Cryptographic Algorithms, B. Preneel, Ed., Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 179–195.
[4] S. Andreassen, M. Woldbye, B. Falck, and S. Andersen, “MUNIN—A causal probabilistic network for the interpretation of electromyographic findings,” in Proc. 10th Nat. Conf. on AI (AAAI: Menlo Park CA., 1987), pp. 121–123.
[5] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, 1974.
[6] G. Battail, “We can think of good codes, and even decode them,” in Eurocode’92 26–30 October, P. Camion, P. Charpin, and S. Harari, Eds. (Udine, Italy), in CISM Courses and Lectures, no 339. Wien, Austria: Springer, 1993, pp. 353–368.
[7] L. E. Baum and T. Petrie, “Statistical inference for probabilistic functions of finite-state Markov chains,” Ann. Math. Stat., vol. 37, pp. 1559–1563, 1966.
[8] F. Bein, “Construction of telephone networks,” Notices Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 36, Jan. 1989.
[9] E. R. Berlekamp, Algebraic Coding Theory. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968.
[10] E. R. Berlekamp, R. J. McEliece, and H. C. A. van Tilborg, “On the intractability of certain coding problems,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-24, pp. 384–386, May 1978.
[11] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.

[12] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. 1993

IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications (Geneva, Switzerland, 1993), pp.

1064–1070.

[13] N. H. Bingham, “Fluctuation theory for the Ehrenfest urn,” Adv. Appl.

Probab., vol. 23, pp. 598–611, 1991.

[14] V. Chepyzhov and B. Smeets, “On a fast correlation attack on certain

stream ciphers,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 547. New

York: Springer-Verlag, 1991, pp. 176–185.

[15] J. T. Coffey and R. M. Goodman, “Any code of which we cannot think

is good,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 36, pp. 1453–1461, Nov.

1990.

[16] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New

York: Wiley, 1991.

[17] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes

over GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., June 1998.

[18]

, “Low density parity check codes over GF(q),” in Proc. 1998

IEEE Information Theory Workshop, June 1998.

[19] P. Delsarte and P. Piret, “Algebraic constructions of Shannon codes for

regular channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-28, pp. 593–599,

July 1982.

[20] P. Diaconis, R. L. Graham, and J. A. Morrison, “Asymptotic analysis of

a random walk on a hypercube with many dimensions,” Random Struct.

Algor., vol. 1, pp. 51–72, 1990.

[21] D. Divsilar and F. Pollara, “On the design of turbo codes,” Tech. Rep.

TDA 42–123, Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, Nov. 1995.

[22] G.-L. Feng and T. R. N. Rao, “Decoding algebraic-geometric codes up

to the designed minimum distance,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

39, pp. 37–45, Jan. 1993.

[23] G. D. Forney Jr., Concatenated Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

1966.

[24] B. J. Frey, Graphical Models for Machine Learning and Digital Com-

munication. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1998.

[25] P. Gacs, “Reliable computation with cellular automata,” J. Comp. Syst.

Sci., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 15–78, 1986.

[26] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[27]

, Low Density Parity Check Codes, no. 21 in Research Monograph

Series. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[28]

, “Finding parity in a simple broadcast network,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 34, pp. 176–180, Mar. 1988.

[29] S. W. Golomb, R. E. Peile, and R. A. Scholtz, Basic Concepts in

Information Theory and Coding: The Adventures of Secret Agent 00111.

New York: Plenum 1994.

[30] J. J. Hopfield and D. W. Tank, “Neural computation of decisions in

optimization problems,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 52, pp. 1–25, 1985.

[31] M. Kac, “Random walk and the theory of Brownian motion,” Amer.

Math. Monthly, vol. 54, pp. 369–391, 1947.

[32] S. Karlin, B. Lindqvist, and Y.-C. Yao, “Markov chains on hypercubes:

Spectral representations and several majorization relations,” Random

Structures and Algorithms, vol. 4, pp. 1–36, 1993.

[33] S. L. Lauritzen and D. J. Spiegelhalter, “Local computations with

probabilities on graphical structures and their application to expert

m systems,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B, vol. 50, pp. 157–224, 1988.
[34] G. Letac and L. Takacs, “Random walk on the -dimensional cube,”

J. Reine Angew. Math., vol. 310, pp. 187–195, 1979.

[35] A. Lubotsky, “Ramanujan graphs,” Combinatorica, vol. 8, 1988.

[36] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman,

“Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and

belief propagation,” presented at the 1998 International Symposium on

Information Theory, ISIT98, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 16–21, 1998. Also

in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, 1998, p. 117.

[37] D. J. C. MacKay, “Free energy minimization algorithm for decoding

and cryptanalysis,” Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 446–447, 1995.

[38] D. J. C. MacKay, “A free energy minimization framework for inference

problems in modulo 2 arithmetic,” in Fast Software Encryption—

Proc. 1994 K.U. Leuven Workshop on Cryptographic Algorithms, B.

Preneel, Ed., Lecture Notes in Computer Science, no. 1008. New York:

Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 179–195.

[39]

, “Iterative probabilistic decoding of low density parity check

codes,” Animations. [Online]. Available WWW: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.

ac.uk/mackay/codes/gifs/, 1997..

[40] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very

sparse matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding 5th IMA Conf., C. Boyd,

Ed., Lecture Notes in Computer Science, no. 1025. Berlin, Germany:

Springer, 1995, pp. 100–111.

[41]

, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check

codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.

Reprinted Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MACKAY: GOOD ERROR-CORRECTING CODES BASED ON VERY SPARSE MATRICES

431

[42] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of

constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf.

Commun. Contr., and Comput., Sept. 1998.

[43] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting

Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.

[44] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles

and low-density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.

[45] R. J. McEliece, The Theory of Information and Coding: A Mathemat-

ical Framework for Communication. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,

1977.

[46] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as

an instance of Pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, 1998.

[47] W. Meier and O. Staffelbach, “Fast correlation attacks on certain stream

ciphers,” J. Cryptol., vol. 1, pp. 159–176, 1989.

[48] M. J. Mihaljevic´ and J. D. Golic´, “A comparison of cryptanalytic

principles based on iterative error-correction,” in Lecture Notes in

Computer Science, vol. 547. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991, pp.

527–531.

[49]

, “A fast iterative algorithm for a shift register initial state

reconstruction given the noisy output sequence,” in Advances in Cryp-

tology—AUSCRYPT’90, vol. 453. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992,

pp. 165–175.

[50]

, “Convergence of a Bayesian iterative error-correction proce-

dure on a noisy shift register sequence,” in Advances in Cryptol-

ogy—EUROCRYPT’92, vol. 658.. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1993,

pp. 124–137.

[51] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of

Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[52] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon Jr.,” Error-Correcting Codes, 2nd ed.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.

[53] N. Pippenger, “The expected capacity of concentrators,” SIAM J. Discr.

Math., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 121–129, 1991.

[54] N. Pippenger, G. D. Stamoulis, and J. N. Tsitsiklis, “On a lower bound

for the redundancy of reliable networks with noisy gates,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 37, pp. 639–643, May 1991.

[55] B. Radosavljevic, E. Arikan, and B. Hajek, “Sequential-decoding of

low-density parity-check codes by adaptive reordering of parity checks,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 38, pp. 1833–1839, Sept. 1992.

[56] T. R. N. Rao and E. Fujiwara, Error-Control Coding for Computer

Systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1989.

[57] J. Rissanen and G. G. Langdon, “Arithmetic coding,” IBM J. Res. Devel., vol. 23, pp. 149–162, 1979.
[58] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, pp. 379–423, 623–656, 1948.
[59] A. M. Slinko, “Design of experiments to detect nonnegligible variables in a linear model,” Cybernetics, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 433–442, 1991.
[60] D. A. Spielman, “Linear-time encodable and decodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1723–1731, Nov. 1996.
[61] L. Swanson, “A new code for Galileo,” in Proc. 1988 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 1988, pp. 94–95.
[62] L. Takacs, “On an urn problem of Paul and Tatiana Ehrenfest,” Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., vol. 86, pp. 127–130, 1979.
[63] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[64] C. Thommesen, “Error-correcting capabilities of concatenated codes with MDS outer codes on memoryless channels with maximumlikelihood decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-33, pp. 632–640, Sept. 1987.
[65] D. J. Thouless, P. W. Anderson, and R. G. Palmer, “Solutions of ‘solvable models of a spin glass’,” Philosophical Mag., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 593–601, 1977.
[66] M. A. Tsfasman, “Algebraic-geometric codes and asymptotic problems,” Discr. Appl. Math., vol. 33, nos. 1–3, pp. 241–256, 1991.
[67] A. J. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, pp. 260–269, 1967.
[68] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Linko¨ping Univ., Linko¨ping, Sweden (Linko¨ping Studies in Science and Technology, Dissertation 440), 1996.
[69] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Ko¨tter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Euro. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–525, 1995.
[70] I. H. Witten, R. M. Neal, and J. G. Cleary, “Arithmetic coding for data compression,” Commun. Assoc. Comp. Mach., vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 520–540, 1987.
[71] G. Zemor and G. D. Cohen, “The threshold probability of a code,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 469–477, Mar. 1995.
[72] M. Zivkovic, “On two probabilistic decoding algorithms for binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 37, pp. 1707–1716, Nov. 1991.
[73] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity for Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Pered. Inform., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 23–36, 1975.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

