ITW 1999. Metsovo. Greece, June 27 - July 1
Constructing Low-Density Parity-Check Codes with Circulant Matrices
J. W. Bond, S. Huit, and H. Schmidt4
Science Applications International Corp, 4105 Hancock St, San Diego, CA, 92110, e-mail: bond-jwOmarlin.nosc.mil
-t Department of Mathematics, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92182, e-mail: huiOsaturn.sdsu.edu 3 Technology Service Corporation, 962 Wayne Ave, Suite 800, Silver Spring, MD 20910, e-mail: hschmidtOtscwo.com

Abstract - This is a report on our ongoing effort to implement Low-Density Parity-Check codes with Iterative Belief Propagation decoding in a communication system. The s y s t e m requires the codes to have block lengths f r o m 1000 to 2000 bits. We describe t w o different methods of constructing the codes using: (1) a combination of r a n d o m and circulant matrices, and (2) random and circulant matrices w i t h constraints to control the n u m b e r of low weight codewords. We illustrate the performances of the different constructions with simulations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sparse matrix parity-check code was introduced by Gallager [4] and has attracted much attention recently; see, for example, MacKay [6], Luby et al[5], and Bond [l].
+ The most common method of implementing the sparse ma-
trix method is to randomly construct a m x (n m) paritycheck matrix
H=[R C],

+ + + a0 a12

an-1zn-l is primitive in Fz[x], then

each row of the inverse of C has asymptotically the same

number of zeros and ones in each row. Using this fact on

the inverse of primitive circulant matrices, it is not hard to

see that the average weight of the check-bits is about m/2

(see Bond [2]), where n is the number of check-bits. This

guarantees good performance on the average when circulant

matrices corresponding t o primitive polynomials are used in

the construction.

111. RANDOMAND CIRCULANT CONSTRUCTION WITH CONSTRAINTS
By using a circulant matrix that corresponds t o a primitive polynomial in the construction of the parity-check matrix, we can guarantee that the average weight of the codewords is at least m/2. However, it is possible to have low weight codewords. We attempt to eliminate the low weight codewords by carefully choosingthe random part of the parity-check matrix.
The codewords are vectors of the form

where R is m x n and C is m xm with certain desired properties
and then put it into systematic form
[ C-lR I ] .

The most common condition to impose on the parity-check

matrix H is that the locations of 1’s of any two different rows

be different with at most one exception. The generator matrix

is then

m C-’R

1i .

Of course, there is no guarantee that the matrix C is invertible. Indeed, it is quite likely for C to be non-invertible. Note that C is not invertible in F z if its base 10 determinant is even.

11. CONSTRUCTIOUNSING CIRCULANMTATRICES In our implementation, we use a circulant matrix C. Recall
that a square matrix is circulant if each row of the matrix is the cyclic shift of the previous row. An example of a circulant matrix is
[H i y ] 1 1 0 0

It is easy to see that the inverse of a circulant matrix is again

circulant. The use of a circulant matrix allows us to guaran-

tee invertibility and to control the number of cycles. Another

advantage of a circulant matrix is that it is automatically reg-

ular. The most important reason for using a circulant matrix

is the following mathematical fact.

Let C be a circulant matrix with first row

[ a0 a1

3. a,-1 We showed in Bond [3] that if

where b E F;. For w to be a low weight codeword, b and a = C-’Rb must have low weights. So t o have low weight
codewords, the equation Rb = Ca must be solvable by low weight vectors b, a. We choose R carefully so that Rh = Ca
has few or no solutions with low weight a’s and b’s.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Low-density parity-check codes with excellent average distance properties can be constructed by using parity-check matrices that are concatenations of circulant matrices and random matrices. However, these codes may have low minimum weights and this can give block error rates that are unacceptable for many important applications. In this talk we present the block error rate for codes constructed using circulant matrices and codes that are obtained by carefully choosing the circulant matrix and random matrix to ensure that the resulting codes have few or no low weight codewords.
REFERENCES
[l] Bond, J. W., Hui, S. and Schmidt, H. (1997)Low density parity check codes based on sparse matrices with no small cycles, Proceedings of the IMA.
[2] Bond, J. W., Hui, S. and Schmidt, H. (1999) Sparse matrix parity-check codes and circulant matrices, In preparation.
[3] Bond, J. W.,Hui, S. and Schmidt, H. (1999)The Euclidean algorithm and primitive polynomials over finite fields, submitted.
[4] Gallager, R.G. (1963)Low Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT Press.
[5]Luby, M.,Mitzenmacher, M., Shokrollahi, M. A., Spielman, D. (1998) Analysis of Low Density Codes and Improved Designs using Irregular Graphs, Preprint.
[6]MacKay, D. J. C. (1998)Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices, Preprint.

52

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:04:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

