406
Transactions Papers

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2002

Near Optimum Universal Belief Propagation Based Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes
Jinghu Chen, Student Member, IEEE, and Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a belief-propagation (BP)-based decoding algorithm which utilizes normalization to improve the accuracy of the soft values delivered by a previously proposed simplified BP-based algorithm. The normalization factors can be obtained not only by simulation, but also, importantly, theoretically. This new BP-based algorithm is much simpler to implement than BP decoding as it requires only additions of the normalized received values and is universal, i.e., the decoding is independent of the channel characteristics. Some simulation results are given, which show this new decoding approach can achieve an error performance very close to that of BP on the additive white Gaussian noise channel, especially for low-density parity check (LDPC) codes whose check sums have large weights. The principle of normalization can also be used to improve the performance of the Max-Log-MAP algorithm in turbo decoding, and some coding gain can be achieved if the code length is long enough.
Index Terms—Belief propagation algorithm, iterative decoding, low-density parity check codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-DENSITY parity check (LDPC) codes [1], first proposed by Gallager in the 1960s, and later rediscovered

by MacKay and Neal [2], [3], have been of great academic in-

terest recently. Like turbo codes, LDPC codes can achieve near

Shannon limit error performance [4], [5], and represent a very

promising prospect for error control coding.

An LDPC code is specified by a parity-check matrix which

contains mostly zeros and only a small number of ones. A reg-

ular

LDPC code, with block length and dimension

, has a parity check matrix of

rows and

columns with exactly ones in each column and ones in each

row. We refer to the rows of as checks, and to all the ele-

ments of an LDPC codeword as bits. Then each check contains

bits and each bit is checked by checks. From another point

Paper approved by N. C. Beaulieu, the Editor for Wireless Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 8, 2000; revised May 15, 2001 and July 15, 2001. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-97-32959 and Grant CCR-0098029, and by the Hawaii Center for Advanced Communications (HCAC). This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 24–29, 2001.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: jinghu@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu; marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier S 0090-6778(02)02039-1.

of view, can be represented by a bipartite graph, with one

subset of nodes being all the bits, and the other subset of nodes

being all the checks [6]. The degree of each bit, i.e., the number

of incidences associated with each bit, is and the degree of

each check is . Usually, two different checks have at most one

“1” in common to prevent short girths in the bipartite graph.

There exist also irregular LDPC codes [4], [7]. The parity

check matrix of an irregular LDPC code has checks with dif-

ferent weights. As a result, neither the degrees of the bits in

the bipartite graph nor the degrees of the checks are constant.

The irregular bipartite graph is deliberately determined by some

rules. It has been reported that irregular LDPC codes can achieve

better performance than regular LDPC codes.

Another special family of LDPC codes can be constructed

based on finite geometries [8], [9]. Among many such codes are

one-step majority logic decodable (OSMLD) codes, including

difference-set cyclic (DSC) codes [10]. These kinds of codes are

competitive candidates for high rate LDPC codes. Usually, they

have check sums with comparatively larger weights than those

of regular Gallager codes, and the dimension of their parity

check matrices is

. Another feature of these codes is that

they are cyclic or quasicyclic codes so that the encoding can be

easily implemented by register circuits. Other classes of quasi-

cyclic LDPC codes have been investigated in [11].

To decode LDPC codes, both soft decision decoding and hard

decision decoding can be used. The bit flipping algorithm is a

kind of hard decoding with low complexity. However, soft de-

coding achieves a much better performance, and can be imple-

mented by iterative decoding based on the belief propagation

(BP)1 algorithm [12]. Actually, the “probabilistic decoding”

proposed by Gallager in his frontier paper [1] is essentially the

same as BP algorithm. Unfortunately, the hardware implemen-

tation of BP algorithm is limited by its complexity. Other al-

gorithms with less complexity, including iterative a posteriori

probability (APP) based algorithms [13], can also be considered

in soft decoding. However severe degradations in performance

may result as correlated values are updated at each iteration after

the first iteration.

In [14], a reduced complexity iterative decoding algorithm

based on BP algorithm has been proposed for LDPC codes

and is referred to as uniformly most powerful (UMP) BP-based

algorithm. A similar algorithm has also been presented in [16].

1Note that in the context of the paper, likelihood propagation seems a more appropriate notation.

0090-6778/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN AND FOSSORIER: UNIVERSAL BP-BASED DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES

407

This algorithm only needs real additions and comparisons,

and is universal as it does not need any knowledge about

the channel characteristics. It can achieve very good tradeoff

between complexity and error performance. Compared with

BP, only about 0.25–0.35-dB degradations in error performance

have been reported for regular

and (1008, 504)

LDPC codes with

and

. Unfortunately, the UMP

BP-based algorithm does not work very well for codes with

check sums of weight larger than that of regular LDPC codes

such as OSMLD codes. The simulation results show that the

performance of UMP BP-based decoding is about 1 dB worse

than that of BP decoding for both the

and the

DSC codes.

The aim of this paper is to explain why the UMP BP-based

algorithm cannot achieve a performance close to that of the BP

algorithm in several instances, and then seek some solutions

which achieve good performance-complexity tradeoffs. To this

end, we analyze and compare the soft values delivered by the

BP algorithm and the UMP BP-based algorithm, and assert the

degradation of the UMP BP-based algorithm is due to the in-

accuracy of the soft values delivered from the first iteration.

Hence, we propose to improve the accuracy of these soft values

by normalization as it has been suggested before for other sub-

optimum decoding methods. The normalization factor for the

first iteration can be obtained by Monte Carlo simulation. We

also derive a set of formulas to determine these normalization

factors theoretically, and show that the theoretical results are

very close to those obtained by simulation. Furthermore, we

show that for a specific code, we can choose one factor and keep

it for all SNR values and all subsequent iterations, while still ob-

serving a very good performance. Then the algorithm becomes

universal. Finally, we apply the normalization approach to im-

prove the Max-Log-MAP algorithm in turbo decoding.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give a

brief review of the BP algorithm and the UMP BP-based al-

gorithm. Then we present the normalized BP-based algorithm

in Section III. Some simulation results are provided in Sec-

tion IV to illustrate the performance of the proposed normal-

ized BP-based algorithm. Then, the extension of the normalized

BP-based algorithm to Max-Log-MAP algorithm in turbo de-

coding is discussed in Section V. Finally, a conclusion is given

in Section VI.

A. LLR BP Algorithm
In the following, instead of handling probabilities as in [1], [3], we are going to deal with the log-likelihood ratios (LLR’s). An LLR passing along the edge connecting bit node and check node provides information about the hard decision of bit and the reliability of this decision, according to all the information propagated to bit node or check node . Moreover, we define the following notations associated with a given iteration.

The LLR of bit which is derived from the received value

. In BP decoding, we initially set

.

The LLR of bit which is sent from check node to bit node . It is obtained from the information
, where the notation will be introduced next.

The LLR of bit which is sent from the bit node to check

node . It is obtained from the a priori information and

the information

.

The a posteriori LLR of bit computed at each iteration. It is

obtained from the a priori information and the informa-

tion

.

For each iteration, we have the a priori information

ob-

tained from the received values , and the extrinsic informa-

tion delivered by the previous iteration. We need to update

as the extrinsic information for the next iteration, and com-

pute for the decision of the current iteration. We can write

the LLR BP algorithm as follows.

Initialization: For each , set

.

Iterative Processing: For each iteration, process the three

following steps.

1) Horizontal step (processing in check nodes):

For each , ,

(1)

(2)
2) Vertical step (processing in bit nodes): For each , update by

II. A BRIEF REVIEW OF BP AND UMP BP-BASED ALGORITHMS

(3)

In the following, we assume BPSK modulation, which maps

a codeword

into a transmitted sequence

, according to

, for

. Then is transmitted over a channel corrupted by

additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). The received value cor-

responding to after the demodulator is

, where

is a random variable with zero mean and variance .

We assume an LDPC code with parity check matrix

is used for error correction. We denote the set of bits that

participate in check by

. Simi-

larly, we define the set of checks in which bit participates as

. We also denote

as the set

with bit excluded, and

as the set

with

check excluded.

For each , update by (4)

3) Hard decision and stopping criterion test:

i) Create

such that

if

, and

if

.

ii) If

then is considered as a valid decoded

word and the decoding process ends; if the number

of iterations exceeds some maximum number and

is not a valid codeword, a failure is declared and

the decoding process ends; otherwise the decoding

repeats from Step 1).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2002

B. UMP BP-Based Algorithm

Some approximation can be made to simplify the LLR BP

algorithm. The key is to simplify the calculation of and

in (1) and (2) which require a lot of computations. First,

for

, define as the hard decision according to

, i.e.

if

if

.

(5)

Also, define as the modulo-2 sum of the hard decisions of

all the bits of the check sum , according to

, i.e.,

For each
(13)
3) Hard decision and stopping criterion test: Same as Step 3) of the LLR BP algorithm given in Section II-A.
The UMP BP-based algorithm derived above is essentially the same as that in [14], but different in representation. In the following, more emphasis is put on its relationship with the LLR BP algorithm.

(6)

Then

represents the modulo-2 sum of the hard deci-

sions of all the bits

in check sum except bit .

Note that the sign of in (1) is

. Therefore

(7)

Based on (7), (2) can be simplified into (8)

where

denotes the binary complement of

.

A similar approximation has been derived in [17]. In addition,

the positive factor

in and has no effect on the de-

coding and can be omitted. Then no a priori information about

the AWGN channel is required. The resultant UMP BP-based

algorithm is described below.

Initialization: For each , set

.

Iteration Decoding: For each iteration, process the three fol-

lowing steps.

1) Horizontal step (processing in check nodes):

For each ,

if

if

.

(9)

For each ,

(10)

For each , (11)
2) Vertical step (processing in bit nodes): For each , (12)

III. NORMALIZED BP-BASED ALGORITHM

A. Improving the Soft Values by Normalization

The UMP BP-based algorithm can achieve good complexity-

performance tradeoff for LDPC codes, if the weights of the

check sums are not too large, say 6, and the block lengths are

not too long. On the other hand, for the

and the

DSC codes, with check sums of weight 17 and 33,

respectively, the UMP BP-based algorithm causes a loss in per-

formance as high as 1 dB compared to that of the BP algorithm.

In the simulation of these DSC codes with the UMP BP-based

algorithm, we observed that for a certain block, as long as there

are errors in the decision of the second iteration, the number of

error bits will usually exceed that of the first iteration. In this

case, obviously, the information

delivered from the first

iteration will not help, but deteriorate the decoding of the second

iteration. Hence, it is desirable to find a way to improve the ac-

curacy of the values

in the UMP BP-based algorithm

with a tolerable computational cost, and hopefully, more accu-

rate values

could help improving the performance.

If we keep the constant

in the UMP BP-based algo-

rithm and the same

provided by the previous decoding

step, then in the current decoding step, the only difference be-

tween the UMP BP-based algorithm and the LLR BP algorithm

is the computation of

. For a certain pair of , denote

and as the value computed by the BP and the UMP

BP-based algorithms, respectively. Then we can prove the fol-

lowing two statements about the relationship between and

.

Statements:

1) The values and have the same sign, i.e.,

;

2) The magnitude of is always greater than that of ,

i.e.,

.

To prove the first statement, note that when we approximate

in (1) by (7), we keep the original sign. So if we substitute

(7) for (1) in calculating

based on (2), the sign will not

change, since the sign of the function

is

just the opposite of the sign of its variable . Hence, has the

same sign as . Actually, the hard decision of either or ,

together with the hard decisions of

,

should satisfy the constraint of check sum . The value

would be a very bad approximation of if they had different

signs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN AND FOSSORIER: UNIVERSAL BP-BASED DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES

409

To prove the second statement, denote the value that satis- sity function (pdf) of depends on the SNR and the code rate.

fies

We can also write

(14) (19)

then

, while

readily shown that

with so that

. It is also

(20)

The normalization factors can be obtained by Monte (15) Carlo simulation. We first generate the random vectors

, and then calculate the means of

and statistically based on (19) and (20). The factor is

obtained from (18).

We can also calculate

and

by the theory of

probabilities, which provides a much faster way to obtain the (16) normalization factors.

First, we calculate

. Let

,

,

so that the pdf of is

(17)

Hence we obtain

.

These two statements suggest the use of normalization to get

more accurate soft values from . In other words, we can di-

vide by a factor which is greater than 1 to get a better ap-

proximation of . To determine , we consider the criterion of

forcing the mean of the normalized magnitude

to equal

the mean of the magnitude , i.e.,

(18)

where

is the pdf of and

. It follows

(21) is a unit-step function of

The last equation in (22) follows from the fact that

random variables.

Since

, we can write

(22) are iid
(23)

The normalization factor that makes

equal to on the so that combining (22) and (23)

average sense may not be the best, but it seems a quite reason-

able choice. It can be determined based on Monte Carlo simu-

lations. In the next section, a theoretical value of is derived.

In [15], it is also proposed to scale down the values computed

at each iteration of a

decoder. However, the scaling

is intended to reduce the hardware complexity of the decoder

and contrarily to our proposed algorithm, the entire a poste-

riori values rather than only the extrinsic information values are

scaled. (24)

B. Theoretical Derivation of the Normalization Factors

We first determine the normalization factors for the first iter-

ation. The accuracy of the soft values

delivered by the

first iteration will not only directly affect the performance of

the second iteration, but also influence the error probability of

the overall decoding. For the LLR BP algorithm, before the first

iteration, each is initialized to

(we keep the con-

stant

for BP-based algorithm in the analysis). For con-

venience, we denote

, where

. Then are independent, identi-

cally distributed (i.i.d.) random variables. The probability den-

The second integration in (24) can be omitted and finally we obtain

(25)

where

,

initialization] and

To obtain

, define

[since

after .

(26)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2002

0 0 Fig. 1. Normalization factors obtained by simulations and analysis for some Fig. 2. Normalization factors obtained by simulations and analysis for codes

codes (W =  1).

with rate 1/2 (W =  1).

Then using a Taylor’s series, we have

(27)

Note that

in (27) have the same signs, then

(28)

Let

. Since

are iid random variables, we

get

(29)

With the knowledge of the pdf of , is readily computed based on (29). Then from (28), we obtain

(30)

The first few terms of (30) are enough to give a very good

estimation of

in most cases. Combined with the value

given in (25), we can obtain the theoretical values of the

normalization factors. Figs. 1 and 2 show the normalization fac-

tors we obtain for some LDPC codes with different code rates

and different values of , both by simulation and by theoret-

ical analysis. In calculating (30), we take the first five terms into

account. We observe that generally, the results are very close.

However, for the code rate

and SNR values greater

than 3 dB, the higher order terms in (30) can not be omitted. In

that case the first five terms in (30) do not give a good enough

theoretical estimates, and more terms need to be added to cal-

culate

.

The normalization factors after the first iteration are not so

straightforward to derive. However we choose not to determine

them, since simulations show the performance remains very

good if we keep the factor of the first iteration for all subsequent

iterations, and little improvement can be achieved no matter how

we change the factors from one iteration to another. Moreover,

although the optimum normalization factors are different for dif-

ferent SNR values, we can associate a fixed normalization factor

to a specific LDPC code. We can choose this factor in the range

of SNR values whose corresponding bit error rate (BER) for

BP decoding is about 10 to 10 . We define this range of

SNR values as critical range. For SNR values higher or lower

than this range, the performance is less sensitive to the factor.

For example, for BP decoding, the BER of the (273 191) DSC

is between 10 to 10 at

dB. Based on Fig. 1,

we choose the factor 2.0 corresponding to

dB. The

“one factor to one code” correspondence implies that the nor-

malized BP-based algorithm becomes independent of , con-

serving the important universal property of the UMP BP-based

algorithm. Hence, the only modification to be made in the UMP

BP-based algorithm is to divide in (2) by a factor deter-

mined in advance.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulations have been conducted to compare the performance of the normalized BP-based algorithm with those of the UMP BP-based algorithm and the BP algorithm. In Figs. 3–6, the number of iterations reported for BP and normalized BP-based algorithms is that for which no or negligible performance improvement can be achieved by further increasing this number.

A. DSC Codes

Figs. 3 and 4 depict the bit error and block error performances

of the

and

DSC codes, respectively.

Based on our discussion above, we choose the factor 2.0 for

the first code and 4.0 for the second one. Note that in circuit

design, a division by 2.0 and 4.0 corresponds to a register

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN AND FOSSORIER: UNIVERSAL BP-BASED DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES

411

Fig. 3. Error performance for iterative decoding of the (273; 191) DSC code Fig. 5. Error performance for iterative decoding of the (504; 252) LDPC code

with BP, UMP BP-based and normalized BP-based algorithms.

with BP, UMP BP-based and normalized BP-based algorithms.

Fig. 4. Error performance for iterative decoding of the (1057; 813) DSC code Fig. 6. Error performance for iterative decoding of the (1008; 504) LDPC

with BP, UMP BP-based and normalized BP-based algorithms.

code with BP, UMP BP-based and normalized BP-based algorithms.

shift of one position and two positions, respectively. As a result, these two factors may be particularly useful in hardware implementation. For these two DSC codes, the results show that at BER below 10 , the normalized BP-based algorithm outperforms the UMP BP-based algorithm by about 1 dB, and has a performance very close to that of the BP algorithm. Furthermore, compared to the BP algorithm, the normalized BP-based algorithm is more stable to numerical problems such as round off errors and clipped values, a property inherited from the UMP BP-based algorithm.

B. Regular LDPC Gallager Codes

We also conducted some simulations for regular LDPC codes.

Figs. 5 and 6 show the bit error and block error performances

for the (504, 252) and (1008, 504) LDPC codes with

and

. We choose normalization factors of 1.4 for both codes.

Although the performance of the UMP BP-based algorithm is

very close to that of the BP algorithm, some improvement still

can be achieved by the normalized BP-based algorithm. We can

see at

, about 0.2- and 0.25-dB coding gain can be

achieved by the normalized BP-based algorithm, compared to

the UMP BP-based algorithm, and its performance is less than

0.1 dB away from that of the BP algorithm. Furthermore, to

achieve convergence, the maximum number of iterations needed

for BP decoding is larger than that for normalized BP-based

algorithm.

Finally, it is worth mentioning that since the performance

degradation of the reduced complexity algorithm reported in

[16] for LDPC convolutional codes is nearly the same as that

reported in [14] for LDPC block codes, it is expected that sim-

ilar gains as those observed in Figs. 5 and 6 can be achieved by

the new proposed algorithm applied to decoding of LDPC con-

volutional codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2002

V. EXTENSION TO MAX-LOG-MAP ALGORITHM IN TURBO DECODING
Turbo codes, proposed in 1993 [18], are another kind of codes which can achieve error performance very close to Shannon limit. The maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding with BCJR algorithm [19] achieves optimum decoding for each iteration of turbo decoding, but has very high complexity. The MAP decoding can be approximated by Max-Log-MAP decoding and soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) [20] decoding, with some tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity. It has been shown in [21] and [22] that the performance of SOVA decoding can be improved by reducing the soft values delivered, which are usually overestimated. Normalization values have also been proposed in [23] and [24] to approach the error performance of Max-Log-MAP decoding with a suboptimum version of the Max-Log-MAP algorithm applied to iterative decoding of block product codes. In this section, we are going to show that in most cases, the soft values of the Max-Log-MAP decoding are also overestimated with respect to those of the MAP decoding, and propose to improve the Max-Log-MAP decoding by normalization. Although the approach is similar to that of Section IV, it does not extend in a straightforward way; the reasons of this fact are elaborated.
Note that compared to [21], [23], and [24] which also introduced normalization factors, the approach proposed in this section considers improvement of Max-Log-MAP decoding instead of improvement of SOVA decoding. Furthermore the scaling coefficients are computed differently and do not depend on the SNR value considered.

A. Normalized Max-Log-MAP Algorithm

First, let us briefly review the MAP decoding and

Max-Log-MAP decoding. Let us denote

,

where ,

, is the a priori LLR of the th

information bit at the beginning of each iteration. For each ,

the modified BCJR algorithm for MAP decoding [25] is an

effective algorithm to evaluate the LLR value associated

with the th information bit, i.e.,

(31)

where

and

. In other

words, for a given , the MAP algorithm divides the set of paths

in the trellis representation of the code into two subsets,

and , where

consists of all the paths corresponding

to the information bit

, and

consists of all the

paths corresponding to

. Then it calculates the sum of

the probabilities of all the paths in each set, conditioned on the

received values and the a priori information , and finally

computes . For the Max-Log-MAP algorithm to evaluate (31),

only two paths are considered based on the approximation

(32)

TABLE I PERCENTAGES ASSOCIATED WITH THE DIFFERENT CASES ON THE
L L RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AND

One path is selected from

and has the largest probability

conditioned on and , the other is selected from

, with

the largest probability conditioned on and . We can get rid

of the a priori information and the systematic information

from or to get the new extrinsic information , and

deliver it to the next decoding step.

The simplification of the MAP algorithm by the Max-Log-MAP algorithm is similar to that of the BP al-

gorithm by the UMP BP-based algorithm. Both take some approximation to avoid nonlinear computations associated with probabilities. For a given , most frequently, although not guaranteed, has the same sign as , since the two

probabilities chosen by the Max-Log-MAP algorithm are

dominant in each set. Also,

holds in general, and

an explanation, although not very accurate, yet still illustrative,

is that usually the ratio of the summations of two sets of

random variables tends to be smaller than the ratio of the largest ones in each set. Consequently, for a given , if we redefine and as the extrinsic values delivered by

the MAP and Max-Log-MAP algorithms, respectively, then

Statements 1 and 2 described in Section III-A still hold in

the majority of the cases. We can identify three cases: 1)

; 2)

;

and 3)

. Table I shows the

percentages of these cases by simulation, with a turbo code of

code rate

and

, at different SNR values and

after the first decoding step. From column 3, we can see that

the two statements discussed in Section III-A are true in most

cases. Similar results can be obtained in subsequent iterations, or with other codes. Therefore, this suggests that it is possible to improve the extrinsic information of Max-Log-MAP decoding

by normalization.

We still use (18) to determine the normalization factors for

the first decoding step, but only take into account the

case

as in Section IV.

Unfortunately, the simulation results show that Max-Log-MAP

iterative decoding is sensitive to the factors, and if we keep a factor for all the SNR values and all the iterations, the simulation results are not satisfying. At some SNR’s, the

performance of normalized Max-Log-MAP iterative decoding

is even much worse than that of Max-Log-MAP iterative decoding. So we try to change the factors from iteration to iteration. First, we statistically obtain the factor of the first

decoding step, which can be used to normalize the extrinsic

information delivered by the first Max-Log-MAP decoder. Then with the improved extrinsic information of the first Max-Log-MAP decoder, we do simulations again and

determine the factor of the second decoding step. We keep this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN AND FOSSORIER: UNIVERSAL BP-BASED DECODING OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES

413

K K Fig. 7. Error performance of the normalized Max-Log-MAP in turbo decoding
after eight iterations with = 8192.

Fig. 8. Error performance of the normalized Max-Log-MAP in turbo decoding after eight iterations with = 16 384.

process until all factors have been found. For each SNR value,

a set of factors can be determined. Furthermore in order to

make the decoder universal, we only select one set of factors,

corresponding to the SNR value where the performances of

MAP and Max-Log-MAP iterative decodings differ the most.

For example, for a rate

turbo code with generator

polynomial

(in octal form) and

, we

find the factors for the first eight iterations (with two

decoding steps in each iteration) at

dB as

. The factors become smaller and smaller, and at the last several iterations, they are so close to 1.0 that no normalization is necessary. Finally, since Statements 1 and 2 are not satisfied, a theoretical derivation of these scaling factors is beyond the scope of this paper, which simply aims to show that the approach of Section IV applied to turbo decoding can also provide interesting gains if properly implemented.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have analyzed the soft values of the BP algorithm and the UMP BP-based algorithm for iterative decoding of LDPC codes, and based on our analysis, we have proposed a normalized BP-based algorithm, which can improve the UMP BP-based algorithm by normalization. We showed how to obtain the normalization factors by simulations, and also give a way to find them theoretically. We finally showed by simulations that if we choose an appropriate normalization factor for a specific code and keep it for all iterations and all SNR values, the achieved performances remain very good. Thus the normalized BP-based algorithm is universal.
This normalization principle can also be used to bridge the error performance between the Max-Log-MAP and MAP decodings of turbo codes, but a much more precise choice of the normalization factors is needed to approach the error performance of MAP decoding with normalized Max-Log-MAP decoding in this case.

B. Simulation Results

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

In our simulations, we use a turbo code with overall rate

and two component convolutional codes with gen-

erator polynomial

. We use random interleaving

for the interleaver. Fig. 7 shows the performance of the nor-

malized Max-Log-MAP iterative decoding with

and after 8 iterations, with the normalization factors given

above. For

, we use a set of factors determined at

dB, which is almost the same as that of

.

The performance of the normalized Max-Log-MAP iterative de-

coding with

is shown in Fig. 8. Compared to

Max-Log-MAP iterative decoding, a coding gain of about 0.2

dB at

and

can be achieved in both cases.

However, for a short code, say

, the coding gain is

less than 0.1 dB. The simulation results show that the normal-

ized Max-Log-MAP algorithm does not work as well as the nor-

malized UMP BP-based algorithm. It can give us some improve-

ment if the code is long, but for short codes, the improvement is

much less.

The authors wish to thank M. Tanner for many interesting discussions as well as providing [15], and the reviewers for their comments which improved the presentation of these results.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] R. M. Tanner, “Transforming quasi-cyclic codes with sparse graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2002

[8] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 931–937, June 2000.
[9] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[10] E. J. Weldon, “Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 45, pp. 1045–1055, Sept. 1966.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[12] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[13] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [14] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative
decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999. [15] K. Karplus and H. Krit, “A semi-systolic decoder for the PDSC-73 errorcorrecting code,” in Discrete Applied Mathematics 33. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1991, pp. 109–128. [16] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2181–2191, Sept. 1999. [17] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996. [18] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding: Turbo codes,” in ICC93, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070. [19] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 20, pp. 248–287, Mar. 1974. [20] J. Hagenauer, P. Robertson, and L. Papke, “Iterative (‘Turbo’) decoding of systematic convolutional codes with the MAP and SOVA algorithms,” in Proc. 1994 ITG Conf. on Source and Channel Coding, Munich, Germny, Oct. 1994. [21] L. Papke and P. Robertson, “Improved decoding with the SOVA in a parallel concatenated (turbo-code) scheme,” in ICC96, pp. 102–106. [22] L. Lin and R. S. Cheng, “Improvements in SOVA-based decoding for turbo codes,” in Proc. ICC97, June 1997, pp. 1473–1478. [23] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near-optimum decoding of product codes: Block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998. [24] P. A. Martin and D. P. Taylor, “On multilevel codes and iterative multistage decoding,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., pp. 1916–1925, Nov. 2001, submitted for publication. [25] P. Robertson, “Illuminating the structure of code and decoder of parallel concatenated recursive systematic (turbo) codes,” in Proc. GLOBECOM94, Dec. 1994, pp. 1298–1303.

Jinghu Chen (S’01) was born on June 22, 1972, in Shanghai, China. He received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering of the University of Hawaii.
His research interests include digital communications, channel coding, and iterative decoding algorithms for linear codes.
Marc P. C. Fossorier (S’90–M’95–SM’00) was born in Annemasse, France, on March 8, 1964. He received the B.E. degree from the National Institute of Applied Sciences (I.N.S.A.) Lyon, France in 1987, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, in 1991 and 1994, all in electrical engineering.
In 1996, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawai’i, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He was promoted to Associate Professor in 1999. His research interests include decoding techniques for linear codes, communication algorithms, combining coding and equalization for ISI channels, magnetic recording and statistics. He coauthored (with S. Lin, T. Kasami and T. Fujiwara) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998). Dr. Fossorier is a recipient of a 1998 NSF Career Development award. He has served as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since 1996, as Associate Editor for the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS since 1999, and is currently the Treasurer of the IEEE Information Theory Society. He was Program Co-Chairman for the 2000 International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA) and Editor for the Proceedings of the 1999 Symposium on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error Correcting Codes (AAECC). He is a member of the IEEE Information Theory, IEEE Communications, and IEEE Magnetics Societies.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

