ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30 - July 5,2002

Soft Decoding of Several Classes of Array Codes

Mario Blaum IBM Research Division K65/C2
650 Harry Road San Jose, CA 95120 e-mail: blaumQalmaden.ibm. com

John L. Fan
Flarion Technologies 135 Route 202/206 South
Bedminster, NJ 07921 e-mail: j ohn@j ohnf an.corn

Lihao Xu
Department of Computer Science Washington University St. Louis, MO 63130 e-mail:lihao@cs.wustl. edu

Abstract - The potential of using various classes of MDS array codes as LDPC codes is examined. These codes include the BR code, a modified EVENODD code, and the X-code. The algebraic structures of the array codes can enable more efficient encoding and decoding in terms of memory space and computation time. Experimental results show iterative decoding of these array codes provides comparable or slightly better error correction performance than a regular LDPC code with similar parameters. In addition, these codes can be decoded as array codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
Numerous structured constructions of low-density paritycheck (LDPC) [2] codes have been introduced based on algebraic, combinatorial and geometric methods. While it is known that properly designed LDPC codes (such as random constructions with irregular degree sequences) can approach capacity when decoded using belief propagation, more structured constructions allow for easier encoding, guaranteed distance properties and less implementation memory.
In this context, it is worthwhile to consider several families of array codes [1]: The BR Code, the EVENODD Code and the X-Code [3] are structured linear binary codes. When considered as LDPC codes, the graphs associated with their parity-check matrices contain none or very few cycles of length 4 (which can cause performance degradations when decoding using belief propagation). In addition, these codes have efficient algorithms for correcting errors and erasures of large
symbols, that can be used as outer decoders after soft decod-
ing using belief propagation.

11. DECODINGUSING BELIEF PROPAGATION

The BR code, the EVENODD code and the X-Code are

all MDS array codes. In addition, they can be thought of as

LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices have columns pri-

marily of weight 2. The EVENODD code can be modified

t o eliminate high-weight columns in its parity check matrix.

From the algebraic structure, it can be determined that there

are no 4-cycles in the graphs for the parity-check matrices for

the X-code and the modified EVENODD code, making them

more suitable for decoding by belief propagation. While there

are 4-cycles in the BR-code’s parity check matrix, its error cor-

recting performance seems not to be significantly degraded.

In Figure 1,we show the performance of these array codes

(the BR-code, the modified EVENODD code and the X-Code)

+ decoded using the message-passing algorithm for p = 37. The
rates of these codes are high: 1- 2/(p 2) for the BR code,

1-

for the modified EVENODD code, and 1- 2/p

for the X-Code. In order to compare the performance of the

different codes fairly, their code rates have been set t o be the

same by shortening the BR and EVENODD codes to have rate 1- 2f p .
The channel is an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
2 A, channel, and the bit error rate is plotted as a function of the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which is expressed as =
where ?c is the variance of the noise. For comparison, a regular LDPC code was generated using Gallager’s construction. Finally, the curve labeled “Shannon capacity” shows the the-
$ oretical threshold for a code of the rate R = 1 - over the
binary-input AWGN channel.

PerlormameCDmpanron P = 37 rate = 3y37 = 094594595

10-1

1

Figure 1: Performance of Array Codes as LDPC codes
From these experiments, we can observe that the three classes of MDS array codes have similar performance, and are slightly better than the regular LDPC code. These array codes have high information rates, and their regular algebraic structures make them suitable for practical applications in data communications and storage systems.
A full version of this paper is available online in [4].
REFERENCES
M. Blaum, P.G. Farrell, a.nd H.C.A. van Tilborg, “Array Codes,” Chapter 22 in Handbook of Coding Theory, V.S. Pless and W.C. Huffman (Eds.), Elsevier Science B.V., 1998.
D.J.C. MacKay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,” I E E E Trans. Inform. Theory, 45(2), 399-431, March 1999.
L. Xu and J. Bruck, “X-Code: MDS Array Codes with Optimal Encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 45(1), 272-6, January 1999.
M. Blaum, 3. Fan and L. Xu, “Soft Decoding of Several Classes of Array Codes,”
http://www.cs.wustl.edu/- lihao/tech.html.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

