IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 4, JULY 2002

1705

Kirkman Systems and Their Application in Perpendicular Magnetic Recording
Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE, Erozan M. Kurtas, Member, IEEE, and Alexander V. Kuznetsov, Member, IEEE

Abstract—A novel class of a very high-rate low-density parity check codes is introduced, and investigated in the context of its application in a perpendicular magnetic recording system. New codes are well structured and, unlike random codes, can lead to a very low-complexity implementation. A systematic way of constructing codes is based on Kirkman systems. A hardware efficient encoding algorithm is proposed. The bit-error-rate characteristics are characterized by simulation of the soft iterative decoding in perpendicular magnetic read channel with different partial response targets and types of noise.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity check codes, partial response channels, storage systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, various types of turbo codes were proposed for communication channels and storage systems. Although they provide flexible tradeoffs in complexity and bit-error-rate (BER) characteristics, and show very good performance in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and erasure channels, these codes have the drawback of being naturally low rate codes, and hence are inappropriate for extremely high-speed and high-density magnetic recording applications. Among these codes are the “repeat-accumulate” (RA) codes and their generalizations, the “accumulated convolutional codes” (ACC) schemes, RA codes with algebraic interleavers, as well as many others. There are good surveys on this subject, for example, [1]–[3], and, therefore, there is no need here to go into the details of their pluses and minuses.
Similar BER characteristics at the lower level of complexity can be also achieved by the use of the random Gallager low-density parity check (LDPC) codes [4], [5], but it requires very complex encoders in general. To deal with this problem, irregular LDPCs were proposed [6]. The parity check matrices with irregular structure enable faster encoding since the dimension of the systematic matrix used for encoding data bits turns out to be smaller than the number of the parity check equations used for decoding.
An alternative approach is the algebraic construction of LDPC codes using finite geometry [7]. Finite geometry LDPC codes are quasi-cyclic and their encoders can be implemented with linear shift registers with feedback connectors based on their generator polynomials. The resulting codes have
Manuscript received October 29, 2001; revised February 22, 2002. B. Vasic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu). E. M. Kurtas and A. V. Kuznetsov are with Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA 15203 USA (e-mail: Erozan.M.Kurtas@seagate.com; Alexander.V.Kuznetsov@seagate.com). Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9464(02)05667-4.

been demonstrated to have excellent performance in AWGN although their decoder complexities are still somewhat high. Vasic [8], [9] uses balanced incomplete block designs (BIBD) [10] to construct regular LDPC. The codes based on BIBDs are a super-class of projective and affine geometry codes, as it will be explained in the section of code construction.
Applications of the LDPC codes and iterative soft decoding in magnetic recording have been studied extensively during the recent years, for example, in [11]–[13]. In contrast, the research on application of iterative decoding to optical recording is limited to [14].
In Section II, we introduce a novel class of a high-rate LDPC codes using some objects from combinatorics, such as BIBD, Steiner and Kirkman systems, and cyclic difference family (CDF). A hardware efficient encoding algorithm for these codes is proposed in Section III. The decoding algorithm used in simulations is briefly described in Section IV. This section also contains the BER characteristics evaluated by simulation for a perpendicular magnetic read channel with different PR targets and types of noise.

II. CODE CONSTRUCTION

A. Basic Notions From Combinatorics and Coding Theory

Since our approach to the construction of the LDPC codes is

essentially based on combinatorial designs, we first give neces-

sary definitions and notations from combinatorics. The relation-

ship between the designs and error correcting codes has been

known in coding theory for a long time [15], [16], but using de-

signs for constructing LDPC codes is a relatively new research

area. Although we will focus on the regular LDPC codes with

constant column and row weights, the combinatorial approach

can be extended to irregular codes as well.

In general, in combinatorics a design is a pair

, where

is a set of some elements called points, and is a collection

of subsets of called blocks. The numbers of points and blocks

are denoted by

and

, respectively. If

is

an integer parameter, such that any subset of points from is

contained in exactly blocks, we deal with a -design. A BIBD

is a -design for which each block contains the same number of

points , and every point is contained in the same number of

blocks .

In this paper, we consider only BIBD with

. Although

such a BIBD still has five integer parameters , , , , and ,

only three of them are independent, since

(1) (2)

0018-9464/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1706

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 4, JULY 2002

(the proof is quite straightforward; see, for example, [16]).

Therefore, given three parameters we can always find the other

two parameters using (1) and (2). The notation

-BIBD

is used for a BIBD with points, block size , index , and

.A

-BIBD with

is called a Steiner system.

A Steiner system with

is called a Steiner triple system.

A BIBD is resolvable if there exists a nontrivial partition of

its blocks set into parallel classes each of which partitions

the point set . The resolvable Steiner triple system is called

Kirkman system. These combinatorial objects originate from

Kirkman’s famous schoolgirl problem posted in 1850 [17], and

have many interesting properties.

1) Example 1: Let

be a set of nine points

, and

be a collection of 12 blocks. This pair

is the

(9,3,1)-BIBD system. Furthermore, since can be partitioned

into the following four parallel classes (or orbits):

is a Kirkman system with

and

.

B. Constructing a Parity Check Matrix Using a BIBD

A point-block incidence matrix

of a design

has rows and columns with elements

if the th ele-

ment of occurs in the th block of , and

otherwise.

Since each block of the BIBD is incident with the same number

of points , and every point is incident with the same number

of blocks , then all columns of have the same weight , and

all rows of have the same weight . Therefore, a point-block

incidence matrix

is in fact a parity check matrix of

a Gallager code. This code has the length

and the rate

.

For example, the incidence matrix of the Kirkman system

from Example 1

(3)

Fig. 1. The bipartite graph of the BIBD(9,3,1) system.

vertex

and the vertex exists if

. For the parity

check-matrix given by (3), the bipartite graph is shown in

Fig. 1.

It is desirable to have each bit “checked” in as many equations

as possible, but because of the iterative nature of the decoding

algorithm the bipartite graph must not contain short cycles. In

other words, the graph girth (the length of the shortest cycle)

must be large. These two requirements are contradictory, and

the tradeoff is especially difficult when we want to construct a

code that is both short and has a high rate. The girth constraint

is related to the condition that every -element subset of is

contained in as few blocks as possible. However, the codes based

on -designs

have short cycles, and therefore, we restrict

ourselves to the 2-designs, i.e., BIBD, or more specifically to

the designs with the index

. The

constraint means

that no more than one block contains the same pair of points,

or that the code is self-orthogonal or, equivalently, that there are

no cycles of length four in a bipartite graph.

C. Constructing the BIBD From a Difference Family

We have shown that the concept of BIBD offers a tool for

designing self-orthogonal codes. Now we show how to con-

struct Steiner triple systems using difference families of Abelian

groups.

Let be an additive Abelian group of order . A

difference family (DF) is a collection of -element subsets

,

, such that every nonzero

element of can be represented exactly ways as a difference

of two elements of the same block , i.e., occurs times among

the differences

,

,

for some

.

The sets are called base blocks. If is isomorphic with , a

group of integers modulo , then a

-DF is called a CDF.

Example 2: The set

is a base block of the

(7,3,1)-CDF, as we can see by creating the difference array

gives the Gallager LDPC code of length 12 with three orthogonal parities for each code bit.
To visualize the decoding algorithm, the matrix of parity checks can be represented as a bipartite graph with two kinds of vertices [18]. The first subset , is composed of bits, and

with elements

.

Example 3: The blocks

and

are the base blocks of a (13,3,1)-CDF of a group

we can see from the difference arrays

, as

the second is a set of parity check equations . An edge

between a bit and an equation exists if the bit is involved in the

check. Translated to the block design terminology, the two sets

of vertices are and , respectively and an edge between the (all nonzero elements are distinct).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC et al.: KIRKMAN SYSTEMS AND THEIR APPLICATION IN PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECORDING

1707

Given a

-DF with base blocks

,

, we can construct a

-BIBD with blocks by creating “orbits” of the base

blocks. An orbit of the base block is a set of new blocks

(4)

where

, and is an addition in . It is not difficult to

check that the union of all orbits

is a

-BIBD.

Example 4: The (13,3,1)-CDF on the group

has

two base blocks

and

with the

following orbits, where each column is a block

These two orbits give the parity check matrix (see equation at

the bottom of the page) of the (26,13)-code with three orthog-

onal parities for each code bit.

In general, given a

-CDF we can always construct a

parity check matrix of a linear code as

,

where each submatrix is a circulant matrix of dimension

corresponding to some orbit of the CDF. Such CDF codes have

a quasi-cyclic structure similar to Townsend’s self-orthogonal

quasi-cyclic codes [19], and Weldon’s difference set codes [20].

The minimum distance of BIBD codes determines the code

performances at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs), the region

where most of the practical systems typically operate. The

bounds on

for Gallager codes with the column weight

are derived in [21]. Another technique for establishing

lower bounds on

is due to Tanner [22]. It pertains to

an arbitrary linear code with a matrix of parity checks ,

represented by a bipartite graph, and is based on combinatorial

optimization. The calculation of the bound involves finding the

second largest eigenvalue of the transformation of the

.

The lower bound

for

-BIBD codes

can be established by using the majority decoding argument.

In [4], some bounds on

have been derived using Pasch

configurations.

As we have shown, it is straightforward to construct a BIBD once the CDF is known. However, finding the CDF is a much more complicated problem solved only for some values of and . Now we describe some known classes of CDF.

D. Netto’s First Construction of CDF [23]–[25]

Let

, and be a power of a prime such that

. Since is a power of prime, there exists a Galois field

,

and we use it as a set of points . Let be a multiplicative

group of this field, and be its generator [a primitive element

in

] [16].

Since

, the element has the multiplicative

order

, . Let be a divisor of . The set

of th powers of is a subgroup , and the sets

are its

cosets. Netto has shown that the set

defines

a

-DF [23], [27]). In the literature, the base blocks

are typically given in the form

,

rather than as

.

An alternative combinatorial way of constructing a CDF is

proposed by Rosa [26]. Rosa’s method also generates a

CDF. A list of constructions for rate 1/2 codes is given

in [27].

E. Netto’s Second Construction of CDF [23], [24]

Again, the number of points is supposed to be a power of

a prime, but the second condition is different:

.

Let be a generator of the multiplicative group of the order

,

, and be the group of th powers of

in

. The set

defines base blocks of

the Netto triple system. Some Netto systems have the following

interesting property. When is a power of a prime, and

, the Netto triple system on , is Pasch-free (see

[26], and [25, p. 214, Lemma 13.7]).

Example 5: The following set of blocks:

,

,

,

,

,

, and

, is the Netto

triple system constructed on with

. The resulting code

is quasi-cyclic, has

, length

and

.

The difference families for some small primes are given in

Table I. Other examples of interesting CDF constructed by

Netto’s method are given in Tables II and III.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1708

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 4, JULY 2002

TABLE I SOME SMALL PRIME POWER (v; 3; 1)-CDFS

data words and the parity word have the same length bits. By the definition of a linear code, we have
(5) where is a column consisting from zeros. This equality can be written as follows:
(6)

TABLE II SOME HIGH RATE PRIME POWER KIRKMAN (v; 3; 1)-CDFS
TABLE III HIGH RATE KIRKMAN (v; 3; 1)-CDF WITH A NUMBER OF BLOCKS (CODE
LENGTH) SMALLER THAN A SECTOR SIZE

This equation leads to a simple hardware implementation of

the encoding process as described below. First, the encoder pro-

cesses independently all data words computing products

, and then calculates the left-hand side of (6)

.

Since all matrices ,

, are circulant, the

calculation of each vector requires a shift register of length

, and logic units consisting of an AND gate, EXCLUSIVE OR

gate, and a flip-flop. More precisely, while working on the th

column

of the submatrix , the encoder performs the

following operations.

1) Shift a vector of length to find the next column .

2) Perform AND operations while the multiplying the data

word and the current column .

3) Perform exclusive-OR operations to calculate

.

The inverse of the matrix is precalculated and stored in

a ROM. In fact, since the inverse of a circulant matrix is also

circulant, the memory required for storing

is not , but

only (only one column of needs to be stored).

Notice that when is not a prime, but a prime power, the

columns of are not obtained as simple shifts of a previous

column, but as consecutive states of a maximum-length shift

register with the primitive polynomial

for which

, where is the generator of the multiplicative group in

used to generate a difference family from a base block (when

is a prime, the polynomial is

).

The generator matrix can be equivalently written in terms of

generator polynomials that can be easily calculated from ma-

trices . However, the advantage of the encoding algorithm

described above is that it allows for an arbitrary choice of parity

bit positions (as long as the columns at parity bit positions are

linearly independent). This is important in magnetic recording

systems because a modulation, run-length limited code is con-

catenated with a LDPC, and the parity bits have to be spread

across the codeword in order to avoid severe run-length viola-

tions due to the insertion of parity bits.

IV. APPLICATION IN PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECODING

III. ENCODING ALGORITHM

As described in Section II, given a

-CDF with base

blocks

,

, we can always con-

struct a parity check matrix

from the cir-

culant submatrices ,

, which have the size

,

and full rank .

For the parity check matrix with such structure, it is conve-

nient to compose the codeword

from

data words ,

, and a parity word . All

We studied the performance of BIBD codes under the different constraints inherited by the perpendicular magnetic recording system. An error function is used as the step response of the perpendicular recording channel, which is not a perfect match to the real systems with new combinations of the read/write heads and media, but is a reasonable approximation. An adaptive least-mean-squared equalization converted step response of the channel to one of the classical or generalized partial response targets. Different combinations of colored electronic noise and media jitter were tested in simulations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC et al.: KIRKMAN SYSTEMS AND THEIR APPLICATION IN PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECORDING

1709

Fig. 2. BER of different Kirkman LDPC codes.

Fig. 4. BER for the fixed Kirkman LDPC and different values of jitter.

Fig. 5. BER for the fixed Kirkman LDPC and different targets.

Fig. 3. Regular Kirkman versus random LDPC codes.

The BER is given for the user linear density

. The

channel linear density was adjusted according to the code rate.

The soft information is extracted from a partial response

channel using the BCJR algorithm [10] operating on a channel

trellis, and then used in a message passing algorithm (MPA)

for the LDPC decoding [11]. The bit “likelihoods” obtained

from the MPA are passed back to the BCJR that uses them as

a priori probabilities and so on. The MPA uses the “min-sign”

approximation for updating bit likelihoods, and the likelihoods

have a precision of five bits. The precision of soft information in

the BCJR is also five bits. The BER results are given below for

an architecture in which the compound operation “

iterations of MPA” is performed ten times before the final hard

decision is taken.

To prevent using the same extrinsic information, we require

that any two variables share no more than a single parity check

equation. In other words, the code is required to be self-orthog-

onal, and as we saw in the previous sections all codes con-

structed from the BIBD

have this property.

For the normalized user density

, Figs. 2–5 show the

BER characteristics of two random and three different LDPC

codes constructed from the BIBD based on Kirkman systems

with the following parameters.

1) Number of points

, code length

,

number of information symbols

, rate

, base blocks are given in Table II.

2)

,

,

,

, base blocks

3)

,

,

,

, base blocks

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 4, JULY 2002

In Fig. 2, we compare the BER characteristics of different

Kirkman codes with rates 19/20, 25/26, and 29/30 for the clas-

sical target

of length 3. As we can see from this

figure, all three codes exhibit an error floor at the level of 10 .

We could not get a sufficient amount of the simulation data to

study the exact behavior of the BER curves at this level, but

at the high values of SNR (18.25 and higher), we always had

at least one or two erroneously decoded sectors. Therefore, al-

though our BER points at the level 10 are not reliable, they

show that our regular codes don’t have the “water fall” property

that we see in Fig. 3 for the random LDPC code. The random

LDPC codes with 4096 information bits, three orthogonal parity

checks for each code bit and rate 16/17 was used for compar-

isons. As we can see from Fig. 3, regular LDPC codes lose ap-

proximately 0.4 dB at the BER level 10 . In this figure, we also

show the BER for the serial turbo codes with precoding and the

pair of the generator polynomials (5,7), in octal form.

Fig. 4 shows the degradation of the BER of the fixed Kirkman

LDPC of the length 4401 in the channels with the media noise

modeled as a jitter of the transition points. The jitter is given as

a percentage of the channel clock cycle, e.g., 3% of jitter means

that the standard deviation of the transition equals

, where

is the channel bit interval.

In Fig. 5 we compare the BER for the same fixed Kirkman

code of length

, but combined with different tar-

gets:

, and

,

and

.

V. CONCLUSION

Different architectures of the advanced read/write channels

for perpendicular magnetic recording can be designed from

LDPC codes and iterative soft decoding routines. In this paper,

we described a class of regular high-rate LDPC codes using

mathematical methods developed in combinatorics over many

years mainly for the design of experiments. Although only

Kirkman

systems constructed from Netto’s CDFs

are used here, our approach is much more general, and can

lead to new classes of the efficient LDPC codes. A hardware

efficient encoding algorithm that exploits the cyclic structure

of our codes and allows for flexible placement of parity bits

has also been proposed. We have analyzed the performance of

these codes in perpendicular magnetic recording systems, and

compared them with random codes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their valuable suggestions.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “Serial and hybrid concatenated codes with

applications,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sept.

1997, pp. 80–87.

[2] M. Viterbi and A. J. Viterbi, “New results on serial concatenated

and accumulated-convolutional turbo code performance,” Ann. Des

Telecommun., vol. 54, no. 3–4, pp. 173–182, 1999.

[3] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, and T. Mittelholzer, “Iterative detection/de-

coding techniques for the magnetic recording channel,” in TMRC 2000,

Santa Clara, CA, Aug. 2000, .

[4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[5] J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse ma-

trices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[6] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably

good low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to

be published.

[7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based

on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. In-

form. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[8] B. Vasic, “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on Steiner sys-

tems and their application in magnetic recording,” in Proc. Globecom

2001, vol. 5, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 26–29, 2001, pp. 2954–2960.

[9]

, “Combinatorial constructions of structured low-density parity

check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

submitted for publication.

[10] P. J. Cameron and J. H. van Lint, Graphs, Codes and Designs, ser.

London Math. Soc. Lecture Note 23. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge

Univ. Press, 1980.

[11] A. Fan, A. Friedmann, E. Kurtas, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Low den-

sity parity check codes for partial response channels,” in Allerton Conf.

Communications, Control and Computing, Urbana, IL, Oct. 1999.

[12] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, and T. Mittelholzer, “On iterative decoding

for magnetic recording channels,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes,

Brest, France, 4–7, 2000.

[13] A. Kuznetsov, “Coded modulation schemes with turbo and list detection

for high-order partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37,

pp. 729–736, Mar. 2000.

[14] Y. Song, B. V. K. V. Kumar, E. Kurtas, Y. Yuan, L. L. MacPheters,

and S. W. McLaughlin, “Iterative decoding for partial-response (PR),

equalized, magneto-optical (MO) data storage channels,” IEEE J. Se-

lect. Areas Commun., vol. 191, pp. 774–782, Apr. 2001.
[15] V. K. Bhargava and J. M. Stein, “(v; k; ) configurations and self-dual

codes,” Inform. Control, vol. 28, pp. 352–355, 1975.

[16] J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting

Codes. Oxford, U.K.: North-Holland, 1977.

[17] T. P. Kirkman, “Note on an unanswered prize question,” Cambridge and

Dublin Math. J., vol. 5, pp. 255–262, 1850.

[18] M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[19] R. Townsend and E. J. Weldon, “Self-orthogonal quasicyclic codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 2, pp. 183–195, 1967.

[20] J. Weldon, Jr, “Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 45,

pp. 1045–1055, Sept. 1966.

[21] D. MacKay and M. Davey. Evaluation of Gallager codes for

short block length and high rate applications. [Online]. Available:

http://www.cs.toronto.edu/mackay/CodesRegular.html

[22] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum-distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.

[23] E. Netto, “Zur theorie der triplesysteme,” Math. Ann., vol. 42, pp.

143–152, 1893.
[24] M. Buratti, “Construction of (q; k; 1) difference families with q a prime power and k = 4; 5,” Discrete Math., vol. 138, pp. 169–175, 1995.

[25] The Handbook of Combinatorial Designs, J. Colbourn and J. H. Dinitz,

Eds., CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1996.

[26] R. M. Wilson, “Cyclotomy and difference families in elementary

Abelian groups,” J. Number Theory, vol. 4, pp. 17–47, 1972.

[27] C. H. Ling and C. J. Colbourn, “Rosa triple systems,” in Geometry, Com-

binatorial Designs and Related Structures, J. W. P. Hirschfeld, S. S.

Magliveras, and M. J. de Resmini, Eds. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge

Univ. Press, 1997, pp. 149–159.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

