IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 7, JULY 2002

1759

High-Performance Iterative Viterbi Algorithm for Conventional Serial Concatenated Codes
Lei Wei, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The Viterbi algorithm (VA) and conventional serial concatenated codes (CSCC) have been widely applied in digital communication systems over the last 30 years. In this paper, we show that the Shannon capacity of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels can be approached by CSCCs and the iterative VA (IVA). We firstly study the algebraic properties of CSCCs. We then present the IVA to decode these codes. We also analyze the performance of the IVA and conclude that a better performance can be achieved if we replace the powerful block codes by some simple parity codes. One of the key results in this paper shows that by using a proper design for the decoding method, codes with small loops can be very efficiently decoded using a min-sum type algorithm. The numerical results show that the IVA can closely approach the Shannon sphere-packing lower bound and the Shannon limit. For block sizes ranging from 56 information bits to 11 970 information bits, the IVA can perform to within about 1 dB of the Shannon sphere-packing lower bound at a block error rate
of 10 4. We show that the IVA has very low complexity and can
be applied to many current standard systems, for example, the Qualcomm code-division multiple-access (CDMA) system and the NASA concatenated system, with very little modification or, for some cases, without any modification.
Index Terms—Bootstrap decoding, iterative decoding, serial concatenated systems (SCC), turbo decoding, Viterbi algorithm (VA).
I. INTRODUCTION
E XCITEMENT about the turbo codes [1], [2] was sparked by their close approach to the Shannon limit (within 0.7 dB of the limit) with a very low decoding complexity. Turbo decoding has clearly demonstrated how to use the soft-output information to cut down the complexity. The iterative algorithm is one of the key components in turbo decoding.
During the last eight years, significant progress has been made in the area of iterative decoding for concatenated codes. In [4], Benedetto and Montorsi provided a theoretical insight into turbo codes which are parallel concatenated codes and their performance. In [5], Benedetto et al. studied serial concatenated systems, in which two convolutional codes are separated by a random interleaver. Hagenauer et al. studied parallel concatenated block codes with block permutation in [6].
At the same time, significant progress has been made in generalizing the iterative decoding algorithms (see Special Issue on Codes on Graphs and Iterative Decoding, IEEE
Manuscript received September 8, 1999; revised January 17, 2001. This work was supported in part by ARC under Grant A00103310.
The author is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816 USA (e-mail: lei@ee.ucf.edu).
Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(02)05151-9.

TRANSACTION ON INFORMATION THEORY, February 2001). In fact, the key concepts pertaining to codes on graphs and to sum-product algorithm were developed 40 years ago by Gallager [7] and were unfortunately neglected. In [8], Tanner generalized Gallager’s low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes to codes on general bipartite graphs, known as Tanner graphs. Tanner also developed two general algorithms called the min-sum and sum-product algorithms. In [9], Wiberg extended Tanner graphs to include trellis codes. Such modified graphs are now known as Tanner–Wiberg–Loeliger (TWL) graphs. With TWL graphs, Wiberg et al. showed that the famous Viterbi algorithm (VA) and the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) (or a posteriori probability (APP)) algorithm [38] are special cases of the min-sum and sum-product algorithms. Kschischang et al. further extended TWL graphs into factor graphs [14]. Recent progress in the area has shown that LDPC codes can closely approach the Shannon limit (about 1.2 dB [10], [11] and within 0.13 dB [12]). A detailed review of the development in this area and a tutorial about factor graphs can be found in [13]–[15].
Up to now, all these achievements have been made by designing better codes so that low-complexity iterative algorithms can achieve near-optimal decoding. One of the key design criteria is to avoid small loops in code or interleaver design. In [26], we showed that a coding scheme, which contains many small loops in their TWL graphs, can also closely approach the Shannon limit if we modify the min-sum and sum-product algorithms. In this paper, we further show this result is valid for general conventional serial concatenated codes (CSCCs).
The primary motivation for this paper is to improve iterative decoding for codes with short block sizes. Much work has focused on near-sphere-packing bound decoding for systems requiring short codes (i.e., around 200 information bits per codeword). Fossorier and Lin showed that linear block codes and ordered statistics decoding can approach the sphere-packing bound to within 0.5 dB for a code length of 64 information bits [28], [29]. In [30], Wei and Qi showed that convolutional codes with long constraint lengths and hierarchical decoding can achieve a performance within 0.8 dB of the sphere-packing bound for code lengths of up to 300 information bits. Up to now, very few results have indicated that iterative decoding can achieve similar performance for codes with similar lengths. In this paper, we show that by using the iterative VA (IVA) [22], [23] we can approach the sphere-packing bound to around 1 dB for a code length as short as 56 information bits.
Our work originated from Jelinek and Cocke’s bootstrap decoding algorithm [31], [32]. In the 1970s, Jelinek and Cocke established an iterative bootstrap algorithm for decoding a concatenated code where a long convolutional code was used as the

0018-9448/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1760

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 7, JULY 2002

inner code and a simple parity code was used as the outer code. The original motivation of bootstrap decoding is to reduce the peak complexity of the sequential decoder used for decoding the long convolutional code. Recently, Cabral et al. noted the remarkable similarity between the turbo decoding and bootstrap algorithm and predicted that the performance of the bootstrap algorithm can be close to turbo decoding (see Costello’s home Web page: http://www.nd.edu/ee and [11]). Our recent results in [22]–[27] have confirmed Costello’s insight. We showed that the iterative Viterbi algorithm, which is a modification of the original bootstrap algorithm, can achieve much better performances.
In this paper, we will show how to extend the IVA for general CSCCs. Our previous work has dealt with the special CSCC which uses a parity-check code as the outer code and whose code trellis forms a tail-biting cycle in each block. In practice, a cyclic redundancy check (CRC) code or a Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) code is often used as the outer code.
For clarification, the terms of CRC-CSCC, BCH-CSCC, and parity-CSCC are used to refer to the CSCC using a CRC code, a BCH code, and an even parity-check code as the outer code, respectively. Furthermore, when two parity-check codes are used as the outer codes, we call it a 2-D parity-CSCC. All these codes will be described in detail in Section II.
The Viterbi algorithm [16], [17], and the CSCCs [18] have been widely applied in digital communications (see [19] as an example). Over the years, people have constructed many VA circuits for various situations (see [20], [21]). In these systems, the code trellis in each block often terminates to a known state rather than tail-biting. In this paper, we will show how to apply the IVA for these non-tail-biting cases and we also show how to convert these non-tail-biting cases into tail-biting ones.
During the study, we found that parity CSCCs always perform better than CRC-CSCCs and BCH-CSCCs when decoded by the IVA. In this paper, we will provide some theoretical justifications about this phenomenon.
Since the code rate varies from one code to the other, we will compare the performances of different coding schemes in term of the code imperfectness which is defined by the gap between the performance of a code and the sphere-packing bound corresponding to its rate and block size.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present CSCCs, including CRC-CSCCs and the concatenated structure used in bootstrap decoding as special cases. In Section III, we present algebraic properties of the CSCCs. In Section IV, we show TWL graphs of the CSCCs and then present the iterative Viterbi algorithm. In Section V, we analyze the performance of the IVA. The numerical results are presented in Section VI. Section VII concludes the paper. In this paper, we will focus on additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels with soft-input metrics, the inner code will be rate one half convolutional codes, and we use a binary linear block code as the outer code.
II. SERIAL CONCATENATED CODES
In this section, we will briefly present a CSCC, and then CRC-CSCCs and BCH-CSCCs as two special cases of CSCCs.

Fig. 1. Block diagram of a CSCC.

Fig. 2. Block interleaver in a CSCC.

After that, the linkage between the CSCC and the bootstrap system will be established. Finally, we show 2D parity-CSCCs.

A. Conventional Serial Concatenated Codes (CSCCs)

Consider a CSCC given in Fig. 1. Suppose the output of an

information source is a sequence (say ) of the binary digits

“ ” and “ .” At the block encoder, this binary information se-

quence is segmented into block of bits each. Each block is

then fed into the block encoder and generates a codeword of

bits in systematic form, . After that, an

block inter-

leaver is used where each codeword of the block code consti-

tutes a row. The interleaver is then read out columnwise in bits,

where is called the interleaver depth. The output bits, , are

then fed into the convolutional inner encoder one bit at a time.

Each input bit produces two output bits. Finally, the output bits

from the convolutional encoder are modulated into binary

phase-shift keying (BPSK) signals and transmitted over an

AWGN channel, i.e.,

, where

,

is a zero-mean independent Gaussian variable with variance

(double sided), and is the energy per information bit,

is the code rate. In Fig. 2, we illustrate this block interleaver.

B. CRC-CSCCs
As a special case of CSCCs, CRC-CSCCs have been widely applied in wireless communications. In CRC-CSCCs, the information bit vector is fed into a CRC encoder. After that, a number of tail bits are inserted into the block. Finally, the block is encoded by a convolutional encoder. A CRC-CSCC is given in Fig. 3. Conventionally, the CRC code is applied to perform error detection and the convolutional code is used for error correction. With the IVA, the CRC code can help the inner code to wipe out the error, at the same time it still performs reliable error detection (see [27, Fig. 7]).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: HIGH-PERFORMANCE VITERBI ALGORITHM FOR CONCATENATED CODES

1761

Fig. 3. A CRC-CSCC.

C. Bootstrap Structure
The concatenated code constructed for bootstrap decoding is the same as the CSCC presented in Fig. 2 except for two changes: a) The block inner code is replaced by a single even parity-check code. The primary role of the parity-check code is to provide a way to pass information between decoders for different columns. b) The convolutional encoder for each column is terminated to the all zero state (see Fig. 4(a)). That is, a number of tail bits are inserted at each column. As shown in [22]–[26], these redundant tail bits can be eliminated by constructing a tail-biting trellis (see Fig. 4(b)). In a tail-biting trellis, every starting state has a unique corresponding ending state. For simplicity, this pair of states are the same state. A path in a tail-biting trellis is a valid codeword if and only if it starts from a state and ends at the same state. For a linear feedforward convolutional encoder, we can set the starting state by shifting the last bits in the block into the shift registers in the encoder, where is the memory length of the encoder. We call this tail-biting code a one–dimensional (1-D) parity-CSCC.

Fig. 4. Bootstrap structures.

D. 2-D Parity CSCC With Tail-Biting Packet Transmission

It has been found in [23] that in order to achieve

near-sphere-packing bound decoding, we need a two-di-

mensional (2–D) parity code, given in Fig. 5. In words, we first

construct

1-D parity concatenated codewords and store

by row in the first

rows of a

-bit memory device.

After that, we build the th row as follows. Each bit in the th

row is the even parity-check bit of the first

rows in the

corresponding column. Finally, the bits are read out by row and

mapped into a BPSK signal for transmission.

In order to perform iterative decoding based only on the soft-

input metrics (which are used in the VA), we need to work out

the algebraic properties of the codes; more precisely, the prop-

erties of due to the block outer code.

Fig. 5. 2-D parity-CSCCs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1762

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 7, JULY 2002

III. ALGEBRAIC PROPERTIES OF CSCCS

In this section, we will establish algebraic properties for sev-

eral CSCCs. Similar to an LDPC code, which is defined by its

parity-check matrix, we need to work out the parity-check ma-

trix for the overall CSCC codeword. Then, the extrinsic informa-

tion can flow according to the parity-check equations specified

by the matrix. For example, assuming that

,

where denotes the XOR operation, the decoder can then pass

the information collected at nodes and to node . The

parity-check matrix is often not unique. It is important to get a

sparse one, since we found that the IVA constructed by a sparse

parity-check matrix has a better performance, and, in Section V,

we will provide a theoretical justification.

In this section, we first provide a way to compute the parity-

check matrix for a CRC-CSCC based on two constitute en-

coders. We then show in Theorem 1 that if we change the CSCC

to tail-biting form, we can obtain a sparse parity-check matrix

which only depends on the encoder of the block code. In The-

orem 2, we modify the sparse matrix in Theorem 1 to accommo-

date the non-tail-biting case. Finally, in Theorem 3 we extend

the results in above theorems to the CSCC using a shortened

CRC code as the outer code.

First, let us study a simple CRC-CSCC in Fig. 3. Let

and be the generator matrix and the parity-check matrix of

the , cyclic code , respectively, in systematic form. Let

and

be, respectively, the generator polynomial and

parity-check polynomial

Fig. 6. A special concatenated code.

be the generator polynomial of the inner convolutional code, where the superscript indicates the corresponding generator sequences of the convolutional encoder. If the convolutional encoder starts from and terminates to the all-zero state, then we can compute the parity-check matrix of , , where

and the corresponding parity polynomial

as follows.

Procedures to Compute

:

Step A: Compute

.

Step B: Find a minimum integer such that

is a

factor of

.

Step C:

.

Procedures to Compute :

Step A: Compute

.

Step B: Use the method on [34, p. 94] to find

dividing

by

for

, we obtain

, i.e.,

and the th row vector of is the

-tuple

of

.

Clearly, the overall code is often much more complicated than

the linear block code , and it is possible for the generator ma-

trix and the parity matrix to be different in each row. In the fol-

lowing theorems, we will establish simple parity-check polyno-

mials for the overall codeword.

Theorem 1: Consider the CSCC given in Fig. 6, that is, a

cyclic code is used as the outer code, a rate– feedforward

convolutional code is used as the inner code and bit is con-

nected to bit to form a tail-biting trellis, then

is the

parity-check polynomial for each output bit row vector

for

Proof: Let the input information sequence be where

and the output sequence from the block encoder be , where

where

Obviously, we have cyclic codes [34], we have

. According to the property of

(1)

is the remainder. After that, we have

for any integer , where

, where is a

identity matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: HIGH-PERFORMANCE VITERBI ALGORITHM FOR CONCATENATED CODES

1763

After reordering we obtain , i.e.,

Proof: Simply considering the bound effect in (3), we can prove this theorem easily. Let

Let We still have

(9)

for

the property given in (1) then becomes

for any integer . But

(2)

for any integer , where

For any tail-biting feedforward convolutional code, the th

output sequence is then

(10)

If we convert to

following (5) and (6), then is identical to (3) biting case given in (3). Thus,

of the tail-

where each row of dent row in the

is cyclic right shifts of the corresponidentity matrix, i.e.,

and

and so on. Each element in the right-hand side of (3) satisfies (2). Thus, , for any integer , where . Therefore,
the output bit row vector from the convolutional encoder forms a codeword of the cyclic code.
This property shows that the concept of bootstrap decoding is valid even for cyclic codes like BCH codes. Theorem 1 can be immediately extended to study the continuous transmission cases given in Fig. 2.

forms a codeword of .

depends on the previous bits,

and the bits at the end of this block,

.

A shortened cyclic code [34] is also often used as the outer

code. Such codes have been extensively used in computer and

wireless communications. By deleting high-order information

bits, we obtain an

shortened cyclic

code .

Applying Theorem 2 for the CRC-CSCC in Fig. 3, we have

the following theorem.

Theorem 3: Consider the code given in Fig. 3. if we

replace the CRC outer code by a shortened CRC code

(i.e., by deleting high-order information bits to obtain an

shortened cyclic code and

),

then

is the parity-check polynomial for each output bit

row vector

.

Proof: The proof is simple. For a CSCC code given in

Fig. 3 using a shortened cyclic code, we have

Theorem 2: For a CSCC scheme with a rate– feedfor-

ward convolutional code and a cyclic code, if the block does where

for

and

NOT form a tail-biting trellis, then

forms a valid cyclic codeword of , for where for
if
if

Substituting this into (10), we can show that , parity-check polynomial for

is the .

(5) The preceding theorem is important, since it gives us a simple parity relationship for the overall codeword for all shortened

(6) CRC cases if

.

In the next section, we will present the iterative Viterbi algo-

rithm (VA).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 7, JULY 2002

Fig. 8. Block diagram for the IVA.

Fig. 7. TWL graph representation for a CSCC.

IV. TWL GRAPH REPRESENTATION AND ITERATIVE VITERBI DECODING ALGORITHM
In [26], we showed several modified iterative decoding algorithms for parity concatenated TCM codes and their TWL graphs. We also showed the IVA for these codes. In this section, we first present TWL graphs for a simple CSCC, then show how to simplify the min-sum algorithm to the IVA.

A. TWL Graphs for a Simple CSCC

The TWL graph [8], [9] is a powerful tool that helps to under-

stand and develop decoding algorithms. Here, we present TWL

for a simple CSCC. In Fig. 7, we present a TWL graph for a

CSCC given in Fig. 4(a), that is, it uses the even parity-check

code as the outer code, a rate– convolutional code as the

inner code,

,

, and

.

Without the parity-check codes, the TWL graph is cycle-free

and we can decode each column by the VA decoder indepen-

dently. After running the VA decoder for each column, the de-

coder can stop and produce the MLD result. With the parity-

check codes, the TWL graph contains many small loops. The

optimal APP decoder is very complicated, thus, we often use

suboptimal iterative decoding algorithms to decode this code.

For example, we can apply two-way min-sum or sum-product

algorithms for each column, then update the soft information

across each row. After that, we can repeat the decoding pro-

cedure for each column and the updating procedure for each

row for a number of iterations. As shown in [26], modified

min-sum and sum-product algorithms can achieve a superior

performance. Now let us consider how to perform iterative de-

coding without computing the soft information.

After decoding each column using the VA decoder, all we

know are the hard-decision results output from the VA decoder

and the branch metrics,

, where

denotes the probability density function. How do we update the

metric? Let us first consider a few simple cases.

Consider the TWL graph in Fig. 7. If

, then we have

only two columns. Since each row is even parity check, both

columns are identical. In other words, we repeat the first column

convolutional codeword in the second column. For such a case,

the optimal way to update the metric is to sum the two metrics

in each row and the optimal decoder is the VA decoder using the

sum of two metrics in each row as its branch metrics.

Consider the TWL graph in Fig. 7 for

when we know

the codeword in the second column. Now, the optimal way to

update the metric (say for the VA in the first column) is either

the sum of the two metrics in the first and the third columns in

each row if the bit in the second column is zero or the difference

between the metrics in the first and the third columns in each row

if the row bit in the second column is one. The optimal decoder

is the VA decoder using the optimally updated metrics in each

row as its branch metrics. This case can be extended for any

as long as we know the codewords in any columns.

In the general case, we do not know the codewords up to

columns. However, after the first iteration we have estimated

codewords for each column. These estimated codewords can be

used to update the metrics. The IVA is based on such an updating

procedure. Fig. 8 presents a block diagram of the IVA decoder.

Clearly, it is a type of decision feedback decoder.

B. Iterative Viterbi Algorithm for CSCCs

Now we present the IVA for general CSCCs.

Iterative Viterbi Algorithm:

Step A: In the first iteration, apply the VA to decode each column without consideration of the outer code.

Step B:

Check the syndrome of the outer code. If it is not a valid codeword of the outer code, go to Step C; otherwise go to Step E, assuming that the outer code can reliably detect errors.

Step C: For the remaining iteration, update the branch metric for each symbol node using the outer code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: HIGH-PERFORMANCE VITERBI ALGORITHM FOR CONCATENATED CODES

1765

Step D: Repeat Steps B and C until reaching a preset maximum iteration number. Decode the block code.
Step E: Output the final decision.

The key step for the IVA is how to update the branch metric. The outer code used in the CSCCs may introduce one or more parity-check nodes that connect symbol nodes in each row. One can easily formulate many different updating rules. Here we will present one which has been used in this paper. The update rule is given as follows.

Branch Metric Update Rule for the IVA:

Step A: For each symbol node (say ), select one paritycheck node (if there are more than one node, randomly select one of them).

Step B: List all symbol nodes connected to this parity-check

node in the row (say

).

Step C: Randomly select one of symbols from the list (say ). Then compute an estimated state information

for tail-biting cases for continuous cases

where denotes the hard decision on the unselected symbol in the previous iteration.
Step D: Update the branch metric by combining the Viterbi metrics on symbols and as follows:

know that error propagation in the min-sum and sum-product algorithms can be fixed for parity-CSCCs [26].
Clearly, Forney’s original decoding method, i.e., decoding the inner code using the Viterbi algorithm and then passing the hard decision of the inner decoder to the outer decoder to further reduce the error rate, can be viewed as a special case of the IVA, i.e., the IVA with one iteration. Thus, the IVA can be used not only to achieve near-optimal decoding for the special CSCC such as parity-CSCCs, but also can improve the performance of CSCCs in general. However, during simulations (as shown in the numerical section), we find that if we use powerful block codes, susch as BCH codes, the improvement is very limited. In the next section, we will analytically study the performance of the IVA, which can explain the phenomenon.
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR THE IVA
Performance analysis for iterative min-sum and sum-product algorithms is a difficult task, even for a simple single circle trellis (see [35]–[37]). Here, we mainly study the pairwise error performance of an error event for the IVA, which will allow us to gain some insights on how to select codes and parameters to maximize the performance.
Let be an error event of length defined in the traditional way such that it starts when the error state sequence differs from the correct state sequence and ends when the two sequences agree again for the first time. Let

(13)

where

denotes the updated metric and is a

factor

which is introduced to reduce

error propagation.

The IVA presented here is a generalized version of that in [22], [26]. It takes into account cyclic codes and CRC codes as outer codes and continuous transmission. The IVA can be viewed as a “switch-sum” algorithm, acting like a switch and the metric simply as the sum of two Viterbi metrics. Of course, will introduce one multiplication operation. But in hardware design we do not need multiplication. Equation (13) can be easily implemented as increasing the metric by “ ” or “ ” levels [27].
It is important to emphasize that the IVA is still using soft information to improve the performance. However, it coarsely approximates the soft information in such a way that we can compute it using the hard-decision output from the Viterbi decoder at the previous iteration and the soft-input metrics. In other words, it uses the hard decision to simplify the graph connections of the square nodes (see Fig. 7) into one input and one output branch. The value of acts as a switch to determine how to combine the two branch metrics.
The key difference between the min-sum and the IVA is that only the symbol nodes are passed around in the IVA, while in the min-sum/sum-product algorithms the information collected around each symbol node is also passed around the trellis. Since the girths of these loops are small, wrong information at one place could pass to several places very close to each other and result in severe error propagation at the next iteration. Now, we

and

and denote two input bit sequences and two output bit sequences

of the convolutional encoder associated with the two paths of ,

respectively. Let

denote the Hamming distance and define

and

.

In the first iteration, the pair-wise error probability for this

error event is identical to that for the conventional VA, i.e.,

(14)

After iteration 1, the metric due to parity constraint is fed in.

Let denote an indication function of , i.e.,

,

if

(i.e., state information is correct);

,

otherwise. Let

if

;

otherwise.

Assuming the interleave depth

, the pair-wise error prob-

ability for this error event is then

(15)

where (16)

is a distance due to the side information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 7, JULY 2002

The side-information distance

is a random variable,

which depends on the status of the decision on in the previous

iteration. If decisions on all bits are correct, then we have

. Actually, if decisions on all bits are

correct, then decoding will be terminated since the syndrome

is zero. Thus, it is important to study how to maximize

especially for the first few iterations.

Let

at the previous iteration and the number

of ’s connecting to the parity node be . Thus, the number

of ’s determining

is

. Now we can state the

following theorem.

Theorem 4: If the decisions on all ’s determining

for

are independent, then the mean of is

equal to

is more likely to happen and it results in error propagation. The-

orems 4 and 5 show that in order to maximize

and

minimize

we should select a block code which has a

smaller value of , i.e., select a weak code with few “ ’s” in

its parity matrix (very similar to low-density codes in [7]). For

given and , the bootstrap structure has a lowest value of

which is equal to

, while powerful block codes such

as BCH codes or Reed–Solomon (RS) codes often have much

larger values of . For example, the minimum value of

for the

BCH code is , which is

more than 10 times that for the simple parity code. Thus, we ex-

pect that the CSCCs with a powerful block code might have a

poorer error performance than those with a weak parity or cyclic

code when the IVA is used. The following theorem shows the

cyclic code with minimum value of .

Proof: For any

, we have

Theorem 6: If is divisible by

, then the code gen-

erated by

will have a minimum value of

.

Proof: The parity constraint is given by

.

For example, for the

code we have

For independent s we have

(17) which means bits

and will form a parity

check. The value of is equal to the number of terms in

(18)

. For

we have

Thus,

where

if denotes mean average. Therefore, we have

which has

. Since

parity bits with

will result in each bit in codeword only having one (19) parity node and no other arrangement can result in an even

smaller

, thus,

will be the minimum value

of

.

The mean and variance are often used to classify the behavior

of a random variable. In the following theorem, we find the vari-

ance of , assuming

for all .

Theorem 5: If the decisions on all ’s determining

for

are independent and

for all , then

the variance of is equal to

.

Proof:

Theorems 4 and 5 also show the difficulty in selection of or

due to the tradeoff between

and

.

However, if is small, then

and

,

thus, we should select a large value for . Otherwise, we should

choose a smaller value. Since, in general, the first few iterations

often have a large and the error rate is gradually reduced as

the number of iterations increases, the best way of selecting

is to gradually increase as the number of iterations increases.

However, selecting a small could result in a large number of

iterations required for the decoder to converge to the correct

sequence.

In the next section, we will present several typical applica-

tions of the IVA.

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS

(20)

where

denotes variance.

It is obvious that in order to construct a successful decoder, we wish to maximize the mean value and minimize the variance. We have to try to avoid feeding a negative since a negative means that in the next iteration a pair-wise error

In this section we present the simulation results for several typical applications. The code notation for both convolutional codes and cyclic codes follows that of [34] which is octal and left-shifted. The simulation mainly focused on block error rate. The simulation trial was terminated for each data point if at least 30 packet errors were obtained or if the number of blocks in simulation trials reached . For all cases, the rate loss due to the dummy tail bits and parity bits is deducted from the computation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: HIGH-PERFORMANCE VITERBI ALGORITHM FOR CONCATENATED CODES

1767

Two rate- convolutional codes are used in this section: a)

the rate convolutional code of

,

, and

with memory length of and b) the rate- convolutional code

of

,

, and with memory length of .

A. CRC-CSCCs
In this subsection, we study three systems. Case a) is a concatenated code with the convolutional codes of memory length as the inner code and a 12-bit CRC of

as the outer code for error detection. The block length is 192, which consists of 172 information bits, 12 CRC bits, and 8 tail bits. This scheme has been used in the wireless Qualcomm CDMA system (see the IS95 Standard). We have , where the values of are

Fig. 9. Block error rate versus E =N for the CRC-CSCCs: Cases a), b) and c).

and

for bit row vectors and , respectively. In Fig. 9, we present

the block error rate for the IVA based on where

.

It shows that the improvement over the 256-state VA (i.e., the

result of iteration 1) is 0.6 dB for a block error rate of . The

average number of iterations is no more than 4 at a block error

rate of

and 1.4 at a block error rate of .

Case b) is a concatenated code with all parameters identical to

Case a), except the CRC code is changed to

.

We have , where the values of are

where the value of is for all parity-check nodes. Fig. 9 shows

that the improvements over the 256-state VA and tail-biting 256-

state VA are 1.0 and 1.2 dB, respectively, for a block error rate

of . The IVA is only about 0.9 and 1.1 dB away from the

sphere-packing bound for block error rates of

and ,

respectively. Case c) not only has a better performance, but also

converges quickly, only three to five iterations being required to

obtain the most of the gain.

For all three cases, we set the peak iteration number to be 40

and the average iteration numbers are less than 13.1, 5.98, 2.4,

1.36, 1.08, 1.012 for

1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5 dB

respectively.

B. BCH-CSCCs

and

for bit row vectors and , respectively. Fig. 9 shows that the

improvement over the 256–state VA is about 0.7 dB for a block

error rate of . This case shows that although

has

a low weight, the weights used for decoding could be high

(due to the convolutional code). Thus, if we do not select a good

method, the IVA performance improvement could be very small.

In the following case, we shall see how much improvement can

be obtained by properly designing the system for the IVA.

In Case c), we consider a concatenated code in which the

same convolutional code as in Case a) and the 24-bit CRC of

as the outer code for error detection. The

block length is 192, which consists of 168 information bits, 24

CRC bits, and no tail bit (i.e., tail biting). Based on Theorem 1,

then we have

Let us consider BCH-CSCCs. In Case d), we use the convo-

lutional codes with memory length as the inner code and the

BCH code as the outer code,

, and the

tail-biting trellis given in Theorem 1 is used. We use a 16-bit

CCITT CRC code

to detect the

block error. Thus, each block contains 2294 information bits and

the code rate is . Case f) is almost the same as Case e) except

that it is for continuous transmission, that is, after each block of

2294 information bits, eight zero bits are used to set the convolu-

tional encoder to the all-zero state. Case f) is a 2-D parity-CSCC

given in Section II-D. We use the convolutional code of

as the inner code, but a simple cyclic code

as the outer

code. Each block consists of 216 information bits and 24 parity

bits. After that, we insert one parity block after every nine 1-D

parity-CSCC codeword to form a 2-D parity-CSCC codeword,

i.e.,

. Therefore, each 2-D parity-CSCC codeword con-

tains 1944 information bits and the overall code rate is .

In Figs. 10–12, we present the block error rate and bit error

rate versus

for Cases d)–f), respectively. These figures

show the performance of the continuous transmission (Case e))

is slightly worse than that of the tail-biting case (Case d)). If we

can replace the RS code by the simple 2-D parity code (i.e., Case

f)), the performance can be significantly improved. For Case f),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 7, JULY 2002

Fig. 10. Bit and block error rates versus E =N for the BCH-CSCC: Case d). Fig. 12. Bit, subblock and block error rates versus E =N for the parity-CSCC: Case f).
TABLE I PERFORMANCE OF SHORT CSCCS

Fig. 11. Bit and block error rates versus E =N for the BCH-CSCC: Case e).

the overall rate is . The Shannon limit is 0.31 dB. The

Shannon sphere-packing bound is 0.31 dB for a block error rate

of . Thus, the

requirement for the IVA to achieve a

block error rate of is 1.37 dB, which is only 1.06 dB away

from the Shannon sphere-packing lower bound and about 0.26

dB worse than the JPL turbo code (rate- , block length of

1784) which is 0.8 dB away from the Shannon sphere-packing

lower bound [19]. The average complexities in term of average

iteration numbers for Cases d) and e) are no more than 4 and 1.4

for a block error rate of

and , respectively; for Case

e) are no more than 8 and 4 for a block error rate of

and

, respectively.

C. CSCCs and the IVA Versus Shannon Sphere-Packing Bound

In this subsection, we present the required

for a block

error rate of

for the IVA, compared with the Shannon

sphere-packing bound.

Table I lists performance of short CSCCs versus the Shannon

sphere-packing bound. The code is constructed as shown in

Fig. 6, i.e., a convolutional code concatenated with a 1-bit even

parity-check code. The IVA based on Theorem 1 is used to de-

code the code, where the value of is fixed for all iterations.

In Table I, denotes the number of parity bits of the block

code, denotes the number of information bits, denotes the

number of convolutional encoded bits per block,

and

denote required

for a block error rate of

based on the sphere-packing lower bound and based on simula-

tions for the IVA, respectively, and

and denote the

maximum and average iteration numbers required for the IVA,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: HIGH-PERFORMANCE VITERBI ALGORITHM FOR CONCATENATED CODES

1769

TABLE II PERFORMANCE OF LONG CSCCS

respectively. The convolutional code of memory length is used

for the

case and the rest of the results are obtained by

the convolutional code of memory length .

Table I shows that for a block length from 56 to 192 bits,

the IVA is about 1 dB away from the Shannon sphere-packing

lower bound, which is slightly better than the JPL turbo codes

for similar lengths, but about 0.3 dB worse than our hierarchical

decoder in [22]. Only three to four (peak) iterations are needed

to get most of the gain and the average iteration number is less

than 1.08. That is, the average complexity only increases by less

than 8%.

In Table II, we show performance of long CSCC’s and the

IVA versus the Shannon sphere-packing bound, where the 2-D

parity code given in Fig. 5 is used as the outer code and the con-

volutional code of memory length is used as the inner code.

The IVA based on Theorem 1 is employed to decode the code,

where the value of changes according to the following proce-

dures.

Step A Step B
Step C Step D

At the first 20 iterations, gradually increases from to a fixed value (say ).
changes according to how many subblocks have been correctly decoded (according to the paritycheck results for each subblock, basically the more subblocks that are decoded correctly, the larger the value of ).
If the number of subblocks decoded correctly does not change for a number of iterations (say 10), then
increases sharply for one iteration and then drops back to its normal value.
If the number of iterations reaches half the peak iteration number and the block is still not decoded, then the decoder selects a different pattern of and redoes the decoding process.

In Table II, denotes the number of parity bits used in each

subblock and denotes the number of subblocks in each block.

The rest of the notations are identical to those used in Table I.

In Fig. 13, we present the imperfectness of CSCCs decoded

by the IVA as a function of block length. The imperfectness

is defined as the difference between

and

.

Clearly, for a block length from 56 information bits to 11 970

information bits, the CSCCs with 1-D and 2-D parity codes

decoded by the IVA are about 1 dB away from the Shannon

sphere-packing bound. It is slightly better than the JPL turbo

Fig. 13. Imperfectness of parity-CSCCs for different block lengths.

codes at short block length, and slightly worse than the JPL turbo codes [19] and about 0.7 dB worse than the LDPC codes for long block length (see [12]). At a block length of 64, the CSCC is about 0.5 dB worse than the BCH code [28], [29]. For a block length from 50 to 200 bits, it is about 0.2–0.3 dB worse than the terminated long convolutional codes decoded by our hierarchical decoder [30].
It is worth mentioning that although we used the above heuristic approach to select in order to gain about 0.1 dB. In practice, we often fix the value of at the cost of about 0.1 dB [27].

D. Complexity Comparison

The complexity of a decoding algorithm may vary with dif-

ferent implementation methods. In this subsection, we give a

rough estimate of the decoding complexity for the IVA [27].

As shown in [27], the key part of the IVA decoder is the con-

ventional VA decoder. The additional circuits include a shift reg-

ister and a few gates which are used to generate ; a circuit

which increases the branch metric by “ ” or “ .” These addi-

tional circuits are negligible, compared with a 64-state VA de-

coder. Thus, an approximate IVA decoding complexity is

per information bit for a rate- convolutional code, where

is the number of states in the trellis and denotes the

number of decoding iterations. For the convolutional code with

and

, it is 10 240. However, the average com-

plexity is less than 276 for the short codes and less than 1800

for long codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 7, JULY 2002

The complexity of turbo codes is estimated as

.

For a 16-state code and

, we have the complexity of ,

which is much lower than the peak complexity of the IVA. It is

the same as the parity-CSCC code using the convolutional code

with

and

[27]; both are . The average com-

plexity of turbo decoding can be reduced to half if a stopping

procedure is in place [39].

VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have shown that the conventional serial con-

catenated codes (i.e., using a convolutional code as the inner

code, a block code as the outer code, and a block interleaver)

can closely approach the Shannon sphere-packing lower bound

and the Shannon limit. For block lengths ranging from 56 infor-

mation bits to 11 970 information bits, the CSCCs are only 1 dB

away from the Shannon sphere-packing bound. A modified VA

called the IVA has been presented to decode the CSCCs. The

IVA has very low complexity and can be applied to many ex-

isting systems with very little modification or, for some cases,

without any modification. Furthermore, the conventional de-

coding method (i.e., using the VA to decode the convolutional

code and then pass the decision of the VA to a decoder to decode

the block code) can be viewed as a special case of the IVA (i.e.,

with one iteration).

In this paper, we have also shown the algebraic properties

of the CSCCs and the IVA as a special case of the min-sum

algorithm. We have analyzed the performance of the IVA and

found a better performance could be obtained if we replace the

powerful block codes by simple parity codes.

There are two disadvantages for the IVA: a) no soft output, b)

slightly poorer performance for long block lengths and a slow

convergence speed compared with turbo codes and the turbo

decoding algorithm. However, the IVA and CSCCs have many

advantages. Many of these advantages are currently sought by

JPL for turbo codes (see the last few papers in [19]). In short,

it can provide a significant performance improvement over cur-

rent systems without modifying them (e.g., the Qualcomm IS95

system (Case a)) and possible NASA systems as well). It can

almost provide the best possible performance gain achieved by

turbo codes over current systems with a simple modification,

i.e., changing the block codes to simple parity codes. It has

very reliable error-detection capability for each subblock and

no error floor. Actually, if turbo codes were to use CRC outer

codes for each subblock, then

loss due to the rate loss

could be more than 0.2 and 0.3 dB. It can recover part of the

information from incomplete blocks or error blocks.

Currently, we are focusing on several applications, including

NASA standard systems, high-rate TCM, wireless communica-

tions.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE

Int. Conf. Communication (ICC), Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp.

1064–1070.

[2]

, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding:

Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct.

1996.

[3] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision out-

puts and its applications,” in Proc. GLOBECOM’89, Dallas, TX, Nov.

1989, pp. 47.1.1–47.1.7.

[4] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results

on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. 42, pp. 409–429, Mar. 1996.

[5] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concate-

nation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and itera-

tive decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 909–926, May

1998.

[6] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary

block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42,

pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.

[7] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[8] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

[9] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. disserta-

tion, Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Linköping, Sweden, Apr. 1996.

[10] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of

low-density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646,

Aug. 1996.

[11] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.

[12] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of

capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[13] G. D. Forney, Jr., “On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm,”

in in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France,

Sept. 1997.

[14] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and

the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp.

498–519, Feb. 2001.

[15] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, G. D. Forney, Jr., F. R. Kschischang, R. J.

McEliece, and D. A. Spielman, “Introduction to the special issue on

codes on graphs and iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. 47, pp. 493–497, Feb. 2001.

[16] A. J. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptoti-

cally optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.

IT-13, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.

[17] G. D. Forney, Jr., “The Viterbi algorithm,” Proc. IEEE, pp. 268–278,

Mar. 1973.

[18]

, Concatenated Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1966.

[19] JPL Rep., “Telemetry channel coding,” Report from the Consultative

Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS), Green Book, JPL and

CIT, Oct. 1998.

[20] P. Black and T. H-Y. Meng, “1-Gb/s, four-state, sliding block Viterbi

decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 32, pp. 797–805, June 1997.

[21] I. Kang and A. N. Wilson, Jr., “Low-power Viterbi decoder for CDMA

mobile terminals,” IEEE J. Solid-state Circuits, vol. 33, pp. 473–481,

Mar. 1998.

[22] L. Wei, “Near optimal limited-search detection: Part 2. Convolutional

codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory. Unpublished parts available [On-

line] at http://www.elec.uow.edu.au/staff/lwei/pub.html, submitted for

publication.

[23]

, “On bootstrap iterative Viterbi algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int.

Conf. Communications, Vancouver, BC, Canada, June 6–9, 1999, pp.

1187–1192.

[24] Q. Wang, L. Wei, and R. A. Kennedy, “Near optimal decoding for trellis

coded modulation using the BIVA and trellis shaping,” in Proc. 13th

Int. Symp. Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error Correcting

Codes, Honolulu, HI, Nov. 1999, pp. 191–200.

[25] Q. Wang, L. Wei, and R. A. Kennedy, “Iterative Viterbi decoding, trellis

shaping and multilevel structure for high rate concatenated TCM,” IEEE

Trans. Commun., to be published.

[26] Q. Wang and L. Wei, “Graph-based iterative decoding algorithms for

parity concatenated trellis codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47,

pp. 1062–1074, Mar. 2001.

[27] L. Wei. (2001, Apr.) Iterative Viterbi algorithm: Algorithm and

implementation—A simple turbo decoding method using VA de-

coding hardware. IEEE JSAC Wireless Serials [Online]. Available:

http://www.elec.uow.edu.au/staff/lwei/pub.html

[28] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block

codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41,

pp. 1379–1396, Sept. 1995.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI: HIGH-PERFORMANCE VITERBI ALGORITHM FOR CONCATENATED CODES

1771

[29] , “Computationally efficient soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 738–750, May 1996.
[30] L. Wei and H. Qi, “Near optimal limited-search detection on ISI/CDMA channels and decoding of long convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 1459–1482, July 2000.
[31] F. Jelinek and J. Cocke, “Bootstrap hybrid decoding for symmetrical binary input channels,” Inform. Contr., vol. 18, pp. 261–298, Apr. 1971.
[32] F. Jelinek, “Bootstrap trellis decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-21, pp. 318–325, May 1975.
[33] H. A. Cabral, D. J. Costello, Jr., and P. R. Chevillat, “Bootstrap hybrid decoding using the multiple stack algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT’97}, Ulm, Germany, June 29–July 4, p. 494.
[34] S. Lin and D. J. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.

[35] G. D. Forney, Jr., F. R. Kschischang, and B. Marcus, “Iterative decoding of tail-biting trellises,” presented at the 1998 Information Theory Workshop, San Diego, CA, 1998.
[36] B. Frey, R. Kotter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 766–781, Feb. 2001.
[37] J. B. Anderson and S. M. Hladik, “Tail-biting MAP decoders,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., no. 16, pp. 297–302, Feb. 1998.
[38] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimal symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[39] Y. Wu, B. Woerner, and W. J. Ebel, “A simple stopping criterion for turbo decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, pp. 258–260, Aug. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

