1410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

Joint Message-Passing Decoding of LDPC Codes and Partial-Response Channels
Brian M. Kurkoski, Student Member, IEEE, Paul H. Siegel, Fellow, IEEE, and Jack Keil Wolf, Life Fellow, IEEE

Invited Paper

Abstract—Ideas of message passing are applied to the problem of removing the effects of intersymbol interference (ISI) from partial-response channels. Both bit-based and state-based parallel message-passing algorithms are proposed. For a fixed number of iterations less than the block length, the bit-error rate of the statebased algorithm approaches a nonzero constant as the signalto-noise ratio (SNR) approaches infinity. This limitation can be removed by using a precoder. It is well known that low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes can be decoded using a messagepassing algorithm. Here, a single message-passing detector/decoder matched to the combination of a partial-response channel and an LDPC code is investigated.

Index Terms—Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm,

iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, max-

imum

(MAP) decoder, message-passing algorithm,

partial-response channel, precoding, sum-product algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION
T HE exponential growth in the bit densities of state-ofthe-art magnetic recording systems has increased the storage capacity of hard disk drives, which has been a boon for computer users. Capacities have increased to the point that commodity hard drives can now be found in new applications such as consumer video recording devices. However, further increases in bit density are limited in part because shrinking bit size on the surface of the magnetic medium produces degradation in signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) to the point that conventional detectors and error-correcting schemes are overwhelmed.
A new class of error-correcting schemes based upon iterative decoding, typified by low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] and turbo codes [2], can achieve target bit-error rates (BER) at SNRs much lower than conventional error-correcting approaches. As such, the application of iterative decoding to magnetic recording systems holds promise for increasing bit densities, although we are unaware of any mass-produced hard drive yet using such an error-correction system.

Manuscript received July 10, 2001; revised January 22, 2002. This work was supported by the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, September 2001.
The authors are with the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0401 USA (e-mail: kurkoski@ucsd.edu; psiegel@ucsd.edu; jwolf@ucsd.edu).
Communicated by S. Shamai, Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(02)04006-3.

Any error-correcting scheme for magnetic recording systems must cope with the intersymbol interference (ISI) present at high bit densities. Partial response is a discrete channel model which approximates the unequalized channel ISI. Conventional Viterbi detectors, which are the de facto standard for eliminating ISI in magnetic recording systems, are not applicable to systems using iterative decoders, because they produce hard bit decisions. Iterative decoders are most effective using soft or probabilistic information as inputs. In applications of iterative decoding to magnetic recording, some type of soft-output algorithm (often the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [3]) replaces the Viterbi algorithm as the partial-response channel detector.
Turbo codes have been shown to have excellent BER performance on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [4], [5]. These gains are preserved when turbo codes are applied to the partial-response channel. A greater performance improvement comes when the channel detector is incorporated within the iterative decoder [6]–[9]. Thus, iterative decoding has been extended beyond the error-correcting code, and the inclusion of the channel detector in an iterative decoder has been called “turbo equalization.”
In contrast to turbo codes which have received substantial attention since their 1993 introduction, LDPC codes have led a quiet existence from the 1960s, when they were first proposed by Gallager, until the mid-1990s when interest in them was rekindled. Gallager proposed a simple decoder that used probabilistic decoding on a code defined by a sparse, random parity-check matrix [1]. In 1981, Tanner showed how to construct a bipartite graph, sometimes called a Tanner graph, representing the parity-check matrix of any code, and recognized that Gallager’s decoding ideas could be applied to this graph [10]. Additional research in the mid-1990s has refined our notion of what we shall refer to as the Gallager–Tanner (GT) algorithm, and broadened our understanding of how codes can be decoded on a graph.
The GT algorithm is a now classical algorithm for decoding codes defined by an LDPC matrix, and has been shown to have remarkable BER performance [11]. In describing the algorithm, it is convenient to use a bipartite graph to represent the code and the decoding operations; see Fig. 1. On this graph, messages of bit probabilities are alternately passed between two types of nodes, bit nodes (represented by circles) and parity-check nodes (represented by squares). Connections between the two types of nodes are defined by a parity-check matrix. Each node as-

0018-9448/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURKOSKI et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

1411

Fig. 1. Classical Tanner graph for a code with three information bits and nine parity bits.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of a partial-response system, possibly precoded, with channel detector.

sumes statistical independence of its inputs and uses elementary rules of probability to calculate outputs, either combining the soft estimates (at the bit nodes) or using the parity-check constraint (at the parity-check nodes). The alternation of messages passing from bit nodes to parity-check nodes and back to bit nodes forms one iteration. When the GT algorithm attempts to decode a codeword, typically several iterations are performed until the decoder converges to a valid codeword. The GT algorithm is a type of message-passing algorithm. See [12] for a more detailed description of the algorithm.
An appealing practical aspect of the GT algorithm is that it consists of many small, independent decoding functions (i.e., the bit nodes and the parity-check nodes). In principle, hardware could implement circuits corresponding to these independent decoders that operate in parallel, potentially leading to a very-high-speed decoder. This aspect is particularly important in magnetic recording applications, where data rate requirements are high, and decoding delay must be low. Kschischang et al. proposed a parallel decoder architecture for turbo codes called “concurrent turbo decoding,” which likewise could lead to a high-speed implementation [13].
An important theme of this paper is the design of a parallel message-passing detector for partial-response channels, conceived in the spirit of the GT algorithm, which we introduce in Section II. In Section III, we demonstrate that for this proposed detector, there are particular output sequences that cannot be uniquely decoded to a single input sequence. We call such sequences ambiguous output sequences, but show also that precoding can eliminate this ambiguity. We show by computer simulation that this algorithm, under appropriate constraints, performs as well as the BCJR algorithm for particular partial-response channels.
Previous proposals for applying LDPC codes to the magnetic recording channel have utilized two separate decoders: the BCJR algorithm for channel detection and the GT algorithm to decode an outer LDPC code. These two separate decoders communicate soft information to each other and operate in accordance with the turbo principle. However, the LDPC code’s advantage of low decoding delay is seriously degraded when the serial BCJR algorithm (sliding-window variants, e.g., [14], notwithstanding), is used as the detector.

Accordingly, in Section IV, we investigate a joint detector/decoder for an LDPC-coded partial-response channel that can operate in a completely parallel manner, circumventing the high delay of the BCJR algorithm. We find that BER is lowest when a large number of “turbo” iterations are performed and a small number of channel detector and LDPC code iterations are performed, subject to the constraint that the total number of iterations is fixed. Section V is a concluding summary.

II. PARALLEL MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM FOR THE DETECTION OF PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

We consider the following partial-response system. A data

source generates an independent and identically distributed bi-

nary sequence

,

,

with zeros and ones equally likely. This is passed through a re-

cursive modulo- precoder, which has transfer function

where

of maximum degree (we also use to indicate modulo- ad-

dition). The output of the precoder and the input to the channel

is

. The high-density magnetic recording medium and

readback process can be modeled as a partial-response channel

with binary inputs and multilevel outputs. The partial-response

channel transfer polynomial is given by

,

for a channel of degree , real. The partial-response channel

output is

. It is followed by AWGN

and the received sequence observed by the channel detector

is

. There are output symbols,

so the polynomials

and

have degree

. We

assume that the partial-response model begins in the zero state

at time index and is terminated at the zero state after time

index

, so the number of information bits is

. An

example system with

is shown in Fig. 2.

In this paper, we consider both nonprecoded systems (i.e.,

) and precoded systems (i.e.,

). When there

is no precoder present,

; in such cases, we shall

use

to refer to the input to the partial-response channel.

For systems that have precoders, the degree of the precoder will

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

Fig. 3. The precoder and partial-response channel can be viewed as a single state machine.

be less than or equal to the degree of the channel transfer poly-

nomial . For analysis purposes, both the precoder (which

represents an actual circuit) and the partial-response channel

model (which represents physical effects) can be combined into

a single transfer function, see Fig. 3. Although this transfer func-

tion is a combination of real and modulo- operations, it can be

expressed using a state-transition diagram. This state-transition

model is used by the partial-response detector and the detector

produces estimates for the precoder input

directly.

We describe two types of message-passing algorithms for

a partial-response channel. Section II-A describes a detector

where the messages passed are bit probabilities and Section II-B

describes a detector where the messages passed are vectors of

state probabilities.

The sum is performed over

from the input al-

phabet

and over from the output alphabet. The term

will be either zero or one;

is

computed using knowledge that the channel noise is Gaussian;

will be for all nonzero terms in the summation;

are the prior probabilities which are factored into indi-

vidual probabilities

because of the independence

of the source data. The term is the message generated by

bit node and passed to triangle function node . This message

is given by

(2)

A. Bit-Based Message Passing

To build a message-passing detector for the partial-response

system, we made a graph similar to the bipartite graph of the

GT algorithm. But, where the GT algorithm has a parity-check

node, we replaced it with a “triangle” function node, which re-

ceives the noisy channel sample. A bit node, represented by a

circle, is connected to a triangle function node if the partial-re-

sponse transfer polynomial

indicates a direct dependence

between that input and the corresponding channel output. The

message passed between nodes is the bit probability

.

Both types of nodes generate bit probability messages using the

“sum-product update rule” [15], that is, the output message from

a node along edge is based upon on all inputs to that node

except the message from edge . Let

represent the bits

and let

represent those same bits except

bit for

. The received sample at node is

. The message generated by the triangle function node and

passed to bit node , called is

(1)

In describing a message-passing schedule, as in [15], we as-

sume there is a global clock which synchronizes the generation

of new messages. A message-passing schedule on a graph is a

predetermined specification of messages that are passed at each

clock tick. For the proposed bit-based message-passing algo-

rithm, the following schedule is applied. First, all the triangle

function nodes simultaneously generate outputs , according

to (1), using prior input from the bit nodes , if available

(initialized to probability otherwise). Using that informa-

tion, bit nodes simultaneously generate messages to send

to triangle function nodes, according to (2). This cycle is re-

peated for a fixed number of iterations, and terminates with

the bit nodes generating the final output

. See Figs. 4

and 5 for bit message-passing graphs corresponding to the di-

code

and EPR4

partial-response channels.

The message-passing graph constructed for the dicode

channel (Fig. 4) has no cycles, and cycle-free graphs are

necessary for exact solutions [16]. When the number of

iterations on the dicode graph is equal to , the number of bit

nodes in the graph, the algorithm will produce the same result

as the BCJR algorithm. However, in computer simulations,

detection of the dicode channel using this graph produced

performance similar to the BCJR algorithm for far fewer

iterations than ( is roughly 4500 for magnetic recording

systems). In particular, 16 iterations produced results that

were indistinguishable from BCJR performance at BER above

, see Fig. 6. An alternative explanation is that because the

dicode channel model has two states, the bit message contains

enough information to describe the state, and thus is emulating

the BCJR algorithm.

However, the message-passing graph for the EPR4 channel

(Fig. 5) has many short cycles, and so we cannot expect this al-

gorithm to produce an exact solution. This was verified by com-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURKOSKI et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

1413

h D 0 D P x Fig. 4. A bit message-passing diagram for the dicode partial-response channel ( ( ) = 1 ). The message passed is [ = 1].

h D D 0 D 0 D P x Fig. 5. A bit message-passing diagram for the EPR4 partial-response channel ( ( ) = 1 +

). The message passed is [ = 1]. Dashed lines

added to enhance contrast.

Fig. 6. BER for bit-based message passing on the dicode channel without precoding.

puter simulation, see Fig. 7. For increasing iterations, BER performance improved very slowly, even for a very large number of iterations and very high SNR.
For the BER simulation results presented in this paper, comparisons are made with the appropriate dicode or EPR4 truncated union bound [17].

B. State-Based Message Passing The key to achieving BCJR-like performance for channels
with more than two states is to pass state information, not bit information. In the proposed state-based algorithm, the messages passed are the state probabilities, represented in a vector; this is in contrast to the algorithm of the previous subsection, where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

Fig. 7. BER for bit-based message passing on the EPR4 channel without precoding.

[ = ] Fig. 8. A state message-passing diagram for a general partial-response channel. The message passed between the triangle function nodes is the state distribution
vector P s m .

the message is a bit probability which can be represented by

a single number. Fig. 8 shows a state message-passing graph

for the general partial-response channel. In this graph, the tri-

angle is a state processing node which has four edges on which

it sends and receives three types of messages. One type of mes-

sage is a vector of state probabilities that are communicated

with its two neighboring triangle nodes. The other two types

of messages are probabilities corresponding to input symbols

and output symbols of the channel,

and

, respec-

tively. In an implementation, the dimension-two vector

can be readily represented as a single number, but because the

partial-response channel has three or more output symbols, the

message

must be represented as a true vector. The

message-passing schedule is still parallel. Note that the graph

has no loops. This graph is similar to a Wiberg graph for trel-

lises [18], but we have omitted state nodes because they connect

two adjacent triangle function nodes and only act as a message

relay. A double line is drawn to indicate where state messages

are passed between nodes.

The proposed state-based partial-response channel detector

algorithm follows. Let be the state of the partial-response

channel with

states, at time ,

. The

quantities

and

are the state messages that are

passed right and left, respectively,

. These

state messages are produced simultaneously by each triangle

function node. Sums are performed over edges in the partial-

response trellis, as in [19]. For a partial-response trellis, there are

edges per trellis section, and the trellis is time-invariant. For

each trellis edge , the starting state is

, the ending state

is

, the associated input label is and the associated

output label is . Fig. 9 shows the correspondence between

a node of the message-passing graph and a trellis section.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURKOSKI et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

1415

Fig. 9. A single section of the message-passing graph for the partial-response detector, and a corresponding trellis fragment.

Algorithm: 1. Initialize:
2. For each node erate the outputs

. Once is available, compute at node 1; likewise, for

. This is the recursive computation of the

state distributions in the forward direction, often called the

“alpha” or forward state metrics. Similarly, there are “beta”

or backward state metrics. Thus, the two different algorithms

can be described by applying appropriate schedules to a single

graph. Further, a variety of algorithms can be described by

applying different schedules to this graph. In Section III, only

the parallel schedule will be used. , simultaneously gen-

,

,

III. WINDOW-APP ALGORITHM PROPERTIES

(Node does not generate generate .) 3. Repeat step 2 times 4. For each node erate

and node

does not

, simultaneously gen-

In steps 2 and 4,

are proportionality constants

chosen so that probabilities sum to one.

For a fixed number of iterations , the output symbol esti-

mates

and the input symbol estimates

that contribute to the decoding of a given bit are all in a

window of length

, centered on that bit. Given only

the input information in the window, this algorithm produces the

a posteriori probability (APP) estimate for that bit. We call this

the window-APP algorithm.

The algorithm we have described is a parallel schedule

applied to a message-passing graph. As has been observed by

Wiberg [18, Sec. 3.2], the BCJR algorithm can be represented

on a message-passing graph by using a serial schedule. Starting

with an initial state distribution for (usually given as

,

), we can compute at node

When the number of iterations for the proposed detector

algorithm is greater than or equal to the block length , the

window size for all bits encompasses the entire block, and the

algorithm produces the same APP outputs that the BCJR algo-

rithm produces. However, here we investigate the behavior of

the window-APP detector for values of much smaller than

the block length.

For partial-response channels that are not precoded, there

exist multiple distinct input sequences starting in distinct states

that produce identical output sequences within a window of

size . Such output sequences are called ambiguous output

sequences. For such sequences, even in the absence of noise,

this detector cannot distinguish which input sequence gener-

ated the observed output sequence and thus the detector has a

high probability of failure. The likelihood of such a decoding

failure depends upon the probability that initial states and input

sequences that lead to ambiguous output sequences will occur.

In turn, this probability is a decreasing function of the window

size. In the following analysis, we predict the probability of

bit error for such a detector,

, in the absence of noise.

is the probability that there was a bit error in the

center of the window.

Whereas the probability of bit error for conventional detectors

approaches zero for increasing SNR, the probability of bit error

for this detector will asymptotically approach

. Hence,

this quantity is the minimum probability of bit error that the

detector will achieve.

For the dicode channel there is only one ambiguous output

sequence in a window of length , the all-zero output se-

quence. The dicode channel has two states,

. For

example with

, the sequence

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

8 8 8 Fig. 10. State diagram for the EPR4 partial-response channel, with labels “precoded input/nonprecoded input/output.” Precoder is f (D) = 1 D D D . 0 Transitions generating outputs 2 and +2 are shown with a dashed line, but not labeled.

TABLE I

The EPR4 ambiguous output sequences of length

can

2 f0 0 g FOR EPR4, SOME EXAMPLE AMBIGUOUS INPUT SEQUENCES FOR WINDOW

SIZE W = 5. THE OUTPUT SYMBOLS ARE y

2; 1; 0; +1; +2

be represented in general by

or (3)

could have been generated by either the initial state

,

and

or by the initial state

and

. The detector will arbitrarily choose

one of the two possible input sequences and if it chooses the

wrong one, all the input bits will be incorrect. This results in a

probability of bit error of , given that an ambiguous output

sequence was received. The probability that output symbols

will all be zero is the probability that

input symbols are

identical, that is,

. If this sequence is

received, the probability of bit error is , and so

where means that the contents may be omitted, used as is,

or repeated an arbitrary number of times. Sequences that differ

by only a change of sign throughout are not listed. The sym-

bols

must occur as pairs, except at the beginning

and end of the sequence, where a single symbol is permitted.

A derivation of this list of ambiguous sequences is given in the

Appendix.

For EPR4, there are two types of ambiguous output se-

quences. Let

be the event that the all-zeros output,

which is an ambiguous output sequence, was received by the

detector. Let

be the event that any other ambiguous

output sequence was received. For the EPR4 channel, there are

four input sequences that correspond to :

,

,

, and

. When

the event occurs (i.e., the all-zeros output is received), the

detector will randomly choose one of the four possible input

sequences, and the probability of bit error will be . There are

two input sequences for each output sequence corresponding

to

. When the event

occurs (i.e., any ambiguous

output sequence except the all-zeros output is received), the

detector will randomly choose one of the two possible input

sequences and the probability of bit error will be , as shown

in the Appendix.

When the length is odd, the number of EPR4 ambiguous

where

is the event that the ambiguous output sequence

was received.

For the EPR4 channel, there are numerous ambiguous output

sequences. The state diagram for EPR4 is given in Fig. 10, and

some example ambiguous output sequences are given in Table I.

output sequences described by (3) is

.

These are generated by

distinct input sequences, four

of which generate the all-zeros ambiguous output sequence, as

shown in the Appendix. (When the length is even, the number

of ambiguous output sequences is

. These are

generated by

distinct input sequences.) There are

possible starting states at the beginning of the window, and

possible input bit patterns that could be received in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURKOSKI et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

1417

Fig. 11. BER for state-based message passing on the nonprecoded EPR4 partial-response channel, for various iterations.

window. Since each starting state and each input bit pattern is equally likely
and
Letting be the event that a bit error occurs in the center of the window, and because all errors are due to ambiguous sequences
EPR4

(4)

This proposed EPR4 detector was simulated on a computer with

AWGN noise for various values of ; see Fig. 11. For increasing

SNR, the probability of bit error tends toward the predicted

value

EPR4 . The proposed algorithm achieves essen-

tially the same BER as the BCJR algorithm, below some SNR

threshold which is a function of . This threshold can be made

arbitrarily high as approaches , in which case the two algo-

rithms produce identical results.

For example, for

and

11 dB, the proposed

algorithm achieves a probability of bit error of

, essen-

tially indistinguishable from BCJR performance for the com-

puter simulation shown in Fig. 11. The proposed algorithm can

produce BCJR-like performance with only

times the

delay of the BCJR algorithm. However, this algorithm has

times the computational complexity of the BCJR algorithm.

For both the dicode and EPR4 channel, when a pre-

coder matched to the partial-response channel is used (i.e.,

), the combined precoder/channel re-

sponse has the property that any output uniquely identifies

the corresponding input in the absence of noise. Although

ambiguous output sequences still exist, they are ambiguous

only in the starting state, not the input sequence. For example,

for the precoded dicode channel

, the output

can be generated by either the initial

state

and input sequence

, or by the

initial state

and input sequence

.

Although the two state sequences are distinct, this ambiguity

will not cause any bit errors.

For EPR4, the precoder matched to the channel,

, as well as the precoder

eliminate input–output ambiguity. In the Appendix, we show

that these are the only two precoders of degree less than or equal

to three that have this property. Computer simulations for EPR4

precoded with

are shown in Fig. 12. In

this figure, the truncated union bounds for both the precoded and

nonprecoded channel are shown for comparison. Regardless of

the number of iterations , the probability of bit error decreases

for increasing SNR, a desirable property, and is in marked con-

trast to the nonprecoded case.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

8 D 8 D 8 D Fig. 12. BER for state-based message passing on the EPR4 partial-response channel precoded with 1

, for various iterations.

Fig. 13. Block diagram of the proposed LDPC-coded partial-response system.

IV. JOINT DECODING OF LDPC AND PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS
Recently, there have been proposals to use an LDPC code on the partial-response channel [20], [21], with an iterative decoder consisting of a BCJR-type detector for the partial-response channel and a GT-type decoder for the LDPC code. However, the BCJR-type algorithms are slower, and the channel decoder proposed in Section II is well-matched for use with the GT algorithm as both are inherently parallel algorithms. The block diagram for such a partial-response system is shown in Fig. 13.
In [22], Garcia-Frias considers decoding of LDPC codes over finite-state Markov channels and specifically investigates the Gilbert–Elliot channel model. Here, we consider a joint message-passing decoder matched to both an LDPC code and the channel, when the model is a partial-response channel. We assume that the channel is not precoded. A graph for such a decoder is shown in Fig. 14, and we apply the following schedule to that graph. First, the proposed decoder operates for iterations on the channel samples, then it passes soft estimates of the input symbols to the GT decoder, matched to the LDPC code. Then, the GT decoder operates for iterations, and the

resulting soft estimates of the input symbols are passed back to

the channel decoder. This forms one “turbo” iteration, and is re-

peated times.

BER performance generally improves with increasing itera-

tions, and we are interested in the relationship between the pa-

rameters , , and that would achieve the best performance.

To do this, we set

equal to a constant (the total number

of iterations used in detection and decoding), and found the

values of , , and that yielded the lowest BER, via com-

puter simulation. In doing this, we assume that the “costs,” in

the sense of delay, for the channel detector and GT algorithm

are the same, and that one channel iteration can be traded for

one decoder iteration, and vice versa with no penalty. It should

be noted, however, that these costs are dependent on the imple-

mentation, and the validity of this assumption will depend upon

system parameters such as the rate of the LDPC code and the

number of states in the partial-response channel. We assume that

no processing begins until all the channel samples have been re-

ceived and are available to the detector (reference [14] describes

a suboptimal version of BCJR that produces final outputs before

all the data has been received). Further, we assume that the GT

algorithm begins processing only after the channel algorithm is

complete (and vice versa).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURKOSKI et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

1419

Fig. 14. Joint message-passing detector/decoder for the partial-response channel and LDPC code (termination states shown).

Fig. 15. Simulation results for joint LDPC/dicode message passing decoder (using bit-message passing for the dicode channel).

A joint LDPC/partial-response message-passing system was

simulated where the partial-response channel was the dicode

model using bit-based message passing, and the LDPC code

was a regular (column weight ), rate LDPC code of block

length [23]. Simulation results are shown in Fig. 15. The

iteration parameters

were chosen so that

and

(except in the case of

, in

which case

). Simulation results show that the

lowest probability of bit error is obtained when

and

. In other simulations, we found that by setting

and changing , or by setting

and changing , the lowest

probability of error was still achieved when

, subject

to a fixed number of iterations.

We also considered how a joint LDPC/partial-response mes-

sage-passing system would perform when the channel is EPR4.

In this case, state-based message passing was used. As with the

dicode experiment, we restricted the schedule parameters such

that

. In this case, we found that the optimal

schedule, subject to the constraint, was

;

see Fig. 16.

The computational complexity of the BCJR algorithm is

equivalent to the proposed algorithm with

, and if we use

this assumption to fix the total computation of the BCJR-GT

detector/decoder system at the same value of

, then

we can compare a BCJR-GT system with the proposed fully

parallel system.

The choice between the proposed algorithm and a BCJR-GT

decoded system represents a tradeoff between decoding delay

and performance. On one hand, the proposed message-passing

detector/decoder has low latency compared to a conventional

BCJR-GT decoder. In principle, the delay of the parallel mes-

sage-passing detector algorithm is , and that of the GT algo-

rithm is , so the overall decoding delay of the proposed system

is

, which is in the case of the system simulated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

Fig. 16. Simulation results for joint LDPC/EPR4 message passing decoder, passing state information.

in Fig. 16. In contrast, the BCJR algorithm has a delay of , so

the overall decoding delay for a BCJR-GT system is

,

which is for the system that we simulated. These numbers

are very rough estimates, and we use them only to emphasize

the much lower decoding delay of the proposed system. On the

other hand, the simulation results show that the BCJR-GT EPR4

system has 0.6 dB better performance at probability of

bit error.

V. CONCLUSION

We have presented two types of detectors for the partial-re-

sponse channel that are parallel, message-passing algorithms.

One is a bit-based message-passing algorithm that was con-

structed in the spirit of the GT algorithm. It is effective at

detecting the dicode channel, but when applied to the EPR4

channel, the observed BER performance was poor.

The other detector we presented was a state-based, parallel

message-passing algorithm. This state-based algorithm is a

window-APP algorithm for general partial-response channels,

in contrast to the BCJR algorithm, which is serial in nature.

However, both algorithms can be described on a single mes-

sage-passing graph, differentiated only by the schedule that

is applied to that graph. The parallel algorithm will produce

results different from the BCJR algorithm when

. We

showed by analysis, and confirmed by simulation, that the

BER for the state-based message-passing decoder can never be

lower than a fixed constant, and we calculated this constant for

the dicode and EPR4 channels. Fortunately, this lower bound

can be eliminated using the proper precoder.

For decoding LDPC codes over partial-response channels,

there is a joint decoder which combines the GT algorithm with

the proposed channel detector, both parallel algorithms. As

such, this algorithm has low decoding delay, as compared to

a conventional BCJR-GT decoder. For the dicode partial-re-

sponse channel with bit-based message passing, the parameters

achieve the lowest probability of bit

error when the joint decoder is used and the total number of

iterations is fixed at 24. When the same restrictions are applied

to the EPR4 partial-response channel using state-based message

passing, we find that the parameters

achieve the lowest probability of bit error. The trend is that

if the total number of iterations is constrained to be a fixed

number, then the lowest BER is achieved when the constituent

decoder iterations

are small, and the number of turbo

iterations is large.

Directions for future work include the application of density

evolution techniques to this joint decoder to determine perfor-

mance thresholds and to analyze iteration schedules, as well as

the investigation of the effect of precoded channels in the con-

text of an LDPC code.

APPENDIX
In this appendix, we consider the system of Fig. 2, i.e., a partial-response system without an outer LDPC code. We generalize the channel slightly and assume that the input and output are bi-infinite, that is,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KURKOSKI et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND PARTIAL-RESPONSE CHANNELS

1421

Let be an ambiguous output sequence of length . We con-

sider two distinct input sequences and of length

(for the EPR4 channel) that generate the same output sequence

. That is, if

and

,

then

, an ambiguous output sequence. We assume

is odd.

A. Ambiguous Output Sequences for EPR4

In this subsection, we list the ambiguous sequences for

the nonprecoded EPR4 partial-response channel. A null error

sequence

is a bi-infinite sequence

with the property that

. It was shown

in [24] for a broad class of channels, including the EPR4

channel, that if the input error sequence

is one of the

following null error sequences: ,

,

,

,

,

,

,

, or

, then the distance

between the corresponding outputs

and

will be zero. Here, the notation

represents an infinite periodic sequence with a pattern given

by the contents of the brackets. The symbols “ ” and “ ”

represent the input errors and , respectively.

If the difference between two distinct sequences and

is a truncated version of one of the listed null error se-

quences, then the distance between and is zero. In other

words, the two output sequences will be identical, and, there-

fore, will be an ambiguous output sequence. Using the list

of possible null error sequences, we generate a list of possible

ambiguous output sequences for EPR4.

Case A: Consider

and

There are

distinct input sequences described by (5).

However, because both

and

generate the all-zeros sequence, the number of distinct am-

biguous output sequences generated by (5) is

. There

are

distinct input sequences described by (6), so the

number of distinct input sequences for Case B is

.

Case C: Consider

(8) and
(9)

which correspond to a truncated version of the null error se-

quence

. Both input sequences will generate the

output

If

and

described by

, then the possible output sequences are

(10)

If

and

described by

, then the possible output sequences are

(11)

If

, then the possible output sequences are described by

(10) or (11) with a sign change throughout. The sequences

(12)

which correspond to a truncated version of the null error se-

quence

. Then,

, the

all-zeros sequence. Input sequences and

that corre-

spond to truncated null error sequences of

,

, and

also produce the all-zeros sequence.

In all, there are four input sequences that generate the all-zeros

ambiguous output sequence.

Case B: Consider:

(5) and
(6)

which correspond to a truncated version of the null error se-

quence

. Both input sequences will generate the

output

If

, then the possible output sequences are described by

(7)

and their counterparts with a sign change throughout, are a convenient way to represent (7) and (10). Together, (11) and (12) are a convenient way to list the possible ambiguous output sequence of the EPR4 channel model, as in (3).

There are

distinct input sequences described by (8).

However, because both

and

generate the all-zeros sequence, the number of distinct am-

biguous output sequences generated by (8) is

. There

are

distinct input sequences described by (9), so the

number of distinct input sequences for Case C is

.

Case D: The input sequences that correspond to truncated

versions of the null error sequences

and

will generate the same output sequences as in Cases B

and C. The null error sequence

is a trivial case.

The distinct ambiguous output sequences are characterized

in Cases B and C. (Case A described only the all-zeros output

sequence and Case D described no new ambiguous output

sequences.) The number of ambiguous output sequences

where means that the contents may be omitted, used as is, or

repeated an arbitrary number of times. If instead

, then

the possible output sequences are described by (7) with a sign

change throughout.

described in Cases B and C is

each, but since the

all-zeros sequence is described in both cases, the number of

ambiguous output sequences is one less than the sum, namely,

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

The distinct input sequences that generate the ambiguous

output sequences are also completely described in Cases

B and C. However, these two cases both include the four

sequences

,

,

and

, so the

number of distinct input sequences that generate ambiguous

output sequences is

. The number of input sequences

that generate the all-zeros output sequence is , and the

remaining

input sequences generate

nonzero ambiguous output sequences, as applied in (4).

When a nonzero ambiguous sequence is received, the prob-

ably of bit error is . To see this, assume that is the input that

generates a nonzero ambiguous output sequence, and is a dis-

tinct input sequence that generates the same nonzero ambiguous

output sequence. Then, the corresponding truncated null error

sequence must be one of

A zero in the truncated null error sequence corresponds to agreement between the corresponding bits in and , and corresponds to disagreement. Thus, half the bits in the input sequences agree. The probability that the detector will choose the incorrect input sequence is , so the net probability of bit error is .

B. Precoder Existence

In this section, we show that the only two precoders of de-

gree less than or equal to three that map input sequences to

output sequences in a one-to-one fashion for the EPR4 channel

are

and

.

Let

, and assume that

. As before,

is the input to a precoder

,

and the output of the precoder is

. Let

and

be two distinct channel input sequences which produce

the same output sequence. We want to choose an

such

that

for the terms that are inside the

window

. The term of this equality is

(13)
Consider the case when the truncated null error sequence is , with

and

These two input sequences will generate the same output sequence. Substituting these two sequences into (13), we get

That is,

. If instead we have the case

,

then the term becomes

That is,

or

. Applying the other

possible truncated null error sequences does not result in any

additional restrictions on the precoder. Therefore, the two pre-

coders which map inputs to outputs in a one-to-one fashion are

and

. We note that

these are also the only two precoders that are divisible by

.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 2. Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[4] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.
[5] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concatenation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 909–926, May 1998.
[6] W. E. Ryan, L. L. McPheters, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Combined turbo coding and turbo equalization for PR4-equalized Lorentzian channels,” in Proc. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, Mar. 1998.
[7] W. E. Ryan, “Performance of high rate turbo codes on a PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications. Atlanta, GA, June 1998, pp. 947–951.
[8] T. Souvignier, M. Öberg, P. H. Siegel, R. E. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Turbo decoding for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 1297–1308, Aug. 2000.
[9] C. Heegard, “Turbo coding for magnetic recording,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 1998, pp. 18–19.
[10] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[11] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[12] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[13] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and P. G. Gulak, “Concurrent turbo-decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Ulm, Germany, June/July 1997.
[14] A. J. Viterbi, “An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 260–264, Feb. 1998.
[15] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[16] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[17] A. D. Weathers, S. A. Altekar, and J. K. Wolf, “Distance spectra for PRML channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 33, pp. 2809–2811, Sept. 1997.
[18] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., S-581 83 Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[19] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “A soft-input soft-output APP module for iterative decoding of concatenated codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 1, pp. 22–24, Jan. 1997.
[20] J. L. Fan, A. Friedmann, E. Kurtas, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording,” in Proc. 37th Annual Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, 1999, pp. 1314–1323.
[21] H. Song, R. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, pp. 2183–2186, Sept. 2000.
[22] J. Garcia-Frias, “Decoding of low-density parity check codes over finitestate binary Markov channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 2001, p. 72.
[23] D. MacKay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. Available: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html.
[24] S. A. Altekar, M. Berggren, B. E. Moision, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Error-event characterization on partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 241–247, Jan. 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

