lSlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland,June 30 -July 5,2002

Code Rate and the Area under Extrinsic Information Transfer Curves

Alexei Ashikhmin, Gerhard Kramer, and Stephan ten Brink Lucent Technologies, Bell Labs Murray Hill, NJ 07974, U.S.A.
{aea,gkr,stenbrink}@bell-labs.com

Abstract - Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts predict the convergence behavior of iterative decoding and detection schemes. The EXIT analysis is made precise by introducing a model that applies to iterative decoding of parallel concatenated, serially concatenated, and low-density parity-check codes. The model leads to an area property of EXIT charts.

”= -

Source

= Encoder 1

Comm. Channe1

_t
Decoder

Fig. 1: A general decoding model.

I. INTRODUCTION
Experience suggests that extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts accurately predict the convergence behavior of iterative decoding schemes [l]. We make the EXIT analysis precise by introducing a decoding model that applies to a wide variety of situations. We also prove properties of EXIT charts that explain some of the observations that have been made by simulations.
11. DECODINGMODELAND EXIT CHART
Our decoding model is shown in Fig. 1. A binary symmetric source produces a vector U of k independent information bits each taking on the values 0 and 1 with probability 1/2. A rate k / n encoder maps 3 to a binary length-n code word -x. A second encoder maps 14 to a binary length-m code word
-v . The decoder receives two vectors: a noisy version y of a: and a noisy version U, of g. We call the a: to y channel the
communication channel, and the 2 to channelthe extrinsic channel (one might also choose to call it the a priori channel). The term “extrinsic” emphasizes that U, originates from outside the communication channel. Usually both channels are memoryless, although some of our results remain valid when the communication channel has memory.
Let aj be the a priori log-likelihood ratio about U,, and let ej be the extrinsic log-likelihood ratio about v j . The EXIT chart depicts how much each decoder “amplifies” the average knowledge about the vj as measured from the decoder inputs aj to the decoder outputs e3. More precisely, let
j=1

111. AREAPROPERTY
The following theorem can be proved by using the information theoretic identity derived in [2]. Let A = ~ ~ I E ( IdA l) b~e the area under the EXIT function.
Theorem 1 Consider Fig. 1 and I E computed using (1) and (3). For any codes (linear or not) and any communication channel (memoryless OT not) we have
af the extrinsic channel is a BEG‘.
We apply Theorem 1 to serially concatenated codes with a rate Rout outer code and a rate Ri, inner code. We find that for a BEC the area under the outer code curve is AoUt= 1 - Rout and the area under the inner code curve is Ai, = I ( X ;l’)/n/Ri,. Furthermore, for successful decoding we must
have 1- Aout< A,, or
where C is the capacity of the communication channel. Thus, we get the satisfying result that the overall rate must be less than capacity for successful decoding. However, the bound (5)
says more because I ( X ;y ) / nequals capacity only if the inner code has rate one. Thus, any inner code with Ri, < 1 has
an inherent capacity loss which the outer code cannot recover. This suggests that for serially concatenated codes it is a good idea to use a rate one inner code when iteratively decoding.
The area result has further implications for decoding complexity, and one can derive similar results for EXIT charts of LDPC codes. For more details see [3].

where the last step follows because all the V, are assumed
to have the same distribution. An EXIT chart plots I E as a
function of I A .
It turns out that for serially concatenated codes and low-
density parity-check (LDPC) codes e3 is a function of -y and
- a[,] = [a1. . .a3-1 a3+1 . . .a,]. This means that I ( V , ;E 3 ) 5 I(V,;xl’bl). One can show that a maximum a posterzorz
(MAP) bit decoder is optimal in the sense that one has

I(&;&) = “Ab]).

(3)

REFERENCES
[I] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806-808, May 1999.
[2] S. ten Brink, “Exploiting the chain rule of mutual information for the design of iterative decoding schemes,” in Proc. 39th Ann. Allerton Conf. on Commun., Control, and Computing, Monticello,Urbana-Champaign,Ill., USA, Oct. 2001.
[3] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: a model and two properties,” in Proc. 36th Ann. Conf. on Inform. Sci. Sys., Princeton Univer-
sity, USA, March 20-22, 2002.

0-7803-7501-7/02f$17.00@2002 IEEE.

115

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:04:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

