MEMORY-EFFICIENTTURBO DECODER ARCHITECTURESFOR LDPC CODES
Mohammad M. Mansour and Naresh R. Shanbhag
iCIMS Research Center, CSL University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801 e-mail: [mmansour,shanbhag]@uiuc.edu

Abstract-In this paper, we propose a turbo decoding message- plications (e.g., 3G wireless applications).

passing (TDMP) algorithm to decode regular and irregular lowdensity parity-check(LDPC) codes. The TDMP algorithmhas two main advantages over the commonly employed two-phase messagepassing algorithm. First, it exhibitsa faster convergence behavior (up to 50% less iterations), and improvement in coding gain (up to an order of magnitudefor moderate-to-highSNR and small number of iterations). Second, the correspondingdecoder architecture has a significantlyreduced memory requirement that amounts to a
+ savings of (75 25n/ C node-degrees)% > 75% for code-length n.
A decoder architecture featuring the TDMP algorithm is also presented. Furthermore, we propose a new structure on the parity-

In this paper, we depart from the traditional LDPC decoding approach by taking a fresh look at LDPC codes, specifically from the perspective of turbo codes themselves. An LDPC code is viewed as a code concatenated from a number of constituent codes the same way a turbo code is viewed as a code concatenated from a number of convolutional codes. Hence, we propose a turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm to decode LDPC codes as an alternative to the TPMP algorithm. The advantages of the proposed TDMP algorithm over the TPMP algorithm are twofold. First, the TDMP algorithm exhibits a faster

check matrix of an LDPC code based on permutation matrices convergence behavior and an improvement in coding gain over

aimed at reducing interconnect complexity and improving decod- the TPMP algorithm, thus rendering LDPC codes attractive for
ing throughput. In addition, we construct a wide range of LDPC high-speed applications. Second, it reduces the memory overcodes based on Ramanujan graphs which possess this structure. head of the TPMP algorithm by more than 75%,thus rendering

LDPC codes attractive for low-power applications.

1. INTRODUCTION

A decoder architecture implementing the proposed algorithm

is developed which applies for randomly (in the sense of Gal-

After the phenomenal success of turbo codes [13, another class lager’s method [2]) or explicitly constructed regular as well as of codes exhibiting similar characteristics and performance, called irregular LDPC codes. The architecture can be extended to ban-

low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, has gained widespread dle generalized low-density (GLD) codes [111by simply tailor-

interest. LDPC codes were introduced by Gallager in 1961 121 ing the constituent SISO decoders to the syndrome trellises of

together with the concept of iterative decoding via message pass- the sub-codes used. Further, we show that regularity features

ing. However, Gallager’s ideas remained largely neglected until in the form of permutation matrices simplify the interconnect

the recent rediscoveries made by Mackay-Neal and Wiberg [3, complexity and hence increase throughput. We show that one

41. It was shown [SI that this class of codes is capable of ap- method capable of generating exceptional codes, namely the Ra-

proaching capacity limit at low decoding complexity. LDPC manujan construction method, possesses these features. We also

codes were further extended in [51 to include irregular LDPC develop a set of transformations that allows for constructing a

codes yielding bit-error rates that theoretically surpass the per- wider range of regular/irregular LDPC as well as GLD codes.

formance of the best (turbo) codes known so far.

This paper attempts to promote LDPC codes as practical se- 2. TURBO DECODING OF LOW-DENSITYCODES rious competitors to turbo codes at the decoder architecture front as well. All current decoder architectures for LDPC codes such 2.1- LDPC Codes

as [6101

the two-phase message-passing (TPMP) algo-

rithm 121. Due to the random nature of LDPC codes, direct ap-

plication Of the TPMP

in ( l ) stringent

requirements in a serial decoder implementation that limits the

Of LDPC ‘Odes in latency and power sensitive aP-

plications, and (2) complex interconnects that limits the amount

of inherent parallelism that can be exploited efficiently in a par-

allel decoder implementation. For this reason, turbo codes still

maintain a clear advantage over LDPC codes in mainstream ap-

An LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a pseudo-
random sparse parity-check matrix = ihijlrnxn and is de-
scribed by a bipartite graph whose reduced adjacency matrix is
H. The graph has on one side m check nodes {cl, . .. ,c,} corresponding to the m rows of H, and on the other n bit nodes {bl, . , . ,bn) corresponding to the columns of H. A bit node bj is
connected to a check node ci if hij = 1. If all bit nodes have de-
gree c and all check nodes have degree r , the code is called a reg-
ular (c,r)-LDPC code, otherwise it is called an irregular code.

This work was supported with funds from NSF under grants CCR 99-7938 1 LDPC codes are decoded iteratively using Gallager’s message-

and CCR 00-73490.

passing (MP) algorithm [2] based on a two-phase schedule that

0-7803-7587-4/02/$17.00 @32002IEEE

159

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

computes iteratively extrinsic probability values associated with each bit node using disjoint parity-check equations that the bit participates in [2]. Each iteration consists of a two-phase round of updates between check and bit nodes according to the connectivity of the underlying graph. Updates in each phase are independent and can be parallelized.

2.2. LDPC Codes Viewed as Concatenated Codes

Gallager [2] constructed ensembles of regular (c, r)-LDPC codes
of length n by defining the parity-check matrix H,,, of a code C as a concatenation of c submatrices, each containing a sin-
gle 1in each column as shown in Fig. l(a). The first of these
submatrices H' having size f x n defines a super-code C' as a direct sum of n / T (r,T - 1)-SPC sub-codes. Note that C' satis-
fies a subset of the parity-check equations of C, and hence C is a
subspace of C' . The other submatrices H2,.. . ,H' are pseudo-
random permutations of the columns of HI, each of which de-
fine a super-code C j on the corresponding subset of the paritycheck equations. Hence, C is the intersection of the super-codes
C',. .. ,C" as shown in Fig. 1@). Irregular LDPC codes can
similarly be defined by puncturing the super-codes. Each punc-
tured super-code Cj is then a direct sum of n / r (rij,rij - 1)SPC sub-codes where raj 5 r and 1 5 i 5 n / r (assuming that puncturing does not result in all-zero rows in H). Figure l(a)
shows an example of a parity-check matrix of a regular (3,4)LDPC code of length 16 as a concatenation of 3 submatrices.
An irregular code can be obtained for example by replacing the
encircled 1's with 0's.

n

4

-r

h

n2ti5i1f-00100001 11111 0011 0010 00100000

1(2o@lo 0 0

n3

0000 00

1010 10

~OOl101

(a)

Fig. 1. (a) A parity-check matrix H12,16 defined as a concatenation of 3 submatrices of size 4 x 16. Puncturing C2 and C3 at the encircled 1's results in an irregular code. (b) A code C
viewed as C' n C2 nC3.

their intrinsic values with respect to C' (i.e., they are not up-
dated). This extrinsic information is fed as a priori information through an interleaver to the SISO decoder working on C2. Next, the second SISO decoder generates updated extrinsic probability values considering now the unpunctured bits belong to C2. The process is repeated for all of the remaining super-codes. A single update of messages based on one super-code is called a sub-iteration, and a round of updates across all the super-codes constitutes a single decoding iteration. At the final iteration, hard decisions are made based on the posterior probability values read (after de-interleaving) from the SISO decoder operating on the last super-code.
The trellis of an unpunctured super-code is a direct sum of n / r syndrome trellises of an (r,r - 1)SPC sub-code as shown in Fig. 2, while that of a punctured super-code C j is a direct sum of n / r syndrome trellises of (rij,rij - 1)SPC sub-codes,
where r i j 5 r and 1 5 i 5 n / r (assuming no all-zero rows in H). Hence, the SISO decoders of the super-codes consist of
independent simple SISO decoders that can operate in parallel on each of the constituent SPC sub-codes. These decoders can either implement Gallager's message update equation [2] or the BCJR algorithm [12]. In [13], it was shown that the BCJR algorithm has a reduced complexity when applied to a 2-state trellis, and is better from an implementation point of view since it is less prone to quantization noise. Moreover, extensions to GLD codes require the use of the BCJR algorithm (or any other a posteriori probability decoding algorithm) to compute extrinsic
probabilities for general ( n o , ko) sub-codes instead of simple
SPC sub-codes. For SISO-decoder architectures based on the BCJR algorithm, the reader is referred to [14].
An important advantage of the turbo decoding algorithm is that it does not require the saving of multiple check-to-bit messages as is the case for the two-phase MP algorithm; only the most recently generated check messages by a super-code are retained as the bit messages of the succeeding super-code in the chain. This results in faster convergence as demonstrated through simulations in the last Section since new messages are computed based on updated values from each sub-iteration rather than old messages from the previous iteration. At the same SNR, the algorithm requires 20% - 50% fewer iterations to converge, and can achieve up to an order of magnitude improvement in coding gain for a small number of iterations and moderate-tohigh SNR's. This is obviously favorable from an implementation point of view since it improves decoding latency.
3. DECODER ARCHITECTURE

23. The lfirbo Decoding Message-PassingAlgorithm
The previous definition of LDPC codes is reminiscent of parallel concatenated turbo codes [12], and hence it is natural to apply the turbo decoding technique to decode LDPC codes employing constituent SISO decoders to decode each of the supercodes. A similar concept was employed in [111 for decoding GLD codes defined using two super-codes. For each bit, extrinsic probability values are computed given that the bit belongs
to C'. For punctured bits, the extrinsic probabilities are set to

This section presents an architecture implementing the turbo decoding algorithm for (ir-)regular LDPC and GLD codes. Besides its improved decoding latency due to its faster convergence characteristics, the turbo decoding algorithm has significantly reduced memory requirements in a decoder implementation. Unlike the TPMP algorithm where all intermediate messages between bit and check nodes in the underlying bipartite graph must be saved, only the partial bit messages that result from decoding each super-code need to be saved. In fact, for c concatenated super-codes, only the partial bit messages from

160

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

"" C

Fig. 2. The turbo decoding algorithm applied to the punctured LDPC code in Fig. I(a) with (3,2) and (4,3)-SPC sub-codes having simple 2-state trellises of length 3 and 4.

( c - 1)of the super-codes need to be saved. For irregular codes, storage for messages corresponding only to unpunctured bits is needed, or (cj - 1) messages where cj is the node-degree of the jth bit. In essence, since the overall code is decoded by decoding the super-codes in tandem in one iteration (= c subiterations), newly generated bit messages from preceding supercodes are directly used to generate bit messages of succeeding super-codeson the same iteration. This eliminates the constraint of saving multiple bit and check messages.
Figure 3(a) shows an architecture implementing the turbo decoding algorithm for low-density codes. The same architecture can be used to decode both LDPC as well as GLD codes where only the constituent SISO decoders of the super-codes differ. The bit messages are stored in n circular buffers each having (cj - 1) stages. The bits can be partitioned according to
their node-degrees d l , . . . ,d k so that the ith partition contains
ni bits of degree di. The circular buffers of the ith partition form a (di - 1) x ni array corresponding to (di - 1)of the c supercodes as shown in Fig. 3. The n channel reliability values are stored in the buffers MEMA. A set of L SISO decoders operate in parallel on a row of the array at any given sub-iteration through the (de-)multiplexers. The parameter L is a VLSI design parameter which is a tradeoff between throughput and interconnect complexity of the (de-)multiplexers.
At the start of every new iteration, messages corresponding to the second super-code occupy the tails of the circular buffers, and those for the last super-code occupy the heads. During the first sub-iteration corresponding to updates from super-code 1, appropriate messages are read from the buffers through the MUX's and then accumulated to form the total reliability values available with respect to super-code 1 (note that the resulting sum does not include the messages previously generated by super-code 1 itself). Each read operation from the buffers rotates the buffers by (cj - 2 ) positions so that the messages to be updated by the SISO decoders are available at the heads of the buffers. The SISO decoders generate the corresponding updated messages for super-code 1 which overwrite old messages corresponding to super-code 2 (at the heads of the buffers) since these are not used in computing new messages for super-code 2 in the

next sub-iteration. A sub-iteration terminates when a complete

row of messages in the partitions accessed by the SISO decoder

is updated. The process is repeated in the remaining ( c- 1)sub-

iterations. The sequence of buffer updates for c = 4 is shown in

Fig. 3(b) for both unpunctured and punctured super-codes.

The total storage required for the messages is Cy=,(cj - 1)

E;=, compared to 4

c j for the two-phase MP algorithm, which

+ corresponds to a savings of (75 25n/ node-degrees)% >

75%. In the next Section, we consider techniques aimed at im-

proving throughput and reducing complexity of the (de-) multi-

plexers as well by imposing structural regularity on the parity-

check matrix H defining an LDPC code.

4. LDPC CODES FROM RAMANUJAN GRAPHS
In this section, we develop LDPC codes having special structural regularity on their parity-check matrix that reduces interconnect complexity and improve throughput of the decoder architecture in Fig. 3(a). One particularly favorable regularity feature is the decomposition of H into permutation matrices. A square matrix P k x k is called a permutation matrix if each row
and each column of P has exactly one non-zero entry, or equiv-
alently, a permutation of the columns (or rows) of the identity matrix I k k . The presence of permutation matrices simplifies the interconnection network and the control logic in Fig. 3.
Short length LDPC codes defined from permutation matrices were introduced in [15, 161. It was shown that their performance matches and even exceeds those of comparable randomly constructed LDPC codes. In [13], we proposed a construction of the permutation matrices based on cyclotomic cosets (where a specific choice of cosets gives the construction in [15]), and showed the advantages of permutations matrices in simplifying interconnect network and improving throughput. Referring back to the decomposition shown in Fig. I(a), the subma-
trices H 1 ,. . . ,H" of the super-codes would be composed of
permutation matrices under this method. However, in general such construction method does not yield impressive codes for long code lengths. One notable construction method capable of generating asymptotically good codes is the explicit algebraic

161

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

y 2 - j +Iyol ...

DECODER 1

...

DECODER L

Fig. 3. (a) Decoder architecture implementing the turbo decoding algorithm. (b) Sequence of updates of the Ith circular buffer for unpunctured (top) and punctured (bottom) super-codes for c = 4

construction method based on Ramanujan graphs. It will be shown that the parity-check matrix of a Ramanujan-based LDPC code has the desired regularity property in which the submatri-
ces HI, . .. ,H"are composed of permutation matrices and all-
zero matrices.
Ramanujan Construction Method. A bipartite graph can be used to define an LDPC code. Of particular interest are those graphs that have large girth (length of shortest cycle) and are

n:AThZ m,the resulting Ramanujan graph is a biregular bipartite graph

$ X R G ( T T Zha, v~i)ng ~ X R =G ~

(1- 4) vertices and

+ Pi
uniform node-degrees of (p 1).The parameters h l , h2,and qi

47. are defined based on the prime factorization of m into @,

~~~~~~1 q? where { q l , . .. ,qhl } are the prime factors for which p is a quadratic non-residue and { q h , + I , .. . ,q h l + h a } are those

for which p is a quadratic residue.

good expanders (informally,propagate information quickly among Theorem 1 [22] The reduced adjacency matrix ARC(mp,) of a

the nodes in the graph). Independently, Margulis and LubotzkyPhilips-Sarnak (LPS) [17,18] found a special class of graphs
that posses, among others, the above two extrema1properties of large girth and expanding coefficient. The class of graphs de-

Ramanujan graph X R G (p~) c,an be partitioned into an N X N

+ array of square matrices W S XwShere N = mnq(,,,(1 $1

n ; and s = d

(1- 1. Each w is either osx or the sum

ofone or m2ore nqolmn-overlapping permutation matrices.

fined by LPS is constructed algebraically based on two distinct

odd primes p and q and denoted by XRci(4,P). The Parameter Example 2 Form = 9 and p = 5, the Ramanujan graph XRG(9,5) P defines the node-degrees Of the graph* and 4 determines the has 720 vertices and node-degree 6. Its adjacency matrix A R G (5~) ,

number of vertices in the graph. If p is a quadratic non-residue has size 340, and can be partitioned into a 12 12 array of ma-

modulo q, the resulting graph is a biregular bipartite graph hav- trices each of which is either a permutation matrix P27x27 or

+ ing

vertices in each partition and uniform node-degrees of 027x27 as shown in Fig. 4.

(p 1). These graphs are called Ramanujan because all non-

The next step is to transform the bipartite Ramanujan graph

trivial eigenvalues of their reduced adjacency matrix ARc(q,P ) into a factor graph XFG(mp,) that defines an LDPC code, or

have magnitude at most 2fi.

alternatively, to transform the square matrix A R G ( ~in,to~a)

LDPC codes constructed from Ramanujan graphs were stud- rectangular parity-check matrix HFG(mp,) as shown in Fig. 5.

ied in [191 following the ideas of Margulis [171 and in [20]. A set of possible transformations of the columns of A R G (p~) ,

In [21], the construction method of Ramanujan graphs was gen- is shown in the middle row in Fig. 6, and the bottom row shows

eralized to the case q = m is composite allowing the con- the corresponding transformations with respect to a node 2 in
struction of a wider range of LDPC codes with flexible param- the right partition of XRGand its neighbors a,b, . . . ;f on the

eters. It can be shown [22] that under certain conditions on left.

162

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. A R G (5~).,
D
- AR&,p)
Reduced adjacency matrix
Fig. 5. A factor graph from a Ramanujan graph.

from Ramanujan graphs using the proposed the transformations over an AWGN channel with BPSK modulation. The parameters of the designed codes are CODE 1: (m = 15,p = 7 ,n =
i) 1440,rate = using node splitting, CODE 2: ( m = 15,p = 3) 7 ,n = 2880, rate = using edge merging, CODE 3: (m = i) 21,p = 11,n = 6048, rate = using edge merging, and
CODE 4: ( m = 3 3 , p = 7 , n = 15 840,rate = 0.504) using node splitting. Figure 8(a) compares the performance of CODE 1 using the turbo decoding algorithm (left) and the twophase MP algorithm (middle), and shows the number of iterations required for convergence (right) as a function of SNR. Figure 8(b) shows the results for CODE 2. The figures demon-
strate that the proposed algorithm converges faster than the commonly employed two-phase MP algorithm (up to 50% less iterations), and yields higher coding at moderate-to-high SNR and small number of iterations (up to 2 orders of magnitude reduc-
tion in BER). Finally, Fig. 8(c) demonstrates that the Ramanujan construction method of LDPC codes coupled with the proposed transformations is capable of generating good LDPC codes with large lengths such as CODE 3 and 4.

The first transfornation, node splitting, splits x into two

Edge

Node replacement t Edge splitting

Edgemerging

Edge merging t Node replacement

nodes $1 and 2 2 which become bit nodes in XFG,while its
neighbor nodes a,b, . . . ,f become check nodes in XFG.In the

edge splitting transfornation, the edges connecting x to a,. . . ,f are split and new nodes 721,722,. . . ,716 are inserted. The nodes 2, a, b, ... ,f become check nodes while . 721,722, . . ,n6 become

bit nodes. All bit nodes have degree 2 and hence this case is suit-

able for GLD codes with sub-codes having minimum distance

at least 3. In the third transformation, a subset of the neighbors,

say d, e, f, are replaced with bit nodes and the edge splitting

transformation is applied to remaining nodes a,b, c and x. Alternatively, edges can be merged together so that they become

Fig. 6. Ramanujan to factor graph transformations.

incident on new nodes which are then taken as bit nodes such

as n1,n 2 , n3 in the edge merging transformation. Finally, the
fifth transformation is a hybrid transformation of edge merging References
and node replacement. The node splitting transformation corre-

sponds to Type 1 and 4replacements in [23] while edge replacement corresponds to Type 3 and 4 replacements. The paritycheck matrices resulting from the application of the node splitting and edge merging transformations on A R G (5~) ,in Fig. 4 are shown in Fig. 7.
In general, the number of super-codes is a multiple of N (the
number of matrices per matrix column in ARG)s.ay a N E Z.
The (de-)multiplexers of the decoder architecture in Fig. 3(a) reduce to a set of I-to-S (de-)multiplexers and the control logic

[l] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon Limit Error-CorrectingCoding and Decoding: Turbo Codes,” in IEEE Int. Conf on Communications, 1993, pp. 1064-107’0.
[2] R. G.Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT Press,Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[3] D. 1. C. MacKay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399431, Mar. 1999.
[4] N. Wiberg, Codes and decoding on general graphs, Ph.D. thesis, Linkoping University,Sweden, 1996.
[5] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-

simply implements the corresponding permutations. Each supercode can be decoded in 1 sub-iteration using Sparallel SISO decoders, and hence one iteration completes in aNrtOwt here rtoits the delay of the decoders and the (de-)multiplexers. For I decoding iterations per frame and clock frequency f,the throughput

approaching irregular low-density panty-check codes,” IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb 2001. [6] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architectures for low densityparity check codes,” in Pmc. of2001 IEEE Int. Sympos. on Circuits and Systems, Sydney, May 2001, pp. 742-745. [7] E. Ye0 et al., “VLSI architectures for iterative decoders in magnetic

is nf/ ( a N I r t o t )bitslsec.

recording channels,” IEEE Trans. on Magnetics, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 748755, Mar. 2001.

[SI T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI implementation-oriented(3,k)mgular

5. SIMULATION RESULTS

low-density parity-check codes,” in SifS 2001, Antwerp, Belgium, Sept. 2001, pp. 25-36.

The performance of the turbo decoding algorithm is compared

191 E. Ye0 et al., “High Throughput Low-Desity Parity-Check Decoder Ar-
chitectures,” in Pmc. IEEE Globecom2001. San Antonio. TX,Nov 2001,

with the TPMP algorithm by simulating LDPC codes constructed

pp. 3019-3024.

163

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

P=pamuttionIdi x of sze S x S

’” 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2- 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2

SNR ldBl

SNR ldBl

1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 SNRldBl

(a) CODE 1: turbo decoding vs. the two-phase MP algorithm.

Turbo decoding schedule roo

Two-phase schedule

60

Fig. 7. HFG(95,) obtained using (a) node splitting and (b) edge merging transformations.
[lo] G. Al-Rawi and J. Cioffi, “A highly efficient domain-programmable parallel architecture for LDPCC decoding,” in ITCC 2001, April 2001, pp. 569-577.
[ I l l J. Boutros, 0.Pothier, and G. &mor, “Generalized low density (tanner) codes,” in Proceedings of ICC’99,Vancouver, June 1999, pp. 441-445.
[I21 L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, E Jelinek, and 1. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizingsymbol error rate,” IEEE Trans.on 1.T. pp. 284-287, Mar.1974.
[13] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” ISLPED 2002 (to appear), Aug. 2002.
[I41 M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architectures for low-densityparity-check codes:’ GlobeCOM 2002 (to appear),Nov. 2002.
[IS] D.Sridhara, R. M. Tanner, and T. E. Fuja, “Low Density Parity Check
Codes from Permutation Matrices,” in 2001 Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Mar. 2001. [I61 J. L. Fan, “Amy Codes as Low-DensityParity Check Codes,” in 2ndlnternational Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics (Brest, France), Sep. 2000.
[17] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit Constructions of Graphs Without Short Cycles
and Low Density Codes,” Combinatorica,vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71-78, 1982.
[IS] A. Lubotzky,R. Phillips, and P. Sam& “Ramanujan Graphs,” Combinarorica, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 261-277, 1988.
[I91 J. Rosenthal and P. 0. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC Codes Using Ramanujan Graphs and Ideas from Margulis,” in Pmc. of the 38-th Allerton Conference on Communication, Contml, and Computing, 2000, pp. 248-257.
[20] J. Lafferty and D.Rockmore, “Codes and Iterative Decoding on Algeraic
Expanders,” in ISIT 2000. Hawaii, U.S.A. Nov. 2000.
[21] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Construction of LDPC Codes from Ramanujan Graphs,” in Conference on Info. Sciences and Systems 2002, Princeton University, Mar. 2002.
[22] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “AlgebraicConstruction of Ramanujan Graphs,” CSL technical report, UIUC.
[23] F‘. 0. Vontobel and H.-A. Loeliger, ‘‘Irregular Codes from Regular Graphs,” ISIT2002 (to appear), 2002.

HI
40
ep
-I 30

10

14 15 16 17 18 1 9 2 0 2 1 SNR Id81
(b) CODE 2: turbo decoding vs. the two-phase MP algorithm.

Turbo dewding Schedule 100

Turbo decodina schedule

10

to-‘

I\

1

10

’”‘t

10 *

E

m

1 0‘‘

10 ‘
1
10

10 10 12 14 1 6 18 20 SNR (dB1

1 0 12 1 4 16 18 2 0 SNR Id81

(c) CODE 3 (left) and CODE 4 (right).

Fig. 8. BER simulation results.

164

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

