ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland,June 30 - July 5,2002

Combinatorial Constructions of Low-Density Parity Check Codes for Iterative Decoding
Bane Vasic Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Arizona, Tucson 85721, USA e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu

Abstract - We introduce a combinatorial construction of regular low-density parity check (LDPC) codes based on balanced incomplete block designs, or more specifically on cyclic difference families of Abelian groups and affine geometries. Several constructions are presented, and the bounds on minimal distance are derived by using the concept of Pasch configurations.
I. BALANCEDINCOMPLETE BLOCKDESIGNSAND LDPC CODES
In the past few years several “random” low-density parity check codes (LDPCs) have been designed with performances very close to the theoretical limit. Although the considerations related to error performance are important, the complexity factors tend to dominate system architecture and design considerations, especially in extremely high speed applications such as magnetic recording and optical communications. The idea of this paper is to construct “deterministic” LDPC codes that admit low hardware complexity implementation. Recently several such constructions have been investigated. A LDPC construction based on finite geometries has been proposed by Kou et al. [ 2 ] ,while MacKay and Davey [3] use Steiner systems to find minimum distance of Gallager codes. Another two related approaches for construction structured LDPC codes are method of using subgroups of the multiplicative group of a prime field [6], and using Ramanujan graphs [ 6 ] .
We present several combinatorial constructions of regular Gallager codes based on balanced incomplete block designs (BIDBD) [l]. The parity check matrix of our codes is completely determined by a small set of parameters, and can lend itself to a very low complexity implementation. The bipartite graphs of BIBD codes have girth six. We present two constructions. The first one is based on difference families and the Z,, group, while the second construction is based on a rectangular lattice finite geometry. The first method exploits Netto [ 4 ] and Buratti [ 2 ] difference families, and gives a BIBD
with v = 1 mod 6 , v power of a prime. The second construction
gives much larger code family lower. The number of parity bits is equal to mk, m-a prime, and the blocks are defined as lines of different slopes connecting points of a mxk integer lattice. The bounds on the minimum distance of the BIBD codes can be established using combinatorial arguments, and are solely function on the parity check matrix column weight.
Given base blocks Bjl y l t , t>O, of a cyclic difference family (CDF) on an Abelian group, the blocks of a design are

B,={b,~+g,..., b,,k+g} where gE V. Generally, given a (v,k,/Z)CDF, the matrix of parity checks can be written in the form
where each sub-matrix is a circulant of dimension VAV. As shown in [9] this structure supports very simple encoder and decoder. The form of H indicates that the CDF codes have a quasi-cyclic structure similar to Townsend and Weldon [7] self-orthogonal quasi-cyclic codes and Weldon’s difference set codes [ 8 ] .Each orbit in the design corresponds to one circulant submatrix in a matrix of parity checks of quasi-cyclic codes. Therefore, we can conclude that the shortened self-orthogonal codes (with removed identity matrix) are LDPC codes.
The matrix of parity checks of a lattice codes can be written as an array of permutation different matrices Hij

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank Alexander Kuznetsov, Victor Kolesnik and Olgica Milenkovic for their comments and suggestions.

REFERENCES

M. Buratti, “Construction of (q,k,l) difference families with q a prime

power and k=4,5,” Discrete Mathematics, 138, pp, 169-175, 1995.

Y. Kou, S . Lin, and M. P.C. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes

based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results”, to appear in

E E E Trans. Inform. Theory, 2001.

D. MacKay, M. Davey, “ Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block

length

and

high

rate

applications,”

http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~ackay/CodesRe~lar.html.

E. Netto, Zur theorie der triplesysteme, Math. Ann. 42, pp. 143-152,

1893.

I J. Rosenthal and P. Vontobel, “Construction of LDP c codes using

Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” ISIT2001

R. M. Tanner, D. Srkdhara, and T. Fuja “A class of group-structured

LDPC codes,” to appear in ISTA 2001 Proceedings, Ambleside, England

(see also http://www.cse.ucsc.edu/-tanner/pubs.html).

R. Townsend and E. J. Weldon,” Self-orthogonal quasi-cyclic codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 2, pp. 183-195, 1967.

E. J. Weldon, Jr.,”Difference-set cyclic codes,” Bell Syst. Tech.J., 45, pp.

1045-1055, Sept. 1966.

B. Vasic, “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on Steiner systems

and their application in magnetic recording,” to appear in proceedings of

Globecom 2001,San Antonio, TX, November 2001.

This work was supported by the National Storage Industry Consortium

0-7803-750-17/02/$17.00@2002IEEE.

31 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:01:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

