1570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

Finite-Length Analysis of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes on the Binary Erasure Channel
Changyan Di, Student Member, IEEE, David Proietti, I. Emre Telatar, Member, IEEE, Thomas J. Richardson, and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Invited Paper

Abstract—In this paper, we are concerned with the finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes when used over the binary erasure channel (BEC). The main result is an expression for the exact average bit and block erasure probability for a given regular ensemble of LDPC codes when decoded iteratively. We also give expressions for upper bounds on the average bit and block erasure probability for regular LDPC ensembles and the standard random ensemble under maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. Finally, we present what we consider to be the most important open problems in this area.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, binary erasure channel (BEC), finite-length analysis, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

I N this paper, we are concerned with the finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes when used over

the binary erasure channel (BEC). The main result is an expres-

sion for the exact average bit and block erasure probability for

a given regular ensemble

l r when decoded it-

eratively with message-passing algorithms as in, e.g., [11]. For

an introduction into the terminology and basic results of LDPC

codes we refer the reader to [3]–[9], [11]–[15].

For a particular code 1 in a given ensemble

, let

denote the expected bit erasure probability if is

used to transmit over a BEC with parameter and if the re-

ceived word is decoded iteratively by the standard belief propa-

gation decoder. Here, the expectation is over all realizations of

the channel. Let

denote the corresponding

ensemble average. The following two results are well known,

see [7], [9].

Manuscript received September 9, 2001; revised January 15, 2002. The material in this paper was presented at the 39th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Allerton, UIUC, October 3–5, 2001.
C. Di, D. Proietti, and R. L. Urbanke are with the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology-Lausanne, LTHC-IC, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: changyan.di@epfl.ch; david.proietti@epfl.ch; rudiger.urbanke@epfl.ch).
I. E. Telatar is with the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology-Lausanne, LTHI-IC, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail:emre.telatar @epfl.ch).
T. J. Richardson is with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ 07921 USA (e-mail: richardson@flarion.com).
Communicated by S. Shamai, Guest Editor. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(02)04026-9.
1More precisely, G denotes the bipartite graph representing the code.

[Concentration Around Ensemble Average] For any given

there exists an

such that

[Convergence of Ensemble Average to Cycle-Free Case] There exists a constant such that

In words, the first statement asserts that the behavior of the indi-

vidual codes concentrates around the ensemble average and that

this concentration is exponential in the block length. The second

statement asserts that the ensemble average converges to the en-

semble average of the cycle-free case as the block length tends

to infinity.2 Note, though, that the speed of the convergence to

the cycle-free case is known to be of order at least and is likely

to be polynomial at best, whereas the converge to the ensemble

average is exponential in the block length.3 The above two state-

ments suggest the following. Fix the block length and consider

individual elements of

. Although the behavior of in-

dividual codes can differ significantly from that of the cycle-free

(asymptotic) case for moderate block lengths, the behavior of

individual instances is likely to be concentrated around the en-

semble average. Let us demonstrate this point by means of an

example. Consider the situation depicted in Fig. 1. The two solid

curves represent

(left solid curve) and

(right solid curve), respectively. As we

can see, for a block length of

, the average bit erasure

probability differs significantly from the one of the cycle-free

case. Also plotted are curves corresponding to

for

several randomly chosen instances of

(dashed

curves). These curves follow the ensemble average very closely

for bit erasure probabilities down to .

From the above observations we can see that the ensemble

average plays a significant role in the analysis of finite length

codes and that, therefore, computable expressions for

2Recall that in the limit of infinite block length, the support tree up to any fixed given depth of a randomly chosen node or edge is cycle free with probability that goes to one. We, therefore, use the phrases “cycle free” and “infinite block length” interchangeably.
3For the erasure channel more precise statements about the convergence speeds can be gained by an analysis of the “error floor,” see [10], [16].

0018-9448/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS OF LDPC CODES ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

1571

Fig. 1. Concentration of the bit erasure probability P (G; ) for specific
instances G 2 C(512; x ; x ) (dashed curves) around the ensemble average

[P (G; )] (left solid curve). (It is noteworthy that there appear

to be two dominant modes of behavior.) Also shown is the performance of the

cycle-free case,

[P (G; )] (right solid curve).

Fig. 2. A specific element G from the ensemble C(10; x ; x ).

are of considerable value. Viewing the decoding operation from

a standard message-passing point of view, it is hard to see how

one could derive analytic expressions of

.

Cycles in the graph seem to render the finite-length problem

quite intractable. The crucial innovation in this paper is to use

as a starting point a combinatorial characterization of decoding

failures. This combinatorial characterization was originally pro-

posed in [12] in the context of the efficient encoding of LDPC

codes.

To recall some notation, an ensemble of LDPC codes

is characterized by its block length , a variable

node degree distribution

, and a check node

degree distribution

. Here,

is equal to

the probability that a randomly chosen edge is connected to

a variable (check) node of degree . To be specific, consider

regular ensembles of the form

l r . For example,

a typical element of

is shown in Fig. 2. Note that

each variable node participates in exactly three checks and that

each check node checks exactly six variable nodes.

The following definition characterizes the key object needed

to study the finite-length performance of LDPC codes over the

BEC.

Fig. 3. The set fv ; v ; v ; v g is a stopping set.
The next lemma shows the crucial role that stopping sets play in the process of iterative decoding of LDPC codes when used over the BEC.

Definition 1.1 [Stopping Sets]: A stopping set is a subset of , the set of variable nodes, such that all neighbors of are connected to at least twice.

As one can see from Fig. 3, for the particular shown the set is a stopping set.

Note, in particular, that the empty set is a stopping set. The

space of stopping sets is closed under unions, i.e., if and

are both stopping sets then so is

. (To see this note that

if is a neighbor of

then it must be a neighbor of at

least one of or , assume that is a neighbor of . Since

is a stopping set, has at least two connections to and

therefore at least two connections to

.) Each subset of

thus clearly contains a unique maximal stopping set (which

might be the empty set).

Lemma 1.1 [Combinatorial Characterization of Iterative De-

coder Performance]: Let be a given element from

.

Assume that we use to transmit over the BEC and that we

decode the received word in an iterative fashion until either

the codeword has been recovered or until the decoder fails to

progress further. Let denote the subset of the set of variable

nodes which is erased by the channel. Then the set of erasures

which remain when the decoder stops is equal to the unique

maximal stopping set of .

Proof: Let be a stopping set contained in . We claim

that the iterative decoder cannot determine the variable nodes

contained in . This is true, since even if all other bits were

known, every neighbor of has at least two connections to the

set and so all messages to will be erasure messages. It fol-

lows that the decoder cannot determine the variables contained

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

in the unique maximal stopping set contained in . Conversely, if the decoder terminates at a set , then all messages entering this subset must be erasure messages which happens only if all neighbors of have at least two connections to . In other words, must be a stopping set and, since no erasure contained in a stopping set can be determined by the iterative decoder, it must be the maximal such stopping set.

In order now to determine the exact (block) erasure probability under iterative decoding it remains to find the probability that a random subset of the set of variable nodes (the set of “erasures”) of a randomly chosen element from the ensemble
l r contains a nonempty stopping set. We show in Theorem 2.1 that this can be done exactly. In Section III, we consider the maximum likelihood (ML) performance of LDPC ensembles as well as of the standard random ensemble. It is instructive to study the ML performance since this makes it possible to distinguish how much of the incurred performance loss of iterative coding systems is due to the suboptimal decoding and how much is due to the particular choice of codes. Finally, in Section IV, we present what we consider to be the most important open problems in this area.

II. FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS

A. LDPC Codes Under Belief Propagation Decoding

The characterization of decoding failures stated in Lemma 1.1

reduces the task of the exact determination of the performance

of iterative decoders to a combinatorial problem. In this section,

we present a solution to that combinatorial problem. In the se-

quel, if is a power series,

, we denote

by

its th coefficient .

Theorem 2.1: Let

denote the bit erasure proba-

bility when transmitting over a BEC with erasure probability

using a code ,

l r , and a belief propaga-

tion decoder. Hereby we assume that we iterate until either all

erasures have been determined or the decoder fails to progress

further. In a similar manner, let

denote the block era-

sure probability. Define the functions

,

,

, and

by the recursions

(2.1) (2.2) (2.3)

Fig. 4. There are v variable nodes of degree l, c check nodes of degree r, and one super check node of degree d.

(Note, in (2.4), that

r

if

so

be defined for this case.) Then

l

r

l

r

l r

l
need not
l r l r l r l r l r l r

l r

where

.

Proof: Consider the situation depicted in Fig. 4. There are

variable nodes of degree , check nodes of degree , and

one super check node of degree .4 Label the variable node

sockets in some arbitrary but fixed way with elements from the

set

and, in a similar manner, label the

check node sockets in some arbitrary but fixed way with

elements from the set

. Let

and the boundary condition if

r l
or

denote maps which describe the association of variable and

check node sockets to their respective nodes, so that, e.g., if

then this signifies that the third variable node socket

(2.4) emanates from the fifth variable node. We always label the regular check nodes by and set the label of the super check

node to

.

4As we will see shortly, it is the introduction of this extra check node which makes it possible to write down the recursions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS OF LDPC CODES ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

1573

For simplicity, we will refer to a particular realization of con-

necting the variable node sockets to the

check node

sockets as a constellation. More precisely, a constellation is an

injective map (so

is required)

so that variable node socket ,

, is connected to check

node socket ,

. Let

denote the

set of all such maps and let

. Since

there are

r l

degrees of freedom in choosing which of the

check node sockets are connected and a further

ways of

permuting the corresponding edges,

is as given in

(2.1).

We will say that a constellation contains a stopping set if it

contains a nonempty subset of the variable nodes such that any

regular check node which is connected to , is connected to

at least twice. More precisely, ,

, is a stopping set if

Note that this definition is slightly more general than the one given in Definition 1.1 since in our current setup we have in

Fig. 5. There are v variable nodes of degree l, c check nodes of degree r, and
one super check node of degree d. Further, S is a subset of V , the set of variable
nodes, of cardinality s.

addition a super check node of degree . In particular, in this

extended definition, no restrictions are placed on the number of

connections from the stopping set to the super check node.

Clearly, the set

can be partitioned into the set of

maps that contain no stopping set, call this set

, and

the set of maps that contain at least one stopping set, call this

set

. Letting

ways of choosing the check node sockets to which the sockets

of the set are connected. Finally, the edges emanating from

can be permuted in

ways.

So far we have only been concerned with edges that emanate

from . We still need to ensure that we only count those con-

stellations for which is the maximal stopping set. Consider a

set

. Assume that has the property that any regular

check node which is connected to but not to is connected

and

to at least twice. Then clearly

is also a stopping set and

so is not the maximal stopping set. Conversely, assume that

we, therefore, have the relationship (2.2).

Consider now

, the set of constellations that con-

tain at least one stopping set. Observe that if and are two

stopping sets then their union is a stopping set. It follows that

each element of

contains a unique maximal stop-

ping set. Therefore, we have

(2.5)

is not the maximal stopping set. Let be the maximal stop-

ping set and consider

. By definition, every regular

check node which is connected to is connected to at least

twice. Therefore, every regular check node which is connected

to but not to is connected to at least twice. We conclude

that will be the unique maximal stopping set iff does not

contain a subset with the property that every regular check

node which is connected to but not to is connect to at

where

denotes the set of constellations which

have as their unique maximal stopping set. By some abuse

of notation, let

least twice. How many constellations are there which fulfill this

property? A moment’s thought shows that this number is equal

to

: there are variable nodes

in ; there are further

regular check nodes which are

not neighbors of ; and the remaining

available

where we have used the fact that the cardinality of

only depends on the cardinality of but not on the specific

choice of variable nodes. Since there are choices of of

size and since the union in (2.5) is disjoint we get (2.3).

It remains to prove the recursion (2.4) which links

to

. Consider the situation depicted

in Fig. 5, where a specific set of cardinality is chosen.

We are interested in counting the elements of

.

Note that by definition of

, is the unique

maximal stopping set. First, this implies that is a stopping

set. Consider those elements of

for which the set

is connected to (out of the ) regular check nodes. There

sockets can be combined relegated the super check node.

The bit erasure and block erasure probability can be ex-

pressed in a straightforward manner in terms of

.

The decoder terminates in the unique maximal stopping set

contained in the set of erased bits. If we are interested in the

average fraction of erased bits remaining, then a maximal

stopping set of size will cause erasures. If we are interested

in the block erasure probability then each nonempty stopping

set counts equally. From these observations the stated formulas

for the erasure probabilities follow in a straightforward manner.

For the second expression giving the block erasure probability

we argue as follows: the quantity

are ways of choosing these check nodes. Next, there are

l r

r

l

l

r

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

Fig. 6. shown is the limit

2 [P (G; )] as a function of  for n = 2 , i [5]. Also Fig. 7.
[P (G; )] (cycle-free case).

2 [P (G; )] as a function of  for n = 2 , i [10].

is the probability that a randomly chosen subset of size con-

tains a nonempty stopping set. If we multiply this quantity with

the probability that the size of the erasure set is equal to and

sum over all then we get the block erasure probability. We can

simplify the expression by verifying that this quantity is equal

to one if

l r

.

Example 1: Consider the ensemble

. Fig. 6

shows

as a function of for

,

. Also shown is the limit

(cycle-

free case). This limiting curve can be determined in the fol-

lowing way. Recall that the threshold associated to a degree

distribution pair

can be characterized as5

Assume now that the initial erasure probability is strictly above

this threshold . In this case, the decoder will not terminate suc-

cessfully and a fixed fraction of erasures will remain. To deter-

mine this fraction define , where

, as

is given by

. From

we

get

so that the limit curve is given in parametric form by

B. Efficient Evaluation of Expressions

It is clear that the recursions stated in Theorem 2.1 quickly

become impractical to evaluate as the block length grows (this

is in fact the reason why in Fig. 6 we only depicted the curves

up to length !). For the cases

or

the following

recursions are substantially easier to evaluate.

Fig. 7 shows the average block erasure probability for the en-

semble

for block lengths

, , as deter-

mined by the following expressions.

Theorem 2.2: Let

and

be recur-

In words,

sively defined by is the erasure probability of the messages emitted

from the variable nodes at the point where the decoder termi-

nates. To this corresponds an erasure probability of the mes-

sages emitted by the check nodes of

. From this

quantity it is now easy to see that the corresponding bit erasure

probability is equal to

, where

(2.6)
and is the variable node degree distribution from the node perspective. Therefore, the limiting curve is given in parametric form as

For the specific example of the

-regular code it is more

convenient to parameterize the curve by (instead of ). We

know from [1] that

and the corresponding

5Note, that the range of x in this definition can be chosen to be x 2 (0; 1] rather than x 2 (0; ] since for x 2 (; 1] the inequality is automatically
fulfilled if it is fulfilled for x = .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS OF LDPC CODES ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

1575

with the boundary condition Define

otherwise.

Then

The basic idea in deriving these recursions is simple although

the details become quite cumbersome. Consider a constellation

which does not contain a stopping set. Then it must contain at

least one degree-one check node. Peal off this check node, i.e.,

remove it together with its connected variable node, any edges

connected to these nodes and any further check nodes which,

after removal of these edges, have degree zero. The result will be

a smaller constellation which again does not contain a stopping

set and so we can apply this procedure recursively. Reversing

this procedure, we see that constellations which do not contain

stopping sets can be built up one variable node at a time. This

gives rise to the stated recursions. Some care has to be taken to

make sure that we count each constellation only once since in

general constellations might contain more than just one check

node of degree one and so the same constellation can be con-

structed in general in many ways starting from suitable smaller

constellations. In the above recursions, denotes the number of

variable nodes of a constellation, the number of used check

nodes, the number of check nodes of degree one, and the

degree of the super check node.

In more detail: Consider a stopping-set-free constellation

which has variable nodes, uses check nodes, of which

have degree one, and is labeled by the standard labels and

, respectively. Let

denote the set of all such

constellations and let

denote its cardinality. We

will now describe how we can prune and grow constellations.

This will give rise to the desired recursion. Fix an element

from

. For each variable node, call it ,

, let

denote the number of neighboring check nodes of

degree one. We will call the multiplicity of and we will

denote these neighbors by

. To prune an element

of

, pick a variable node of multiplicity at least

one and delete and

from the constellation. The

parameters of the new constellation are therefore

,

, and . In order to make this constellation an

element of

we have to ensure that its

labeling is the standard one with label sets

and

for the variable and check nodes, respectively. We do this in the

natural way, i.e., for the pruned constellation all labels smaller

than remain unchanged whereas all labels larger than are

decreased by one. An equivalent procedure is applied at the

check node side where we have deleted nodes.

The above procedure can be inverted, i.e., if we start with this

pruned constellation and add a variable node with label as well

as check nodes with labels

then we can recover

our original constellation by connecting the edges in an appro-

priate way. Hereby, in adding, e.g., the variable node with label

we have to increase all labels of variable nodes with labels

equal to at least by exactly one and a similar remark applies for

the check nodes. Let c c

denote the subset of

which contain the variable node of multiplicity

which is connected to the degree-one check nodes

.

Now note that each element in c c

can be re-

constructed in a unique way from an element of

by adding and

. It follows that a given

element of

can be reconstructed in exactly as many

ways as the number of its variable nodes which have multiplicity

at least one. Note that, by definition, the sum of the multiplic-

ities of all variable nodes is equal to . Therefore, the above

statement can be rephrased in the following manner. If we weigh

each reconstruction by the multiplicity of the inserted variable

node then this weighted sum of reconstructions equals .

Consider now the recursion for

in more detail. Without

much loss of generality we assume here that

, i.e., that

there is no super check node. The general case is a quite straight-

forward extension. On the left-hand side of the recursion we

write

, which by our remarks above is equal to the

weighted sum of reconstructions. There are only three possible

ways of reaching an element of

by adding one vari-

able node of degree two to a constellation in

. We can have

or

Consider first the case

, and therefore

. In this case, we can choose the label in ways and the

label in ways. Further, there are choices for the socket of

and, as a moment’s thought shows,

choices for the socket of the second edge. Next, look at the case

which also implies that

. As before,

we can choose the label in ways, the label in ways, and

there are choices for the socket of . The second edge is now

connected to a check node of degree one, and there are

of them and further we can choose one out of

sockets.

Finally, consider the case

, which

implies that

. As before, we can choose the label in

ways and the labels

in ways and we have choices

for the sockets of the two check nodes. Since we count weighted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

reconstructions we also have to add a factor . In summary we ML decoder. Let

get the recursion

erasure probability. Then

denote the corresponding block

(3.1)

We can simplify the above recursions by noting that several fac-

tors are common to all terms and only depend on and . This

gives rise to the recursion stated in (2.6).

Rather than explaining the case

in detail we refer the

reader to [16], where the above approach has been generalized

to arbitrary and a systematic derivation is given.

There are many more alternative ways in which expressions

for the average block or bit erasure probability can be derived.

We mention one which is particular to the case

. Note that

in this case, a stopping-set-free constellation cannot contain a

double edge, i.e., each variable node connects two distinct check

nodes. Therefore, stopping-set-free constellations can be repre-

sented as regular graphs, whose nodes are the check nodes of the

bipartite graph and whose edges are in one-to-one correspon-

dence with variable nodes of the bipartite graph. A moment’s

thought now shows that stopping-set-free constellations on the

bipartite graph correspond to a forest in the corresponding reg-

ular graph. We can, therefore, equivalently count the number of

forests, where each node in the regular graph has degree at most

and where sockets and edges are labeled.

III. ML DECODING
It is instructive to compare the performance of an LDPC ensemble under iterative decoding to that of the same LDPC ensemble under ML decoding as well as the performance of the standard random ensemble under ML decoding. The reason for our interest in these quantities is that they indicate how much of the performance loss of iterative coding systems is due to the choice of codes and how much is due to the choice of the suboptimal decoding algorithm. We note that we assume an ML decoder which determines all those bits which are uniquely specified by the channel observations but does not break ties and therefore we will deal with true erasure probabilities rather than error probabilities.

(3.2)

where

is the number of

binary matrices of

rank . An enumeration is given in Appendix A.

Proof: First consider the block erasure probability. Let

denote the set of erasures and let denote the submatrix of

which consists of those columns of which are indexed by

. In a similar manner, let denote those components of the

codeword which are indexed by . From the defining equation

we conclude that

(3.3)

where

. Now note that if denotes the transmitted

codeword and denotes the set of erasures then

,

the right-hand side of (3.3), is known to the receiver. In standard

terminology, is called the syndrome. Consider now the equa-

tion

. Since, by assumption, is a valid codeword,

we know that this equation has at least one solution. It has mul-

tiple solutions, i.e., the ML decoder will not be able to recover

the codeword uniquely, iff has rank less than . From (A1)

we know that this happens with probability

otherwise.

From this, (3.2) follows in a straightforward manner.

Next consider the bit erasure probability. We claim that a bit

cannot be recovered by an ML decoder iff

is an

element of the space spanned by columns of

. To see this

we argue as follows. Write the basic equation

in the

form

A. Standard Random Ensemble Under ML Decoding

Theorem 3.1: Consider the ensemble

of binary

linear codes of length and dimension defined by means

of their parity-check matrix , where each entry of is

an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Bernoulli

random variable with parameter one-half. Let

denote the bit erasure probability of a particular code defined

by the parity-check matrix when used to transmit over

a BEC with erasure probability and when decoded by an

Since, by assumption, is a codeword we know that there is at

least one choice of such that this set of equations has solu-

tions. The ML decoder will not be able to determine if this

equation has solutions for both choices of . But this happens

iff

is contained in the column space spanned by

,

as claimed. From (A1) we know that the probability that

has rank is equal to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS OF LDPC CODES ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

1577

IV. INTERPRETATION

Fig. 8.

[P (H; )] as a function of  for n = 2 , i 2 [10] (solid

curves). Also shown is the union bound (dashed curves). As we can see,

for increasing lengths the union bound expressions become more and more

accurate.

In comparing Fig. 7 with Fig. 9 (assuming that the shown

union bound is reasonably tight) and Fig. 6 with Fig. 8, we see,

at least for the ensemble

, that most of the perfor-

mance loss is due to the structure of the codes themselves. No-

tice that for the ensemble

the performance under

iterative decoding is only slightly worse (at least in the “error

floor region”) than the performance under ML decoding. In

particular, even under ML decoding the curves show an “error

floor” region which is so characteristic of iterative coding sys-

tems. We remark that this effect is even more pronounced since

we look here at block error curves. The corresponding bit error

curves would show this error floor to a lesser degree.

V. OUTLOOK
Although the exact characterization of the average bit and block erasure probabilities given in this paper are quite encouraging, much work remains to be done. We briefly gather here what we consider to be the most interesting open problems.

Fig. 9. Union bound on the quantity
2 of  for n = 2 , i [10].

[P (H; )] as a function

Further, assuming that

has rank , the probability that

is an element of the space spanned by the columns of

is equal to

. From these two observations (3.1)

follows easily.

1) In Fig. 1 we see that the individual bit erasure curves fall into two categories. There is one curve which shows a fairly pronounced “error floor,” whereas all other curves exhibit a much steeper slope. In the region where the individual curves diverge, the ensemble average is to a large degree dominated by those “bad” graphs. This suggest that one can define an expurgated ensemble and that the concentration of the individual behavior around the average of this expurgated ensemble holds down to much lower erasure probabilities. The question is how to find a suitable definition of such an expurgated ensemble and whether one can still find the ensemble average of the expurgated ensemble? Some progress in this direction has been made in [10].
2) The exact evaluation of
and

Example 2: Fig. 8 shows

as a function

of for

,

. Also shown is the union bound which

is derived in Appendix B. As we can see, for increasing lengths

the union bound expressions become more and more accurate.

B. LDPC Ensemble Under ML Decoding
We have so far not succeeded in deriving exact expressions for the ML performance of LPDC ensembles. From the previous section though one can see that the union bound on the ML erasure probability for the random standard random ensemble is reasonably tight except for very short lengths. Therefore, it is meaningful to derive the union bound of the ML performance of LDPC ensembles as well. This is done in Appendix B. Stronger bounds, especially away from the error floor region, can be obtained using more powerful techniques, see, e.g., [4].

Example 3: Fig. 9 shows the union bound on the quantity

as a function of for

,

.

is, in general, a nontrivial task and it would be highly desirable to find simpler expressions. It is particularly frustrating that not even the simple recursion for the cycle code case seems amenable to an analytic attack. For example, if we try the obvious path employing generating functions, the resulting partial differential equation does not seem to admit an analytic solution. Simpler bounds on these quantities would also be useful.
3) Once simpler expressions for the regular case have been found, it is natural to investigate if exact expressions can also be given for the irregular case.
4) These expressions can then be used to find the optimum degree distribution pairs for a given length .
5) Find exact expressions for the bit and block erasure probability for LDPC ensembles under ML decoding. Comparing then the expressions for the iterative decoding of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2002

LDPC ensembles with the ones for the ML of LDPC ensembles and the ones for the ML of standard random ensembles it will then be possible to assess how much loss is due to the structure of the codes and how much loss is due to the suboptimum decoding. A related but simpler problem is to find the threshold for LDPC codes below which the block erasure probability can be made arbitrarily small. It should be interesting to see for which codes the threshold for bit and block erasure probability are different and for which they are the same. Some partial answers to the last question can be found in [10].
6) Find exact expressions for the bit and block error probability of LDPC ensembles under iterative decoding for more general channels.
7) Apply the same analysis to other ensembles, e.g., repeat– accumulate (RA) ensembles [2].
8) In this paper, we assumed that the decoder proceeds until no further progress is achieved. What is the distribution of the number of required iterations? Also, since measurements by MacKay and Kanter have indicated that the distribution of the number of required iterations have slowly decaying tails it is interesting to see how the error probabilities behave if we perform a fixed number of iterations.

APPENDIX A FULL RANK MATRICES

Lemma A.1: Let matrices of dimension

denote the number of binary and rank . By symmetry

ways, and conversely, any

matrix of rank can be mapped

to a unique

matrix of rank

by deleting the

last row. It follows that

and, therefore, that

Finally, to prove the recursion we argue as follows. Consider the

number of matrices of dimension

and rank . Split these

matrices into those matrices such that after deletion of the last

row the resulting matrices of dimension

have rank

and those that have rank

. The first such group has by

definition cardinality

and each element in this

group can be extended to a

matrix of rank in exactly

distinct ways. The second group has cardinality

and each element in this group can be extended to a

matrix of rank in exactly

distinct ways.

APPENDIX B UNION BOUNDS
It is useful to derive union bounds on the block and bit erasure probabilities of the standard random ensemble as well as for LDPC ensembles under ML decoding. We start with the standard random ensemble.
A. Random Ensembles
Lemma B.1 [Union Bound for Standard Random Ensembles Under ML Decoding]:

For

Proof: Clearly, there is exactly one rank, namely, the all-zero matrix, so that
. Next, note that

otherwise. (A1)
matrix of zero , for

Proof: First note that rank

since any nonzero binary element of

forms a

matrix of rank . Further by induction, any

matrix

of rank

can be extended to a

matrix of rank in

exactly

Therefore,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DI et al.: FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS OF LDPC CODES ON THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

1579

l

r

r

r

l

l l
where denotes the weight of , from which the block erasure probability follows in a straightforward manner.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Igal Sason and the reviewers for their many helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

B. LDPC Ensembles
In exactly the same manner we can derive bounds on the erasure probabilities for LDPC codes under ML decoding.

Lemma B.2 [Union Bound for LDPC Codes Under ML Decoding]:

l

r

l

r

r

r

l r

l

l l

Proof: We have

r

r

l r

l

l l

l

r

r

r

l

l l

REFERENCES

[1] L. Bazzi, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal

codes for the binary symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algo-

rithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 1999, to be published.

[2] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for “turbo-like”

codes,” in Proc. 1998 Allerton Conf., 1998, p. 210.

[3] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[5] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis

of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in

Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 249–258.

[6]

, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs

and belief propagation,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information

Theory, 1998, p. 117.

[7] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Ste-

mann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp.

Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.

[8] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[9] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity ap-

proaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. In-

form. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[10]

, “Error floor analysis of various low-density parity-check ensem-

bles for the binary erasure channel,” submitted to IEEE Int. Symp. In-

formation Theory, Lausanne, 2002.

[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity

check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[12]

, “Efficient encoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.

[13] A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes ap-

proaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. 13th Conf. Applied Algebra,

Error Correcting Codes, and Cryptography (Lecture Notes in Computer

Science). New York: Springer Verlag, 1999, pp. 65–76.

[14]

, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” in Codes, Systems, and Graph-

ical Models, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-

Verlag, 2000, vol. 123, IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applica-

tions, pp. 153–166.

[15] A. Shokrollahi and R. Storn, “Design of efficient erasure codes with

differential evolution,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento,

2000.

[16] J. Zhang and A. Orlitsky, “Finite length analysis of LDPC codes with

large left degrees,” submitted to IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Lausanne, Switzerland, 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

