ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30 -July 5,2002
Lattice Low-Density Parity Check Codes and Their Application in Partial Response Systems

B y e Vasic*,Alexander Kuznetsov' and Erozan Kurtas' Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Arizona, Tucson 85721
e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu 'Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA 15203 e-mail: { Alexander.V.Kuznetsov,Erozan.M.Kurtas}@seagate.com

Abstract - This paper introduces a combinatorial
construction of high rate low-density parity check codes based on two-dimensional integer lattices. A class of codes with a wide range of lengths, column weights and minimum distances is obtained. The resulting codes are doubly circulant, i.e. the matrix of parity checks is an array of circulant matrices. The bounds on the minimum distance are established and the performance of these codes in partial response channels is investigated.
I. INTRODUCTION
The code construction presented in this paper is based on balanced incomplete block designs (BIBD) [l]. More specifically, the codes are based on sub designs of a 2-(v,k,1) BIBD, where v is a number of parity bits, and k is the column weight of a parity check matrix.. In this paper we are interested in very high rate Gallager codes [2]. In many applications, such as magnetic recording, high rates are necessary in order to minimize the equalization loss. In this paper we present a construction based on a rectangular lattice, which is conceptually simple, and gives a large family of codes. The number of parity bits is equal to mk, m-a prime, and the blocks are defined as lines of different slopes connecting points of a mxk integer lattice. We give the bounds on the minimum distance of the lattice codes and consider their performance in perpendicular magnetic recording systems.

Since there are m parallel classes of blocks (lines), each corresponding to the different slope, the matrix of parity checks of a lattice codes can be written in the form
wherein each submatrix HiJis a permutation matrix.
111. APPLICATIOINN PERPENDICULAR RECORDING SYSTEMS We analyze the performance of the constructed codes in
partial response perpendicular magnetic recording channels. We consider an iterative decoding scheme in which the BCJR algorithm is used on the channel trellis, and the messagepassing algorithm is used for the decoding a LDPC code. The lattice codes are compared with randomly constructed codes as well as with the codes constructed Kirkman systems [3]. For normalized recording density of 2 the simulation results are shown in Fig. 1. We also show that the distance improvement by transition to higher values cannot compensate for the rate loss.

II. LATTICECONSTRUCTION OF 2 - ( ~k, 1) DESIGNS

Consider a rectangular integer lattice
L = {(x, y ) :0 Ix Ik -1,O5 y Im -1 , where m is a

prime. Let I:L+V be an one-to-one mapping of the lattice L to the point set V. The m set of points is referred to as a line

(or a block). A line with slope s, OsXm-I, starting at the

point

(.,a),

contains

the

points

{ ( x , a+sx modm) :0 I x I k- l} , where 0 I a I m -1. The

design index 3L E {O,l}, implying that no more than one block contains the same pair of points, or equivalently that there are no cycles of length four in a bipartite graph. We can also state the following [4]: Lemma I : A set B of all m k-element sets of V obtained by taking the labels of the points along the lines with slopes s,

OG-*-I is a resolvable 2-design.

Lemma 2: A (m, k=3) lattice BIBD is Pasch-free.

Conjecture 3.1: A (m, k) lattice design contains no generalized Pasch configurations.

0-7803-7501-7/02/$17.00@2002 IEEE.

453

W
to.4
10.5k
Fig. 1. Comparison of various LDPC codes.
REFERENCES L. M. Batten, Combinatorics of finite geometries, London, Cambridge University Press 1997. R. G. Gallager,Low-Density Purify-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. B. Vasic, "Structured iteratively decodable codes based on Steiner systems and their application in magnetic recording," to appear in proceedings of Globecom 2001, San Antonio, TX, November 2001. B. Vasic, "Combinatorial constructions of structured low-density parity check codes for iterative decoding," submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:05:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

