Factor Graphs Based Iterative Decoding of Turbo Codes'
Lianxiang Zhu'.'*, J@ng Wan;', Shizhong Yang'
*Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, China. **Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications,Chongqing, 400065, China.

Abstract: Turbo codes and LDPC codes both have their advantages and can achieve the Shannon limited performance. Combining the turbo codes encoding and LDPC decoding, a new scheme based on factor graphs and sum-product algorithm is developed in this paper. It can reduce the decoding complexity of turbo codes greatly, and also has some guides in the designing of interleaver and the choosing of RSC constituent codes. Keywords: Turbo codes, sum-product algorithm, factor graphs, LDPC codes.
1. Introduction
Undoubtedly, the invention of turbo codes is a big milestone in the development of communication theory. Compared with many code systems before it, the performance improvement of turbo codes is so large that for most applications the gap between theory limit and the practical performance obtainable almost fade away ['I. As a result, many standardization groups such as 3GPP. 3GPP2 and DVB-RCS have adopted turbo codes ['I.
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Robert Gallager of MIT in 1960. They received virtually no attention from coding community until mid-1990's. MacKay and Neal rediscovered them and shown the importance of iterative decoding in their approaching Shannon limit performance LDPC code is a family of linear block codes with parity-check matrices H containing mostly zeros and only a small number of ones. The "sparsely" of the parity-check matrices defining these codes is key in enabling their efficient decoding by a message-passing procedure known
+This work was supported by NSF Grant A2002-21 of Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications.
'Corresponding author,Email: cazlx(iisina.com

as the "sum-product algorithm". It is today well known that LDPC codes are as good as turbo codes, and have already been adopted for some standard (ADSL) 13.41.
In fact, LDPC codes and turbo codes are based on a similar design philosophy - both can be described from a constrained random code ensemble viewpoint. And the decoding techniques used for both methods can be viewed as different instantiations of the same basic decoding process. However, the soft-input soft-output BCJR algorithm, or the sub-optimal version of it, used for turbo-decoding is rather complex while sum-product algorithm used for LDPC decoding lends itself to parallel implementation and is computationally simpler. LDPC codes, on the other side, may lead to more stringent requirements in terms of storage. From the encoding viewpoint, the constituent RSC codes in turbo codes are more structural and this lends the encoding problem easier with shift-register circuit. While the encoding of LDPC codes is performed via matrix inultiplication, and this is more complex than it appears for capacity-approaching LDPC codes ['I.
Observe that the parity-check matrix of turbo codes are also sparse, it can be say that turbo codes are special kinds of LDPC codes essentially. Turbo codes and LDPC codes all approach the same goal of Shannon limited performance in their own viewpoint. It is natural to combine the good aspect of turbo codes and LDPC codes, keep the encoding of turbo codes unchanged while the decoding of it using the factor graph based sum-product algorithm.
2. Turbo Codes
The original turbo code is the combination of two constituent recursive systematic convolutional (RSC) codes, a pseudorandom interleaver, and an iterative MAP

0-7803-7547-5102/57.00 0 2 0 0 2 IEEE
46
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoder. The turbo encoder is illustrated in figure 1. The input
information bits feed the first encoder and enter the second encoder afler being scrambled by the interleaver. The output sequence consists of the information bits and the parity hits of both encoders. Puncturing, which deletes some codeword bits according to a chosen perforation pattern, can he used to increase the code rate of the overall code. The interleaver has the effect of matching low-weight parity sequences with high-weight parity sequences in almost all cases, thus generating a code with very few low-weight output sequences.

Encoder1

b

C

-

.

I I 00 00 00 00 ...

01 I 1 00 00 00

H = 11 01 11 00 00 ...

11 11 01 I 1 00

.

Fig. I . Turbo code encoder

3. Factor Graphs of Turbo Codes
Recursive systematic convolutional (RSC) codes are being used as the constituent codes of turbo codes. The RSC encoder yields infinite informative redundancy Y about a single “1” entering the encoder. While all finite weight input sequences produce finite weight sequences at the output of non-recursive non-systematic convolutional (NSC) code, only a fraction of finite weight input

RSC encoder. For turbo codes, this fraction can be
decreased even more to an extremely low level with the
interleaver. Future, On the condition of low SNR, RSC can $et better performance than that of NSC, and the lower SNR, the better performance.
A. Parity-Check Matrix of RSC Codes Usually we represent convolutional codes in generator
polynomial, when study the sum-product decoding of it, panty-check matrix is needed so as to get the factor graph representation. Consider a (13,17) RSC code, the generator polynomial is (1. D+D’,I. f).D’+D’), where memory

is the parity output of i t h constituent RSC encoder in time k , N is the information data size and. dk=x, is
satisfied. Figure 2 and 3 illustrate the graph representation of RSC code parity and turbo code parity respecti%%.
Obviously, the 1’s in the parity matrix of RSC ‘code manifest it in the diagonal distribution, which is to say almost all the 1’s locate in the diagonaLof the parity matrix. Due to the function of interleaver, the 1’s .distribution of turbo code parity has some randomicity besides the diagonal character. It is this randomicity that makes turbo code more like LDPC codes and can he decoded using the sum-product algorithm more easily.

47
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. Graph representation of parity-check matrix of RSC

--
j is connected to bit node i . From the fact c .H T = 0 , ,

we can conclude that all bit nodes connected to a single check node sum to zero.
Figure 4 illustrate the panty-check matrix H of a simple linear block code and the corresponding factor

graph-

11110000

10001110
H =[
01010101

00101011

(a)

f, f,

f, f,

Fig. 3. Graph representation of parity-checkmahixof turbo codes

C. Factor Graphs Representation of Turbo Codes In fact, the unpunctured block-orient turbo code is a
linear block code with information size N ,codeword size
3 x N and code rate R=1/3. Denote 43XthNe 3 x N dimensional vector space overF,, the element of h3”
are the 23xN 3 x N dimensional row vectors. An ( N , 3 x N ) linear block code with data word length N
and codeword length 3 x N is a N dimensional

subspace of 43XtNher,e are 2wdata words and 2’

corresponding code words in the code space. The null

space of the code. space has dimension 2 x N and is

spanned by ~ X Nlinearly independent vectors, these

vectors form the parity matrix H. All 2 x N vectors are

-

orthogonal to any valid code word C , which is to say

c-

H

T=o.

Once the parity check matrix of turbo codes is gained,

we can use factor graph to describe it. There are two

classes of nodes in a factor graph: bit nodes correspond-

ing to codeword bits and check nodes corresponding to the

parity equations. If and only if h,, =1 in H , check node

CI c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c.1 CS
(b> Fig. 4. Parity-check matrix of linear block code (a) and
the Corresponding factor graph (b)

4. Sum-Product Decoding

The information bit sequence is encoded using a rate 113
2 turbo encoder and the coded output is BPSK

modulated before being transmitted through an AWGN

channel. At the receiver end, output of matched filter

-
=,+;;

are given to soft decision iterative decoder:

n where is the noise vector.

A. Decoding Algorithms
Much like the BCJR algorithm, we are interested in computing the a posteriori probability (APP) that a given
2 bit in equals one, given the received word 7 and the
c fact that must satisfy some constraints. Without loss of
generality, let us focus on the decoding of bit c, , thus we
are interested in computing

Where S, is the event that the bits in 2satisfy the

48
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

parity-check equations involving

Or for simplicity, we may compute the log-likelihood

ratio (LLR):

] log[

P,(c, = 0 l-i s , )
P,(c, =IlY J , )

(3)

Denoting that:

R, = ( j : = I ) , the set of column locations of the 1's in the j th

row of H;

~ , \ , = { f l : / , ~ ~ = ~ ) \ ( j > ,theset ofcolumn locationsofthe I'sinthej

throw of H, excluding location i; ~ , = ( , : / ~ , , = 1 ) , the set of row locations ofthe 1's in

the i th column of H;
c, j = {jr :jZf,= 1) \ {j ) * the set of row locations of the

1's in the i th column of H, excluding locationj;
From the assumed statistical independence of the y,,

thus the log-domain version decoding algorithm can he described as follows:
Perform looping below for any i a n d j which satisfy
h. = I
i. Initialization
L(q,)=L(c,)=2%

iii L(Q,)= L ( c , ) + c L ( r , , )
JGC,

iv Vi,
-

Ii/L(Q,)<O

4 =[ 0 esle

if- $"=E- or

(# iterations = max-iterations)

then stop

else goto (ii)

+'
B. Complexity Reduced Decoding Algorithms

Consider the update equation for qY,)in the log-

domain decoder:

Notice the shape of 4(x) :
t\

We may conclude that the term corresponding to the smallestpy in the above sumnution dominates, so that:
(13)
the second equality follows from 4(4(x)) =x.
Then, the min-sum algorithm is simply the log-domain algorithm with step (ii) replaced by
I

Observe that the noise parameter o 2 is required in the
dbcoding algorithms discussed above. However, it is easy to normalize all LLR's in the min-sum algorithm by 2/0' with no change in performance.

49
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

C. Memory Consideration
Compared with the BCJR algorithm used in Turbo codes decoding, sum-product algorithm (or the simplified form of it) is more suit for decoding.codes with sparse 1’s in its
parity-check matrix. The computational complexity of an LDPC decoder is very low compared with the MN or SOVA decoders. But due to the irregularity in the parity
check matrix, the memory requirement far exceeds those of the latter two. This can be overcome by exploit.the fact
that obvious regularity exist in the set of R j and C, .
Unlike that of general LDPC codes, the 1’s in the.matrix of turbo codes manifest it in diagonal distribution, and this can reduce the memory requirement remarkably. Further, compute +(x) by a lookup table, or use the simplified min-sum algorithm can reduced the memory requirement even more.
5. Simulations
Figure 5 shows the BER curves for two different block size turbo codes with the decoding’algorithms’ described above. The two constituent codes of these turbo ,codes are ( I 3,I7) RSC codes, and the overall code rate R equals I/?. Ten times of iteration is used in that simulation with AWGN channel supposed.
It can he said that, compared with the conventional turbo codes decoding algorithms, the BER performance of the factor graphs based sum-product algorithm or min-sum algorithm are not improved. These can be explained as follows: first, many times of iteration is needed in order to approach the Shannon limited performance; second, the randomicity of parity check matrix is not enough and,there are short cycles exist in the corresponding factor graphs, these result in the descending of BER performance; finally, the block size in the simulations is too small to embody the
superiority of direct sum-product decoding. It can be
predicted that, with larger block size, perfect. designed interleaver and rational choose RSC constituent codes to avoid the short cycles, better results can obtained eventually.

0

*I

,

IS

2

1
33

Fig. 5 Bit-emr probabilities of Turbo codes

6. Conclusions
Combining the good aspect of turbo codes and LDPC, a new sum-product turbo decoding algorithm based on factor graphs is developed. Simulation shows the correctness or the scheme. The future work will concentrate on the effects of interleaver and component RSC codes to the decoding performance.

References [I] C . Berrou, .4.Glavieux and P. Thitimajshima, “Near
Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: turbo-codes”, Pmc. of IEEE ICC’93. Geneva, pp.1064-1070, May 1993. [2] “Convolutional turbo codes solution for TG4”, IEEE
802.16 Rraadbaiid wireless Access Wurking Group,
May 2001 [3] S:Y. Chung, et al. “On the design of low-density
panty-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit”, IEEE Cusrar. Lerrers, pp.58-60, Feb. 2001. [4] “Low-density parity-check codes for DSL transmission,” Teriipuraiy Donrnierii BI-095, Study Group 15/4, Goa, India, 23-27 Oct. 2000 [5] D.J. C MacKay and R. M.Ned1, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes”, Eiect m i . Letter, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645-l646,Aug. 1996. [6] D. J. C . MacKay, ‘Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices’, IEEE Trans. lnf Theoq March 1999, IT-45(2):399-43 1 [7]E R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey and H.-A. “Factor Graphs and the sum-product algorithm”, IEEE Trans. I f : Tkorp February 2001, IT-47(2):49S-519

50
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:06:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

