2346

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2002

LDPC Codes Based on Mutually Orthogonal Latin Rectangles and Their Application in
Perpendicular Magnetic Recording
Bane Vasic, Erozan M. Kurtas, and Alexander V. Kuznetsov

Abstract—We present a large family of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from mutually orthogonal Latin rectangles. The construction is conceptually simple and gives high-rate LDPC codes with a structure of the parity check matrix that leads to a low complexity implementation of encoders and decoders. The bit-error rate characteristics are characterized by simulations of the soft iterative decoding in perpendicular magnetic read channels with different partial-response targets and types of noise.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, partial-response (PR) channels, storage systems.

I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, it has been well recognized that the Gallager low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes perform close to the theoretical limit in communication channels and storage systems [1]. However, due to the random nature of their parity check matrix the complexity of their encoder and decoders is very high.
In this paper, we address the problem of finding LDPC codes with structured parity check matrices as opposed to the common “random code” assumption that has been widely used in recent research. We are particularly interested in codes with orthogonal parity checks whose Tanner graphs have good cycle (girth) properties [2].
One of the first attempts to design a deterministic LDPC for iterative decoding is due to Kou, Lin, and Fossorier [3] and based on projective and affine geometries. Some of the finite geometry LDPC codes are cyclic and their encoders can be implemented with linear shift registers with feedback connectors based on their generator polynomials.
The code construction presented in this paper is based on balanced incomplete block designs (BIBD), in particular, constructed from mutually orthogonal Latin rectangles (MOLRs). The new codes share many nice properties of their relatives-finite geometry codes [4]. However, the finite geometry axioms are relaxed while the orthogonality of the parity checks is still preserved. Parity check matrix is composed from circulants with column weight one (circulant is a matrix whose columns/rows are cyclic shifts of the first column/row), and this leads to simple
Manuscript received February 7, 2002; revised May 19, 2002. B. Vasic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu). E. M. Kurtas and A. V. Kuznetsov are with Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA 15222 USA (e-mail: erozan.m.kurtas@seagate.com; alexander.v.kuznetsov@seagate.com). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2002.801901.

= Fig. 1. Example of the rectangular grid for m 5 and k = 3.

implementation of the encoders and decoders. The bit-error rate (BER) performance is investigated by simulation of the iterative soft decoding in the perpendicular magnetic recording channels with the different PR targets and types of noise.

II. CODE CONSTRUCTION

In general, in combinatorics a design is a pair ( ), where

is a set of some elements called points and is a collection of

subsets of called blocks. The numbers of points and blocks

are denoted by

and

, respectively. If

is an integer parameter, such that any subset of points from

is contained in exactly blocks, we deal with a design.

A BIBD is a design for which each block contains the same

number of points and every point is contained in the same

number of blocks . In this paper, we consider only BIBD with

. Although such a BIBD still has five integer parameters

and , only three of them are independent. The notation

( )-BIBD is used for a BIBD with points, block size ,

index and

. Sometimes the BIBD whose index is an

element of a given set are called imbalanced block designs. In

our construction

, but we still use the term “BIBD.”

To illustrate the concept of parallel lines, we start with an

example. Let us construct a simple (15,3,1)-BIBD that gives a

parity check matrix with the column weight

. First, we

choose the prime number

and consider a rectangular

integer lattice shown in Fig. 1. Formally speaking, an integer

lattice is the following set of points

. Now, we map the points of the lattice

to the points of the BIBD set

.

This mapping

, must be a one-to-one mapping. An

example of such mapping is a simple linear mapping

0018-9464/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VASIC et al.: LDPC CODES BASED ON MUTUALLY ORTHOGONAL LATIN RECTANGLES

2347

= TABLE I

k m LINES OF THE LATTICE WITH

3 AND = 5

TABLE II
GF LINES OF THE MOLR CONSTRUCTED FROM (4)

Fig. 2. The parity check matrix constructed from the rectangular grid shown in Fig. 1.

. The numbers

are referred to as lattice point

labels.

Some subsets of points are referred to as lines (or blocks). A

line with slope

starting at the point (0, ),

contains the points

mod

,

where

. The number of lines with different

starting points

, and slopes

,

is equal to

. Table I contains 25 lines of the lattice show

in Fig. 1.

A point-block incidence matrix

of a design ( )

has rows and columns with elements

if the -th ele-

ment of occurs in the th block of and

otherwise.

Since each block of the BIBD is incident with the same number

of points and every point is incident with the same number

of blocks , then all columns of have the same weight and

all rows of have the same weight . Therefore, a point-block

incidence matrix

is in fact a parity check matrix of

a Gallager code. This code has the length

and the rate

rank

. Using a lattice from Example 1 we get

the parity check matrix shown in Fig. 2 (the LDPC code has

length 25 and three orthogonal parities for each code bit).

To visualize the decoding algorithm, the matrix of parity

checks can be represented as a bipartite graph with two kinds

of vertices as described in [2]. It is desirable to have each bit

“checked” in as many equations as possible, but because of the

iterative nature of the decoding algorithm the bipartite graph

must not contain short cycles. In other words, the graph girth

(the length of the shortest cycle) must be large.

In this paper, we are interested in design indexes

and

. In such designs, no pair of points can occur in more

than one block, which means that there are no two columns in

a parity check that have more than one nonzero element at the

same position. Consequently there are no cycles of length four

in a bipartite graph. The requirements of high rate and large girth

are contradictory and the tradeoff is especially difficult when we

want to construct a code that is both short and has a high-rate.

The girth is related to the condition that every -element subset

of is contained in as few blocks as possible. The codes based

on -designs ( ) have short cycles, but we restrict ourselves

to the two designs with

which don’t have cycles of length

four. Since the girth of the bipartite graph is an even number, the

girth of the new codes is at least six.

The MOLR construction of the 2-( ,1)-BIBD. Now, we ad-

dress the problem of construction of resolvable BIBDs using

MOLR. This construction gives an extremely wide range of

block sizes and code rates. It can be viewed as an extension on

the integer lattice construction explained in [5] and illustrated

in Example given above. For an in depth treatment of Latin

squares and rectangles, the reader can refer to [6, Ch. 17 and

Ch. 22]. For the sake of simplicity, let us start with BIBD de-

signs using the MOLS or order . Let the dimension of the

square be

and let

be

the elements of

. Consider the nonzero element and

define a

array with elements

,

. The arrays ,

, are MOLS

of order . For example

are two MOLS of order four (low indexes are used here to rep-

resent the elements of the

). Consider now a integer

lattice

with elements labeled by the points from the

set . In other words, let

, be a one-to-one mapping

of the square to the integer set of a design. An example of

such mapping is a simple linear mapping

.

The numbers

are referred to as cell labels. Each de-

fines a set of parallel lines

,

. These sets are analogous to the sets of lines with

slopes

in the lattice design introduced in [5]. The

slopes

and

can be also included to create a full

resolvable BIBD with

,

and

.

Our experimental findings, however, show that excluding the in-

finite slope leads to somewhat better performance although we

still do not fully understand this phenomenon. The design with

the resolvability classes shown above is given in Table II.

The construction can be readily extended to the case of the

unequal horizontal and vertical dimensions and . For ex-

ample, for prime , the rectangle

can be defined by the

equation

. Notice that, in general, there

are parallel classes of lines, each corresponding to different

. The parity check matrix of MOLR codes can be written in

the form

...

...

...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2348

TABLE III PARAMETERS OF THE CODES STUDIED

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2002

= Fig. 4. BER performances of the MOLR LDPC codes with k 5.

Fig. 3. Comparison of the random, TPC, and MOLR codes.

where each submatix is a permutation matrix. Using the last property, the complexity of the encoders can be drastically reduced. The exact rates of the MOLR codes are difficult to compute in general, but a lower bound on the rate for the BIBD codes is given in [5]. These results hold for MOLR codes, as well.

III. APPLICATION IN PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECODING

In this section, we present the simulation results for the per-

pendicular recording system characterized by its transition re-

sponse

ND where ND is the

normalized linear density, and is the random jitter. Upon

low-path filtering and sampling operations, the received signal

was further shaped to the partial-response target PR2

by the equalizer with 21 taps. The detection is performed by the

channel MAP detector implemented as BCJR and the message

passing algorithm (MPA) for the LDPC decoding [5]. The BER

results are given in the following for an architecture in which

the compound operation “BCJR + four iterations of MPA” is

performed ten times before the final hard decision is taken. Five

different regular LDPC codes constructed from MOLR with the

parameters given in Table III were tested in simulations.

In Fig. 3, we compare the lattice LDPC code of length

with a random LDPC code and a turbo-

product code of comparable length [7]. As we can see from

this figure, the lattice code exhibits an error floor atthe level of

and has worse BER then turbo-product code. In Fig. 4,

the BER of the lattice LDPC codes is analyzed for fixed

and different code lengths. Here, we see the longer codes give

better BER, buthe improvement is only dB. Fig. 5 shows

the BER performance of the lattice LDPC code with

and

as a function of the random jitter. The jitter is given in

percentage of the channel clock cycle (e.g., 3% of jitter means

Fig. 5. BER of MOLR codes in the presence of jitter.

that the standard deviation of the transition equals is the channel bit interval.

, where

IV. CONCLUSION
We have described a class of regular high-rate LDPC codes using combinatorics developed for the design of experiments. The new codes have simple encoding and decoding algorithm that exploits the cyclic structure of parity check matrix. We have analyzed the performance of these codes in perpendicular magnetic recording systems and compared them with random LDPC codes and turbo-product codes.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] L. M. Batten, Combinatorics of Finite Geometries. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997.
[5] E. Kurtas, B. Vasic, and A. Kuznetsov, Design and analysis of the low density parity check codes for applications to perpendicular recoding channels. ser. Encyclopedia of Telecommunications, J. G. Proakis, Ed. New York: Wiley, to be published.
[6] J. H. van Lint and R. M. Wilson, A Course in Combinatorics. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.
[7] J. Li, K. R. Narayanan, E. Kurtas, and C. N. Georghiades, “On the performance of high-rate TPC/SPC and LDPC codes over partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 723–734, May 2002, submitted for publication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

