ThA.l (Invited)
- 8:30 am 9:00 am
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes for Optical Data Storage
Vijayakumar Bhagavatula, Hongwei Song, and Jingfeng Liu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC) Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Tel(412) 268-3026 (Prof. Kumar) Fax: (412) 268-6345 Email: kumar@ece.cmu.edu
1.) introduction
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, first introduced by Gallager [ l ] in 1962, are error-correcting codes based on very sparse parity check matrices. Recently, in the wake of excellent performance of turbo codes, LDPC codes were rediscovered [2] as another category of random codes approaching the Shannon capacity t i i t with practical decoding complexity. Extensive investigation of the applications of turbo codes and LDPC codes for data storage channels has been reported [3-41. While LDPC codes can be iteratively decoded using the sum-product algorithm with moderate complexity, the memory required to specify the nonzero elements in the random parity check matrix can be a major challenge for hardware implementation. Construction of good LDPC codes with structure is particularly desired in data storage channels to facilitate low complexity implementation. We will address this issue by introducing a class of low complexity structured LDPC codes.
2.) Structured LDPC Code with Column Weight 2
Since Gallager proved that the tpical (n,j , k) LDFC code with column weight123 has a minimum distance that increases linearly with n for givenj and row weight k, and that the minimum distance of an (n, 2, k) code can increase at most logarithmically with the block length [l], column weight j 2 3 became a popular and de facto choice for LDPC codes. However, for applications such as magnetic recording and optical recording systems requiring 10-'~typecorrected bit error rate (BER), an outer error correction coding like Reed-Solomon (RS) code is generally employed to guarantee low BER. Therefore, the primary design criterion for the inner code should be that its block error statistics are compatible with the outer RS code. This aspect is probably more important than searching for inner codes with large minimum distance. Guided by this principle, we propose two methods to construct column weight j = 2 LDPC codes. These codes possess several significant features. First, they are free of 6-cycle, and can be easily constructed for a large range of code rates. Second, the parity check matrix of the code can be represented by a simple set, thus lending itself to a low complexity implementation. Third, these codes reduce computational complexity by a factor of 3 and 4 over regular LDPC codes with column weight j = 3 and 4, respectively. Finally, we have observed in simulations that the BER performance of j=2 codes actually is better than that of the j 2 3 LDPC codes over the low SNR region investigated for partial response channels.

0-7803-7379-0102/$17.00@2002IEEE

371

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:02:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3.) Channel Model and Simulations
In real partial response equalized optical recording systems, the overall channel response after equalization will not perfectly match the ideal PR target response. However, in order to focus on the comparison of coding schemes, we model the channel as perfectly equalized partial responses, i.e., the channel is modeled by h ( ~=)(I+ D)",n = 1,2,3. We assume additive white Gaussian noise in this model. A
block diagram of the overall system is shown in Fig. 1. Interleaving is generally not used for random LDPC codes since it is inherent in the random parity check matrix, but is required for structured LDPC code to make the encoded sequence random-like. No precoding is employed for LDPC coded system because it introduces performance loss at low to medium SNR.

First, we investigated the bit error rate (BER) as a function of signal to noise ratio
(SNR)for various PR targets. Fig. 2 shows the BER Vs. S N R for the three PR targets
(PR1, PR2 and PR3 for It = 1,2,3 respectively) with the proposed LDPC code, without
precoding. PRML (uncoded) channel results are also plotted for comparison. Significant coding gains (4-5dB) over the uncoded case were observed for all three PR channels at a target BER of lo4. We also noticed that coded PRl and PR2 channels have similar performance after PR2 reaches the error floor region. Actually, it is bounded by the performance of PR1 channel. We will explain this using density evolution technique [5] in the final submission, and predict that PR3 will also essentially follow the same BER Vs. SNR curve of PRl channel after it reaches the error floor.

Figure 3 compares the BER performance of the proposed LDPC code to random LDPC codes with column weight j = 3 and 4 for PR2 channel. As we see, the larger

the column weight, the worse the BER performance at low to medium SNR. However, LDPC codes with large column weight don't suffer from error floor in the simulated BER region. The plot also shows the performance of j=2 LDPC code with

two precoders. Inclusion of

precoder causes 0.5dB loss compared to the no

IbD'

precoder case, while -.!- precoder causes negligible loss at low SNR, and can
lbD
effectively lower the error floor. It is important to notice that j=2 LDPC code with

'precoder
IQD

actually outperforms j=3 LDPC code, while its computation

complexity is about 3 times lower than that of the j=3 LDPC code. The impact of

different precoders will be discussed in the final submission.

4.) Conclusions
We constructed column weight j=2 LDPC codes with quasi-cyclic structure. The encoding and decoding of these codes requires significantly lower complexity compared to the regular LDPC codes with column weight j 2 3. Simulations indicate
that the BER performance of our j=2 codes is better than that of the j 2 3 LDPC
codes over the SNR region investigated for partial response channels such as PR2. Therefore, they are very attractive for optical data storage applications.

372
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:02:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

e Encoder
- I---- I Fig. 1. Schematic of iterative decoded channel model

wam
.__.r....~__

PR2, uncoded channel

4

5

6

7

8

9

101112

SNR (dB)

Fig. 2. BER.Vs. SNR results for various PR targets with and without LDPC code.

'10.' 5

55

6

65

7

7.5

8

SNR (.dB).

Fig. 3. BER Vs. SNR results for LDPC codes with various column weights over PR2

channel with and without precoder.

References

1. R. G. Gallager, Low-Densify Parity Check Codes, MlT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963. 2. D. 1.C. Mackay and R. M. Neal,'%dcodes based on very sparse matrices", Crypfographjarid
Coding. 9 1MA Conference, 1995. Availabe from http://wol.ra.phy.camac.uk
3. T.Souvignier, A. Friedmann, M. Oberg,P. Siegel, R. E. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, "Turbo codes for P R 4 parallel Versus serial concatenation," Proc. 1999litter. Cor$ Conenun., June 1999.
4. H. Song, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, E. Kurtas, Y.Yuan, L L McPheters, and S. W. McLaughlin,
''Iterative decoding for partial response (PR) equalized magnetooptical (MO) data storage channels." lEEE JSAC. Vol. 19, UD. 774-883, 2001.
5. T.J. Richardson, and R. Urbank;'"The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-
passing decoding," /EEE Trans. lnform ?71eo?y,vol. 47, No.2, pp. 599618, February 2001.

373

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:02:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

