Ta.inar Fricdlaiidcr aiicl David Burshtciii
This work addresses decoding algorit,lims for low tlcrisity purity clicek (LDPC) codes transmitted over cliaiiiiels witli intwsynibol irlterfwencc (ISI).
LDPC codes, lirst, int,roduced by Gallager [I]in 1963. are linear parity check codes mitli a sparse parity check ma,trix. Gallager also proposed an it,erative decoding algorithm lor decoding these codes. Their ma,ior significance is due t,o t.lieir ability to provide reliable coniiiiunication a t rates mhicli are extremely close to c~iariiiec~a1Jacit.y. .-\not,Iier appealing practical aspect of the iterative decoding algoritlim. is its structure: It is coniposed ol xiiaiiy siiiall independent decoders all xvorking in parallel. AII LDPC decoder could blius be applied as several parallel circuits IJotentially minimizing the decoding delay.
Having been neglected Cor niaiiy years. interest in t.liese codes rekiriclled aner the introduct.ion of Turbo Codes in 1993. However: Gallager‘s decodiiig algoritlim assumes that the cliaiinel is tneiiioryless.
h n y pract.ical communicarion channels iiibroduce tiiemory. Ylajor examles are liard disk drives, t.elephone lines. IJI’oadCast,in UIlJSIi area5 (where reIlect,ioiisoccur). Hence. Tliere is a great deal of inlerest in the design of codes for channels wit.11memory.
A s LDPC codes are aljpealing in t,lieir achieved rate. some recent works propose their application to cfianneIs wit,Ii memory. Clearly, dlie t.wo issues could be liandled separat.ely: first. ISI can be reiiioved I J a~ ny of the familiar t.echniyues (e.g. YlLSE: DFE) a i d t,lieii the code word can be decoded utilizing Gallager’s algoritlini Cor tlie memoryless cliaiinel. iVe call this approacli the “separation approacli”. A unified solution t,akirig into consideration both the code and tlie IS1 can Le yoteiitially better: though. In our worli we derive sucli a uiiilied solution: atic~compare tlie ‘BER obtained by our solution to t ~ i eBER attained I J ~die separat,ion a l ~ p r ~ ~ ~ l i .
In our work Gallager‘s original decoding algorit.lirriis exoeiided to alleviate rlie probleiii of cliaiinel with finite nieiiiory. Two decoding algorit.liiiis are derived. Tlie basic algoritliiii tra. the original derivation or Gallager with t.lie necessary adapt.ahions. This resu1t.s in a sixigle usage or t,lie BC.JR, algoritlini, whereas the iterat,ive part remains iiit.act.. The second algorithm is a generalization or the first.. While the basic aIgorit,limonly utilizes tlie correlat.ion aiiioiig adjacent. c1igit.sto achieve an improved estimation of the prior probabilities; the generalized algorit,lim also exploits the in~oonnationlying in the 1Jarit.y check in w11icli the adjacent digit.s participate. This results iii niodified rightbound messages. The generalized algoorit.lini is aynilJtotically optiinal in the seiise of achieved bit error rate: based on blie information extracted Croom a given number ol adjacent digits.
Bot.11 slgoribluiis are assessed in simulabion. -4s expected, tlie generalized algorithm yields improved performance in conq~arisonwit.li t.lie first. algoritlim. The t.wo algorit.lltiis are Curbher compared with tlie “separation approacli” iliaking use oC preyrocessiiig met.liods for IS1 renioval (e.g. YILSE, decisionCeedback) lollowed by the original decoding algorit.lim. Both proposed nietllods are found significantly IJet.ter tliaii tliese approaclies (2-3 orders of niagnitude ill BER). The relation between our algoritlrms to otlier recently proposed m e t h d s is also studied.
Tlieoret,ical analysis: utilizing D m s i t y E7rolzltioti. is introduced Cor the first algoritlini. Whereas Cor the menioryless cliarinel the analysis of the all zero cocleword is suKicient (as provecl by Ricliardson and
Lrbanke [‘I) for our algorit.limlt,lieanlysis sliould colisider an arbitrary code word. The Density Euolution
analysis provides the asympt,ot.ic t,liresliold oC the algorit.hm. The siiiiulatioli resu1t.s are conipared and Cound to be in good agreement with blie tlieoretical analysis.
References
[l] R.G. Gallager. Low Deiisity Purify Clicek Codes. Y1.I.T Press, Cambridge3Ylassacliusetts, 19G3.
[2] T. Richardson. R. Urbaiike. Tlie capacit,y or I& density parit.? check codes under niessage passing decoding. IEEE Tfuns. Iiiforni. Tileory: 47399-618: 2001. availalJle at Iittp://l tlicw~vw.eyll.cli/puLlications.iis.litiiil.
268
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

