A 54 MBPS (3,6)-REGULARFPGA LDPC DECODER
Tong Zhang and Keshab K. Parhi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
E-mail:{tzhang, parhi)@ece.umn.edu

ABSTRACT
Applying ajoint code and decoder design methodology,we develop a high-speed (3, k)-regular LDPC code partly parallel decoder architecture, based on which a 9216-bit, rate1/2 (3,6)-regular LDPC code decoder is implemented on Xilinx FPGA device. When performing maximum 18 iterations for each code block decoding, this partly parallel decoder supports a maximum symbol throughput of 54 Mbps and achieves BER at 2dB over AWGN channel.

1. INTRODUCTION

Thanks to its excellent performance, Low-Density ParityCheck (LDPC) code [1][2] has been widely considered as a next-generation error-correcting code for telecommunication and magnetic storage. Defined as the null space of a
very sparse M x N parity check matrix H, an LDPC code
is typically represented by a bipartite graph, called Tanner graph, in which one set of N variable nodes corresponds to
the set of codeword, another set of M check nodes corresponds to the set of parity check constraints and each edge
corresponds to a non-zero entry in the parity check matrix H. An LDPC code is known as (j,k)-regular LDPC code if each column and each row in its parity check matrix have j and k non-zero entries, respectively. The construction of LDPC code is typically random. As illustrated in Fig. 1, LDPC code is decoded by the iterative belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [2] that directly matches its Tanner graph.

check nodes

eck-to-variable

ariable-to-check

variable nodes

Fig. 1. Tanner graph representation of a LDPC code and the decoding message flow.

This research was supported by the Army Research Office by grant number DA/DAAGl9-01-1-0705.

A fully parallel decoder is realized by directly instantiat-

ing the BP decoding algorithm to hardware. Such fully par-

allel decoder could achieve extremely high decoding speed,

e.g., a 1024-bit, rate-l/2 LDPC code fully parallel decoder

[4] with the maximum symbol throughput of 1 Gbids has

been implemented using ASIC technology. However, the

primary disadvantage of fully parallel design is that with

the increase of code length the hardware complexity will

become more and more prohibitive for many practical pur-

poses, e.g., the ASIC LDPC decoder [4] with only 1K-bit

code length consumes 1.7M gates. Moreover, as pointed

out in [4], the routing overhead is quite formidable due to

the large code length and randomness of the Tanner graph.

A joint code and decoder design methodology [5] was

recently proposed for (3,k)-regular LDPC code and partly

parallel decoder design to achieve appropriate trade-offs be-

tween hardware complexity and decoding throughput. In

this paper, applying the proposedjoint design methodology,

we develop an elaborate (3,k)-regular LDPC code high-

speed partly parallel decoder architecture based on which

we implement a 9216-bit, rate-1/2 (3,6)-regular LDPC code

decoder using Xilinx Virtex FPGA device. We significantly

modify the original decoder structure [5] to improve the de-

coding throughput and simplify the control logic design. We

propose a novel concatenated scheme to realize the ran-

dom connectivity by using two concatenated routing net-

works, where the random hardwire routings are localized

to significantly reduce the routing overhead. Based on the

post-routing static timing analysis, with the maximum 18

decoding iterations, this decoder supports a maximum sym-

bol throughput of 54 Mbps and achieves BER

at 2dB

over AWGN channel.

2. JOINT CODE AND DECODER DESIGN
In this section we briefly describe the joint (3,k)-regular LDPC code and decoder design methodology according to [5]. The essential objective of this joint design approach is to construct an LDPC code that not only fits to a highspeed partly parallel decoder but also has large average cycle length in its 4-cycle free Tanner graph. This joint de-

0-7803-7587-4/02/$17.00 02002 IEEE

127

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:56:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

sign process is outlined as follows and the corresponding schematic flow diagram is shown in Fig. 2.
1. Construct two matrices, H1 and H2, in such a way that [HT,H:IT defines a (2, k)-regular LDPC code whose Tanner graph has the girth' of 12;
2. Develop a partly parallel decoder that is configured by some constrained random parameters and defines a (3,k)-regular LDPC code ensemble, in which each code has the parity check matrix H = [HT,HT, H;IT;
3. Select a good (3,k)-regular LDPC code from the code ensemble.

Parallel Decoder

Parameters

Fig. 2. Joint design flow diagram.
Construction of HI and H2: As illustrated in Fig. 3, both H1 and H2 are L . k by L . k2 submatrices. Each block matrix I,,, in HI is an L x L identity matrix and each block matrix P,,, in H2 is obtained by a cyclic shift of an L x L identity matrix. Let T denote the right cyclic shift operator where T"(Q)represents right cyclic shifting matrix Q by U columns, then P,,, = T"(1)where U = ( ( z - l ) . ~ ) mod L and I represents the L x L identity matrix. We can prove that [HT,HTIT defines a (2, k)-regular LDPC code whose Tanner graph has the girth of 12.
left-most column rieht-most column

Y
Fig. 3. The parity check matrix.
Partly Parallel Decoder: The authors presented a principal (3,k)-regular LDPC code partly parallel decoder structure in [5].Configured by a set of constrained random parameters, this decoder defines a semi-random (3,k)-regular LDPC code ensemble in which each code is 4-cycle free and has the parity check matrix as shown in Fig. 3. For real
'Girth is the length of a shortestcycle in a graph.

applications, we can select a good code from this code ensemble based on average cycle length comparison combined with computer simulations. For the detailed description of this joint design methodology and the principal partly par-
allel decoder structure, readers are referred to [5].

3. PARTLY PARALLEL DECODER ARCHITECTURE

Applying the joint design methodology, we develop a high-

speed (3,k)-regular LDPC code partly parallel decoder ar-

chitecture and implement a 9216-bit, rate-1/2 (3,6)-regular

LDPC decoder using Xilinx Virtex FPGA device. Com-

pared with the structure presented in [5],this partly parallel

decoder architecture has the following distinct properties:

0 A concatenated configurable random 2-D shuffle net-

work implementation scheme is proposed to realize

the random-like connectivity with minimized routing

overhead, which is especially desirable for FPGA im-

plementations;

0 To improve the decoding throughput, this decoder con-

tains k2 Variable Node processor Units (VNU's) and

3k Check Node processor Units (CNU's) ;

0 To simplify the control logic design and reduce the

memory bandwidth requirement, this decoder com-

pletes each iteration in 2L clock cycles in which CNU's and VNU's work in the lStand 2"d L clock cycles,

alternatively.

This decoder defines a semi-random (3, k)-regular LDPC

code ensemble in which each code has the parity check matrix as illustrated in Fig. 3. To facilitate the succeeding de-

scription, we introduce following definitions: Denote the

submatrix consisting of the L consecutive columns in H that go through I,,, as H("pY),in which from left to right each

column is labeled as

with i increasing from 1 to L, as

shown in Fig. 3. We label the variable node corresponding

to column hi"") as I J ! ~ " ) and the L variable nodes vzz7')
for i = 1 , . . . ,L constitute a variable node group VG,,,. We arrange the L . k check nodes corresponding to all the

L . k rows of submatrix Hi into check node group CGi.

Fig. 4 shows the partly parallel decoder principal struc-
ture. It mainly contains k2 PE Blocks PE,,, for 1 5 2,y 5 k, 3 bi-directional shuffle networks TI, 7r2 and 7r3 and 3 . k CNU's. Each PE,,, contains one memory bank RAMS,,,

that stores all the decoding information associated with all
the L variable nodes in the variable node group VG,,,, and contains one VNU to perform the variable node computa-

tions for these L variable nodes. Each bi-directional shuffle

network 7ri realizes the decoding information exchange be-
tween all the L .k2 variable nodes and the L .k check nodes
in CGi. The k CNUi,j's for j = 1 , . . . ,k perform the check node computations for all the L . k check nodes in CGi.

128

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:56:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1
activeduring variable node processing

.

I

, active during check node processing

Fig. 4. The principal (3,Ic)-regular LDPC code partly parallel decoder structure.

This decoder completes each decoding iteration in 2L clock cycles. During the lStand 2nd L clock cycles, it

works in check node processing (CNP) mode and variable

node processing (VNP) mode, respectively. In the CNP

mode, the decoder performs both the computations of all

the check nodes and the decoding information exchange be-

tween neighboring nodes. In the VNP mode, the decoder

only performs the computations of all the variable nodes.

All the intrinsic, check-to-variable and variable-to-check

information are quantized to 5 bits. The iterative decoding datapath is illustrated in Fig. 5, where the datapath in CNP
mode and VPN mode are represented by solid lines and dash dot lines, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5, each PE Block PE,,, contains five RAM blocks: EXT-RAM-z for

i = 1,2,3, INTRAM and DECRAM. Each E X T R A M i
has L memory locations and the location with the address d - 1 (1 5 d 5 L) contains the decoding information

exchanged between the variable node wy”) in VG,,, and its neighboring check node in CGi. The INTRAM and

w?’~) DEC-RAM store the intrinsic information and hard decision

associated with node

at the memory location with the

address d - 1 (1 5 d 5 L). As we will see later, such

decoding information storage strategy greatly simplifies the

control logic for generating the memory access address.

3.1. Check node processing

In the CNP mode, decoder performs the computations of

all the check nodes and decoding information exchange be-

tween neighboring nodes. At the beginning, in each PE,,,

the memory location with address d- 1 in EXTRAMi con-

tains 6-bit hybrid data consisting of 1-bit hard decision and

~ 2 ’ ~ ) . 5-bit variable-to-check information associated with the vari-

able node

Each clock cycle this decoder performs

the read-shuffle-modjfjwnshuffle-writeoperations to con-

vertone variable-to-check information in each EXTRAMi

to its check-to-variable counterpart. We outline the datapath loop in CNP mode as follows: 1. Read One 6-bit hy-
brid data h?!, is read from each EXTRAMi; 2. ShuHe:
Each h$)ggoes through the shuffle network rzand arrives CN&; 3. Modi@ Each CNU,,j performs the parity check on the 6 input hard decision bits and generates the 6 out-
put 5-bit check-to-variable information a?L; 4. Unshufle:
at), Send each back to the PE Block via the same path as
its variable-to-check counterpart; 5. Write: Write check-tovariable information a$)yto the same memory location in EXTRAWI-z as its variable-to-check counterpart.
We implement each bi-directional U 0 connection in the
3 shuffle networks by two distinct sets of wires with opposite directions so that the hybrid data from PE Blocks to CNU’s and the check-to-variable information from CNU’s
to PE Blocks are carried on distinct set of wires. Compared
with sharing one set of wires in time-multiplexed fashion, this approach has higher wire routing overhead but eliminates the logic gate overhead due to the realization of timemultiplex and, more importantly, make it feasible to directly pipeline the datapath loop for higher decoding throughput.
Each EXTRAM-z associates with one address genera-
tor AGkk that provides the read address in each clock cycle. The write address for writting the check-to-variable information is obtained via delaying the read address by the pipelining stages of the datapath loop. The connectivity among all the variable nodes and check nodes realized by this decoder isjointly specified by all the addressgenerators and the 3 shuffle networks. Moreover, for i = 1 , 2 , 3 ,submatrix H, or the connectivity among all the variable nodes and the check nodes in CG, is completely determined by all
AG~’!,’sand r,.
Implementations of AGiL and .rr, for i = 1,2:Recall that node wy”) corresponds to the column h!”,’) as illustrated in Fig. 3 and the decoding information associated with node

129

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:56:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5.Iterative decoding datapath.

v?”) is always stored at address d - 1. Exploiting the explicit structure of HI and H,, we have
Each A G c i is realized as a [log, L]-bit binary counter that is cleared to zero at the beginning of CNP mode; The shuffle network 7r1 connects the k PE,,,’s with the same 2-index to the same CNU; AGi:i asa [log, L]-bit binary counter that only counts up to the value L - 1and is loaded with the value of ((2- 1). y) mod L at the beginning of CNP mode; The shuffle network 7 ~ 2connects the k PE,,,’s with the same v-index to the same CNU.
Notice that the counter load value for each AGi:h comes from the construction of each block matrix P,,y in H2.
Implementationsof AGi7i and 7r3: The bi-directional shuf-
fle network 7r3 and A G ~ L ’jsointly define the connectivity between all the variable ndoes and check nodes in CG3, which is represented by H3. The design of each AGL:b and 7 ~ 3are not trivial because of the following requirements:
0 The parity check matrix H = [HT,@,H:lT should
correspond to a 4-cycle freeTanner graph;
0 To make H be random to some extent, H3 should be
random-like.
To simplify the design process, we separately conceive
AG~!~’sand 7r3 so that the design of AGi:L’s and 7r3 accorn-
plish the above l S tand 2nd requirement, respectively.
Implementationsof AGL:;: We implement each AGch as a [log, L]-bit binary counter that counts up to the value L - 1 and loads a constant value t,,, at the beginning of CNP mode. Each t,,, is generated in random under the following two constraints:
1. Givenz,wehavet,,,, #t,,,,,Vyl,y2 E { l , . .,.k}; 2. Giveny, we have tzl,,-tzz,, f ((zl-z,).y) mod L ,
VZl,S, E { l , . . .,k}.
We can prove that the above constrains are sufficient to make H always correspond to a 4-cycle free Tanner graph no matter how we implement 7r3.

Implementation of 7r3: We develop a novel concatenated configurable random shuffle network implementation scheme for 7r3 as described in the following.
Fig. 6 shows the forward path (from PE,,, to CNU3,j)
of the bi-directional shuffle network 7r3. In each clock cycle, it realizes the data shuffle from a,,, to c,,, by two concatenated stages: intra-rowshuffle and intra-column shuffle. First, the a,,, data block, where each a,,, comes from PE,,,, passes an intra-row shuffle network array in which
each shuffle network a?) shuffles the k input data a,,, to
b,,, for 1 I: y 5 IC. Each XPr)is configured by 1-bit con-
trol signal s?) leading to the fixed random permutation R,
if s c ) = 1, or to the identity permutation (Id) otherwise.
The k-bit configuration word d T )changes every clock cy-
cle and all the L k-bit control words are stored in ROM R. Next, the b,,, data block goes through an intra-column
shuffle network array in which each is configured by 1-
SF) bit control signal and shuffles the k data b,,, to c,,, for .st) 15 2 5 k. The k-bit configuration word changes every
clock cycle and all the L k-bit control words are stored in ROM C. As the output of forward path, the k c,,,’s with the
same 2-index are delivered to the same CNU3,j. To realize the bi-directional shuffle, we only need to implement each
configurable shuffle network a?) and !Vf) as bi-directional
so that 7r3 can unshufflethe k2 data backward from CNU,,j to PE,,, along the same route as the forward path on distinct
sets of wire. To make the connectivity realized by 7r3 be random-like
and change each clock cycle, we randomly generate the con-
trol word sk’ and st)for each clock cycle and each R, and
Cy. Since most modern FPGA devices have multiple metal layers, the implementations of the two shuffle arrays can be overlapped from the bird’s-eye view. Therefore, such concatenated implementation scheme confines all the routing wires to small area (in one row or one column), which will significantly reduce the routing overhead.

130

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:56:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

- Input Data fromPEBlocks

..............................................
.4.1 . .

j
r=O ...L-1
I"

...

RORM

......................................... .)j

......................

...
...............

Stage I: Intra-Row Shuffle

......................................... Stage 11: Intra-Column Shuffle

Fig. 6. Forward path of 7r3.

Output Data
J to CNY . 's

.-
*

. ..

3.2. Variable node processing
The operations performed in the variable node processing is quite simple since the decoder only performs all the variable node computations. At the beginning of variable node

Load Intrinsic Address Data

trated in Fig. 5, in each clockbycle. this decoder performs the readmodifywrite operations\y convertthe 3 check-tovariable information associated w i t h h e same variable node to 3 hybrid data consisting of variable-to-check information and hard decision.
3.3. Data Input/Output
This decoder works simultaneously on 3 consecutive code frames in two-stage pipelining mode: while one frame is being iteratively decoded, the next frame is loaded into the decoder and the hard decisions of the previous frame are
read out from the decoder. Thus each INTRAM contains
two RAM blocks to store the intrinsic information of both current and next frames. Similarly, each DECRAM contains two RAM blocks to store the hard decisions of both current and previous frames.
The intrinsic information input and hard decision output schemes are heavily dependent on the floor planning of the
k2 PE Blocks. To minimize the routing overhead, we develop a square-shaped floor planning as illustrated in Fig. 7 and the data I/O scheme is described in the following:
Intrinsic Data Input: The intrinsic information of next frame is loaded 1 symbol per clock cycle. As shown in Fig. 7, the memory location of each input intrinsic data is determined by the input load address that has the width of
+ ([log, L] [log, k21) bits in which [logz k21 bits specify

Addre

Decoding Outpu1

Fig. 7. Data Inputloutput structure.

which PE Block is being accessed and the other [log, L1 bits represent the memory location in the INTRAM. The primary intrinsic data and load address input directly con-
< < nect to the k PE Blocks PEl,, for 1 y k, and from each
PE,,, the intrinsic data and load address are delivered to the adjacent PE Block PE,+l,, in pipelined fashion.
Decoded Data Output: As shown in Fig. 7, the primary [log, L]-bit read address input directly connects to the k PE Blocks PE,,1 for 1 5 2 2 k, and from each PE,,, the read address are delivered to the adjacent block PE,,,+l
in pipelined fashion. Each PE Block outputs 1-bit hard de-
cision per clock cycle. Therefore, as illustrated in Fig. 7, the width of pipelined decoded data bus increases by 1 after going through one PE Block, and at the rightmost side, we obtain k k-bit decoded output that are combined together as the k2-bit primary data output.

131

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:56:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4. FPGA IMPLEMENTATION
Based on the above architecture, we implemented a (3,6)regular LDPC code partly parallel decoder for L = 256 using Xilinx Virtex-E XCV2600E device. The LDPC code
length is N = L . k2 = 256 . 62 = 9216 and code rate is
1/2. The target XCV2600E FPGA device contains 184 on-
chip block RAMS, each one is a dual-port 4K-bit RAM. We configure each dual-port 4K-bit RAM as two independent
single-port 256x 8-bit RAM blocks so that each E X T R A M i can be realized by one single-port 256 x %bit RAM block.
Since each INTRAM contains two RAM blocks for storing the intrinsic information of both current and next code
frame, we use two single-port 256 x 8-bit RAM blocks to implement one INTRAM. The DECRAM is realized by
distributed RAM that provides shallow RAM structures im-
plemented in CLBs. Because all the RAM blocks have fixed locations, the placement of the decoder is primarily carried out based on the RAM block locations and we manually
configured the placement of each PE Block according to the
floor planning scheme as shown in Fig. 7. Notice that such placement scheme exactly matches the structure of the configurable shuffle network x3.

Table 1.FPGA resources utilization statistics.

Resource

Number Utilization rate

Slices

11,792

46%

Slices Reg. 10,105

19%

4 input LUTs 15,933

31%

BlockRAMs 90

48%

This decoder is described in VHDL and SYNOPSYS FPGA Express was used to synthesize the VHDL implementation. The Xilinx Development System tool suite was used to place and route the synthesized implementation for the target XCV2600E device with the speed option -7. The resource utilization statistics are listed in Table 1. Notice that 74% of the total utilized slices, or 8691 slices, are used for implementing all the CNU’s and VNU’s.
The post-routing static timing analysis results suggest
that the maximum decoder clock frequency can be 56 MHz. If this decoder performs s decoding iterations for each code
frame, the total clock cycles for decoding one frame will
+ be 2s . L L where the extra L clock cycles is due to the
initialization process, and the maximum symbol decoding
throughputwill be 56.k2.L/(2s.L+L) = 56.36/(2~+1) Mbps. If we set s = 18, the maximum symbol decoding
throughput is 54 Mbps. Fig. 8 shows the corresponding performance over AWGN channel with s = 18, including the BER (Bit Error Rate), FER (Frame Error Rate) and the av-
erage iteration numbers.

IO‘

Fig. 8. Simulation results on BER (Bit Error Rate), FER
(Frame Error Rate) and the average iteration numbers.

5. CONCLUSION

Following a joint design methodology, we develop a (3,’k)-

regular LDPC code high-speed partly parallel decoder ar-

chitecture and implement a 9216-bit, rate-1/2 (3,6)-regular

LDPC decoder on the Xilinx XCV2600E FPGA device. The

detailed decoder architecture has been presented. With the

maximum 18 decoding iterations, this decoder can a c d

upto 54Mbps symbol decoding throughput and thc$3&

at 2dB over AWGN channel.

/

6. REFERENCZS

[l] R. G. Gallager, ,, Low-Density Parity-Check

Codes,

M.I.T.. Press, 1963. available at

http://justice.mit.eddpeople/gallagerh.tml.

[2] D.J. C. MacKay. “Gooderror-correctingcodes based on very
sparse matrices,” IEEE Transactionson Information Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.

[3] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low-density parity-check codes decoder,” in PIVC. of ZOO1 IEEE Int. Spp. on Circuits and Systems, Sydney, May 2001. available at http://www.ece.umn.edu/groups/ddp/turbo/.

141 A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Journal of Solid-state Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404-412, March 2002.

[5] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI implementation-oriented (3,k)-regularlow-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (Sips), Sept. 2001. available at http://www.ece.umn.edu/groups/ddp/turbo/.

[6] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Jointcode and decoder design for implementation-oriented (3,k)-regular ldpc codes,” in PIVC. ofIEEEAsilomar Conference,Nov. 2001, pp. 1232-1236.

132

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:56:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

