ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland,June 30 -July 5,2002

Improved Bit Flipping Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes

Nenad Miladinovic
Department of Electrical Engineering University of Hawaii
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA
e-mai1:chelicalQyahoo.com

Marc P.C. Fossorier
Department of Electrical Engineering University of Hawaii
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA e-mail: marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu

Abstract - A n e w m e t h o d for improving bit flipping decoding of LDPC codes is presented. In this method, bits with a number of unsatisfied check sums larger than a predetermined threshold are flipped w i t h a probability p which is determined based on the code considered. W i t h a proper choice of p , the proposed improved b i t flipping algorithm achieves gain not only in performance, but also i n average decoding t i m e for SNR values of interest w i t h respect to p = 1.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes were first proposed by Gallager [l]and recently resurrected by MacKay [2]. A number of algorithms for soft decision decoding have been proposed, but no hard decision decoding algorithm that gains over the bit flipping Alg. A and B proposed by Gallager has been reported in the literature. It has been observed that these algorithms produce unreliable estimates when the number of unsatisfied check sums is close to J / 2 , especially for Alg. A and J = 3, where J is the number of check sums orthogonal on each bit. The bit flipping algorithm proposed in [3] addresses this weakness but it uses soft values in order to increase the reliability of the estimates. The bit flipping algorithm proposed in this paper uses a probabilistic approach to increase the reliability of the estimates, without soft information.

larger probability p . This suggests that p should be small at the beginning of the decoding and then increased gradually during the iterative decoding. Out of several criteria for updating p , the following has been chosen for its simplicity: p is increased by a predetermined step if all estimates to be passed at the current iteration are the same as in the previous iteration. The probabilistic bit flipping algorithm can be stated as follows. Whenever check sums suggest that a bit should be flipped (based either on Alg. A, or on Alg. B), it is flipped with probability p . If all estimates to be passed have not changed, p is increased and the algorithm resumes. If p is already l, the decoding stops. The basic probabilistic decoding algorithm can be further improved by independent parallel decodings as well as reinitialization strategies.
111. SIMULATIORNESULTS
The proposed probabilistic bit flipping algorithm has been applied to the (1008,504) ( 3 , 6 ) LDPC code given in [2]. Simulation results are depicted in Fig. 1: “BP over BSC” represents the performance achieved with belief propagation initialized with the crossover probability of the BSC. For this type of iterative decoding, it represents the best possible performance over the BSC, but updates probabilities rather than binary values. Similar results were achieved for other codes, possibly in conjunction with reduction of the average iteration number.

11. PROBABILISBTIITCFLIPPINAGLGORITHMS
Regular LDPC codes transmitted over a BSC are considered. If the crossover probability of the BSC is big, a large number of correctly transmitted bits have all J - 1 associated check sums in error, thus producing an incorrect estimate in Gallager’s Alg. A. Unlike Alg. A, the proposed probabilistic
bit flipping algorithm flips such bits with probability p 5 1,
therefore reducing the number of incorrect estimates passed to the next iteration. Although the number of correct estimates is also reduced, this has no major drawbacks except slowing down the algorithm in its initial phase when properly choosing p . The reduction in incorrect estimates is more important because those estimates affect subsequent iterations and may cause error propagation, especially when the graph representation of the code has short cycles. As the decoding progresses and the fraction of incorrect estimates decreases, the check sums based on these estimates become more reliable, which in turn allows us to flip bits with J - 1unsatisfied check sums (or possibly less if Alg. B is considered) with a
lThis research was supported by NSF under Grants CCR-9732959 and CCR-00-98029, and by the Hawaii Center for Advanced Communications (HCAC)

3

35

4

45

5

55

6

65

SNR in dB

Figure 1: BER’s for (1008,504) ( 3 , 6 ) LDPC code.
REFERENCES
R. G. Gallager, Low-Denszty Paraty-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
D.J.C. MacKay, “Good Error-CorrectingCodes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Dans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
A. M. Chan and F. R. Kschischang , “A simple taboo-based soft
decision decoding algorithm for expander codes,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 2, no. 7, pp. 183-185, July 1998.

US. Governmentwork not protected by US. copyright.

229

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:01:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

