IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2002

2307

Thresholds and Scheduling for LDPC-Coded Partial Response Channels
Andrew Thangaraj and Steven W. McLaughlin

Abstract—Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes exhibit a threshold phenomenon over a wide variety of channels. The threshold serves as a good parameter for system and code design, and is usually very close to channel capacity. There has been a great deal of recent work surrounding the use of LDPC and turbo codes with iterative decoding for partial response (PR) channels. In this paper, we calculate thresholds for LDPC codes over binary-input PR channels using a Gaussian approximation. We show that the threshold varies according to decoder schedule, and we identify schedules that result in good thresholds. Conversely, we use our results to guide the design of decoder schedules that minimize the number of computationally expensive Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv algorithm steps.

Fig. 1. System diagram.

Index Terms—Irregular codes, low-density parity check (LDPC) through a PR channel,

,

codes, partial response (PR) channels, scheduling, thresholds.

with additive white Gaussian noise. So

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] exhibit a threshold phenomenon when iteratively decoded using a sum–product message passing decoder over many channels. Arbitrarily low bit-error rates (BERs) can be obtained whenever the channel-noise level is below a particular threshold value by increasing the blocklength and number of iterations. For channels with additive Gaussian noise, threshold calculation by density evolution (DE) [2] was simplified by Chung et al. [3] using a Gaussian approximation.
DE has been extended to binary-input inter-symbol interference (ISI) channels by Kavcˇic´ et al. [4]. Gaussian approximation methods for partial response (PR) channels with additive Gaussian noise have been outlined in [5], [6]. In this paper, we formalize our earlier work [5], with particular emphasis on decoder scheduling. We calculate thresholds for the dicode and EPR4 channels for different schedules. Based on the calculation, we identify schedules that result in good thresholds, and develop suboptimal schedules that provide a good compromise between performance and complexity.

II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

The system setup is shown in Fig. 1. The bits are encoded to

codeword bits

, which are transmitted with BPSK

modulation (

;

). The codeword bits are passed

(1)

where is Gaussian distributed with mean 0 and variance .

The decoder consists of a Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv algo-

rithm (BCJR) equalizer followed by a message passing (MP)

decoder for the LDPC code. After receiving ,

, the

BCJR equalizer outputs the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs)

(2)

where is the LLR that was obtained from a prior MP decoding step. The MP decoder uses to calculate new LLRs,
[1]. If the decoder schedule calls for a further BCJR step, is the extrinsic information passed back to the
BCJR equalizer. The approximation of the probability distribution function
(pdf) of (over all possible decoder inputs) by Gaussian distributions has been studied in [3]. For binary-input ISI channels (when the input bits are random), the BCJR equalizer output looks very close to that of BPSK over AWGN. So, based on empirical evidence, we approximate in (2) (see Fig. 1) as follows:
(3)

Manuscript received February 12, 2002; revised May 19, 2002. The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: andrew@ece.gatech.edu; swm@ece.gatech.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2002.801875.

where is the equivalent SNR independent of , and is the

equivalent additive Gaussian noise. Given for

,

the maximum-likelihood estimate of can be found by solving

0018-9464/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:13:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2002

During the th iteration, the evolution of SNR of the BCJR part (4) is given by

due to

Fig. 2. Message flow between nodes.
That is

where represents the change in SNR due to the channel equalizer. The function is evaluated using Monte Carlo simulations. In log-domain, is smooth, and spline interpolation can be used to minimize the number of simulation points. As in [3], the evolution of mean of due to the MP decoder part [in (5)] is given by
(8)

III. THRESHOLD CALCULATION
Kavcˇic´ et al. [4] have shown that thresholds exist for LDPC codes over binary-input ISI channels. Their extension of DE and our Gaussian approximation method for threshold calculation is summarized briefly in this section. The notation in Fig. 1 is used in the description.

where is a function that is defined in [3] and (respec-

tively ) is the fraction of edges out of degree- check nodes

(respectively degree- bit nodes). The mean of at a bit node

of degree is given by . Since the fraction of bit nodes of

degree is

, the mean of , aver-

aged over the bit nodes, is given by

A. DE

(9)

Fig. 2 shows the message flow in the combined code-channel

factor graph at a bit node of degree . During the th iteration,

(4) Putting (8) and (9) together, the overall update equation can be written as an update of one parameter , as follows:
(5)

and

(6)

Output LLR

(7)

The functions and refer to the calculations performed in the channel and LDPC decoder, respectively. Iterations are terminated when the bit decisions based on the output LLR satisfy the parity check equations of the LDPC code. To perform DE, the pdf’s of , , and have to be calculated for successive iterations. This involves convolution for the MP decoder part and a large number of Monte Carlo simulations for the BCJR part (see [2], [4], and [7] for more details).
B. Gaussian Approximation
Following Chung et al. [3], the pdf’s of and [in (4)–(7)] are represented by their means and , respectively. By using the approximation in (3), the pdf of [in (4)–(7)] is represented by , the equivalent SNR of . Note that the equivalent SNR and mean of a message are related by
.

(10)

For a particular channel noise level , starting with

, (10) is iteratively evaluated to find . If

, the

noise level is lower than the threshold. If is finite for all

, the noise level is above the threshold. The at which the

transition occurs is the threshold denoted .

Table I shows the thresholds for some regular and irregular

codes over the dicode

channel and the EPR4

channel. The irregular codes used are from [3, eq.

(17)] and [7, Tab. II]. We see that the GA method comes very

close to the DE threshold. The fact that it is higher than the DE

threshold is consistent with similar observations for memory-

less channels [3]. The thresholds for irregular codes suggest that

low-rate codes optimized for the AWGN channel perform better

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:13:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

THANGARAJ AND MCLAUGHLIN: THRESHOLDS AND SCHEDULING FOR LDPC-CODED PR CHANNELS

2309

TABLE I THRESHOLDS FOR LDPC CODES

h D 0 D TABLE II
COMPARISON OF SCHEDULES; (3, 27)-REGULAR CODE; ( ) = 1

(GA: Gaussian Approximation)

A. BCJR Once
In this schedule, the BCJR step is done only once. This schedule is denoted as . Since the BCJR step is done just once, it is the least complex schedule. It typically has a loss of 1 dB in threshold when compared to schedules similar to (4)–(7).
B. Resetting LDPC
In this schedule, the check-node to bit-node messages [Fig. 2, (4)–(7)] are all set to zero whenever a BCJR step is performed. This is equivalent to resetting the LDPC part of the factor graph. So, memory that was used to store the ’s can be reused during the BCJR step. This could result in a substantial saving in implementation costs. Schedules that reset the LDPC part typically lose a fraction of a decibel when compared to optimal schedules. In the schedule string, iterations that reset the LDPC part are separated by a “–”. For instance, and so on.
Table II shows the thresholds of a (3, 27)-regular LDPC code for different schedules over a dicode channel. From Table II, it is evident that resetting schedules offer a good compromise between optimal and BCJR once schedules.

Fig. 3. BER curves for the dicode channel.
than regular codes over the dicode and EPR4 channels. The difference between capacity and thresholds for regular codes is significant for low rates [4]. So, these codes could be used as the starting point for further optimization to get closer to capacity.
Fig. 3 shows the BER curves for regular (3, 27)-LDPC codes of blocklength 4 K, 16 K, and 64 K over the dicode channel. The decoder performs 50 iterations of (4)–(7) followed by 50 iterations of LDPC decoder. It can be observed that the curves move closer to the threshold as blocklength increases.
IV. COMPARING SCHEDULES
There are several schedules, similar to the one described by (4)–(7) that use the entire code-channel factor graph in every iteration. These schedules result in high noise thresholds, and are complex, since the BCJR calculations are performed at every iteration. But, there are other suboptimal schedules which reduce the decoding complexity by decreasing the number of BCJR steps. Naturally, they result in lower noise thresholds. In this section, we consider two suboptimal schedules. We represent a schedule by a string of ’s and ’s, with a denoting a BCJR step and an denoting a LDPC step.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have developed a Gaussian approximation to DE for ISI channels. The method results in a significant reduction in calculation complexity while being accurate to 0.1 dB. The threshold has been used as a parameter to compare the performance of suboptimal decoder schedules.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] S.-Y. Chung, R. Urbanke, and T. J. Richardson, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[4] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[5] A. Thangaraj and S. W. McLaughlin, “Threshold for regular LDPC codes over PR channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, June 2001, p. 70.
[6] J. Li, K. R. Narayanan, C. N. Georghiades, and E. Kurtas, “Thresholds for iterative equalization of partial response channels using density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, June 2001, p. 73.
[7] S.-Y. Chung, D. G. Forney Jr., R. Urbanke, and T. J. Richardson, “Lowdensity parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:13:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

