Highperformance LDPC Codes For CDMA Applications

J. HAGHIGHAT and S.H.JAh4ALI
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering,Universityof Tehran, North Karegar Avenue,Tehran, IRAN javadh@,ece.ut.ac.ir, hiamali@,chamran.ut.ac.ir

H. BEHROOZI and M. NASIRI-KENARI
School of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of Technology,Azadi Street, Tehran, IRAN behroozi@mehr.sharif.edu,mnasiri@sina.sharif.ac.ir

Abstract - Recently Sorokine et al. have introduced a class of

Low-density pariwcheck (LDPC) codes which when applied on

IS95 CDMA system show a live-fold and two-fold increase in

capacity at BER=lO' compared to the traditional uncoded

scheme and

state-of-the-art Low-Rate Orthogonal

Convolutional codes, respectively. However, these codes suffer

from an error-floor at lower BERs, which is needed for high.

quality services such as data. To enhance the capacity of CDMA

systems, not only for moderate BER values but also for lower

BER values, we modify the Construction of these codes slightly,

to improve their performance at lower BERs. We use a simple

and fast iterative algorithm instead of an exhaustive search for

this purpose. Our results show a three-fold increase in capacity

at BER=103 compared to the low-rate orthogonal convolutional

codes and 1.5 times increase compared to a typical code of

Sorokine elal. ensemble, respectively.

Key Words: Low-density parity-check codes, CDMA, ensemble of Sorokineet a/.,distance properties, system capacity, special loop

I . INTRODUCTION

Lowdensity paritysheck (LDPC) codes [l], [Z], [3] (also referred to as Gallager codes), originally introduced by Gallager 141, [ I ] and rediscovered by Mackay and Neal [5], have found different applications in communication systems due to their simple decoding approach and excellent performance. Recently [6] highly optimized irregular LDPC codes have been shown to come even closer to the Gaussian channel capacity than turbo codes [7].
Powerful lowrate error-correcting codes that can be decoded with a relatively low complexity are of special interest in Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) applications [SI. Viterbi [8]has proposed a class of very low rate orthogonal convolutional codes, which are proper for Spread Spectrum systems. Using these codes, Ormondroyd et
al. [9] improved the performance of IS9S-CDMA system significantly, compared to the uncoded scheme. Recently Sorokine et al. [IO], [ I l l by modifying original Gallager construction [I] have presented a new consmction for LDPC
codes that yields good short frame-length codes. They applied the constructed code on IS-95 CDMA system and
observed a five-fold and two-fold increase in the capacity [I21 at BER=10" compared to the traditional uncoded

scheme and stateof-the-art lowrate orthogonal convolutional codes [9], respectively. But these LDPC codes show a significant decrease in the performance at lower BERs, due to their poor minium distance properties [lo]. Therefore, they do not seem appropriate for high quality services, e.g., data, included in mobile systems and networks. To improve the capacity of CDMA system, not only for moderate BER values but also for lower BERs down to IO", we propose a slight modification on Sorokine et al. codes. As we will see, the poor distance properties of these codes is due to the existence of some order 4 loops which we refer to as special loops (for definition of loop, see section U). Then, we try to find special loop free codes in the ensemble. As will be
shown in section N ,random search of such codes is an
exhaustive task. Therefore, we propose a simple and fast iterative search algorithm to find special loop /Fee codes. These codes have good distance properties; so will be referred to as high performance codes. We apply highperformance codes to the IS-95CDMA system and observe a three-fold increase in the capacity at BER=IO-' with r e s p t to orthogonal convolutional codes and 1.5 times increase, compared to typical Sorokinee fal. codes.
2. GALLAGER CODES ANOTHELR MODIFICATION
Original Gallager construction [I] for LDPC codes can be graphically described as follows.Considering integers (n,j, k)
such that k+Z and k is a divisor of n, the graph of the code contains m=nj/k check nodes (C, to 6 ) and n variable
nodes (VI to V. ) and consists o f j sub graphs. Each sub graph includes n/k check nodes, and each check node is connected to k variable nodes by k edges. In the fmt sub graph a deterministicassignment is used such that V(i.llk+I to Vi, are
assigned to G. In other sub graphs, random reassignment of
variable nodes is used. In the matrix specification, as mentioned by Gallager [I], sub graphs are replaced by sub matrices and random reassignment of variable nodes is replaced by random permutations of columns of the first sub matrix (sub matrices are separated by solid lines in matrix H
of Eq. (I)). Therefore, a (n,j , k) Gallager code is a regular [3] LDPC code in whichj is the degree of variable nodes, k is
the degree of check node and n is the block length. Different reassignments lead to different codes, so an ensemble of

0-7803-7605-6/0U$17.0020002 IEEE. 105

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. I:Graphical representation of a (8.3.4) Gallager eade. Dashed edger show a speciol loop and dash-dots show the modifration ofGallager codes

codes is obtained. The parity check matrix of a (8,3,4) Gallager code is given in Eq. (I) And the corresponding graph is depicted in Fig. ].Note that our description is slightly different from the conventional graphical representation [13]. This different representation helps us to explain further concepts more clearly. LDPC codes can be easily decoded with iterations of belief propagation [14], [2] on their Tanner graphs [131.

modified Gallager code [IO] the authors in [ I I], improved the IS-95 capacity significantly, compared to the uncodcd scheme and lowrate orthogonal convolutional codes [9] (see Fig. 4). We will refer to the (1536,-,3) ensemble as the ensemble ofSorokine et al. and to its members as Sorokine et a1 codes. Although Sorokine et al. codes improve the IS-95 capacity significantly for BERs down to l o 3 , however, their codes do not improve the capacity for lower BERs as well, due to their poor distance properties [IO]. Hence, these codes are not appropriate for high-quality applications, e.g.,
data transmission.

3. SPECIAL LOOP BREAKING ALGOFJTHM

A loop is a sequence of distinct variablecheck nodes (VI,
C,), (Cl, V2), ...,(CN.l,V,) with V,=VN. N is called order or
length of the loop. Code construction implies that N is even and not less than 4. Two overlaps between two columns of the parity-check matrix of a code leads to a length 4 loop in the corresponding graph of the CO& [2]. Short loops result in sub optimal decoding of LDPC codes [IS], so at least length 4 loops should he avoided [2]. However, in the case of small number of loops, their effect is negligible [IS].
Sorokine el al. [IO], [ I l l generalized the Gallager construction with a slight modification, which is simply truncation of some check-nodes from the end of last sub graph (dashed line in Fig. 1 and mamx H). This truncation
leads to an unequal degree in variable nodes, so the new ensemble is referred to as an (n, -, k) ensemble [IO]. In contrast to the Gallager codes, modified Gallager codes can be obtained from graphs with equalj and k . This modification is very useful for designing practical systems. For example, to design a rate 1/8, block length 1536 code-as in IS-95
application- a (1536,7,8) Gallager code can be used. However, this code has a large number of loops in its related graph, which leads to very suboptimal decoding and significant loss in performance [IS], [2]. But as an appropriate alternative, a (1536;,3) or (1536,-,4) modified Gallager code may he used. Note that this modification leads
to relatively poor distance properties [IO]. More general classes of Gallager codes are introduced in [Z].
In Is-95 system, data rate is 9.6 kb/sec and the (traffic) frameduration is 20 msec, so the frame contains 192 bits of data. This data frame length is considered as a “target” frame
length in [10],[11]. Then, using a rate 118, (1536,-,3)

To include high-quality applications too, we will introduce a heuristic, simple and fast iterative search algorithm to find powerful codes in the ensemble ofSarakine et al. To describe
this method, we should first explain more about the ensemble of Sorokine et al. and the reason of its poor distance propelties. First we will define some new concepts.
Assuming a (n, -, k) modified Gallager ensemble of LDPC
codes, we define: Special loop: By a special-loop we mean an order 4 loop for
which one of the check-nodes is in the first sub graph or equivalently one of the overlaps is occurred in the first sub matrix. A special loop is shown in Fig. 1 and also is indicated as bold in matrix H of equation (I). Non-special loop: An order 4 loop that is notspecial loop. Truncalion depfh: Ratio of the number of truncated check-
nodes to the total number of check-nodes in the last sub graph (in other words the ratio of truncated rows from the last sub matrix). Low performance code: Any code of the ensemble, for
which the number of special-loops is more than or comparable with the expected number of this type of loops. Medium performance code: Any code of the ensemble for
which the number of special-loops is relatively small compared to the expected number of this type of loops. High performance code: Any code of the ensemble for which the number of special-loops is zero. We refer to them also as special loopfree codes. Also we will define the following parameters: 1 The number of check nodes in each complete sub graph
I=-n t
s:The number of check nodes in the incomplete sub graph

106

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Td The truncqtion depth defined as Td = 1 -5.
I Intuitively the distance properties of a random selected code from this ensemble, tightly depends on the number of its special-loops. As an example, consider a code o f the ensemble of Sorokine et al. with a special loop between two certain variable nodes, which are overlapping in the first, and
the second sub graph. This loop makes a weight 2 code word with the probability of 0.14, which is simply the probability that both of these variables appear in the truncated part o f the third sub graph. Such a special loop with a higher probability creates a near code word [I61 with weight 2 and syndrome weight 1, which in turns weakens distance properties of the
code. Therefore, it can be expected that special loop free codes are more powerful codes. Theorem I : For a random selected code from a (n ;, 3) modified Gallager ensemble with j=3, the expected number
ofnon-special loops is :
. E. = k s ( n - k ) ( -k) - l . .n* - 1
Proof: Assuming two certain variables that do not overlap in

the first sub graph, the probability that these variables make an order 4 loop is equal to the probability that these variables overlap in both the second and the third sub graphs:

PI = P z X P 3 >

(3)

n(k-1)

pz =-’

(4)

ks(k-I)

p3 =n(n-l)

(5)

p 2 is the probabilityof overlappingin the second sub graph. p 3 is the probabilityof overlappingin the third sub graph.

Such variable nodes can be selected in n(n-k) different
ways. Thus, the expected number ofnon-special loops is E,.
Theorem 2: Far a random selected code from a (n. -, 3) modijed Gallager ensemble with j=3, the expected number of the special loops is
E, = n(k - W P ~ (p d~+-P,(I -~ ~ 1 1 . ( 6 )
Proof: Assuming two certain variables that overlap in the first sub graph, the probability that these variables make a special-loop is equal to the probability that they overlap in the second sub graph and do not overlap in the third sub graph, plus the probability that they do not overlap in the second sub graph and overlap in the third sub graph (Note that the probability of overlapping in both the second and the third sub graphs is very smaller that these two probabilities and can be neglected). This probability can be computed in the similar way as theorem I . The variable nodes can be selected in n e - I ) different ways, so the expected number of special-laaps is E,. Discussion: Using the reasonable approximations:

n >> l , n >>-,k ks(k - I ) < < I ,
n ( n - 1)

and using the definition of the truncation depth. we have:

E, =(l-Td)(k-l)’,E, = (2- Td)(k-1)’.

(I)

These equations show the effect o f the truncation depth clearly. As the truncation depth increases, the ratio of the expected number o f the special loops to the expected number of the non-special loops becomes larger. Furthermore, as Td increases, the expected number of the special loops decreases, but the destructive effect of them on distance properties increases (with a higher probability they cause a weight 2 code word). The largest possible value of Td is defined by the stability condition [17]. For the ensemble of Sorokine et al. Td=0.375, &=2.5, K 4 . 5 and E, / &=2.6. Therefore, in a random selected code of this ensemble, the most probable loops are the special loops. In other words the probability that a random selected code o f this ensemble is special loop free is almost equal to the probabilitythat the code is loop free, which is very low. From our Monte Carlo simulation,this probability for the ensemble of Sorokinc e t al. is 0.036.
From the above discussion one can see that finding highperformance codes with consequent random selections of the ensemble, is really an exhaustive task. On the other hand, constructingsuch codes by deterministic approaches leads to very poor distance properties. Indeed, good minimum distance of LDPC codes is due to their random consauction [I], [2]. Now instead of an exhaustive search, we propose a simple and fast iterative search algorithm to find high performance codes. We refer to our algorithm as special loop breaking algorithm or SLBA.
SLB Algorithm: We start with a random selected code of ensemble. Algorithm scans the second sub graph from the first to the last variable. If a variable participates in a special loop, algorithm changes the situation o f that variable with a random selected variable from the same sub graph. This process is done for other sub graphs in the same manner. When the algorithm scans all o f sub graphs (except the first one), one iteration has been completed and the second iteration is started. The algorithm stops when in an iteration no special loop is found. It is obvious that the resulted code is a member of ensemble, too. Special loop breaking can find the special loopfree codes for all reasonable values o f k .For the ensemble of Sorokine et al. algorithm stops after 2 or 3 iterations. Note: The standard loopbreaking method [IS], is such that when a variable participates in an order 4 loop, it changes its situation randomly in the graph. We do not use this method because the resulted code is not a member of the ensemble.

107

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

To demonstrate the efficiency of OUT proposed search algorithm, in this section we provide some numerical results. We again consider a rate l/8 code of the ensemble of Sorokine et al.

4. NUMERICAL RESULTS

Fig. 2 and 3 show the siniulahon results in the AWGN channel. In Fig.2, code C is a lowperfrmance code with 5 special loops which reaches to the error floor at FER=IOJ

Code D that is obtained by applying SLB to C does not show an error floor at least down to FER=10-5 and at FER=10”, outperforms code C by about 1.2 dB. To get the results of Fig. 2 , the maximum number of decoding iterations [2] is set to 200. To see the effect of the number of iterations, the simulation for code C is performed with 2000 iterations (Bold line). As can be observed increasing the number of decoding iterations does not have considerable effect on the performance of the code. In Fig.3, we compare the medium performance code with 2 special loops (code A) with the best high performance code which we obtained so far by our algorithm (code B). The performance of code A is similar to the code used in [I I]. Indeed the authors in [I 11med to avoid order 4 loops but did not try to remove these loops, so reached to a medium-performance code. Similar to [1I], we set the maximum number of decoding iterations to 2000.
Code B shows about 0.7 dB improvement in the performance
compared to code A at FER=104. We have obtained similar improvements when applying our algorithm in uncomelated fading channel.
Another criterion to demonstrate the efficiency of our proposed algorithm is the system capacity. In [12], the

system capacity of the reverse CDMA link, for a single cell and perfect receiver synchronization, has been approximately calculated as:

n I-- rl

(9)

Eb / I , ’

where n is the number of users, 7 is the processing gain, and

&/I, is the signal-t&nterference ratio. The system capacity can be computed by using bit-error probabilities for Gallager codes in the AWGN environment. In Fig. 4, we compare the capacity of a reverse CDMA link when applying our code (a), the medium performance code (b), low rate orthogonal convolutional code [9] (c) and uncoded DS-CDMA. In this figure the processing gain is set to 64,and also a coherent detection as in [I 11, has been considered. Fig. 4 shows that at

BER=IOJ the high performance codes achieve a threefold and IS-fold increase in the capacity compared to orthogonal convolutional codes and typical codes of Sorokine et al., respectively.

5. CONCLUSION

To enhance the capacity of CDMA system, in this paper, we proposed a new search algorithm to find a high

performance code from the ensemble of Sorokine e! al. To demonstrate the efficiency of our proposed code, we considered an IS-95 CDMA application. We compared our code with the previous code from the modified Gallager constmction (the ensemble ofSorokine et al.) and also with state-of-the-art orthogonal convolutional codes. Our results have shown a three-fold increase in capacity at BER = IO-’.
ACKNOWLEDGMMT
The authors wish to thank Dr. M. Amin Shokrollahi, Dr. S. Nader Esfahani, M. Rashidpour and anonymous reviewers for
their detailed comments and many helpful suggestions.
1oo
10.’

tlo’

............. ;......__;_ ..._ ..._ ....._..;..............>.._____....

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Eb I NO (de)

Figure 2. F a m e error a t e C U N ~for a typical low performance code of the ensemble of Sorokine el al. (Curve C), and a high peflormonee code,
resulted by applying SLB algorithm on code C (Curve D), in the AWGN channel. Maximum number of decoding iterations is set 10 200. Dashes show the FER C U N ~of code C with 2000 iterations.

10‘

IO‘

Eb I NO ldBl
Figure 3. Frame error rate culycs for a typical medium performance code Of the ensemble of Sorokine el al. (Curve A), and a high performonce code, resulted by applying SLB algorithm on code A (Curve B), in the AWFN channel. Similar IO [II], the maximum number of decoding iterations is set to 2000.

108

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1 oo
10.'
0
iii 10-2
LL
b
6= IO-'
rn
f IO4
10'

1171 T. 1. Richardson. M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, "Design of
capacity-approaching irregular lowdensity paritycheck codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, "0.2, pp. 61P637, Feb. 2001. [I81 R. M. Neal, "Software for low density parity check codes," www.fln:lil~~.cr.ularonclua;niibliadC"rd.~DPC-2001-05~01!, 2001

looO

10

20

30

40

50

60

Number of Users

Figure 4. The single cell capacity of CDMA reverse link.

REFERENCES
[I] R. G. Gallager, Low-Densiry Porify-Check Codes. Cambridge, M A MIT
Press, 1963. [2] D. 1. C. Mackay, "Good error correcting codes based on very sparse
matnces," IEEE Trans. In/om. Theory, vol. 45,pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999. [31 M. G. Luby, M. A. Shokmllahi. M. Mirenmacher, and D. A. Spielman,
"lmpmved low-density parityiheck codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation," IEEE in Proc. Int. Symp. Informofion Theory, 1998, pp. 117. [4] R. G Gallager, "LOW density parity check codes,"IRE Trons. In/orm. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1,pp. 21-28, lan.1962. I S ] D. I. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes," Elecrran. Lett., vol. 32. no. 18, pp. 16451646, Aug. 1996. [6] T. Richardson. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, "Design of provably good lowdensity parity check codes, " ISITZOOO, Proceedings. p. 199. [7] G. Berrou. A. Glavicur, and P.Thitirnajshima, "Near Shannon limit emorcorrecting coding and decoding: Turbo codes, "in Proe. IEEE In!. Conf Communications (ICC'93). Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp.2.10642.1070. [SI A. 1. Viterbi, "Very low rate convolutional codes for maximm theoretical performance of spread-specbur multiple-access channels, " IEEEJ. Selected. Areas Commun, vol. 8, pp.641-649, May 1990. 191 R.F. Omandroyd and J. 1. Maxey, "Performance of low-rate orthogonal convolutional codes in DSCDMA applications." IEEE Trans. Veh. Techno/., vol. 46, pp. 32O328, May 1997. [IO] V. Sorokine, F. R. Kschischang and S . Pasupathy, "Gallager codes for CDMA applications-Part I," IEEE Trons. Commun., vol. 48, no. IO, pp. 16601668, OR 2000.
[ I l l V. Sorokine, F. R. Kschischang and S . Pasupathy, "Gallager eodei for
CDMA applications-Pan 11," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 1 I , pp. 18181828,Nov. 2000. [I21 A. I. Viterbi, CDMA Principles of Spread Spectrum Commun-ieotion. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995. 1131 R. M. Tanner, "A recursive approach to low complexity codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory. vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981. [ 141 I. Pearl, Piobnbiiistie Reasoningin Intelligenr System: Networks o/ Plausible Infireme. San M ateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1998. [IS] F. R. Kschischange, B. 1. Frey, H. A. Loeliger, "Factorgraphs and the sum product algorithm," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 4 9 8 5 1 9 , F e b . 2001.
[I61 D. J. MacKay, and M. C. Davey. "Evaluation of Gallager codes far
short block length and high rate applications." http:liwww.keck.ucsf.~d~-machyiseagate.p~.g~

109

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:58:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

