2304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2002

ECC-Less LDPC Coding for Magnetic Recording Channels
Toshihiko Morita, Yuichi Sato, and Takao Sugawara

Abstract—This paper presents a system for magnetic recording channels, using low-density parity check (LDPC) codes and a novel method of erasure compensation that can correct thermal asperity (TA) and media defects (MDs). The system does not require errorcorrection codes (ECC) based on the Reed–Solomon codes, and thus is ECC-less. Simulation results show that the performance of ECC-less LDPC codes is better than that of the LDPC codes with ECC. It is also shown that LDPC codes of rate 0.814 can correct 48-byte TA and 24-byte MD, which are sufficient for practical hard disk drives.
Index Terms—Erasure, error-correction codes, low-density parity check codes, media defect, thermal asperity.

Fig. 1. Magnetic recording system using LDPC codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity check (LDPC) codes have recently received considerable attention as a next-generation coding technique for magnetic recording channels [1]–[3], because they show a 5-dB gain over the conventional PRML method. The gain reduces to 1 dB, however, if the code is combined with an error-correction code (ECC) based on the Reed–Solomon (RS) codes. After the LDPC code, the ECC is not effective in the sense that its gain is less than the rate loss. In fact, we confirmed that ECC-less LDPC codes perform better than LDPC codes with ECC. However, it is still difficult to avoid use of ECC because the iterative decoder is unable to correct erasures caused by thermal asperity (TA) or media defects (MDs). This paper presents a method of erasure compensation for the iterative decoder. The method enables the use of ECC-less LDPC codes, which results in better performance than the use of LDPC codes with ECC.

The PR channel consists of a modified Lorentzian channel

with an isolated pulse of

[5] and

micro-track jitter noise, which represents media noise. After

the transfer function of the MR head [5] is applied, white

Gaussian noise is added. The ratio of media noise to white

noise (Nm–Ne) is 1. The low-pass filter used is a seventh-order

equi-ripple filter. The channel is equalized to the

target

with a 10-tap finite-impulse

response filter. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as

(1)

where is the peak amplitude of the isolated pulse,

is the

power spectral density of noise, and is the Nyquist frequency.

To take into account the code rate of ECC, the extended user

density (EUD) [6], defined as follows, is fixed at 2.63:

II. PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES FOR MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

A. Simulation Conditions

First, we examine the performance of LDPC codes combined

with ECC. The codes considered consist of a rate 16/17 max-

imum-transition-run (MTR) code [4] and a systematic LDPC

code, as shown in Fig. 1. The parity-check matrix is a randomly

constructed regular matrix with a column weight of three with

no four cycles. To satisfy the run-length conditions

,

the sequence of LDPC parity bits is inserted with guard bits. For

ECC, a three-way interleaved RS code with 9-byte error-correc-

tion capability is assumed.

Manuscript received February 14, 2002; revised May 24, 2002. T. Morita and Y. Sato are with Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Kawasaki 211-8588, Japan (e-mail: tmorita@flab.fujitsu.co.jp). T. Sugawara is with Fujitsu, Ltd., Kawasaki 211–8588, Japan. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2002.801874.

(2)

where is the user density defined at the MR head output and is the code rate of ECC. The number of information bits is
4096. The decoder consists of an inner a posteriori probability (APP) decoder based on the MaxLogMAP method and an outer LDPC decoder based on the sum-product method. We perform four iterations using both decoders, followed by three iterations using the outer LDPC decoder only.

B. LDPC Codes With ECC

Fig. 2 compares the sector error rate (SER) performance of

the rate 16/17 MTR and rate 0.889 LDPC coded channel, which

was described above, with a 16/17 MTR coded channel, both of

which are combined with ECC. In this figure, the LDPC codes

actually show a 5-dB SNR gain at

before ECC.

However, the gain is reduced to 1 dB after ECC. It is important

to note that the improvement added by ECC is only 0.3 dB.

0018-9464/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:13:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MORITA et al.: ECC-LESS LDPC CODING FOR MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

2305

Fig. 3. Modified decoder for erasure compensation.

by thresholding the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) output from the inner APP decoder, finds a portion where the constraint is violated, then generates an erasure flag. If the number of violations is less than a predetermined threshold, all erasure flags are cleared.
Erasure flags from both detectors are logically summed and supplied to the modified APP decoder, which computes the branch metric while masking the channel information of the erased bits indicated by the erasure flags. More specifically, the decoder computes the branch metric associated with a specific state transition from to with bit as follows:

Fig. 2. Performance of LDPC codes with and without ECC.

(3)

if ON

else

(4)

Although not shown here, LDPC codes with different code rates

were tested, including 0.833 5/6 , 0.941 16/17 , and

0.970 32/33 . In this experiment, the code rate of 0.889

8/9 achieved the best performance at

.

C. ECC-Less LDPC Codes
Fig. 2 also shows the performance of ECC-less LDPC codes. Eliminating the parity bits for ECC reduces the channel density, which possibly results in better performance. In fact, Fig. 2 shows that the ECC-less rate 0.889 LDPC codes are 1.1 dB better than the LDPC codes of the same code rate with ECC. As we shall see later, a code rate of 0.889 is not sufficient when TA is considered, and we therefore propose a rate 0.814
407/500 LDPC code. The ECC-less LDPC codes with rate 0.814 show a 0.8-dB gain over the rate 0.889 LDPC codes with ECC. They also show a 1.8-dB gain over the MTR coded channel with ECC.

III. ERASURE COMPENSATION
We have shown that the ECC-less LDPC codes perform better than the LDPC codes with ECC. However, it is still difficult to avoid use of ECC since the iterative decoder is unable to correct erasures caused by TA or MD. To solve this problem, we propose a method of erasure compensation, which consists of two erasure detectors and a modified APP decoder, as shown in Fig. 3.
A read channel LSI already employs a TA detector based on thresholding. But, such a detector cannot detect MDs, since MDs reduce the ac components of the readback signal while TA drifts the dc components. Thus, we added a defect detector that looks for violations of the run-length constraints. In the first decoding iteration, the detector makes a tentative decision

where —symbol bit associated with the state tran-
sition; a priori information; equalized signal; ideal channel output; noise variance. The succeeding computations of , , and the a posteriori probability are performed in the same way as the original MaxLogMAP method. If TA or an MD occur, the channel produces an invalid signal, which perturbs the LDPC decoder. Equation (4) masks those signals to be unknown, so that the LDPC decoder can recover them using the parity information only.
IV. EVALUATION
A. Performance Under TA
The TA performance of the ECC-less LDPC codes with the proposed erasure-compensation method is evaluated under the same conditions as described in Section II. TA is modeled by overwriting the equalized signal with the peak amplitude of the isolated pulse. The location of TA is randomly changed sector by sector. The ECC used here can correct 24-byte errors, and thus can correct 48-byte TA if employing erasure decoding. Fig. 4 shows the performance of the ECC-less LDPC codes under 48-byte TA with different LDPC code rates. For comparison, the performance of an MTR-coded channel with ECC under 24-byte TA is also plotted, which we assume corresponds to the performance under 48-byte TA when the ECC performs erasure decoding. The plots show that a code rate of 0.833 5/6 or higher is not sufficient for 48-byte TA. A code rate of 0.814 or lower is acceptable. Consequently, we chose a rate of 0.814, with which the ECC-less LDPC codes outperform

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:13:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2002

Fig. 4. TA performance of ECC-less LDPC codes.

Fig. 6. Defect performance (after modification).
The results shown in Fig. 5 depend highly on the signal-reduction ratio, which is the ratio of the reduced signal amplitude to the original amplitude. When the reduction ratio is small, it is difficult for the decoder to estimate the original information sufficiently. However, such a signal easily violates the run-length constraints, and the proposed defect detector can detect them with high probability. In contrast, when the reduction ratio is large, it is difficult for the defect detector to detect such a defect, but the decoder can correct them with high probability. According to this balance, the ECC-less LDPC codes with the proposed erasure compensation method demonstrate better performance than ECC, as shown in Fig. 6.

V. CONCLUSION
Although magnetic recording systems have long employed RS-based ECC as an outer code, the combination of LDPC codes and ECC is not necessarily effective. In fact, the ECC-less LDPC codes proposed here outperform LDPC codes with ECC. They also show good tolerance to TA and MDs based on the proposed method of erasure compensation.

Fig. 5. Defect performance (before modification).

ECC, at least at

, under both 48- and 30-byte TA.

Moreover, the LDPC codes without the proposed erasure com-

pensation method cannot correct TA at all. Thus, it is obvious

that the proposed method is effective.

B. Performance Under MD
Fig. 5 shows the performance of the ECC-less rate 0.814 LDPC codes under 24-byte MDs without the proposed erasure compensation. MD is modeled by reducing the signal amplitude before the MR head. The location of MD is randomly changed.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Near shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] H. Song, R. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, pp. 2183–2186, Sept. 2000.
[4] T. Nishiya et al., “Rate 16/17 maximum transition run (3; 11) code on an EEPRML channel with an error-correcting postprocessor,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 35, pp. 4378–4385, Sept. 1999.
[5] T. Sugawara et al., “A nonlinear model for magnetic recording channel with an MR head,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, Jan. 1998.
[6] K. Saeki and Z. Keirn, “Optimal combination of detection and error correction coding for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, pp. 708–713, Mar. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:13:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

