Decoding Turbo-Like Codes via Linear Programming

Jon Feldman

David R. KargerВЈ

MIT Laboratory for Computer Science Cambridge, MA, 02139
jonfeld,karger @theory.lcs.mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel algorithm for decoding turbo-like codes based on linear programming. We prove that for the case of Repeat-Accumulate (RA) codes, under the binary symmetric channel with a certain constant threshold bound on the noise, the error probability of our algorithm is bounded by an inverse polynomial in the code length.
Our linear program (LP) minimizes the distance between the received bits and binary variables representing the code bits. Our LP is based on a representation of the code where code words are paths through a graph. Consequently, the LP bears a strong resemblance to the min-cost flow LP. The error bounds are based on an analysis of the probability, over the random noise of the channel, that the optimum solution to the LP is the path corresponding to the original transmitted code word.
1 Introduction
The introduction of turbo codes [3] revolutionized the field of coding theory by achieving an error probability orders of magnitude smaller than any other code code at the time. Since then, volumes of research has focused on design, implementation, and analysis of turbo codes and their variants and generalizations [17].
One of the main goals of this research has been to explain the somewhat mysterious good performance of turbo codes and turbo-like codes. Even though the distances of turbolike codes are generally bad [10, 2, 5], when decoded using an iterative decoder, they seem to achieve very good error rates [6]. The drawback to an iterative decoder is that it not
ВЈResearch supported by NSF contract CCR-9624239 and a David and Lucille Packard Foundation Fellowship.

guaranteed to converge, nor does it have any guarantee on the quality of its output.
Some progress has been made assuming optimal maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding, for which no polynomial-time algorithm is known. It is known [6] that if the noise in the channel is under a certain constant threshold, ML decoding of randomly generated turbo codes has an error probability bounded by an inverse polynomial in the code length, as the code length goes to infinity. The first such result by Divsalar and McEliece[6] was for a type of turbo-like code called a repeat-accumulate (RA) code.
There are several drawbacks to these results. The fact that they do not apply to a specific constructible code forces the designer of the code to choose a random one, and thus be uncertain about its quality. Additionally, in many cases the asymptotic nature of the bound requires a large block length, whereas small fixed code lengths are desirable in practice to reduce latency in transmission. Most importantly, however, the given error probability is proven only under ML decoding, for which no efficient algorithm is known.
Our Results. In this paper we introduce a novel approach to decoding any turbo-like1 code based on linear programming. We prove that for the case of Repeat-Accumulate (RA) codes, with a certain constant threshold bound on the noise in the channel, the error probability of our algorithm is bounded by an inverse polynomial in the code length. We improve upon previous results in three important respects. Our analysis holds for (i) a provably polynomialtime decoding algorithm, (ii) a specific, deterministically constructible code, and (iii), any code length.
More precisely, we show that for a particular RA code
1We note that our definition for turbo-like codes is along the lines of [6], where the class includes any serial or parallel concatenated convolutional code.

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with rate ВҪ Вҫ Г“ВҙВҪВө and length Г’, our LP solves to the cor-

rect solution with probability ВҫГ’ ВҜ, for any ВҜ Вј, as long

Вҫ as Г”

ВҙВҜВ·ВҙГҗГ“ Вҫ Вө ВҫВө, where each code bit is flipped by

the channel with probability Г”. As ВҜ Вј, the threshold

on Г” approaches Вҫ ВҪ . For lower rate RA codes, our

bound on error rate is trivially applicable by simply decod-
ing an embedded rate-ВҪ Вҫ RA code; however, we expect

that a more general analysis will yield better bounds.

When applied to any turbo-like code, our decoder has the desirable property that when it outputs a code word, it is guaranteed to be the maximum-likelihood code word. As

far as the authors are aware, no other efficient algorithm for decoding turbo-like codes is known to have this MLcertificate property. Additionally, the key structural theo-

rem used to prove the error bound for RA codes easily generalizes to other turbo-like codes, and provides a good basis for proving better error bounds.

Previous Work. A breakthrough in the analysis of turbo codes came when McEliece, MacKay and Cheng[12] showed how the classic iterative decoding method for turbo codes is an instance of PearlвҖҷs belief propagation (BP) algorithm, a standard tool used in the artificial intelligence community. Now most work in the areas of turbo codes and low-density parity check (LDPC) codes is interpreted in this context (Richardson, Shokrollahi and Urbanke[13], for example).
The convergence of BP algorithms becomes difficult to prove when the underlying вҖңbelief networkвҖқ contains cycles, as is the case for turbo codes. However, a lot of progress has been made by analyzing average codes (or вҖңcode ensemblesвҖқ), giving various tradeoffs involving rate, probability thresholds, and iterations of the BP algorithm [14].
In follow-up work (with Wainwright [8]), we have shown that the the recent iterative tree-reweighted max-product (TRMP) algorithm for MAP estimation of graphical models of Wainwright, Jaakkola and Willsky [18], when applied to the problem of decoding turbo-like codes, has a fixed point equivalent to the solution of the LP we present here. Thus we have begun to connect our LP-based decoder with the world of iterative decoders.
The minimum distance of a code is the minimum Hamming distance between any two code words. The minimum distance of turbo-like codes has received some attention recently [10, 2, 5]. Most of the work has focused on the negative side, showing that the minimum distance of a turbolike code is sub-linear. Kahale and Urbanke [10] give highprobability upper and lower bounds on the minimum distance of a random interleaver, as the block length goes to infinity, for any parallel or serially concatenated convolutional code. Bazzi, Mahdian, Miller and Spielman [2] give similar upper bounds over all interleavers for some of the

same types of codes. They also give a construction of a rate-
ВҪ Вҫ RA code and show its minimum distance is ВӘВҙГҗГ“ Г’Вө.
We will discuss this code in more detail later in the paper.

Coding Theory Background. An error-correcting code

is used to build redundancy into a data stream for transmis-

sion over an unreliable channel. The sending party takes

a binary vector Гң of length (the information word), ap-

plies an encoder (a function

ВјВҪ

Вј ВҪ Г’), to

obtain a code word of Г’ bits, Г’ (the parameter Г’ is re-

ferred to as the code length or block length), and transmits
the code word Гқ ВҙГңВө over the channel. The rate of the
code is Г’. The code word is then subject to an unreli-

able channel that can be modeled in several ways. Here we

will use the binary symmetric channel (BSC), where each

bit of the code word is flipped independently with proba-
bility Г” (called the crossover probability). Our results in

this paper also hold for the average white Gaussian noise

(AWGN) channel, where the channel adds an independent

random Gaussian variable to each transmitted bit; for clar-

ity, we discuss only the BSC.

The receiving party gets the corrupted code word Гҡ of length Г’, and must try to recover the original information word Гң using a decoder. The decoder is simply a function
Вј ВҪ Г’ Вј ВҪ . The word error probability ГҲГӣ of

the decoder is the probability, over the random coin flips of
the channel, that ВҙГҡВө Гң. The maximum-likelihood (ML) information word Гң is the one that maximizes ГҲГ– ВҙГңВө was
sent Гҡ was received . Using BayesвҖҷ rule, and the con-

ventional assumption that all information words have equal
probability, this is the same information word Гң that maxi-
mizes ГҲГ– Гҡ was received ВҙГңВө was sent . Thus, under the
BSC, Гң is the information word that minimizes the Ham-
ming distance between ВҙГңВө and Гҡ. Note that the ML in-

formation word is not necessarily the original encoded in-

formation word. An ML decoder is one that always finds

the ML information word.

The purpose of an error-correcting code is to be robust
against noise, so the word error probability ГҲГӣ is the metric
that should be used to measure the quality of a code. Codes are often measured for quality in terms of their minimum distance . This is the minimum, over all pairs of valid code words, of the Hamming distance between the pair. It is not hard to see that an ML decoder will always correct
up to Вҫ ВҪ errors in the channel, so a large minimum
distance is desirable. However, the minimum distance is a вҖңworst-caseвҖқ measure, so considering it as the only measure of quality ignores other important attributes of the code that affect the word error probability. In fact, turbo codes are a perfect example of codes whose minimum distance is considered bad, but whose word error probability is good.
We will use the definitions given here for Г’ Гң Гқ Гҡ and Г” throughout the paper. For more background on error-

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

correcting codes, we refer the reader to textbooks written on the subject [19, 11].
Our Techniques. We show that the problem of finding the ML code word (referred to as ML decoding) can be solved by finding an optimal integral point inside a polytope with linear constraints. Binary variables represent the
information word Гң, and the objective function is to mini-
mize ГҲГ– Гҡ was received Гң was sent , where Гҡ is the cor-
rupted code word received from the channel. We relax the integral constraints to obtain a linear program (LP). The algorithm solves the LP, and if the solution is integral, outputs the information word, which it knows is the ML information word. If the solution is not integral, the algorithm outputs вҖңerror.вҖқ This approach guarantees the ML-certificate property discussed earlier.
In the setting of decoding algorithms, the rounding scheme for an LP relaxation is not as important as it is in other more conventional optimization problems. Because the LP is only guaranteed to output the ML information word if it finds an integral solution, even if we provide a rounding scheme with a provably small approximation ratio, it does not help bound the probability that the decoder returns the ML information word.
Therefore, instead of analyzing the approximation ratio as is normally done, we assume that the algorithm is always wrong when the solution is fractional, and bound the probability that the LP returns the real information word that was transmitted (not the ML word). By doing so, not only do we bound the error probability of our polynomial-time algorithm, we also bound the error probability of ML decoding; this is because whenever our LP finds the correct solution, this solution must also be the optimal point in the integral polytope, and an ML decoder would have found it as well.
Our LP can be used to decode any set of concatenated codes, with interleavers between them. However, the LP has polynomial size only if the component codes can be expressed using a polynomial-sized вҖңtrellis.вҖқ The simplest such codes are the class of convolutional codes (see [19]). Thus we say that the LP decoder is a decoder intended for вҖңturbo-likeвҖқ [6] codes: serial or parallel concatenated convolutional codes.
Outline. In Section 2, we define repeat-accumulate (RA) codes, and present our linear program as applied to RA codes. In Section 3 we state our main structural theorem (proven in Section 4), and show our bound on the probability that the LP returns the original information word. We discuss the generalization of the linear program to any set of concatenated codes in Section 5. In Section 6 we give several interesting open questions that arise from this work.

Г—Вј Вј

Вј

Г—Вј ВҪ

ВҪ

Г—ВҪ ВҪ
Seg. Вј

Вј Вј

Г—Вј Вҫ

ВҪ

ВҪ

Г—ВҪ Вҫ

Seg. ВҪ

Г—Г’Вј -ВҪ Вј Г—ВјГ’

...

Вј

Г—Г’ВҪ -ВҪ
Seg. Г’ ВҪ

Figure 1. The trellis for an accumulator, used in RA
codes. The dashed-line switch-edges correspond to information bit ВҪ, the solid-line remain-edges to information bit Вј. The edges are labeled with their associated output code bit.

2 Repeat-Accumulate Codes

Repeat-Accumulate codes are perhaps the simplest nontrivial example of a turbo-like code. They were introduced by Divsalar and McEliece [6] in order to show the first bounds for error probabilities under ML decoding. Their simple structure and highly efficient encoding scheme make them both practical and simpler to analyze than other more complex turbo-like codes. They have also been shown experimentally to have excellent error-correcting ability under iterative decoding [6], on par with classic turbo codes.

Encoding. The encoder for an RA code takes the input

word, repeats every bit times, then sends it through an

interleaver (known permutation), and then through an ac-

cumulator. The accumulator maintains a partial sum mod

2 of the input seen so far, and outputs the new sum at each

step.

More formally, an RA( ) code of length Г’

has an

interleaver (permutation) Вј Г’ ВҪ

ВјГ’

Вҫ ВҪwLeo.trTdГң,hВј ie.beee.,ntfchooerdaleelrlniГҳgstghi-vГ’eВјnreapneaintГ’efodrmaВҪnadt,iГңpoenВјГҳ rwmouГңrtdedГң

of length . information ВҪВҙГҳВө . The

RA encoder outputs a
all Вҫ Вј Г’ ВҪ For all Вҫ Вј

code
,Гқ
ВҪ

wГҲord Гҳ
, let

Гқ
Вј

ГңoВјf

length Г’,
Г‘Г“ Вҫ.

be the set of

where for indices to

which information bit Гң was repeated and permuted, i.e.,

Вҙ Вө Вҙ В· ВҪВө Вҙ В· ВҪВө . Let

ВҫВј

ВҪ . To keep the proofs in this paper

simpler, we assume that the input contains an even number

of 1s. This can be achieved by padding the information

sequence with an extra parity bit. Thus the rate of this code
is Вҙ ВҪВө , or ВҪ Г“ВҙВҪВө. The Г“ВҙВҪВө can be avoided by a

more technical proof, which we leave out for clarity.

The Accumulator Trellis. A trellis is a simple layered graph that models the actions of a finite-state encoder over time, as it encodes a binary string passed to it. The trellis is the basis for the classic Viterbi decoding algorithm [16, 9].

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1 shows the trellis ГҢ for an accumulator.

To derive the trellis, we view the accumulator as a simple

ГңfinВј oitneesbtaitteatmaatcimhien.eT, rheecaecivciunmguthlaetoГ’r-hbaits

binary input two possible

string states

per time step, depending on the parity of the input bits seen
so far. We refer to the two states of the accumulator as Вј and ВҪ; state Вј represents even parity, ВҪ represents odd parity. We

use

Г—Вј Вј

Г—Г’Вј

and

Г—ВҪ ВҪ

Г—Г’ВҪ ВҪ to refer to the sets of

even and odd parity nodes, respectively.

An encoder using this trellis begins in state Г—ВјВј. At each
time step, if it receives a ВҪ as input, it follows the dashed-

line transition to the next layer of nodes, switching states. We call this a switch-edge. If it receives a Вј, it follows the

solid-line transition to the next layer of nodes, staying in

the same state (see Figure 1). We call this type of edge a remain-edge. The labels on the transition edges represent

the code bit output by the encoder taking that transition;
label Вј for edges entering state Вј, label ВҪ for edges entering state ВҪ.

A

path

from

Г—Вј Вј

across

the

trellis

to

Г—Г’Вј

corresponds

to

an

entire Г’-bit input string. Since the accumulator begins and

ends in state Вј (the input string has even parity by assump-

tion),

we

do not

need

the states

Г—ВҪ Вј

and Г—ВҪГ’.

Looking

at the

edge labels on the path, one can read off the code word cor-

responding to that input the encoder through the

string. Let ГҲГң trellis ГҢ while

benectohdeipnagthГңВјt.aken

by

We will refer to the group of four edges at one time step

of the trellis as a segment. Define the cost of an edge
in the trellis at segment Гҳ to be the Hamming distance between its label and the received bit ГҡГҳ. The cost of a path
is the sum of the costs of the edges on the path.

Decoding with the Trellis. Assume for the moment that

the accumulator was the entire encoder (i.e., the information

bits were fed directly into the accumulator without repeat-

ing and permuting). Then, all paths through the trellis from

Г—Вј Вј

to

Г—Г’Вј

represent

valid

information

words,

and

the

labels

along the path represent valid code words. Furthermore, the

cost of the path is the Hamming distance between the code

word and the received word. A simple shortest-path compu-

tation thus yields the ML information word. The decoding

algorithm we just described is exactly the Viterbi algorithm

[16, 9, 19].

However, if we tried to apply the Viterbi algorithm to RA

codes, we would run into problems. For example, suppose

Вҫ, and let Гң ВҪ be some arbitrary information bit,

where

Гҳ Гҳ . Since Гң is input into the accumulator at

time Гҳ and time Гҳ, any path through the trellis ГҢ that repre-

sents a valid encoding would use a switch-edge at time step
Гҳ, and at time step Гҳ. In general, any path representing a

valid encoding would do the same thing (as in switch levels
Вҫ or remain on the same level) at every time step Гҳ . We
say a path is agreeable for Гң if it has this property for Гң .

An agreeable path is a path that is agreeable for all Гң . Any

path that is not agreeable does not represent a valid encod-

ing, and thus finding the lowest cost path is not guaranteed

to return a valid encoder path.

What we would like to find is the lowest cost agreeable

path

from

Г—Вј Вј

to

Г—Г’Вј .

We

give

a

simple

integer

program

based

on min-cost flow that solves this problem.

RALP: Repeat-Accumulate Linear Program. For each
node Г— in the trellis, define ГҶВҙГ—Вө to be the set of outgoing edges from Г—, and ВӯВҙГ—Вө to be the set of incoming edges.
Our integer program contains variables Вҙ Вө Вҫ Вј ВҪ for
every edge in the trellis, and free variables Гһ for every
information bit Гң , Вҫ Вј Г’ ВҪ . The relaxation
RALP of the integer program simply relaxes the flow
variables such that Вј Вҙ Вө ВҪ. RALP is defined as
follows:

RALP:

Г‘Г’ ГҲ
ВҫГҢ

Вҙ Вө Г—Гҳ

ГҲ ВҙВө ВҪ

(1)

ВҫВӯВҙГ—Г’Вј Вө

ГҲ ВҙВө ГҲ ВҙВө

ВҫВӯВҙГ—Вө

ВҫГҶВҙГ—Вө

Г—ВҫГҢГ’

Г—Вј Вј

Г—Г’Вј

(2)

ВҙГ—ВјГҳ Г—ГҳВҪВ·ВҪВө В· ВҙГ—ВҪГҳ Вө Г—ГҳВјВ·ВҪ Гһ

Вҫ Гҳ Вҫ (3)

Вј Вҙ Вө ВҪ ВҫГҢ

RALP is very close to being a simple min-cost flow LP:

Equation (1) gives a demand of one unit of flow at the sink
node Г—Г’Вј , and equation (2) is a flow conservation constraint
at each node. Unique to RALP are the agreeability con-

straints (3). These constraints say that a feasible flow must

Вҫ have, for all

, the same amount Гһ of total flow on

Вҫ switch-edges at every segment Гҳ . Note that these con-

straints also imply a total flow of ВҪ Гһ on remain-edges at

Вҫ every segment Гҳ . We will refer to the flow values of

a feasible solution Вҙ ГһВө to RALP as an agreeable flow. The

free variables Гһ do not play a role in the objective function,

but rather enforce constraints among the flow values.

Using RALP as a decoder. A decoding algorithm based

on RALP is mal solution according to

aВҙths eВЈforeГһllcВөoewtiovseR. dARwuLonPr,dasneГҡt.LtiIPnf-gsotВЈhlveisecriontstotesgfiornandl,thtoheuetepodupgtteiГһs-

as the decoded information word Гң. If not, output вҖңerror.вҖқ

We will refer to this algorithm as the RALP decoder.

All integral solutions to RALP represent agreeable paths,

aitemngdpraltilhe,usthsthevanatliifdВЈtheisenctohopedtiilmnogwasleosstoflcsuootsimot naegirnВЈefeotaorbmRleaAtpiLoaPnthiw,saoinnrddf.aГһcTtrehinpis--

resents the ML code word. Thus the RALP decoder has the

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Г…Г„ certificate property: whenever it outputs an information
word, it is guaranteed to be the ML information word. No standard iterative decoding techniques are known to have this property.

3 A Coding Theorem for RA(2) Codes

In this section we state our main structural theorem

(proven in section 4). We then show how this theorem sug-

gests a design for an interleaver for RA(2) codes, and prove

an inverse polynomial upper bound on the RALP decoderвҖҷs

word error probability when we use this interleaver.

Our main structural theorem states that the RALP de-

coder succeeds (returns the original information word) if

and only if a particular graph does not contain a certain

negative-cost subgraph, generalizing the role of a negative-

cost cycle in min-cost flow. The graph has a structure that

depends on the interleaver and weights that depend on the

errors made by the channel. We note that an analogous the-

orem holds for any RA( ) code, or any turbo-like code for

that matter. This is discussed further in Section 5.

For the remainder of this section we deal exclusively

Вҫ with RA(2) codes. This means that each set

has

two elements, and the agreeability constraints may be ex-

pressed as, Вҫ ,

ГҳГҳ,

Гһ

ВҙГ—ВјГҳ Г—ВҪГҳВ·ВҪВөВ· ВҙГ—ГҳВҪ Вө Г—ВјГҳВ·ВҪ

ВҙГ—ГҳВј

Г—ВҪ
ГҳВ·ВҪ

ВөВ·

ВҙГ—ВҪГҳ

Вө Г—Вј
ГҳВ·ВҪ

The Promenade. Let

ВҙГҺ

Вө be a weighted undi-

rected graph with Г’
line, where the cost

nodes Вҙ
Гҳ ГҳВ·ВҪ

Вј
of

edge

Г’
Вҙ

Гҳ

ВҪВө

connected in a
Вө ГҳВ·ВҪ is ВҪ if the

ГҳГҳ bit of the transmitted code word is flipped by the channel

(ГҡГҳ ГқГҳ), and В·ВҪ otherwise. Call these edges the Hamil-

tonian edges, since they make a Hamiltonian path. Note

that these costs are not known to the decoder, since they de-

Вҫ pend on the transmitted code word. For each Гҳ Гҳ

,

add an edge between node Гҳ and node Гҳ with cost Вј. Call

these edges the matching edges. Note that is a line plus a

matching.

Define a promenade to be a circuit in that begins and

ends in the same node, and may repeat edges as long as it

does not travel along the same edge twice in a row. The

cost of a promenade is the total cost of the edges visited

during the path, including repeats (i.e., repeats are not free).

Formally, a promenade is a path Г… ВҙГ”Вј Г”ВҪ Г” Г…

Вҫ Г”ВјВө in
for all

that begins and ends at the
Вј Г… ВҪ ,Г” Г”

of a promenade Г… is Г…

ГҲГ…
Вј

same node Г”Вј, where
В·Вҫ Г‘Г“ Г… . The cost
ВҪ Г” Г” В·ВҪ . We are

now ready to state our main structural theorem.

Theorem 1 The RALP decoder succeeds if all promenades in have positive cost. The RALP decoder fails if there is a promenade in with negative cost.

When there is a zero-cost promenade, the RALP decoder may or may not decode correctly (this is a degenerate case when the LP has multiple integral optima). We will prove Theorem 1 in Section 4, but first we show what it suggests about interleaver design, and how it can used to prove a bound on the probability of error of our algorithm.
Recall that every Hamiltonian edge of has cost ВҪ
with some small constant probability Г”, so promenades with
many edges are less likely to have a total negaitve cost (at least every other edge of a promenade is Hamiltonian). The girth of a graph is the length of its shortest simple cycle. It is not hard to see that every promenade contains at least one simple cycle, and so graphs with high girth will have promenades with many edges. This suggests that what we want out of an interleaver, if we are to use the RALP decoder, is one that produces a graph with high girth.
We use a result of ErdoВЁs and Sachs [7] and Sauer [15] (see also [4]) to make a graph that is a line plus a matching, and has high girth. Their construction allows us, in cubic
time, to start with an Г’-node cycle and build a 3-regular
graph with girth ГҗГ“ Г’ that contains the original cycle.
We remove an edge from the original cycle to obtain a line plus a matching with girth at least as high. To derive the interleaver, we simply examine the edges added by the construction. We will refer to this interleaver as . This is the same construction used by Bazzi et al. [2] to show a
ВҪ Вҫ ГҗГ“ Г’ lower bound on the minimum distance of an RA
code using this interleaver.

Theorem 2 [2] The rate 1/2 - Г“ВҙВҪВө RA code with block

length Г’, using as an interleaver, has minimum distance

of

at

least

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’.

Error Bound. We would like to bound the probability that contains a promenade with cost less than or equal to zero,
thus bounding the probability that the RALP decoder fails. However, there are many promenades in , so even a tight bound on the probability that a particular one is negative is insufficient. Furthermore, the fact that promenades may repeat edges creates dependencies that interfere with using standard Chernoff bound analysis. Consequently, we need to find a simpler structure that is present when there is a promenade with cost less than or equal to zero. In the following, a simple path or cycle means a path or cycle that does not repeat edges. For clarity (to avoid floors and ceil-
ings), we will assume Г’ is a power of 8, though our argu-
ments do not rely on this assumption.

Lemma 3 If Г’ Вҫ , and there exists a promenade Г… in

, Г… Вј, then there exists a simple path or cycle in

,

Вј,

that

contains

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’ Hamiltonian edges.

Proof: Let Г…
promenade in ,

ВҙГ”Вј Г”ВҪ
Г…

Вј.

Г” Г… ВҪ Г” Г… Г”ВјВө be a
Since Г… contains a cycle,

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Г… ГҗГ“ Г’. Contract every matching edge in Г… to obain

a tour ГҖ Вҙ Вј ВҪ

ГҖ

Вј . No two matching

edges share an endpoint, so at worst every other edge of the

Вҫ tour
ГҖ
Вј

is

a

mГҲatcГҖhГҖВјinВҪg(eodpgeer.atTiВ·ohВҪnus.s,oWГҖn einkdniocВҪВҫweГ…s tohfat

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’. Let
В·Вҫ ,
ГҖ are

performed mod ГҖ ); if this was not the case, then there

would be a cycle in of length 3, violating our assump-

tion that Г’ Вҫ , since the girth of is at least ГҗГ“ Г’.

Let ГҖ Вҙ

whose edge set

ГҲ

В·

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’

ВҪ

В·

ВҪ Вҫ

contains

В·ВҪ .

ГҗГ“ Г’Вө be the subsequence of ГҖ

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’ edges, and let

ГҖ

We know that ГҖ has no repeated

edges (i.e., it is a simple path or a simple cycle); if it were
not, then if we added the matching edges back into ГҖ we
would get a path in with at most ГҗГ“ Г’ edges that repeated

an edge, which would imply a cycle in of length less than
ГҗГ“ Г’.

NedogSteeinotchfeaГҖtalliГҖsmcaotcuhnitnВҙegГҲd eidnГҖgВјtehsВҪehsauГҖvme

Since ГҖ

Г… Вј, at least

zero cost, Г…

ГҖ.

Вө

ВҙВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

exactly

Г’Вө, since every

Вҙ

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’Вө times.

one simple path or cycle

ГҖ ВЈ must have ГҖ ВЈ Вј. Set to be the simple path or

cycle in obtained by expanding the zero-cost matching
edges in the path or cycle ГҖ ВЈ .

Theorem 1, along with the above construction of and

a

union

bound

over

the

paths

of

length

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’ of

, gives

us an analytical bound on the probability of error when de-

coding with the RALP decoder:

Theorem 4 For any ВҜ Вј, the rate ВҪ Вҫ Г“ВҙВҪВө RA code
with block length Г’ using as an interleaver decoded with

the RALP decoder under the binary symmetric channel with

Вҫ crossover probability Г”

ВҙВҜВ·ВҙГҗГ“ Вҫ Вө ВҫВө has a word er-

ror probability ГҲГӣ of at most Г’ ВҜ.

Proof: By Theorem 1, and Lemma 3, the RALP decoder

succeeds if all simple paths or cycles in

with

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’

Hamiltonian edges have positive cost. We claim that there

ВЎ are at most Г’

ВҝВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’

different

simple

paths

that

have

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’ Hamiltonian edges.

To see this, consider building

a path by choosing a node, and building a simple path from

that node. At each point, there are at most three choices for

the next Hamiltonian edge.

The remainder of the proof is a union bound over the

paths of with ticular path with

ВҪВҫВҫВҪГҗГҗГ“Г“

nian edge has cost

Г’ Hamiltonian edges. Let be a parГ’ Hamiltonian edges. Each Hamilto-
ВҪ or В·ВҪ, so at least half of the Hamil-

tonian edges must have cost ВҪ in order for

Вј. Each

Hamiltonian edge probability that

had

cost
Вј is at

ВҪ with ВҪ
most ВҪВҫ

pГҗГҗГ“Г“robГ’Г’ВЎabГ”iВҪliГҗtГ“y

Г”,
Г’.

so By

the the

union bound,

ГҲГӣ

ВҝГ’ ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г’

ВҪ ГҗГ“ Г’

Г” ВҪ ГҗГ“ Г’

Г’ Г’ Вҫ ВҜ Г’ ВҪВ·

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Вҝ

ВҪ Вҫ

Вҙ

В·

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Вҫ Вө ГҗГ“

Г’ ВҜ ВҪВ·

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

ВҝВ·

ВҪ Вҫ

Вҙ

В·

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

ВҫВө

Г’ВҜ

4 Proof of Theorem 1
Theorem 1 The RALP decoder succeeds if all promenades in have positive cost. The RALP decoder fails if there is a promenade in with negative cost.
In this section we prove Theorem 1. We assume a working knowledge of the min-cost flow problem, specifically the notions of a residual graph, a circulation and a path decomposition [1].
Let Вј be the unit flow along the path ГҲГң taken by the en-
coder. The RALP decoder will succeed if Вј is the unique optimal solution to RALP. The RALP decoder will fail if Вј is not an optimal solution to RALP. To prove the theorem, we will first establish conditions under which Вј is optimal that are very similar to the conditions under which a normal flow is optimal; specifically, we will show that Вј is opti-
mal if and only if the residual graph ГҢ Вј does not contain a
certain negative-cost subgraph. We will then show a cost-
preserving correspondence between these subgraphs in ГҢ Вј
and promenades in , the Hamiltonian line graph on which Theorem 1 is based.
Agreeable Circulations. Suppose that is some feasible flow for a normal min-cost flow problem (without agree-
ability constraints) on an arbitrary graph ГҠ. Let be the cost of , and ГҠ be the residual graph of . A solution is optimal iff ГҠ does not contain a negative-cost circulation.
Now consider the agreeable flow problem (RALP) on the
trellis ГҢ , and the solution Вј to RALP. Define the residual igNScniriornaГҢcwpcu.ehlcaTbГҢothionoetВјsnhicdiinerВјcВјrtuhsaleonamdtsiaoemanВјlosetoohВјmbeoeraybnfeentyhВјaesesriintbaahglsГҢeerienaaВјegganhrrboeeaieesrlmaaictbbyoailsllecitmtoflynionscwt-oВјrcanoisnsВјttrtsafl,inotВјhtwseВј...
We call such a circulation an agreeable circulation.
Lemma 5 The RALP decoder succeeds if all agreeable cir-
culations in ГҢ Вј have positive cost.
PtoukwnnpВЈroiotoqiwomaufgea:trhВјleSo.aseputSoatpilbinupmlctoeiaeВјsofllenostwohtoВјlВјesu. tRRiIisotAAanigsLLrtPPcoe.lВЈeedRCaaebrAocltoneLhds,aPiesdt.ВјoretLhf,raeeaВјittnlhsisduse, mВЈatchgieorrnecВЈreudaliabВјfВјtfliieeosbr.neennВјoscto,Вјemtwhoeeef

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Г—Вј

Г—Вј

Г—ВҪ

Г—ВҪ

Г—Вј

Seg.

Seg.

Figure 2. An example of a cycle ГӣВҙ

Вө in the

residual graph ГҢ Вј . The cycle (in bold) contains a subpath

(straight bold lines) backwards along residual edges of ГҲГң, where ГҲГң Вҙ Г—Вј Г—ВҪ Г—ВҪ Г—Вј Г—Вј Вө. It also contains the complimentary forwards path from Г—Вј to Г—Вј (curved bold

lines).

Lemma 6 The RALP decoder fails if there exists an agree-
able circulation in ГҢ Вј with negative cost.

PLerot ofВЈ:
similar Since

ВЈaLreigstuamВјВјfВ·eebnaetsitaВјbh.sleeSincisniorLcclueeumtliaomtnioaВјtno5i,RnAВјГҢВЈ,LiВјPs

wВЈith

negative Вј.

cost. By a

an agreeable flow.

with cost less than

Вј, Вј is not optimal, thus the RALP decoder fails.

Agreeable Circulations and Promenades. In the remain-

der of the proof, we show a correspondence between agree-
able circulations in ГҢ Вј and promenades in . We first define a special class of cycles in ГҢ Вј and show that the cost

of a cycle cycle in this class is the same as that of a cor-

responding subpath in . Then we show that every simple
cycle in ГҢ Вј is from this class. We conclude the proof by

arguing that agreeable circulations always contain sets of

these cycles that correspond to promenades in with the

same cost.

Let Вҙ Вө,
Hamiltonian edges in

, be the path Вҙ . Now let ГӣВҙ

Вө,

В·ВҪ

Вө of
, be a cer-

tain cycle in ГҢ Вј, as depicted in Figure 2. We define ГӣВҙ Вө

formally as follows. Let ВҙВ« Вј Вј В« ВҪ В« Г’ ВјВө

be the sequence of states of the accumulator when encod-

ing
В«

Гң

(nВјoteВ«thaВ·t ГқВҪГҳ

В« Гҳ В· ВҪ ). For example, in Figure 2, ВҪ В« В·Вҫ ВҪ В« Вј В« В·ВҪ

ВҪ. We have that ГҲГң ВҙГ—ВјВ« Вј Г—ВҪВ« ВҪ

Г—Г’В«

Г’
ВҪ

ВҪ

Г—Г’В« Г’ Вө,

the path in ГҢ taken by the encoder. In ГҢ Вј, all edges

along ГҲГң have a unit residual capacity going backwards

tTohweacrdyscleГ—ВјВјГӣ, ВҙsincВөe

Вј is the unit
in ГҢ consists of

flow across path ГҲГң.
the backward subpath

ВҙГ— Г— В« В·ВҪ В« Вҙ В·ВҪВө

Вө Г— Г— В« В·ВҪ В« Вҙ В·ВҪВө

, and the forward subpath

ВҙГ—В«

Г—ВҪ В« В·ВҪ

For

В·ВҪ

Г—ВҪ В«

, we let Вҙ

Вө Вҙ Г—В« В·ВҪ В·ВҪ

Вө.

Вө and ГӣВҙ

Вө

ГӣВҙ Вө. We will also use the notation Гӣ to represent a

circulation in ГҢ that sends units of flow around a residual

ГҸ ГҸ cycle Гӣ. For a
the circulation

sГҲet of
ГӣВҫГҸ

cycles
Гӣ.

Гӣ

in

ГҢ

Вј,

we say that

is

Claim 7 Вҙ Вө = ГӣВҙ Вө , Вј

Г’.

Proof: The cost of the cycle ГӣВҙ Вө is the sum of the costs
of its residual edges:

ГӣВҙ Вө

Г—В«

Г—ВҪ В« В·ВҪ В·ВҪ

В·

ВҪ

Г—ГҳВҪ

В«Гҳ

Г—ВҪ В« ГҳВ·ВҪ
ГҳВ·ВҪ

Гҳ В·ВҪ

В· Г—ВҪ В«

Г—В« В·ВҪ В·ВҪ

Г—ГҳВ« Гҳ Г—ГҳВ«В·ГҳВҪВ·ВҪ
Гҳ

Let be the indicator vector for errors occurring in the chan-

nel. In other words, for all Гҳ, Вј Гҳ Г’, let Гҳ

ВЎ ГҡГҳ, and Гҳ Вј otherwise. Note that every edge Вҙ

ВЎ in ГҢ entering a node on ГҲГң has

ВЎ ВЎ every edge Вҙ

Вө Г—ВҪ В« ГҳВ·ВҪ
ГҳВ·ВҪ

has

Г—ГҳВ«В·ГҳГ—ВҪВ·ГҳВҪВ·ВҪ ВҪВ«

Гҳ. ГҳВ·ВҪ

ВҪГ—iГҳВ«fВ·ГҳГқВҪВ·ГҳВҪ Вө
Similarly,
ВҪ Гҳ.

Thus we may conclude

ГӣВҙ Вө

ВҪ

ВҙВҪ Вө В·

ВҪ ГҳВ·

Гҳ В·ВҪ

ВҪ
ВҪ ВҫГҳ
Гҳ
ВҙВө

Equation (4) follows from the definition of .

Гҳ Гҳ
(4)

Claim 8 For every simple cycle in ГҢ Вј,

some Вј

Г’.

ГӣВҙ Вө for

Proof: Let Г—В« be the node on the cycle that is the вҖңclos-

ensotdвҖқetoГ—В«Г—ВјГ’m, ui.set.,be Г—В« on the cycle

is maximum among all nodes on . The
on ГҲГң; otherwise, the outgoing edge from
would go forwards in the trellis to some

node from from

Г—Г—ГҲВӯВ¬ГңВ·taoВҪt.Г—sFВ«oom(ltlheoawntoddoeebsГ—aВӯnc.oktTwrhaeerudsosenaalylnorneedgmgГҲeaГң)iniusinnfgtoirlswiimtadrpdilveienprgtahethes

trellis along the edges that complete the cycle ГӣВҙ Вө.

Lemma 9 If there is a promenade in with negative cost,
there is an agreeable circulation in ГҢ Вј with negative cost.

Proof: Let Г… be a promenade in with negative cost. Let

ВҪ be the maximum number of occurrences of any sin-

gle Hamiltonian edge in Г… . If the matching edges along

Г… are removed, what remains is a multiset of subpaths

of the Hamiltonian path of , of the form Вҙ Вө. Let

ГҚ

Вҙ Вј ВјВө

Вҙ ГҚ ГҚ Вө be this set of subpaths,

ordered by their occurrence during a traversal of Г… . In

other words, one may traverse Г… by following the path

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ВҙВј
path

ВҙВј

Вө,
ГҚ

ГҸ Let

matching edge Вҙ

ГҚ

Вө, and ГӣВҙ Вј

finally
ВјВө

Вј ВҪВө, path
matching edge
ГӣВҙ ГҚ ГҚ Вө

Вҙ Вҙ

ВҪ
ГҚ

ВҪВө,Вј Вө

be the set

, of

ГҸ corresponding cycles in ГҢ Вј. No edge in has more than

one unit of flow sent across it (by the definition of ), so
ГҸ is a feasible circulation in ГҢ Вј.

ГҸ Since all the matching edges

has negative cost, we have Г…

Therefore that

by

Claim
Вј.

7,

ГҲ

ГҸ
Вј

of
ГӣВҙ

ГҲhaГҚve
Вј

zero
Вҙ

cost,

and
Вө

Г…
Вј.

Вө Вј. It follows

ГҸ It remains to show that is agreeable. Consider the

ГҸ first cycle in , namely ГӣВҙ Вј ВјВө. As Figure 2 shows,

the only agreeability constraints violated by sending flow

around this cycle are at trellis segments Вј and Вј; all seg-

ments in-between have the same amount of flow on switch-

edges as they did before.

ГҚ Вҫ Assume
so ГӣВҙ Вј
segment Вј

wlog that ГҲГң
.ВјВөSiinnccereВҙaseВјs

has a remain-edge at segment Вј, the flow on switch-edges by at
ВҪ Вө is a matching edge (by def-

inition of ), Вј ВҪ

. Therefore ГҲГң must obey

the agreeability constraint at segments Вј and ВҪ; in other

words, it must It follows that

also
ГӣВҙ

have
Вө ВҪ ВҪ

a remain-edge increases the

at segment ВҪ. flow on switch-

edges by at segment ВҪ. Therefore the agreeability con-
straint for information bit Гң is preserved by the circulation
ГӣВҙ Вј ВјВө В· ГӣВҙ ВҪ ВҪВө, and the only violated agreeability

constraints are at segments Вј and ВҪ. A symmetric argu-

ГҸ ment holds if ГҲГң has a switch-edge at segment Вј. By repeatedly applying the same argument along , we

ГҸ may conclude that the circulation only violates agree-

Вҫ ability constraints at Вј and ГҸ . Since Вј ГҸ

,

ГҸ we have that does not violate any agreeability con-

straints.

Lemma 10 If all promenades in have positive cost, all
agreeable circulations in ГҢ Вј have positive cost.

oPfroВјoВј.f:CSВјou.npLspiedotesre

Вј is an agreeable circulation in ГҢ Вј where

be the gcd of all the values of the cycle decomposition of

Вјflwowheorne

edges every

ГҸ cycle has units of flow around it. Let be the collection

of cycles in this decomposition. By claim 8, every cycle
in ГҢ Вј is of the form ГӣВҙ Вө. For all Гҳ, Вј Гҳ Г’, let
Гҳ ГӣВҙ Вө Вҫ ГҸ Гҳ Г“Г– Гҳ .
For some set of cycles ГӣВҙ Вө, we use the notation
Вҫ to denote the flow ГӣВҙ Вө for some arbitrary cycle Вҫ Вҫ Вҫ ГҸ ГҲ ГӣoferВјВҙcВҙВҙCtГ—sГ—ВҫГҳВҪoГҳВјtnhГҳГ—ВөГҳsГ—e,ГҳВјiГҳВҪВ·daВ·ВҪeghВҪВҙВөrrВөaГ—.e.,ssГҳВјeoaaBmnГ—beudВҪГҳieВ·clniazВҪtiueytВөsrsВ·coeoofuenflnasocitВҙtrhwsГҳГ—aiВҪГҳocnoГҳyntnГ—sc.ВјГҳtolВ·ahenLteВҪeesГӣВөoet.oВҙtgIfГһhmfГҳethГңreenoВөetnsdeg.ВјВјВҙe,TГ—astnВјГҳhhВҙdueГ—Г—onsГҳВјГҳВҪnВ·,flГ—oyВҪГһВҪГҳrwВөВ·ГҳaaiВҪВ·fllВө-ll

add to ГһГҳ in the above sum. If Гң ВҪ, then has on either ВҙГ—ГҳВј Вө Г—ВҪГҳВ·ВҪ or ВҙГ—ВјГҳ Г—ВҪГҳВ·ВҪВө, and contributes
sum. Therefore,

flow to the

ГһГҳ

Гҳ ГңВј Гҳ ГңВҪ

Define ГһГҳ similarly. By the same logic,

ГһГҳ

Гҳ Гҳ

ГңВј ГңВҪ

Вҫ Since
that

Вј is agreeable, ГһГҳ

Гҳ

Гҳ . For all

Гҳ ГҳГһГҳ.

Thus we may conclude , create a one-to-one

correspondence between the members of Гҳ and Гҳ (we can

do this because the sets are the same size).

Create an auxiliary multigraph ГҖ with a node Гҡ ГӣВҙ Вө

for each ГӣВҙ Вө Вҫ ГҸ. Add edges according to the corre-

Вҫ spondence we just created for each Гҳ Гҳ

. Note that if

ГӣВҙГҳ ГҳВө Вҫ ГҸ, it would be in both
correspondence may assign Гҡ ГӣВҙГҳ

Гҳ and
ГҳВө to

Гҳ. In itself;

this case, the we represent

this by a self-loop on Гҡ ГӣВҙГҳ ГҳВө .

Each ГӣВҙ Вө Вҫ ГҸ is in exactly two sets:

and

. Therefore, ГҖ is 2-regular, a collection of simple

cycles (where a node with a self-loop is considered a cy-

cle). For a cycle Вҫ , let ГҸ

ГӣВҙ Вө Вҫ ГҸ

Гҡ ГӣВҙ

ГҲ tutes a

ВЈ
ГҲ

ВҫВҫ

ГӣВҙ

We

bpГҲ ВөuВҫВөaiГҸrlstdВҫiuВҫtГҸicaВЈohnprtГӣohof.amВҙ.tГҸeSГҲ niTnaВөihdcneeВҫetoГҸГ…sesВјtu.ВЈВјbinsГҸets,Вјbs,yotfhВјoe.lВјrleowIВҫmtinГҲ ufogstlltoВҫbhwГҸeecsoscnoytsmhctaliee-t

Вҫ . We begin with an
the edges of the path
edge in ГҖ to a node

arbitrary

ГҡВҙГӣВјВҙ

ВјВө
ВҪ

node Гҡ ГӣВҙ
to Г… . We
ВҪВө , where

Вө Вј Вј
then
Вј

, and add

follow an

ВҪ

,

by definition of ГҖ. When we follow this edge, we add the

matching edge Вҙ Вј ВҪВө to Г… , then the path Вҙ ВҪ ВҪВө. We

continue this way until we complete the cycle , and thus

close the promenade Г… .
ГҚ Let be the set of subpaths Вҙ Вө we added to Г… while

ГҲ following
Вҙ ВөВҫГҚ
we have
Thus Г… is

.
Г…

ВҙMatcГҲ Вөh.inSВҙginecdВөeВҫgГҚeГҲs ГӣhВҙaВҙve

zero
ВөВҫВөГҸ

cost, so

ВЈ

ГӣВҙ Вј by

Г…
Вө
Claim

Вј,
7.

a negative-cost promenade, and we have a con-

tradiction.

Theorem 1 is implied by Lemmas 5, 6, 9 and 10.

5 Generalization to Concatenated Codes

In this section we give a generic LP to decode a repetition code concatenated with any other inner rate-1 code, with an interleaver between them. The LP can be generalized further to apply to any set of parallel or serially concatenated codes of any rate, connected by interleavers. We defer this

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

general form to a later version, though it is not difficult to

derive.

We model the inner code using a simple graph (trellis)

that represents each input string by a path from a start node

to an end node. Any rate-1 binary code can be modeled

this way, though for some codes, the trellis could require

exponential size. So, the LP is only of polynomial size if

the code can be described by a polynomial-sized trellis. Any

convolutional code (see [19]) has a simple linear-size trellis.

Let trellis ГҢ be a directed graph with the following prop-

erties: (i) There is a specified start node Г—Вј. For all other nodes Г— in ГҢ , all paths from Г—Вј to Г— have equal length. Let Г„Гҳ be the set of nodes distance Гҳ from Г—Вј. (ii) Nodes in Г„Г’

have no outgoing edges. All other nodes have two outgoing

edges: an вҖңinput-0вҖқ edge, and an вҖңinput-1вҖқ edge. Let ГӢГҳ be the set of input-1 edges leaving nodes in Г„Гҳ. (iii) Each edge

is labeled with a code bit Вј or ВҪ.

Let be a permutation

Вј Г’ВҪ

ГҳlnwooВјofoowdflreedttnhhГ—ГңgeeВјtвҖңoГ’hpoifafnГ’tlpГҢhe,un,,ВҪwtgff-oot1h.hllвҖқelloroTeewwdhagГңestaehГҳВјcfpeioofalвҖңdtlГңihoenГҳВјГңwipВҙnsГҢu.ГҢtВҪ-(0ВҪ.iuВҙ)вҖқВөCГҳsВөLeieondenngtgcc.eГңobaditВјi(tefeisbnisГң)efarГҳВјatFaoenmrbtohiimnnГңeВјfa,Вјol:rtaaryhobmnenesdatlsrsstftiitoanooerlngpn-t

the edges of the path to obtain a code word Гқ of length Г’.

We define the linear program TCLP as follows. As in
RALP, we have a flow varaible Вҙ Вө for each edge in the
trellis ГҢ . We also have free variables Гһ for each information bit Гң . The cost of an edge entering a node from Г„Гҳ

is the Hamming distance between the label on the edge and

the the

received bit ГҡГҳ.
set of outgoing

For each node
edges from Г—,

Г— in ГҢ , define ГҶВҙГ—Вө to and ВӯВҙГ—Вө to be the set

be of

incoming edges. For all Вҫ Вј

ВҪ , let be the

set of indicies to which information bit Гң was repeated and

permuted, i.e.,

Вҙ Вө Вҙ В· ВҪВө

Let

ВҫВј

ВҪ.

Вҙ В· ВҪВө .

TCLP:

Г‘Г’ ГҲ
ВҫГҢ

ВҙВө

ГҲ ВҙВө ВҪ
ВҫГҶВҙГ—Вј Вө

ГҲ ВҙВө ГҲ ВҙВө

ВҫВӯВҙГ—Вө

ВҫГҶВҙГ—Вө

ГҲ
ВҫГӢГҳ

ВҙВө

Гһ

Вј ВҙВө ВҪ

Г—Гҳ
Г— Вҫ ГҢ Г— Г—Вј Г— Вҫ Г„Г’ Вҫ ГҳВҫ ВҫГҢ

A decoder based on TCLP has the ML certificate property for the same reasons the RALP decoder did. It is also not hard to derive a generalized вҖңpromenadeвҖқ structure for

TCLP, and prove a theorem analogous to Theorem 1 for this class of codes. The challenge then is to prove that for some interleaver, it is unlikely that there will be a вҖңpromenadeвҖқ with cost less than or equal to zero. It would be interesting to see a general construction to derive interleavers for this class of codes.
6 Future Work

Improving the Running Time The obvious drawback of our approach to decoding is the complexity of solving a linear program. Even though interior point methods run in polynomial-time (and the simplex algorithm often faster), most applications of error-correcting codes require a more efficient decoding algorithm. There are two possible solutions to this problem, and both have some important unanswered questions.
The first option is to try and solve RALP or TCLP combinatorially. For the case of RA(2) codes, the resulting agreeable flow problem can be reduced to an instance of normal min-cost flow, and thus yields a more efficient combinatorial algorithm. We leave the details for a later version. It is an interesting open question as to whether combinato-
rial solutions exist for RA( ), Вҝ, or other codes.
The agreeable flow problem has a more general formulation that could apply to areas outside of coding theory. We define the min-cost agreeable flow problem as follows:

Min-Cost Agreeable Flow: Given a directed network

ВҙГҺ Вө, a source Г— Вҫ ГҺ and a sink Гҳ Вҫ ГҺ

with a demand В«, capacities Гҷ

ГҠВ· and costs

ГҠ on the edges, and a sequence of edge sets

В«-unit

ВҪ
flow

ВҪ

Вҫ
from

Вҫ
Г— to

Гҳ,

Г‘ where

Г‘Вҙ

,

find

a minimum-cost
Вө, the total flow

going through arcs in is equal to the total flow going

through arcs in .

Any LP with a constraint matrix made up of В·ВҪ ВҪ
can be expressed using only the agreeability constraints of the above formulation, so we would not expect to be able to solve Min-Cost Agreeable Flow combinatorially in its full generality. However, the specialized structure of RALP or TCLP may allow a combinatorial solution. In general, it is an interesting question to determine how the min-cost agreeable flow problem must be restricted in order to make it solvable combinatorially.
The second option for improving efficiency is to use an iterative decoder. We showed (with Wainwright [8]) that the iterative TRMP algorithm of Wainwright, Jaakkola and Willsky [18], when applied to the problem of decoding turbo-like codes, outputs exactly the solution to TCLP. We have done some testing of this algorithm applied to various

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

codes, and it seems to converge reasonably well. However, it is not known whether this algorithm converges in general, or how long it takes to converge when it does.
Improving the Error Bounds. The RA code with rate
ВҪ Вҫ Г“ВҙВҪВө that we were able to analyze completely is not
the best code experimentally in the literature. We are currently trying to understand the combinatorics behind more complicated codes such as a rate 1/3 RA code, and the classic turbo code (parallel concatenated convolutional code). In order to provide better bounds for these codes, we need to prove that negative-cost вҖңpromenadeвҖқ-like subgraphs are unlikely. Theorem 1 suggested a design for an interleaver
for the rate ВҪ Вҫ Г“ВҙВҪВө RA code. It would be interesting
to see if other design suggestions can be derived for more complex turbo-like codes.
Interpreting Iterative Decoders as Optimization Algorithms. We have already begun the work of connecting the world of iterative decoders to our LP decoder [8]. However, preliminary testing suggests that BP algorithms outperform our LP decoder. The reason for this difference is not well understood. If we were able to interpret standard BP decoders as global optimization routines, perhaps we would be able to bound their error rate using the same techniques.
Using the Polytope for ML Decoding. We observed through experimentation that the integrality gap of TCLP applied to RA codes was usually very good, and so the solution to TCLP provided a good lower bound for use in a branch-and-bound search for the ML code word. Although not guaranteed to run in polynomial time, our branch-andbound search finished much sooner than a naive ML decoding algorithm would have. More details of these experiments will appear in a later version.
More applications of LP-based decoding. Our analysis of the error probability is over the random coin flips of the channel; in the context of TCLP, this translates to the probability, in a fixed polytope, over a random direction of the objective function, that the LP solution was integral. It would be interesting to write LPs for other codes (such as lowdensity parity check codes or expander-based codes) and apply the same sort of analysis. Perhaps this sort of analysis could have other applications outside of coding theory.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Piotr Indyk, Martin Wainwright and Matthias Ruhl for helpful discussions. We also thank Dan Spielman, David Forney, Ibrahim Abou-Faycal, Matteo Frigo, Vanu Bose, John Chapin, Andrew Russell, Madhu Sudan, Ryan OвҖҷDonnell, Muriel Medard and Matt Levine for their comments, suggestions, and support.

References
[1] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin. Network Flows. Prentice-Hall, 1993.
[2] L. Bazzi, M. Mahdian, S. Miller, and D. Spielman. The minimum distance of turbo-like codes. manuscript, 2001.
[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima. Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: turbocodes. Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communication (ICC), Geneva, Switzerland, pages 1064вҖ“1070, May 1993.
[4] N. Biggs. Constructions for cubic graphs with large girth. Electronic Journal of Combinatorics, 5(A1), 1998.
[5] M. Breiling and J. Huber. Upper bound on the minimum distance of turbo codes using a combinatorial approach, 2001.
[6] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece. Coding theorems for вҖҳturbo-likeвҖҷ codes. Proc. 36th Annual Allerton Conference on Comm., Control, and Computing, pages 201вҖ“210, Sept 1998.
[7] P. ErdoВЁs and H. Sachs. Regulare graphen gegebene taillenweite mit minimaler knotenzahl. Wiss. Z. Univ. Hall Martin Luther Univ. HalleвҖ“Wittenberg Math.вҖ“ Natur.Reine, 12:251вҖ“257, 1963.
[8] J. Feldman, D. Karger, and M. Wainwright. Linear programming based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches. Proc. 40th Annual Allerton Conference on Comm., Control, and Computing, October 2002.
[9] G. Forney. Convolutional codes II: Maximum likelihood decoding. Inform. Control, 25:222вҖ“266, 1974.
[10] N. Kahale and R. Urbanke. On the minimum distance of parallel and serially concatenated codes. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 1998.
[11] F. MacWilliams and N. Sloane. The Theory of Error Correcting Codes. North-Holland, 1981.
[12] R. McEliece, D.MacKay, and J. Cheng. Turbo decoding as an instance of PearlвҖҷs belief propagation algorithm. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 16(2):140вҖ“ 152, 1998.
[13] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke. Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density paritycheck codes. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, 47(2):619вҖ“637, 2001.
[14] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke. The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 47(2), February 2001.
[15] N. Sauer. Extremaleigenschaften regularer graphen gegebener taillenweite, iandii. Sitzungsberichte Osterreich. Acad. Wiss. Math. Natur. Kl., S-BII(176):27вҖ“43, 1967.
[16] A. Viterbi. Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, IT-13:260вҖ“269, Apr. 1967.
[17] B. Vucetic and J. Yuan. Turbo Codes. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2000.
[18] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky. MAP estimation via agreement on (hyper)trees: Message-passing and linear programming approaches. MIT LIDS Tech. report, July 2002.
[19] S. Wicker. Error Control Systems for Digital Communication and Storage. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995.

Proceedings of the 43 rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCSвҖҷ02) 0272-5428/02 $17.0A0uthВ©oriz2e0d0li2ceInEseEd uEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:09:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

