ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30 -July 5,2002

Iterative Decoding for Two-Dimensional Intersymbol Interference Channels
Joseph A. O’Sullivan, Naveen Singla, Yunxiang Wu, and Ronald S. Indeck
Dept. of Electrical Engg., Washington University in St Louis,
St Louis, MO 63130, USA { j a o , s i n g l a , ywu, rsi}Qee.wustl.edu

Abstract - We study iterative decoding and equalization for information storage systems that have twodimensional (2-D) intersymbol interference (ISI) during read-back. Four iterative schemes for 2-D equalization are introduced and evaluated. Two schemes are based on turbo equalization, the third on minimum mean squared error estimation, and the fourth on message passing on the combined graph of the channel IS1 and the error correction code.
I. SUMMARY

then forms the basis for the third and the fourth schemes. In the third scheme, MMSE equalization is performed to mitigate the IS1 in the column dimension only and then a maximum a-posteriori (MAP) detector is used for the IS1 in the row dimension. The MMSE equalization is done only once and iterations are done between the MAP detector and the LDPC code decoder.
The fourth scheme uses MAP detection for both the column and row dimensions. Iterations are performed between the row detector and LDPC decoder only; the column detector does not enter the iterations.

Two-dimensional (2-D) intersymbol interference (ISI) arises during detection in page oriented optical memories [l]. In magnetic recording systems as the bit aspect ratio is reduced, the cross-track interference becomes significant enough t o give 2-D ISI. We study the performance of iterative decoding in conjunction with equalization for 2-D IS1 channels. Lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes are used for error correction.
The discrete 2-D IS1 channel is characterized by its impulse response, h. For our simulations we use

11. RESULTS

The observed data is R = h * * X + W , where ** denotes 2-D
convolution, X is the matrix of encoded bits obtained from the LDPC code encoder and W is additive white Gaussian noise.
Four equalization methods are studied. For the first scheme equalization is performed using a minimum mean squared error (MMSE) equalizer which is designed subject to the input power constraint. The Wiener filter is applied iteratively with soft information, the estimated mean of the codeword, being passed from the LDPC decoder to the filter.
The second equalization method studied is based on a pure a-posteriori probability (APP) based algorithm that performs message passing on a three-level graph of the LDPC code and the channel ISI. The channel IS1 graph contains many short cycles which deteriorate the performance of the message passing algorithm. The message passing schedule is as described in [3]. A fixed number of iterations are performed on the LDPC bipartite graph and if decoding fails then message passing is done on the three-level graph, again for a fixed number of iterations.
If the channel response matrix is separable, as in our case, then we can treat the 2-D IS1 as two separate one-dimensional (l-D) ISIs acting along the row and column dimension and use conventional l-D equalization techniques [2] for them. This
lThis work was supported in part by NSF Grants ECS-0000434, and ECS-9900159.

I

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

SNR [dB]

Figure 1: Performance curves for t h e proposed schemes.

Capacity computation for a discrete input 2-D IS1 channel is still an open problem so we use the performance of the LDPC code on the ISI-free channel as a bound on the performance of the proposed schemes. The LDPC code used is a rate 1/2, block-length 10000 regular code. As shown in Fig. 1, the fourth scheme gives the best performance for the IS1 we consider.
REFERENCES
[l]X. Chen et al., “Near-OptimalParallel Distributed Data Detection for Page-OrientedOptical Memories,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 4,No. 5, Sept./Oct. 1998.
[2] M. Tiichler et al., “Turbo Equalization: principles and new results,” to appear in I E E E Trans. on Comm..
[3] A. KavEiC et al., “Binary Intersymbol Interference Channels: Gallager Codes, Density Evolution and Code Performance Bounds,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory.

0-7003-7501-7lO2/$17.Q0@2QOI2EEE.

198

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:05:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

