ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland,June 30 -July 5,2002

Finite-Length Analysis of Various Low-Density Parity-Check Ensembles for the Binary Erasure Channel

Tom Richardson
Flarion Technologies Bedminster, N J 07921, USA e-mail: richardsonQflarion.com

Amin Shokrollahi Digital Fountain
Fremont, California 94538, USA e-mail: aminadigitalfountain.com

Rudiger Urbanke
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne, LTHC-ICs-IC, CH-1015 e-mail: ruediger.urbankeaepf1.ch

I. INTRODUCTION
In this paper we are concerned with the finite-length analysis of various low-density parity-check (LDPC) ensembles when used over the binary erasure channel (BEC). It is now well known, see e.g. [l] and references therein, how to design LDPC ensembles which, asymptotically as the block length tends to infinity, achieve the capacity of the BEC within any desired gap. Less is known about the finite-length behavior and optimization of LDPC ensembles. In [2, 31 it was shown, in principle, how to analyse finite-length ensembles, but the proposed methods are essentially limited to (mildly ir)regular ensembles because of complexity constraints. An alternative approach for specific codes was proposed in [4]. We investigate the average erasure probability of the belief propagation algorithm over the binary erasure channel for various finite-length LDPC ensembles. In particular, we give tight upper bounds on the “error floor”, i.e., on the contribution to the erasure probability stemming from relatively small deficiencies in the graph. We also define and analyse “expurgated” ensembles and give upper bounds on the error floor of “typical” codes. Finally, we show that typical codes of properly chosen ensembles have an erasure correcting radius which grows linearly in the block length. The presented method provides valuable insight into how finite-length codes should be designed. Although the standard ensemble can achieve capacity on the BEC, the construction of good finite-length codes requires careful control of the structure of the degree two variable nodes. In this paper, we investigate the standard ensemble, the Poisson ensemble, an ensemble in which degree two nodes are added in a cycle, and an ensemble in which different degree two variable nodes have distinct neighboring check nodes.
11. THEERRORFLOORBEHAVIOR
For classical codes the analysis of the “high SNR” performance is typically done in two steps: first, one determines the weight spectrum (or at least the minimum distance) of the code; second, this is then translated into an error bound for a given channel via a union bound argument (or a more sophisticated bounding technique.) For iteratively decoded ensembles over the BEC one can proceed in completely analogous fashion provided that we look not at the weight spectrum of codewords but, rather, a t the weight spectrum of stopping sets, see [2]. In this paper we derive the combinatorial expressions to determine the weight spectrum of stopping sets for the various ensembles. Rather than presenting some explicit examples, we point the reader to the web page at http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/efc/index.php, which contains an interface that allows the evaluation of these expressions for arbitrary degree distributions.
By the same method we can also define and analyse expurgated ensembles. More precisely, using the same bounding

technique as above, one can upper bound the probability that a randomly chosen graph contains a stopping set of a partic-
ular size (rather than the probability that a randomly chosen graph contains a stopping set of a particular size within the erasure set). This leads to a natural definition of expurgated ensembles as the (non-empty) subset of codes which do not contain stopping sets up to a given size. It is then possible to give upper bounds on the performance of these expurgated ensembles. The interested reader is invited to experiment on the aforementioned web page. E.g., for the (3,6)-regular ensemble of length 1000 one can see that less than half of all codes contain stopping sets of size 20 or less. Therefore, in the region of low E the erasure curve of the whole ensemble is dominated by a few “bad” codes and typical codes exhibit a much better behavior.
In almost complete analogy with the results derived in [5]
for the growth rate of the minimum distance, if X’(O)p‘(l) > 1
then the size of the minimum stopping set will be logarith-
mic whp, whereas if X’(O)p’(l) < 1,codes in the ensemble can
be suitably expurgated to yield linear growth of the size of the minimum stopping set whp. E.g., for the (3,6) code the “erasure correcting radius” is a t least 0.01799n. Note that, in general, this radius is strictly smaller than the relative minimum distance of the ensemble. The performance of iterative decoding is therefore, in general, not determined by the minimum distance of the code and codes should be constructed according to the weight distribution of the stopping sets!
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish t o acknowledge fruitful discussions with A. Orlitsky, J. Zhang, K. Viswanathan, A. Montanari and C. Di.
REFERENCES
[l] P. OSWALDAND A. SHOKROLLACHaIp,acity achieving sequences for the erasure channel, in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Information Theory, Washington DC, 2001, p. 48.
[2] C. DI, D. PROIETTTI., RICHARDSOEN. ,TELATAARN,D R. URBANKE, Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel, in Allerton Conf. on Communication,Control and Computing, 2001.
[3] J. ZHANG AND A. ORLITSKYF,inite length analysis of LDPC codes with large left degrees. Submitted IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2001.
[4]J. YEDIDIAAE, . SUDDERTHAN, D J.-P. BOUCHAUPDr,ojection algebra analysis of error-correcting codes, in Proceedings of 39th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, 2001.
[5] c . DI, T. RICHARDSOANND, R. URBANKEW, eight distributions: How deviant can you be?, in 2001 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Washington, DC, June 24-June 29 2001, p. 50.

1
0-7803-7501-7/02/$17.00@2002 IEEE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:13:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

