IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

391

Bootstrap Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Ahmed Nouh, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Associate Member, IEEE

Abstract—An initial bootstrap step for the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is proposed. Decoding is initiated by first erasing a number of less reliable bits. New values and reliabilities are then assigned to erasure bits by passing messages from nonerasure bits through the reliable check equations. The bootstrap step is applied to the weighted bit-flipping algorithm to decode a number of LDPC codes. Large improvements in both performance and complexity are observed.
Index Terms—Bootstrap decoding, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing algorithms, message-passing schedule, weighted bit-flipping algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [3], decoded by iterative message-passing algorithms have proved to be a viable alternative for high-performance low-complexity coding schemes (see, e.g., [1], and the references therein). There have been a wide variety of iterative algorithms, ranging from full hard-decision to a spectrum of soft-decision algorithms, proposed for the decoding of LDPC codes. Each algorithm provides a different performance/complexity tradeoff. Iterative algorithms can be naturally described as passing messages (hard, soft or both) along the edges of a bipartite graph that represents the code through its parity-check equations. Such a graph is referred to as “Tanner graph” [7]. A Tanner graph has two sets of nodes representing the code symbols and the parity-check equations. These are called “variable” and “check” nodes, respectively. An edge connects a variable node to a check node if and only if appears in the parity-check equation associated with . Each iteration in iterative decoding algorithms consists of two series of message-passing along the edges of the graph: 1) from variable nodes to check nodes and 2) from check nodes back to variable nodes.
Among different iterative message-passing algorithms for the decoding of LDPC codes, weighted bit-flipping (WBF) [4] appears to offer a good tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity. It combines the simplicity of bit-flipping algorithms [3] with the improved performance due to including some measure of reliability (soft information) in the messages. In this work, we use WBF to illustrate the idea of “bootstrap
Manuscript received May 6, 2002. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Dr. K. Narayanan. This work has been supported in part by Zarlink Semiconductor Corporation (formerly, Mitel Semiconductor Corporation) under a research contract.
The authors are with Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: anouh@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Publisher Item Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2002.803481.

decoding” that can be applied, in principle, to many iterative

message-passing algorithms. The combination is called “boot-

strapped weighted bit-flipping (BWBF).” It is based on iden-

tifying the unreliable (or less reliable) received bits and esti-

mating their values and corresponding reliabilities by passing

information to them from more reliable bits and through “reli-

able” check nodes. This is done as the first step of the decoding,

preventing the less reliable information to propagate through the

graph. The details are explained in the following section.

Weighted BF appears to perform particularly well when ap-

plied to the LDPC codes constructed by finite geometries [4].

The graphs for these codes are regular and have a girth 6. Two

important families of finite geometry are Euclidean and projec-

tive geometries over finite fields. LDPC codes constructed based

on these geometries are cyclic or quasicyclic, and thus easy to

encode (linear time). They also have relatively large minimum

distances. In fact, the exact minimum distances for some classes

of these codes are known. In this work, we present simulation

results on a projective geometry (PG) LDPC code with param-

eters

. The minimum distance is 18, and the

Tanner graph of the code has variable nodes and check nodes

( redundant check equations). All the nodes in the Tanner graph

have degree 17. We also present simulation results for a Gallager

code with the same parameters.

In the following, we describe WBF and BWBF algorithms,

and show that BWBF results in large improvements in error per-

formance and decoding complexity over conventional WBF. Al-

though, for the sake of brevity, we only present simulation re-

sults for two LDPC codes here, more codes have been simulated

and similar improvements have been observed.

II. BOOTSTRAPPED WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING (BWBF) ALGORITHM

Consider a binary LDPC code C of length , defined as the

null space of the row span of the parity-check matrix with

rows,

, and columns. Suppose that a codeword c

in C is transmitted over a binary input additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN) channel using a BPSK modulation. Assuming

that 0 and 1 in c are mapped to 1 and 1, respectively, the re-

ceived vector is then equal to

, where

,

, and the elements of are independent and iden-

tically distributed zero-mean Gaussian random variables with

variance . Suppose that the AWGN has a power spectral den-

sity , and let and denote the energy per information

bit and the code rate, respectively. Then

.

The sign of each received value provides an estimate for

the transmitted bit , while can be considered as a measure

1089-7798/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

392

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

of reliability for such an estimate. In the following, we first describe the weighted BF algorithm:

A. WBF Algorithm

Let be the estimate for c, initially obtained by making hard

decision on , i.e.,

, where

or 1 depending on

or 0, respectively.

1. Compute the syndrome bits

by

. If they are all zero, stop

the decoding.

2. For each check node

, compute

(1)

3. For each variable node pute

, com-

 2 } (2) Fig. 1. BER (––) and MER (– – –) for (273 191) PG-LDPC code decoded by WBF ( ), BWBF ( ) and SP ( ).
4. Flip bit (i.e., complement ) for which is the largest. 5. Repeat steps 1, 3 and 4, until all the syndrome bits are zero or a maximum number of iterations is reached.

B. BWBF Algorithm

Before explaining the bootstrap step, we need to make a few

definitions: we call a received value and its corresponding

variable node “unreliable,” if

, for some predeter-

mined value , and “reliable,” otherwise. A check node is re-

ferred to as “reliable” with respect to an unreliable variable node

if all the other variable nodes connected to that check node are

reliable.

We initiate the decoding by identifying and erasing all the un-

reliable variable nodes. We then assign improved values and re-

liabilities to the erased bits by passing them messages from the

reliable variable nodes through the reliable check nodes. The

new value that substitutes for an erased variable is com-

puted as

 2 } Fig. 2. BER (––) and MER (– – –) for (273 191) Gallager code decoded by
WBF ( ), BWBF ( ) and SP ( ).

(3)

III. SIMULATION RESULTS

where

denotes the reliable neighboring check nodes of

the variable node , and

represents all the neighbors of

the check node other than . If there is no reliable check node

connected to an erased variable node, we reassign the original

received value to that node. For all the reliable variables , we

leave intact, i.e.,

. The algorithm then proceeds with

the conventional WBF using the new values . The threshold

value is optimized by simulation.

It can be seen that the above bootstrap step is equivalent to

one round of min-sum (max-sum) algorithm [2] applied to the

erased variables through the reliable check nodes.

Simulations are performed on a number of LDPC codes.

However, the results are only presented for one PG-LDPC code

[4] and one Gallager code [5]. Both codes have

and

. All the variable nodes for the Gallager code have

degree 3, compared to 17 for the PG code. The received vectors

are decoded simultaneously using WBF and BWBF decoders,

and also a sum-product (SP) decoder [2] as reference. The

maximum number of iterations is chosen to be 100. At each

SNR, sufficiently large number of codewords, up to 10 , is

simulated. For both codes, the bit error rate (BER) and the

message error rate (MER) of WBF, BWBF, and SP decoders

are plotted in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. As expected, the PG

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOUH AND BANIHASHEMI: BOOTSTRAP DECODING OF LDPC CODES

393

TABLE I STATISTICS OF THE NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS FOR (273, 191) PG-LDPC CODE

The results show that for both codes, BWBF provides a considerable improvement over the conventional WBF both in error performance and decoding complexity. At high SNRs, the number of iterations is reduced on average by more than a factor of two, and at a given probability of error, the required SNR is reduced by a few tenths of a decibel. The complexity cost due to the initial bootstrap step is negligible compared to the advantages. In fact, in the bootstrap step, only a small percentage of variables are declared unreliable. For example, for the simulated codes, this number, on average, is only about 3.8 %–11.6% for the SNRs between 2.5 – 5 dB (larger percentages correspond to smaller SNRs).

IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This work can be considered as an example of hybrid (multistage) decoding, in which different decoding algorithms are employed at different iterations throughout the decoding process. Our results indicate that large improvements in error performance and/or decoding complexity can be achieved by using such methods. On the other hand, the bootstrap step can be viewed as a reliability-based message-passing schedule. Scheduling appears to play a very important role in the performance and complexity of iterative decoding algorithms, particularly at short block lengths [6]. This work is another testament to such importance.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors wish to thank Y. Kou, M. Fossorier, and D. J. MacKay for providing them with the parity-check matrices of the LDPC codes.

Fig. 3. Effect of  on BER at SNR’s 2.5 (), 3 (+), 3.5 ( ), 4 ( ) and 4.5 ( ),
for (273 191) PG-LDPC code decoded by WBF (– – –) and BWBF (–––).

code performs better than the Gallager code, in general, and for

WBF decoding, in particular [4]. For the PG code, the statistics

of the number of decoding iterations for converged cases are

shown in Table I. For each SNR, the results are obtained based

on the optimal value for . The optimal value of is not only a

function of SNR, but also depends on the code and its Tanner

graph. The effect of on the BER of the PG code is shown in

Fig. 3 for

dB. It can be seen that

for all SNRs, the optimal normalized value of ( ) is close

to 0.5. It is also observed that at lower SNRs, the error rate is

less sensitive to the value of . The same trends also apply to

the Gallager code.

REFERENCES
[1] “Codes on graphs and iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Feb. 2001.
[2] G. D. Forney Jr, “On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 1997, pp. 12–25.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] D. J. MacKay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/ data.html.
[6] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check cods with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 414–416, Oct. 2001.
[7] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

