Proceedingsof I€€€ T€NCONt02

Iterative Decoding of Turbo Codes Based on Factor Graphs
ZHU Lianxiangl.’ FENG Wenjiangl YANG Shizhongl 1. Chongqing University, Chongqing City, 400044;
2. Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing City, 400065 cazlxE!sina.com

Abstract: Turbo codes and LDPC codes both have their advantages and can achieve the Shannon limited performance. The constituent RSC codes in turbo codes are more structural and this lends the encoding problem easier with shift-register circuit. While the encoding of LDPC codes is performed via matrix multiplication, and this is more complex than it appears for capacity-approaching LDPC codes. On the other band, the soft-input soft-output BCJR algorithm, or the sub-optimal version of it, used for turbo-decoding is rather complex while sum-product algorithm used for LDPC decoding lends itself to parallel implementation and is computationally simpler. Combining the turbo codes encoding and LDPC decoding, a new scheme based on factor graphs and sum-product algorithm is developed, it can reduce the decoding complexity of turbo codes greatly, and also has’-some guides in the designing of interleaver and the choosing of RSC constituent codes. Simulation shows the correctness of the scheme. Key Words: Turbo codes, sum-product algorithm, factor graphs, LDPC codes.
1. INTRODUCTION
The invention of turbo codes is a big. milestone in the development of communication theory. Compared with many code systems before it, the performance improvement of turbo codes is so large that for most applications the gap between theory limit and the practical performance obtainable almost fade away [I]. As a result, many standardization groups such as 3GPP, 3GPP2 and DVB-RCS have adopted turbo codes [2].
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Robert Gallager of MIT in 1960[3].. They received &ually no attention from coding community until mid:T990% MacKay and Neal rediscovered them and shown the ‘itiiportance of iterative decoding in their approaching Shannon limit performance [4,5]. LDPC code 1s a family of linear block codes with parity-check matrices H containing mostly zeros and only a small number of ones. The “sparsely” of the parity-check matrices defining these codes is key in enabling their efficient decoding by a message-passing procedure known as the “sum-product algorithm”. It is today well known
This work was supported by NSF Grant ,42002-21 of Chongqing
University of Posts and Telecommunications.

that LDPC codes are as good as turbo codes, and have already been adopted for some standard (ADSL) [6,7].
In fact, LDPC codes and turbo codes are based on a similar design philosophy - both can be described from a constrainted random code ensemble viewpoint. And the decoding techniques used for both methods can be viewed as different instantiations of the same basic decoding process. However, the soft-input soft-output BCJR algorithm, or the sub-optimal version of it, used for turbo-decoding is rather complex while sum-product
algorithm used for LDPC decoding lends itself to parallel implementation and is computationally simpler. LDPC codes, on the other side, may lead to more stringent requirements in terms of storage. From the encoding viewpoint, the constituent RSC codes in turbo codes are more structural and this lends the encoding problem easier
with shift-register circuit. While the encoding of LDPC codes is performed via matrix multiplication, and this is more complex than it appears for capacity-approaching
LDPC codes [ 8 ] . Observe that the panty-check matrix of turbo codes are
also sparse, it can he say that turbo codes are special kinds of LDPC codes essentially. Turbo codes and LDPC codes all approach the same goal of Shannon limitpd performance in their own viewpoint. It is natural to combine the good aspect of turbo codes and LDPC codes, keep the encoding of turbo codes unchanged whle the decoding of it using the factor graph based sum-product algorithm.

2. T W O CODES The original turbo code is the combination of two
constituent recursive systematic convolutional (RSC) codes, a pseudorandom interleaver, and an iterative MAP decoder.

U
1
Inter.

Encoded

Fig. 1. Turbo code encoder
The turbo encoder is illustrated in figure 1. The input information bits feed the first encoder and enter the second encoder after being scrambled by the interleaver. The

0-7803-7490-8/02/$17.0002002 IEEE. 1077

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:02:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

His a N x 2N matrix with columns corresponding to
codeword bits and rows corresponding to check equations
3.2 Parity-Check Matrix of ’hrbo Codes After the parity matrix of RSC constituent code is found,
then the parity-check matrix of turbo codes can be found naturally with considering the function of interleaver.
Consider the unpunctured turbo code with rate R =1/3, the output is (X,,~~,Y:,X,,Y,I,Y ,2, . . . , ~ , , Y ,I, Y ~ ) ,
where yi is the panty output of i th constituent RSC
encoder in time k , N is the information data size and dk = x, is satisfied. Figure 2 and 3 illustrate the graph
representation of RSC code parity and turbo code parity respectively.
Obviously, the 1’s in the panty matrix of RSC code manifest it in the diagonal distribution, which is to say almost all the 1’s locate in the diagonal of the parity matrix. Duo to the function of interleaver, the 1’s distribution of turbo code parity has some randomicity besides the diagonal character. It is this randomicity that makes turbo code more like LDPC codes and can be decoded using the sum-product algorithm more easily.

J O~,rnrsmMm
Fig. 2. Graph representationof parityiheck matrix of RSC

-
11 00 00 00 00 ..’.

-

01 I1 00 00 00

H = , I 1 01 11 00 00 ...

00 11 01 1 1 00

.

-

this is a semi-infinite matrix.

In turbo codes, block-orient RSC codes is used, the

corresponding parity-check matrix H i s finite. Suppose

the information length is N and code rate R =1/2, then

I

0

s Irn 350 Zm M 3 a U0 I r n

Fig. 3. Graph representation of parity-check matrix of turbo codes

3.3

Graphs Representation of’kbo Codes

In fact, the unpunctured block-orient turbo code is a

linear block code with information size N , codeword

1078

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:02:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

size 3 x N and code 'rate' R=1/3. Denote' E;3xN the
3 x N dimensional vector space over F', the element of
F? are the 2J"N 3 x N dimensional row vectors. An [ N , 3 x N ) linear block code with data word length N and codeword length 3 x N is a N dimensional
subspace of F;"N,there are 2 Ndata words and 2N
corresponding code words in the code space. The null
space of the code space has dimension 2 x N and is spanned by 2 x N linearly independent vectors, these vectors form the parity matrix H . A-ll 2 x N vectors
=6. a-re orthogonal to any valid code word c , which is to say
c.HT Once the panty check matrix of turbo codes is gained,
we can use factor graph to describe it. There two classes of nodes in a factor graph: bit nodes corresponding to codeword bits and check nodes corresponding to the
panty equations If and only if h , =l in H , check node --
j is connected to bit node i . From the fact c .H' = 0 ,
we can conclude that all bit nodes connected to a single check node sum to zero.
Figure 4 illustrate the parity-check matrix H of a
simple linear block code and the corresponding factor graph.
1110000

H=[:x;,j

'

'.,

(4

@)
Fig. 4.Parity-check n m i x of linear block code (a) g d the corresponding factor graph @) .

+ c-han-nel_. At the receiver end, output of matched filter '
y = c -n are given to soft decision iterative decoder.I
where n is the noise vector.

4.1 Decoding Algorithms ' ' Much like the BCJR algorithm, we are interested in
comput-ing the a posteriori probability (APP) th-at a given bit in c -equals one, given the received word y and the fact that c must satisfy some constraints. Without loss of
generality, let us focus on the decoding .of bit c, , thus we

are interested in computing

(2)

P,(G =lIY,SJ

-

Where Si is the event that the bits in c satisfy the

parity-check equations involving c,

Or for simplicity, we may compute the log-likelihood

ratio (LLR):

..

(3) Denoting that:
R, = {i:hji= 1 ) ,the set of column locations of the
I'sinthejthrowofH; . '
Rj\i={i':hji.=l}\{i} , the set of column
locations of the 1's in the j th row of H, excluding location i;
{ C, = j :hji = I } ,the set of row locations of the 1's

in the i th column of H;

Ci\j,=.{j':h,.i=l)\{j} t h e ' s e t of .row

locations of the 1's in the i th column of.H, excluding location j;

From the assumed s.tatist.ic.al, independence of the y,,

thus the log-domain version decoding algorithm can be described as follows:
Perform looping below for any i and j which satisfy

h..= 1 . ' ?i -i.Initialization .

i!

..

..

4. SUM-PRODUCT DECODING The information bit sequence is encoded us-ing a rate 1/3
turbo encoder and the coded output c is BPSK
modulated before being transnutted through an AWGN

,inwhich , .

1079

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:02:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ii L ( q , , ) = L ( c , ) + UT,.,)
l'SC,\J
iii L(Q,)=.L(C,)+CL(~,)
JG

iv V i ,

;={ 1 i f W ) < O

0 esle

if

= O ) or

(#iterations = max-iterations)

then stop

else goto (ii)

4.2 Complexity Reduced Decoding Algorithms ~~ Consider the update equation for L(y,) in the log-
domain decoder:
(12)

Notice the shape of #(X) :

2/a2with no change in performance. Denoting the

normalized LLR's by an overbar, the algorithm is as

follows.

- i. Init-ialize:

Uq,) = U C , )= Y,

(15)

,

(16)

where

j%C,\j

(20)

V. V i

1 ifL(Qi)<O

0 else

(21)

(# iterations = ma-iterations)
then stop else go to (ii)
The algorithm can be furth-er simplified at the expense of degradation, by using the L(Qi)values in the place of the L(q,) values. That is, for eachj,

We may conclude that the term corresponding to the
smallesth, in the above summation dominates, so that:

4" =

Pi?

the second equality follows from @(#(X)) = X.
Then, the min-sum algorithm is simply the log-domain algorithm with step (ii) replaced by

(14)

Observe that the noise parameter o2is required in the
decoding algorithms discussed above. However, it is easy to normalize all LLR's in the min-sum algorithm by

In this case, step (2) is omitted and step ( I ) is modified in accordance with (22). Thus, instead of several LLR values being computed for each hit node, only one is now computed. Further, storage is reduced.
4.3 Memory Consideration Compared with the BCJR algorithm used in Turbo codes
decoding, sum-product algorithm (or the simplified form of it) is more suit for decoding codes with sparse 1's in its parity-check matrix. The computational complexity of an LDPC decoder is very low compared with the MAP or SOVA decoders. But due to the irregularity in the parity check matrix, the memory requirement far exceeds those of the latter two. This can be overcome by exploit the fact
ci that obvious regularity exist in the set. of R j and .
Unlike that of general LDPC codes, the 1's in the matrix of turbo codes manifest it in diagonal distribution, and this can reduce the memory requirement remarkably. Further,

1080

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:02:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

compute +(x) by a lookup table, or use the simplified
min-sum algorithm can reduced the memory requirement even more.
5. SIMULATIONS Figure 5 shows the BER curves for two different block
size turbo codes with the decoding algorithms described above. The two constituent codes of these turbo codes are (I,5/7)RSC codes, and the overall code rate R equals 1/3. Ten times of iteration is used in that simulation with AWGN channel supposed.
It can be said that, compared’with the conventional turbo codes decoding algorithms, the BER performance of the factor graphs based sum-product algorithm or minzsum algorithm are not improved. These can be. explained as follows: first, many times of iteration is needed in order to approach the Shannon limited performance; second, the randomicity of parity check matrix is not enough and there are short cycles exist in the corresponding factor graphs, these result in the dscending of BERperformance; finally, the block size in the simulations is’too small to embody the superiority of direct sum-product decoding. It can he predicted that, with larger block size, perfect designed interleaver and rational choose RSC constituent codes to avoid the short cycles, better results can obtained eventually.

Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: turbo-codes”, Pmc. of IEEE ICC’93, Geneva, pp. 1064-1070, May 1993. [2] “Convolutional turbo codes solution for TG4”, IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Access Working Group. May 2001 [3] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes”, IRE Trans.Information Theory. pp.21-28, Jan.1962.
pi] D. J. C MacKay and R. M.Neal. “Near Shannon limit
performance of low density parity check codes”, Electmn. Lener, vol. 32, no, IS, pp. 1645-1646; Aug. 1996. [5] D. J. C. MacKay, ‘Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices’, IEEE Trans. In$ Theovs March 1999, IT-45(2):399-431 [6] S.-Y Chung, et al. “On the design of low-density panty-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon
limit”, IEEE Comm.Letrers, pp.58-60, Feb. 2001.
[7] “Low-density parity-check codes for DSL transmission,” Temporary Document BI-095, Study Group 15/4, Goa, India, 23-27 Oct. 2000
[8] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey and H . 4 . “Factor Graphs
and the sum-product algorithm”, IEEE Trans. In$ Theory. February 2001, IT-47(2):498-519

m , a

05

2s Slgnd-lo-noaeRak EWMY(dB1

.

Fig. 5 Bit-emr probabilities of Turbo codes

6. CONCLUSION Combining the good aspect of turbo codes and LDPC; a new sum-product turbo decoding algorithm based on factor graphs is developed. Simulation shows the correctness of the scheme. The fiiture work will concentrate on the effects of interleaver and component RSC codes to the decoding performance.

REFERENCES [I] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux and P, Thitimajshima, “Near

1081

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:02:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

