IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

1389

Transactions Letters________________________________________________________________

Pseudorandom Construction of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using Linear Congruential Sequences
Abhiram Prabhakar and Krishna Narayanan, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We consider maximal-length linear congruential sequences generated using a simple recursion to generate the bipartite graph of a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code. The main advantage is that the graph structure of the codes (edge connections) can be generated using a recursion, rather than having to store the graph connections in memory, which facilitates hardware implementation of the decoder. For this class of codes, sufficient conditions on the recursion parameters are derived, such that regular LDPC codes can be constructed with no cycles of length four or less. Simulation results show that these codes provide almost the same performance of a constrained pseudorandom construction that explicitly avoids cycles of length less than or equal to four.
Index Terms—Algebraic construction, linear congruential sequences, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [2] have been the focus of intense research in recent years. The parity

check matrix of a regular

LDPC code is sparse, with

ones in each column and

ones in each row.

Subject to these constraints, the parity-check matrix is typically

constructed at random. A bipartite graph can be associated with

the LDPC code (explained in Section II), and the decoder is

a message-passing decoder which passes extrinsic information

along the edges in this graph. Short cycles in this bipartite graph

should be avoided in order for the message-passing decoder to

perform well. In a random construction, cycles of length four

appear with high probability, and hence, a constraint is typically

added to avoid cycles of length four.

Gallager [2] showed that for regular codes, if

, the re-

sulting ensemble has good minimum distance, and hence, is

typically chosen to be greater than or equal to three. Recently,

irregular LDPC codes, where the columns and rows have a dif-

ferent number of ones, have been shown to be superior to regular

LDPC codes for long block lengths [4]. Regular LDPC codes

still have an advantage in hardware implementation, since the

regular structure can be exploited to simplify the decoder. Fur-

ther, for short block lengths, irregular codes may have a small

Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 20, 2001; revised January 12, 2002. This work was supported by an Advanced Technology Program Grant from the Texas Higher Education Coordination Board and by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR 0073506.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA (e-mail: pabhiram@ee.tamu.edu; krishna@ee.tamu.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2002.802537.

minimum distance, and so regular codes may be preferable. It

can be shown that the performance of regular LDPC codes under

iterative decoding is best when

[4], and hence, we re-

strict ourselves to this class of codes (regular LDPC codes with

) in this letter.

The exact structure of the parity-check matrix (or, equiva-

lently, the graph) needs to be stored at the receiver and, since the

graphs are constructed at random, the memory required to store

the structure of the graph using lookup tables may be prohibitive

in practical applications. Further, in applications where one de-

coder is used to decode a set of LDPC codes of different lengths

and rates, a separate parity-check matrix needs to be stored for

each LDPC code in this set. Therefore, it is very desirable to be

able to generate the graph structure algebraically, such that this

lookup can be avoided. In this letter, we consider generating the

graphs using a simple recursion so that the expensive lookup

can be avoided. In Section II, we discuss the graph structure of

these codes very briefly. In Section III, we discuss a particular

algebraic construction and prove that the girth of the resulting

graphs using this construction is greater than four. This is a par-

ticularly useful result, since cycles of length four are the ones

that are most likely to result in prominent error floors for LDPC

codes in random constructions. In Section V, we show simula-

tion results to confirm that these designs provide good bit error

rate (BER) performance.

II. GRAPH STRUCTURE

LDPC codes are well represented by bipartite graphs. One

set of nodes, the variable nodes or bit nodes, corresponds to el-

ements of the codeword and the other set of nodes, viz. check

nodes, corresponds to the set of parity-check constraints satis-

fied by each codeword. A

regular LDPC code has a graph-

ical representation in which each variable node or bit node is

connected to edges and each check node to edges. We use

the following representation to ease the exposition in this letter.

We first associate with each check node connections, called

check connections, and with each bit node connections, called

bit connections, as shown in Fig. 1 for

and

.

Therefore, there are a total of

bit and check con-

nections. An edge in the graph connects a bit connection on the

left to a check connection on the right. Let the th bit connec-

tion on the left be connected to the th check connection on

the right. A randomly constructed LDPC code is formed by ran-

domly connecting the bit connections on the left with the check

connections on the right or, equivalently, when the sequence

0090-6778/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

where and satisfy the following conditions, and is any

integer between 0 and

:

C1.

,

.

C2. is relatively prime to .

C3.

is a multiple of , for every prime dividing .

In addition,

is a multiple of four if is a multiple

of four.

C4. (optional) is relatively prime to .

Fig. 1. Bipartite graph structure.

is a randomly generated sequence.

It should be noted that th bit connection on the left belongs

to

th bit node and, similarly, the th check connection on

the right belongs to

th check node on the right. Equiva-

lently, the set of bit connections

correspond to the th bit node, and the set of check connections

are connected to the th check node.

It is important to note this relationship between bit (or check)

connections and actual bit (or check) nodes, since both are used

in this letter. Finally, note that an edge between the th bit con-

nection and th check connection represents an edge between

th bit node and

th check node. From now on, we

restrict ourselves to

, i.e., to

regular LDPC codes as

shown in Fig. 1.

In general, the mapping between the bit connections and

check connections should be a one-to-one mapping, such that

the following occurs.

1) A bit node is not connected to the same check node via

two edges (cycles of length two should be avoided). Cy-

cles of length two occur when

or,

or,

for

some .

2) There are no cycles of short lengths. It is preferable to

avoid, at least, cycles of length four, i.e., two bit nodes

should not be connected to the same pair of check nodes.

III. RECURSION-BASED GENERATION OF BIPARTITE GRAPH
In this letter, we consider generating the sequence using a recursion

(1)

In [1], it was shown that a maximal length sequence from 0 to

can be generated using (1) if the above conditions are

satisfied.

To design the bipartite graph of the LDPC code, (1) is iterated

for

to find the check connection

con-

nected to the

th bit connection. An example will clarify

this. Consider the design of a rate-1/2 LDPC code with

,

,

,

. For this case, the number of

edges

and let

,

,

. The se-

quence is

. This means that the

bit node 0 on the left is connected to check nodes

,

, and

on the right. Similarly, the bit

node 1 on the left is connected to check nodes

,

,

on the right, and so on.

In terms of practical implementation of the decoder, the ex-

trinsic information to be passed along the edges sequentially la-

beled

are stored in an array. Processing at the

th check node can be done by taking the extrinsic information

from the edges

to

. That is, accessing the memory

locations

to

. For the th bit node, the memory

locations

need to be accessed. The

key advantage of the proposed approach is that the address of

the memory locations

can be gen-

erated on the fly without having to store them. This results in

a significant reduction in storage and, since memory access is

usually very time consuming, this can speed up the decoding.

It should be noted here that since the parity-check matrix is

not constructed in systematic form, Gaussian elimination should

be used to determine a generator matrix for encoding. This may

involve reordering the columns of the parity-check matrix. In

practice, the system would be implemented by first reordering

the encoded bits at the transmitter and then at the receiver before

decoding, so that the original parity-check matrix (generated

using the recursion) can still be used for decoding.

In this letter, we show that if certain additional constraints are

added to the choice of and , we can generate graphs that avoid

cycles of lengths two and four. The main result of this letter is

the following theorem:

Theorem 1: Consider an LDPC code with

, generated

using the recursion

, where and

satisfy the constraints C1–C4, and let

. If in

addition:

C5.

divides ;

C6.

;

C7.

;

C8.

or, equivalently,

C9. There exists no integer ,

or, equivalently,

;

; such that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

1391

then the resulting bipartite graph has no cycles of length two

(duplicate edges) or of length four. When is even, condition

C7 can be loosened to

.

Proof: See Appendix A.

A. Circular Model

Although the detailed proof is given in Appendix A, we will

give the intuition behind the proof here. The pseudorandom

number generator can be modeled as a pointer on a circle with

circumference units. The movement of the pointer along the

circle during every step of the recursion can be studied as ex-

plained below. The recursion

can

be rewritten as

(2)

Since

(3)

Let Then

. Therefore,

for some .
Fig. 2. Circular model showing the recursion in (6).

(4)

(5)

(6)

Since the modulo operation results in a value between 0 and

, can be imagined as a pointer on a circle with circum-

ference units. During each recursion, the pointer moves by

points clockwise on the circle, and further by a small

value from the previous position . This is illustrated in

Fig. 2. The circle is divided into divisions, each containing

points. In the first example shown in Fig. 2(a),

is three, and hence, the pointer moves by three divisions, and

further by points. The pointer moves closest to the present

value when

or

. The dis-

tance between and

along the circle in the clockwise

direction is

. The distance in the an-

ticlockwise direction is

. When

,

is points clockwise of . When

,

is

points anticlockwise

of . These situations are shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c).

The main idea in the proof is to first determine a set of suf-

ficient conditions to avoid loops of lengths two and four. These

conditions are usually of the form that two terms in the recur-

sion and should not lie within a distance of from each

other, either in the clockwise or anticlockwise direction. Then,

for each of these conditions to be true, we determine bounds

on and which result in the conditions C6–C9. For example,

in order to avoid loops of length two, it is sufficient to ensure

that

and

do not lie within a distance of

from in the clockwise or anticlockwise direction as shown

in Fig. 2(d) (area within the dotted lines).

lies closest to

if

or

as shown in

Fig. 2. For these values of

, we determine bounds

on and . We can then see that for all values of , this holds

true. This procedure is repeated for the distance between and . The procedure for cycles of length four is also based on the same principle, but is more involved since the recursion at two nodes should be tracked. It is difficult to depict this clearly using a figure or to explain in words succinctly and hence, it is avoided. A detailed proof using these ideas is given in the Appendix. Note that for this model to be applicable, we need condition C5.

IV. DESIGN PROCEDURE

We have shown that if conditions C1–C9 are enforced, then

the resulting LDPC codes do not have loops of lengths two or

four. We will briefly show via examples that these conditions are

not very restrictive, and that the actual design of LDPC codes

using these constraints is fairly easy. Further, using these con-

straints, LDPC codes can be generated for several lengths and

rates. The following few examples will demonstrate this.

Example 1:

,

,

and . In this

case,

, which has only 2 and 3 as prime factors. Since

we need

and to be relatively prime to , we

can choose to be any integer greater than 10 which is relatively

prime to 6144. We can pick

. Since is even, we need

. That is,

and

should be a multiple of 4 and 3 and should divide

6144. Therefore, any of the form

,,

is a valid choice. Then we pick an and we need to verify that

C9 is satisfied, which involves five modulo calculations. For this

example,

satisfies all the conditions. Finally, we choose

. So the parameters of the code are

Code 1:

In order to show that this technique can be used to generate a variety of codes with different lengths and rates, we used

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

the above design procedure to design the following three other codes. The parameters for the codes are
Code 2: Code 3: Code 4:

where denotes the rate of the code. The parameters were

chosen to be almost the same as finite geometry-based codes

in [3], so that we can make fair comparisons. For Code 2 and

Code 3, is not exactly equal to

. In these cases,

check nodes are of degree and the last check

node has degree less than . Theorem 1 applies to these cases

also, since a careful look reveals that it only requires that the

maximum right degree be . In Section V, we provide simula-

tion results for these codes.

The following remarks are appropriate here.

1) Among the values of and that satisfy C1–C9, the per-

formance is somewhat sensitive to the choice of and .

For the codes tested, it was found that the smaller value

of and provided better performance. Since only four

codes have been tested here, we cannot draw conclusions

based on this.

2) The conditions C5–C9 are sufficient conditions and are

not necessary conditions. Therefore, it is possible that for

some values of and that do not satisfy C1–C9, the re-

sulting graphs do not have cycles of lengths two and four.

For example, for the parameters of the code in Example

1, when

and

, the resulting graph does not

have any loops of length four, although Condition C7 is

not satisfied.

3) The BER performance was also found to be sensitive to

the initial condition , although Theorem 1 holds for any

. This will be discussed in Section V.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND CONCLUSION

For the simulations, the message-passing algorithm was im-

plemented in the log domain and the extrinsic information (log

likelihood) was clipped to 10 in magnitude. That is, probabili-

ties are between 10 and 1–10 . A maximum of itera-

tions were used, and the iterations were stopped if all the parity

checks were satisfied before iterations. For Code 1, a gen-

erator matrix was constructed, and a random sequence of zeros

and ones was encoded using the generator matrix. However, for

the other codes, the all-zero data sequence was assumed and

hence, a specific encoder was not constructed. At least 50 block

(frame or codeword) errors were observed, or at least 250 000

blocks (approximately 2.5 10 bits were simulated).

Fig. 3 shows bit error plots for the code in Example 1 for

and

. The performance of an LDPC code

constructed randomly but explicitly avoiding cycles of length

Fig. 3. BER versus E =N for a (3, 6) regular LDPC code of length 2048 and rate = 0.5.

four is also shown. It can be seen that the performance of the

LDPC codes generated using a linear congruential sequence is

comparable to that of the constrained random construction both

for

and

. Further, no undetected errors were

observed in either case. The advantage of the proposed construc-

tion, however, is that the memory requirement at the decoder

can be significantly reduced, since only , , and need to

be stored and the graph structure can be generated on the fly.

This will be advantageous, especially in a digital signal pro-

cessor (DSP) implementation with limited onboard memory, or

in situations where a single decoder is used to decode different

LDPC codes with different lengths and rates.

The performance of Code 2 and Code 3 were compared to

two LDPC codes designed based on finite geometries of ap-

proximately the same length and rate from [3]. The first is a

code designed from a projective geometry (PG) with

,

, and the second is a code designed from an Euclidean

geometry (EG) with

,

, respectively.

The codes proposed here compared favorably with the finite ge-

ometry codes for both these rates in terms of performance and

complexity; however, the results are not shown for the sake of

brevity. Fig. 4 shows bit error plots for Code 4 for

,

and for an extended LDPC code based on Euclidean geometry

with

and

. It has been verified by one

of the anonymous reviewers that the performance of this code

was on par with that of a random construction. Further, some

improvement in performance is possible for both the proposed

construction and the random construction if is increased to

250. It can be seen that the performance of the two codes are

almost the same, and that the performance is quite close to the

Shannon limit, which is

dB. While finite ge-

ometry-based codes provide an important advantage of easy en-

codability, the codes proposed here simplify the decoder imple-

mentation without loss in performance. It should also be noted

that finite geometry-based LDPC codes may have a higher min-

imum distance and hence, their performance at low BERs may

be superior.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

1393

of when divided by and hence, is an integer between 0

and

. In equalities or inequalities involving mod opera-

tions, it should be remembered that the result of a mod operation

is always a positive integer between 0 and

.

The following simple facts about

operations will be

useful for the proof.

1) If

, then

for some integer .

2)

, iff

.

3) If

, then

.

4)

, if

.

Fig. 4. BER versusE =N for Code 4 and an extended Euclidean geometry code.

A. Length Two Cycles

Length two cycles (or duplicate edges) occur when a bit

node is connected to a check node by more than one edge. Let

the three check connections corresponding to a bit node on

the left be

. In order to avoid duplicate edges,

should belong to different check nodes. The

interleaver must satisfy the following sufficient conditions.

D1.

( and do not belong to the same check node).

D2.

( and do not belong to the same check node).

First, we prove that Condition D1 is satisfied.

Let

. From (6), we get

and hence

(7)

Since

since

When

,

(8) and hence

Fig. 5. Effect of A on the bit error rate performance.

Finally, we study the effect of the initial condition . Fig. 5 compares the performance of the codes with the following parameters:
Code 5:

Hence, Condition D1 reduces to showing that (9)
Since (8) is true, in order to show (9), it suffices to show (10) (11)

Code 6:

Note that the above two codes differ only in . It can be seen from Fig. 5 that the BER performance of Code 5 is worse than that of Code 6. Note that both the codes do not have any loops of lengths two or four. The difference in performance is possibly due to the difference in the number of loops of higher lengths; although we cannot prove or confirm this.

APPENDIX

We use

to denote the nonnegative remainder of

when divided by (for example,

). We use

to denote that is equal to the positive remainder

Condition C6 ensures that (10) is satisfied. The condition (11)

reduces to

, and since , it suffices to

show

. Condition C7 ensures that (11) is satisfied.

Next, we prove that Condition D2 is satisfied.

(12)

Substituting for

the equation can be rewritten as

(13) (14)

Let

and hence,

for some integer . We have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

Fig. 6. Example showing cycle of length four.

and

. Hence,

.

In order to show that D2 is satisfied, we need to show that

(15)

Since

,

Condition C7 ensures that

. Therefore,

all , and

. and hence,
for

some . In this case, the following three conditions are sufficient conditions:

S1. ( and S2. ( and S3. ( and

do not belong to the same check node). do not belong to the same check node). do not belong to the same check node).

The other case is when

and are connected to the

same check node. In this case, the following four are sufficient

conditions.

T1. ( and T2. ( and T3. ( and T4. ( and

do not belong to the same check node). do not belong to the same check node). do not belong to the same check node). do not belong to the same check node).

It can be seen that the other case, namely

and

being connected to the same check node, need not be consid-

ered separately since the sufficient conditions for the above case

subsume the sufficient conditions for this case. Symmetry in

and can be exploited to show that other situations are similar

and need not be considered separately. We will first consider

the situation when and are connected to the same check

node, and show that S1, S2, and S3 are satisfied. Let us define

and

. Then

(16) (19)

Since

is true for all

, in order to show (15), it suffices to show that

(20)

In order to satisfy S1, we need (17)

(18)

C6 ensures that (17) is true. Equation (18) reduces to which is satisfied due to C7.

B. Length Four Cycles

Length four cycles occur when 2-bit nodes are connected to

the same pair of check nodes. Consider the situation as shown

in Fig. 6. Consider the th bit node corresponding to bit con-

nections

and the th bit node corre-

sponding to bit connections

. Further,

let us consider two check nodes and connected to check

connections

,

, and

,

, respectively.

Since we are interested in loops of length four, we will con-

sider two situations separately. The first is when and

belong to the same check node (and hence, both bit nodes

and are connected to the same check node ). Equivalently,

and

for some

,

, and

Since
and . Case 1:

(21)

and

, where

,

,

. Let us consider three cases for

: In this case, or, equivalently, . Hence

Since

,

(22) , and hence,

. From (22), it can be seen that sufficient conditions to satisfy (21) are

(23) (24)

Condition C7 guarantees that both these conditions are satisfied

and hence, S1 is satisfied for

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

1395

Case 2:

: In this case, the above proof can be re- Since divides ,

peated to show that

and hence

(33)

since

, Similarly

the above condition is the same as S1.

Case 3:

: In this case, (21) is not satisfied. However,

(34)

when Condition C8 is satisfied, that is, if is chosen to be larger

than

, we can show that cannot be equal to . This For

, we need

follows from the fact that

and

, and

if

, then

and

hence,

when

(this is how C8 is derived).

We next prove Condition S2. Using a similar technique fol-

(35)

lowed for (14),

can be written as

(25)

Let us define

and recall that

. Then, Condition S2 reduces to

(26)

In the case when

, we can use the same approach as

in the previous paragraph, along with the fact that

(due to Condition C7) to show that S2 is satisfied. In

the case when

, the condition reduces to showing that

(27)

Since

, the above condition

will be satisfied when

(satisfied due to C5) and

which is satisfied due to Conditions C7

and C8 together.

In order to prove S3, we start with

Since

and

, where

and ,

, and

, we have

and

. Condition C9

ensures that there is no integer ,

such that

. This ensures that (35) is never satisfied

and hence,

. Therefore, we have proved that S3 is always

satisfied. Note that the condition that

is

equivalent to

, since

.

Let us now consider the situation when

and are con-

nected to the same check node and show that T1–T4 are satis-

fied. Let us begin with

(36) (37)

Adding (36) and (37), rearranging the terms and using the fact

that

, we get

(38)

(28) therefore,

can take values between 0 to

and

(29)

where . Therefore, when

and , we get

(30)

Since and

belong to the same check node,

. Then, we can show that

(Condition

C6 ensures the lower bound and C7 ensures the upper bound).

Hence, it suffices to show

(31)

Condition C7 guarantees the upper and lower limit and hence,

S3 is satisfied when

.

(39)

Finally, we show that

if C9 is satisfied.

Therefore, the necessary conditions to prove T1 are

(40)

(32)

(41)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2002

since

The first equation

reduces to

and is satisfied due to Condition C6.

The second equation reduces to

and is

satisfied due to Condition C7. This proves Condition T1. Next,

let

we proceed to proving T2.

then

(47)

Using similar techniques used in proving T1 we can show that the necessary conditions to prove T4 are

(48) (49)

let (42)
then
(43) Using similar techniques used in proving T1, we can show that the necessary conditions to prove T2 are

The first equation reduces to

and is satisfied due

to Condition C6. The second equation reduces to

and is satisfied due to Condition C7 (this is how

C7 is derived).

Hence, we have proved that there are no cycles of lengths two

or four if Conditions C1–C9 are satisfied.

Special Case: is Even: When is even, is even,

is even, is odd, and

is odd. The recursive equation is

of the form

. From the

previous equation we find that if is even,

is odd, and

vice versa. Therefore,

must be an even number. Hence, can take values between 0

to

only.

(44)

. Since

,

(45) due to Conditions C6 and C7

The first equation reduces to

and is satisfied

due to Condition C6. The second equation reduces to

and is satisfied due to Condition C7. Next, we

proceed to proving T3.

Now in order to prove T4, it is sufficient to show and hence, the sufficient conditions are

(50) (51)

The first condition is satisfied due to C6. The second condition

reduces to

, which is satisfied when

is obtained from Condition T2 and

hence, it suffices that

.

Q.E.D.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

let then

We would like to thank all the reviewers and the editor for

their constructive comments which have helped us improve the

(46)

paper since the first submission. In particular, Reviewer 2’s comments have been very helpful.

Equation (46) is equivalent to (43) and hence, T3 is proved. Finally, we prove T4.

REFERENCES
[1] G. C. Clark, Jr. and J. B. Cain, Error-Correction Coding for Digital Communications. New York: Plenum, 1981.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, Jan. 1962.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check matrices based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

