PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF LDPC CODE ON VR2 CHANNEL

D. Yang, R. Molstad and Y. Yip Imation Corporation, Oakdale, MN 55128, USA

Introduction LDPC (low density parity check) codes are error correcting codes with sparse parity check matrices. They
can be iteratively decoded with message passing algorithm. The application of LDPC codes to magnetic recording channel has been reported in [l-31. LDPC codes offer great potential to mitigate the dropout effects present in magnetic tape recording systems [4].
At high recording densities, bit interaction results in particular transition edges shifting from its original locations. This leads to nonlinear transition shift (NLTS) distortion which can severely degrade the channel performance. In this work, we investigate the application of LDPC codes in VR2 tape channel through simulation. In particular, the effect of NLTS on the channel performance is studied.
VR2 (variable rate and randomization) technique, developed by Overland Data Inc., is currently used in tape drive systems due to its high efficiency. VR2 channel is an EPRML channel. During encoding process, bits are inserted according to several conditions. The average bit insertions are 4 bits per block and the code rate is 99.9% on average.
In our simulation, the Lorentzian channel model is assumed. The equalized readback signal first pass through channel detector. In the channel detector, Max-log APP decoding based on BCJR algorithm is used. The soft information from the output of channel detector feeds the LDPC decoder which utilizes the standard sumproduct algorithm (SPA).

Simulation Results We generated a regular LDPC code with column weight 3 and code rate 8/9. The parity check matrix H
has size 524x4716. Each data block contains 4096 user data bits, preamble bits and block mark bits. In our simulation, the maximum iteration inside LDPC decoder is 20. No turbo equalization is used. User density is 2.5. S N R is defined as the dibit energy divided by the noise variance (rate loss is included). Simulation result shows a 4
dB SNR improvement at BER=IO-5, compared with traditional Viterbi decoder. In fact, most of the errors from the channel detector are absorbed by LDPC decoder, hence, leading to significant performance improvement. In addition, we observe that in the case of LDPC decoder, the SNR loss due to NLTS is smaller compared with the case of the Viterbi decoder. For example, in the case of Viterbi decoder, 15%
NLTS will cause 3 dB SNR loss at BER= , while in the LDPC decoder, 15% NLTS only incur 1.5 dB S N R loss. LDPC codes exhibit improved tolerance to NLTS.

Conclusion 1. 4 dB S N R gain can be realized by using LDPC code on
VR2 channel. 2. LDPC code is less sensitive to NLTS distortion.

. ......:......i...... :... . :

.

References [ l ] J. L. Fan, A. Friedmann, E. Kurtas, and S. McLaughlin, ‘Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording”Proc. 36 rh Allerton Conf., 1999 [2] T. Mittelholzer, A. Dholakia, and E. Eleftheriou, ‘Reduced complexity decoding of low density parity check codes for generalized partial response channels”1EEE Trans. on Magnetics, Vol. 37, No. 2, March 2001 [3] H. Song, R. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, ‘Applications of low density parity check codes to magnetic recording channels”1EEE J. on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 19, No. 5, May 2001 [4] J. Moon, B. Steingrimsson, and Y. Kim, ‘Signal processing for ATS’: ATS Summary Meeting, Imation, Sept.
2000

PARTICLE DISPERSION AND NOISE IN METAL PARTICLE TAPES

M. M. Aziz*,B. K. Middleton’, and J. J. Miles’ * School of Engineering and Computer Science, University of Exeter, Harrison Building,
Exeter EX4 4QF, UK.
+ Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M I 3 9PL, UK.

Introduction A general theory describing the behaviour of magnetic particles inside particulate media including the effects of physical chaining and inter particle interactions has been produced [I]. This work aims to provide evidence of the validity of this theory by comparison with experimental measurements on advanced metal particle (MP) tapes.

Theory

The distributions of particle sizes within collections of particles were assumed to be described

by the Gamma function while chain lengths (numbers of particles per chain) were uniformly

3

distributed throughout the assumed length range.

003

Experimental measurements and interpretation

3
0

Figure 1shows good agreement between the assumed Gamma function and the distribution of particle lengths in a typical metal powder sample [2]. Measurements of noise spectra were performed using a helical-scan digital tape system with virgin (previously unused) MP tapes

ee$

5 with coercivity 185kA/m,remnant magnetisation 270kA/m, squareness 0.9 and magnetic

layer thickness of 0.1pm. Figure 2 shows the spectra taken from an inductive replay head

2

with gap length 0.2pm and head-to-medium separation of 40nm. The medium noise spectrum 0

was normalised by the inductive head transfer function to yield the magnetisation spectrum as

8

shown in figure 3. A least-squares algorithm was used to fit the theoretical predictions to the 8

measured spectrum using selected values for the numbers of chains and their lengths.

-N

mm

*

m

I

P..IIEIP lk”llh ,“.“I
Figure 1

Frtquenr) (MHZ,
Figure 2

k ,x d.”$
Figure 3

References [13 Aziz, M. M., Middleton, B. K., and Miles, J. J., Autocorrelation Analysis of the Particle Magnetisation in Erased Particulate Media, Accepted for publication in the IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 2001. [2] Morales, M. P., Walton, S. A., Prichard, L. S., Sema, C. J., Dickson, D. P. E. and O’Grady, K., Characterisation of advanced metal particle recording media pigments, JMMM, 190,357-370,1998.

A? 02

AP 04

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:03:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

