208

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 5, MAY 2002

Density Evolution for Two Improved BP-Based Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes
Jinghu Chen, Student Member, IEEE, and Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, we analyze the performance of two improved belief propagation (BP) based decoding algorithms for LDPC codes, namely the normalized BP-based and the offset BP-based algorithms, by means of density evolution. The numerical calculations show that with one properly chosen parameter for each of these two improved BP-based algorithms, performances very close to that of the BP algorithm can be achieved. Simulation results for LDPC codes with code length moderately long validate the proposed optimization.
Index Terms—Block codes, density evolution, iterative decoding, LDPC codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW DENSITY parity check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] can achieve very good performance with the so-called BP algorithm or sum-product algorithm [2]. The BP algorithm can also be simplified to the BP-based algorithm [3], which greatly reduces the decoding complexity in implementation, but degrades the decoding performance as well. In [4], density evolution has been elaborated to analyze the capacity of LDPC codes for BP decoding. The density evolution algorithm was applied in [5] and [6] to the BP-based decoding algorithm, and in [7] to modified versions of the latter based on corrective terms.
In [8], we proposed to improve the performance of the BP-based algorithm by normalization. In this letter, we apply density evolution to obtain the thresholds of the normalized BP-based algorithm and another improved BP-based algorithm, named offset BP-based algorithm. Surprisingly good results are obtained for both algorithms, whose implementations are much simpler than that of the BP algorithm. The density evolution of these two improved BP-based algorithms is studied from a practical viewpoint, with no particular attention on theoretical issues such as concentration and convergence theorems.

II. DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR LDPC CODES WITH BP-BASED DECODING

In the following, we assume BPSK modulation over an

AWGN channel. The received values are Gaussian random

variables with mean

and variance

. The

log-likelihood ratio of bit is

.

Manuscript received December 26, 2001. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Dr. K. Narayanan. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-97-32959 and Grant CCR-00-98029, and by the Hawaii Center for Advanced Communications (HCAC).
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: jinghuspectra.eng.hawaii.edu; marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier S 1089-7798(02)05094-9.

A. BP and BP-Based Algorithms

For iteration , let

and

denote the message sent

from bit node to check node and the message sent from

check node to bit node , respectively [2]. Also denote the

set of neighboring check nodes for bit node as

, and the

set of neighboring bit nodes for check node as

. For

regular LDPC codes, we have

and

.

Then each iteration of the BP decoding includes the following

two steps.

1) Processing in check nodes—for each and each

, update

(1)

2) Processing in bit nodes—for each and each

,

update

(2)

The BP-based algorithm uses simplified processing in check nodes based on
(3)

with

. Note that the max-product algorithm of [5] and

the Max-Log-MAP algorithm presented in [6] are equivalent to

the BP-based algorithm of [3] (also known as min-sum algo-

rithm).

B. Density Evolution for Iterative BP-Based Decoding

The density evolution of the BP-based algorithm in check

nodes processing can be found in [5], [6]. In the following, we

present it in a slightly different way, but the results are equiva-

lent.

A specific , denoted as , is a function of

in-

dependent identically distributed random variables, denoted as

, with probability density function

(pdf)

. Similarly to the notations in [6], we define

and

,

for

. Note that

and

are the probabilities of

with magnitude greater than , and sign and , respec-

tively. Then for

odd number of negative values in

and

(4)

1089-7798/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN AND FOSSORIER: DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR BP-BASED DECODING ALGORITHMS OF LDPC CODES

209

Hence the probability distribution function of is (5)
Similarly, for

(6)

Taking the derivative of

with respect to for both (5) and

(6), we finally obtain the pdf of as

formances very close to those of the BP algorithm. However, for

long LDPC codes, this criterion to determine scaling factors is

not as good.

For long code lengths, we propose to approximate the per-

formance of the normalized BP-based algorithm having a fixed

scaling factor by density evolution, and consequently find the

best scaling factors. It is quite straightforward to modify the

density evolution for the BP-based algorithm to take the nor-

malization into account. The only modification is the probability

density function

corresponding to (8), i.e.

(9)

and all the other procedures are the same as in the BP-based algorithm.

B. Offset BP-Based Algorithm

(7)

The density evolution procedure in bit nodes is identical to

that of BP decoding and the pdf of , denoted as

,

can be numerically computed with fast Fourier transform based

on (2) [4].

III. DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR TWO IMPROVED BP-BASED DECODING

Let and represent the values

computed by the

BP algorithm and the BP-based algorithm with (1) and (3), re-

spectively. It was shown in [8] that the following two statements

hold.

1) and have the same sign, i.e.,

.

2) has larger magnitude than , i.e.,

.

Based on these two statements, two improved BP-based algo-

rithms are presented in the following, the first having already

been suggested in [8]. Then we apply density evolution to eval-

uate the performance for each of these two improved algorithms

and determine the best corresponding parameters for the de-

coder.

A. Normalized BP-Based Algorithm

Another possible approach to improve the accuracy of the extrinsic messages delivered by the BP-based algorithm is to reduce the reliability values by a positive constant in the following way:

(10)

Note that all extrinsic messages with reliability values smaller

than are set to 0, such that they have no contribution to the

following bit node processing. As in the case of the normal-

ized BP-based algorithm, should be changed with the itera-

tion number to achieve the best possible performance. Instead,

for simplicity again, we keep it fixed.

To develop the density evolution of the offset BP-based algo-

rithm, we need to modify the definition of

used in the

density evolution procedure of the BP-based algorithm, in ac-

cordance with the update (10) as

(11)

where

.

In (11), an impulse function is introduced in the pdf

by updating with (10). But it disappears in the pdf of after the processing in bit nodes with (2), since the pdf of is continuous. The existence of the impulse function in does not have too much effect on the density evolution in bit node processing and only slight modifications are needed.

The check node processing with (3) could be improved by dividing with a constant, i.e.
(8)
where is a normalization factor greater than one. To obtain the optimum performance, should vary from one iteration to another, and depends on SNR values. However to facilitate the implementation, and the analysis as well, we keep only one scaling factor for all iterations and all SNR values.
In [8], a criterion was proposed to determine the normalization factor by letting the updated with (8) have the same mean as with the BP algorithm. The corresponding is determined for the first iteration, either by simulation or theoretically, and kept for all subsequent iterations. Simulation results show that for geometric LDPC codes and regular LDPC codes of short or medium length, the normalized BP-based algorithm with the normalization factor determined by this method can achieve per-

C. Numerical Results
We have performed numerical calculations of the thresholds for the normalized and offset BP-based algorithms with different values and and different code ensembles. The results for three ensembles of LDPC codes with rate 1/2 are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. With a properly chosen and , these two improved algorithms can achieve performances very close to that of the BP algorithm. The best possible thresholds of the two improved BP-based algorithms are summarized in Table I, and compared with those obtained for the BP [4] and the BP-based [5], [6] algorithms.
Most of the gap between BP and BP-based decoding can be bridged by both improved methods. The normalized BP-based algorithm slightly outperforms the offset BP-based algorithm, but may also be slightly more complex to implement. Importantly, these results also suggest that little additional improve-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

210

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 5, MAY 2002

Fig. 1. Threshold  for the normalized BP-based algorithm.

Fig. 3. Bit error performance of an (8000, 4000) regular LDPC code (maximum iteration number: 100).

decoding algorithms. Although the code length is far from in-

finity, we can still observe the effectiveness of the two improved

BP-based algorithms. For this code, the gap between BP and

BP-based algorithms is about 0.5 dB. However, with the nor-

malized BP-based and the offset BP-based algorithms, the gap

can be reduced to about 0.05 dB with

and

,

respectively. These values correspond to the best parameters

found for that family of codes in Figs. 1 and 2. For compar-

ison, we also plot the performances of these two algorithms

with

(which corresponds to the criterion of [8]) and

. For this code length, these parameter choices are

not as good as the proposed ones. For regular LDPC codes of

medium length, both the proposed approach and the approach

of [8] achieve comparable error performances.

Fig. 2. Threshold  for the offset BP-based algorithm.
TABLE I THRESHOLDS (IN dB) FOR VARIOUS DECODING ALGORITHMS

ments could be achieved by allowing either or to change at each iteration for these families of codes.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

In Fig. 3, simulation results are plotted for an (8000, 4000)

regular LDPC code [9] with

, under various

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] S. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, M.I.T., Sept. 2000.
[6] X. Wei and A. N. Akansu, “Density evolution for low-density paritycheck codes under Max-Log-MAP decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 37, pp. 1225–1226, Aug. 2001.
[7] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. Globecom 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001.
[8] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[9] D. J. MacKay. Online database of low-density parity check codes. [Online]. Available: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.uk/makcay/codes/data.html.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:15:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

