2310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2002

Bounds for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Over Partial Response Channels
Weijun Tan, Richard M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A bounding technique is used to evaluate the performance of high-rate low-density parity-check codes over partial response channels. Performance bounds for an ensemble of random codes, as well as for particular finite-geometry codes, are computed. Simulations are used to evaluate the bounds. The results show that the bounds appear to be valid for signal-to-noise ratios and code rates of interest in magnetic recording.
Index Terms—Error bounds, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, magnetic recording, partial response (PR) channels, weight distribution.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE recent introduction of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for magnetic recording applications has sparked a great deal of interest in the evaluation of the performance of these codes over partial response (PR) channels. Simulation techniques are not practical at the signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) of interest. Therefore, there is a need for analytical tools to evaluate the error-rate performance of these codes at high SNRs.
In this paper we use a bounding technique introduced in [1] to evaluate the performance of high-rate LDPC codes over PR channels. One condition required for using this technique is that we must know the weight distribution of the underlying code. However, it is generally impossible to obtain it accurately. Instead, we circumvent this obstacle by using a weight distribution bound for the target code.
Originally, most LDPC codes were found through random search. The recent introduction of algebraic methods for constructing LDPC codes [2] has made available codes with good minimum distances that are either cyclic or quasi-cyclic. One interesting characteristic of these geometrically constructed codes, which makes the method in [3] particularly well suited for the estimation of their weight distribution, is that many properties of these finite-geometry codes and the designs on which they are based have been well-studied and are known [4], [5].
Our approach consists of incorporating the estimated weight distribution into the performance bound for LDPC codes over PR channels. We first present the performance bound for an ensemble of random LDPC codes. Then we use the method in [3] to estimate the weight distribution of particular finite-geometry codes, which are used in the computation of their perfor-
Manuscript received February 12, 2002; revised May 19, 2002. The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA (e-mail: jcruz@ou.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2002.801877.

mance bounds. Simulations are used to evaluate these bounds over moderate SNRs.

II. BOUNDING TECHNIQUES

In this section we summarize the bounding technique pro-

posed in [1] and extend it to probability of frame error.

Consider a magnetic recording channel equalized to some PR

target, which uses a high-rate LDPC code and a random inter-

leaver between the code and the channel. This interleaver may

not be present in an actual system. It is, however, a key compo-

nent, which in conjunction with another basic assumption makes

the use of this bounding technique possible. The additional as-

sumption used in [1] is that for an error event, the squared Eu-

clidean distance between two codewords resulting in this error

event is approximately equal to the same distance when the two

codewords are not required to belong to the code. This approx-

imation is justified for high-rate codes.

Let the number of codewords with weight of information bits

and total weight be

(

for the ensemble). If only

the total weight distribution is known, we denote it as

.

By denoting

as the number of pairs of sequences with

input Hamming distance and output squared Euclidean dis-

tance in a PR channel, the union bound on the probability of

bit error for a

linearly coded system with white Gaussian

noise power

, employing maximum likelihood (ML) de-

coding, is [1]

(1)

Similarly, this bound can be extended to the probability of frame error, namely
(2)

Successful computation of these bounds hinges upon the

computation of

for the particular PR channel. Details

of its implementation can be found in [1]. Note that this

computation for a standard PR target is straightforward and

can be extended to generalized PR channels or even to the

Lorentzian channel [6].

0018-9464/02$17.00 © 2002 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAN et al.: BOUNDS FOR LDPC CODES OVER PR CHANNELS

2311

TABLE I FINITE-GEOMETRY LDPC CODES

III. WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF FINITE-GEOMETRY CODES

A. Finite-Geometry LDPC Codes

Finite-geometry LDPC codes were introduced by Kou et al.

[2], in which code construction is closely associated with finite

geometries. The basic idea is that the rows and columns of the

parity-check matrix correspond to the points and lines of a finite

geometry. The geometries we are currently using are projective

(PG) and Euclidean (EG) geometries, in which it is guaranteed

that there are no cycles of length four.

The codes we are interested in are the type-I and type-II codes

defined in [2]. Since EG codes and PG codes with similar pa-

rameters have similar performance, we only consider type-I PG

(PG-I) codes, some type-II PG (PG-II) codes, and type-II EG

(EG-II) codes as examples in this paper. These codes are listed

in Table I. Note that

denotes the code based on

geometry

in Table I, where , , , , and de-

note the minimum distance of the code and its dual, the column

and row weight of the parity-check matrix, and the code rate,

respectively.

The codes have some properties, which can be used in esti-

mating the weight distribution, as follows.

Fig. 1. Weight distribution of PG-I codes.

finite-geometry codes. For those codes whose and/or is not

known, available bounds can be used.

Let and be the weight distribution of a

linear

code and its dual with minimum distance and . Define

a weight moment function

, where

is a linear combination of

’s.

The bounds on

are derived using the basic idea of The-

orem 1 in [3]. However, some modifications are made to incor-

porate the additional knowledge about the code. For instance,

the weight distribution of is symmetric, i.e.,

.

Let

,

be two

polynomials, such that

,

for

and

,

, for

, then

1) For PG-I codes, both minimum distances are known

[5], and

[4]. Other parame-

ters such as code length, code dimension, etc., are already

given in [2] and more results can be found in [4].

2) The dual code of every PG-I code has a fixed number of

codewords of weight , which is equal to the number of

incidence vectors for the lines in the geometry [4]. In our

case, this number is equal to the code length .

3) For type-II codes, no explicit results are known for and

, but bounds are available.

B. Weight Distribution
The approach introduced in [3] for the estimation of the weight distribution of codes is a polynomial-based method, in which general bounds on the weight moment function of the code are formulated in terms of the Krawtchouk polynomials
. The basic principle
behind this method is the MacWilliams identity [7], which relates the weights of a code to that of its dual.
This method requires knowledge of the minimum distance of the code and/or that of its dual, which is available for some

(3)

(4)

where is the cardinality of the code . Note that and

are included to make the bounds on

better.

By defining appropriate series of polynomials , and

, we can find both upper and lower bounds on

, from

which the weight distribution can be estimated [3].

Using this technique, we compute the weight distributions of

some PG-I, PG-II, and EG-II codes. In Fig. 1, we show the re-

sults for some PG-I codes, where the axes are the normalized

weight

and the number of codewords,

.A

curve of exact weights for the PG-I(2,3) code denoted by “exact”

is also plotted. Note that the estimates for short codes, e.g.,

PG-I(2,3), are good, whereas those for long codes are only fair.

In some cases, the estimates of are larger than , which

is impossible. This indicates that some of these estimates can

be very poor. However, in the calculation of our performance

bounds, we only use estimates of low weight codewords, which

are shown in Fig. 1 for some PG-I codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 38, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER 2002

8 Fig. 2. Performance of an ensemble of (5000,3,30) codes on the precoded
(1=(1 D )) EPR4 channel.

8 Fig. 3. Performance of finite-geometry LDPC codes on the precoded (1=(1
D )) EPR4 channel.

IV. PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND SIMULATIONS

A. Bounds for an Ensemble of LDPC Codes

One commonly used approach to construct LDPC codes is

based on random bipartite graphs. We refer to these LDPC codes

as

codes, where is the code length, and and are the

variable and check node degrees, respectively. For this ensemble

of codes, a weight distribution bound is available [8]. The com-

puted frame error rate bound and simulation results for the en-

semble of (5000,3,30) codes over the precoded EPR4 channel

are shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen that the simulation results

at moderate SNRs violate the computed ML bound. There are

two possible reasons for these violations. First, the weight dis-

tribution bound may be loose; second, the LDPC decoder uses

a sub-optimal algorithm, namely the belief propagation (BP) al-

gorithm. However, the bounds at high SNRs appear to be valid,

which means that the log-BP algorithm is performing within the

ML upper bound. We must note that the bound herein is an en-

semble bound and the code simulated is a particular code, so

these comparisons must be used with caution.

B. Bounds for Finite-Geometry LDPC Codes
Estimated weight distributions for geometric LDPC codes are used in computing the performance bounds. Some samples of the bounds are shown in Fig. 3. Note that a bound for PG-I(2,3) using the exact weight distribution denoted as “exact” is also shown in the figure for comparison with the one using the estimated weights. It can be seen that the gap between these two bounds is less than 1 dB, which implies that the estimated weight distribution is good. Simulation results for these codes are used to evaluate the bounds. It is observed that the bounds for codes PG-I(2,3) and PG-I(2,4) are not validated by the simulations, perhaps due to their low code rates. The simulation curves for

other codes are consistent with the computed bounds even at moderate SNRs. However, the bounds appear to be somewhat loose.
V. CONCLUSION
We developed a technique to compute the union bound for high-rate randomly or geometrically constructed LDPC codes over arbitrary PR channels, assuming ML decoding. This technique can be used to analyze the performance of LDPC codes, particularly at high SNRs. This is a very useful tool to predict the performance of LDPC coded magnetic storage systems. Simulations indicate that the bounds are valid at high SNRs, albeit loose. From these bounds, we can conclude that these finite-geometry codes may be very competitive candidate codes for magnetic recording systems.
REFERENCES
[1] T. M. Duman and E. Kurtas, “Performance bounds for high-rate linear codes over partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 1201–1205, Mar. 2001.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory., vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] A. Ashikhmin, A. Barg, and S. Litsyn, “Estimates of distance distribution of codes and designs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 1050–1061, Mar. 2001.
[4] E. Assmus and J. Key, Design and Their Codes. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
[5] J. Neil, J. Key, and J. Marialuisa, “Minimum weight and dimension formulas for some geometric codes,” Des. Codes Cryptogr., vol. 17, pp. 105–120, Sept. 1999.
[6] T. M. Duman and E. Kurtas, “Maximum likelihood decoding bounds for high rate turbo codes over Lorentzian channels,” Electron. Lett., vol. 37, pp. 771–773, June 2001.
[7] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1981.
[8] G. Miller and D. Burshtein, “Bounds on the maximum decoding error probability of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2696–2710, Nov. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:17:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

