ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30 -July 5,2002

Designing Irregular LPDC Codes Using EXIT Charts Based on Message Error Rate
Masoud Ardakani and Frank R. Kschischang The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto {masoud, frank}Qcomm.toronto.edu

Abstract - A new analysis of irregular low density more than 10, those methods show noticeable inaccuracy [2].

parity check (LDPC) codes on AWGN channels based On the other hand finding a good degree sequence using the

on modified extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) density evolution method requires tedious computations.

charts is presented. We modify EXIT charts to track In this work we first use EXIT chart analysis to track the

the message error rate transfer characteristics of the error rate of messages from variable nodes iteration by itera-

constituent codes. Previous analyses, which make a tion. As a result there is no condition on messages from check

Gaussian assumption for all messages passed, are in- nodes, which in turn allows for a more accurate analysis under

accurate at low SNRs. We more accurately track the the Gaussian assumption.

message error rate transfer by making a Gaussian A new design method based on EXIT charts is then intro-

approximation only for messages sent from variable duced for design of irregular codes. The main point here is

nodes, with statistics of messages from check nodes that the message error rates of regular codes combines linearly

computed by simulation. This makes the analysis for an irregular code:

more accurate, particularly for low rate codes where, at low SNR, the messages from check nodes are far

p e r r ( m )= Cp,,,(mldegree = i) .p(degree = i)

from Gaussian. The new analysis simplifies under-

222

standing of the irregular codes to the level of regular case, leading to a simple approach to the design of irregular codes. We have used this method to design irregular LDPC codes that perform close to the Shannon limit over a wider range of rates and varitable degrees as compared to previous work. The same method can be used for many other codes defined on graphs.

Here p(degree = i ) is described by degree distribution and p,,,(mldegree = i) is described by EXIT chart of a regular code. In other words, the EXIT chart of an irregular code is a linear combination of EXIT charts of regular codes. We employ our method t o design very close t o Shannon limit irregular LDPC codes with a wider range of rates which perform almost as well as codes designed by density evolution.
Since EXIT chart analysis needs information from only one

I. INTRODUCTION

iteration of the algorithm, our method offers the great advan-

tage of simplicity, both for analysis and design of LDPC codes.

The design of irregular codes defined on graphs, such as Moreover, since our analysis is not based on the simplicity of

LDPC codes or turbo codes have been of great interest recently [2-51. In [3] a density evolution algorithm is proposed

constituent codes we believe it can be used for designing other codes defined on graphs, such as irregular turbo codes, repeat-

to find the convergence threshold of LDPC decoders. In [4] accumulate codes, concatenated tree codes, and so on.

density evolution is used to design LDPC codes which per-

form very close t o Shannon limit. In fact the simplicity of constituent codes in LDPC codes (single parity check nodes)

REFERENCES

makes all of these analyses possible.

N. Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs. Ph.D.

Another approach for finding convergence threshold of iterative decoders, including codes with complicated constituent codes, is t o use extrinsic information transfer charts (EXIT charts) [5-71. Usually a Gaussian assumption about the density of passed messages is included. In [l]Wiberg noticed
that, on AWGN channels, a Gaussian assumption for LLR messages is not far from reality. In [3] a consistency (or sym-

thesis, Linkoping University, Sweden, 1996. S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Truns. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657-670, Feb. 2001. T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of lowdensity parity-check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 47, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.

metry) assumption on LLR messages is proposed. In [2] based on Gaussian assumption and density evolution, LDPC codes are designed with a performance very close t o Shannon limit.
Although the Gaussian assumption has led to the design of very good LDPC codes [2], previous work included a Gaussian assumption for both messages from check nodes and from variable nodes. At low SNR, the Gaussian assumption on the output of check nodes is poor, which hinders the design of low rate LDPC codes. In fact the previous method can be employed for designing irregular LDPC codes with rate no less than half [2]. Moreover, when the maximum variable degree is

T. J. Richardson,A. Shokrollahi and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approachingirregular low-densityparity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 47, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001. S. ten Brink, “Iterative decoding trajectories of parallel concatenated codes,” Proc. 3rd IEE/ITG Conference on Source and Channel Coding, pp. 75580, Munich, Jan. 2000. D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar and 17. Pollara “Low complexity turbolike codes,” Proc. 2nd Internat. Synp. on Turbo Codes, pp. 73-80, Sep. 2000. H. El Gamal, A. R. Hammons “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Truns. Inform. Theory, Vo1.47, Feb. 2001.

0-7803-7501-7/02/$17.00@2002IEEE.

454

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:12:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

