'hrho Decoder Architectures for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes 
Mohammad M. Mansour and Naresh R. Shanhhag 
iCIMS Research Center,Co ordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Urbana. IL61801 
mmansour@uiuc.edu shanbhag@uiuc.edu 
Absnmt-Tubo deeding oflowdenrily pllityshrek (LDPC) and gem- 
e m b e d  lowdensity (GLO) coda and the corresponding deeodor amhitoe- 
h m s  are mnridrred. A regular (c,r)-LDF'C code of length n is viewed 
s 
the interseetion of c intedrrvrd supersods where each smper.de is 
the dlred sum of n/r indepodent single pa.rity-cheek w b d l s  E*- 
dons e GLD coda dmply utilize mom pwellul subsoder. The turbo 
d d h g  schedule is employed to d d e  LDPC and GLD coda using con- 
stitnmt mR.input soR-mQut (SJSO) deader5 that eommonicste thmugh 
c inbrlwera. The pmposod xhedule exhibits a faster Convergence be- 
havior, and hence lower decoding latency, than the " m o n l y  employed 
Wo-phase schedule, and hss P reduced memory requirrment that is a Ihnc- 
tim of the nomkr of sopercoda. The ~ a r m a n c e  
of the turbo decoding 
xhedule is esploaled thmngb dmolationr over an AWGN channel. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
tterative decoding of codes defined on graphs using the sum-product 
or message-passing ( M p )  algorithm U.21 have proved to be extraordi- 
narily effective compared to conventional maximum-likelihood decod- 
ing. Turbo codes [3] and low-denslty parity check (LDFC) codes [4] 
are the two best known codes of this class that are capable of achieving 
direct sum of nlr independent single parity-check (SPC) sub-codes. 
The SFC codes in each super-code can be decoded in parallel using 
nlr simple SISO decoders that implement either Gallager's check- 
to-bit message update equations or the BCIR algorithm [5,6] on the 
syndrome trellis of a (r, r - 1) parity-check code. Extensions to other 
stronger constituent codes is also possible under the title of gened- 
ized low-density (GLD) codes [7,81. The proposed decoding technique 
has two imponant advantages over existing techniques: (I) 
It exhibits 
faster convergence behavior (up to 50% fewer iterations) which re- 
duces bath decoding latency and switching activity of the decoder, and 
(2) the storage requirements are a function of the number of constituent 
super-codes which in most practical cases is small (O(1og n)). 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the 
iterative decoding algorithm for LDFC codes and its hardware wm- 
plexity are reviewed. In Section IU, turbo decoding of LDFC codes is 
proposed and compared to the original two-phase decoding technique. 
Section IV presents a decoder architecture based on the proposed tech- 
nique. Simulation results comparing the performance of the proposed 
and existine decodine technioues are vresented in Section V. Sec- 
low bit crrorralc, at rode rater appruaching Shannon's capacit) l t m  
Thc ~tcraovc decohg pmccss of both Lode, cons~st~ 
of tu0 man 
t,,," 
SOmr n,;nclud,ng'remurk.' 
steps: (1) computing independent messages proportlonal to the apos- 
teriori probability distributions of the code bits. and (2) communicnt- 
ing the messages. The complexity incurred in both steps depends on 
how messages are wmmunicated with respect to the pmcess of wm- 
puting the messages. In turbo codes, the communication mechanism 
is defined by a simple pseudo-random message interleaver that is ex- 
t c m l  to the process of computing the messages, while the computa- 
tional complexity is proportional to the code length and memory. On 
the other hand, the communication mechanism for LDFC codes is de- 
ll. ITERATIVE DECODING 
OF LDPC CODES 
A. W P C  Codes 
An LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a sparse parity- 
check matrix H = [/L;~],,,~~ and is usually described by a bipartite 
graph (see Fig. 1) whose reduced adjacency matrix is H. The graph 
has on one side m check nodes {CL, m,. 
. . , G,,} corresponding to the 
m rows of H, and on the other n bit nodes {bl,L, ... , b,} corre- 
sponding to then columns of H. A bit node bj is connected to a check 
fined by a p,eudo-mdom hipamlc graph and IS mema1 uith rcrpcc~ 
to message computalion (,.e., an mtcmd interleavrr), uhlle the corn- 
puwtmal complexity IS very low (-. ,,der of the logmthm ofthe code 
length) In both w\e,, the performancc depends ,m thc propcmc\ cif 
themtrrleaver themmblingofchanncl bunt error sfor turbocodes, 
and the exuemal graph proFmcs (such as gmh and erpinwn cocfi- 
cient) of thc blDarUte eraoh definine the code for LDFC code,. 
node c. 11 thc entry h,, of H is I .  In a reRuhr (c, rJ-LDPC code. 
brl nodes hdvc degree c and check nodes havc dcgrcc r In the graph 
The number of edges in the corrcrpondlrg bipmlc gnph IS the Ham- 
ming welght of H gl\rn by u.(H, = nc 7 w r .  and Ihr dcnuly of 
H 13 defined I 5  d(H, = w ( H ~ , m n  = c w, = r/n. In an irrpgu- 
lor (C. H)-LDPC rode Ihc bit node and check nodedegrees are draun 
from Ihc sets Rand C. respectively. Typcdly, regular cudcs arc easier 
- .  
- 
However, unlike the case for turbo codes, the lack of any slructural 
regularity in the message communication mechanism of LDFC codes 
has more reaching consequences regarding decoder implementation 
resulting in (I) complex interconnects that limits the amount of inher- 
ent parallelism that can be exploited efficiently in a parallel decoder 
implementation, and (2) stringent memory requirements in a serial de- 
coder implementation that limits the applicability of LDFC codes in 
latency and power sensitive applications. 
This paper presents a turbo decoding technique for LDFC wdes 
which combines the attractive features of turbo codes (compared to 
those for LDFC codes), namely the redud memory overhead due 
to message communication thmugh the use of intedeavers, with the 
reduced complexity features of the message compurations of LDPC 
codes. A regular (c, r)-LDFC code of length n is vi$wed as the in- 
tersection of c interleaved super-codes where each super-code is the 
This work was suppled with funds from NSF gran0 CC 99-79381 
00-73490. 
and CC 
to encode and have a simpler decoder architecture than irregular codes, 
however the latter achieve higher coding gain. 
* d  nodss 
Fig. 1. Bipartite graph and parityxheck malrir H of a regular (2.3tLDPC 
code of length 9. 
B. The Message-Possing Algorirhm 
LDPC codes are decoded iteratively using Gallager's message- 
passing algorithm [4] based on a concurrent or two-phase schedule 
0-7803-7632-3102/$17.00 02002 IEEE 
1383 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:03:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
that is best described with the help of a bipartite graph. The algorithm 
computes iteratively the extinsic probability values associated with 
each bit node using disjoint parity-check equations that the bit partic- 
ipates in [4]. Each iteration consists of two phases in which updates 
of all check nodes are done in phase 1 by sending messages &-b) 
IO neighboring bit nodes, and then updates of all bit nodes are done 
in phase 2 by sending messages (pa-& 
0 neighboring check nodes 
(Fig. 1). Updates in each phase a s  independent and can be paral- 
lelized. 
The two-phase message-passing algorithm is listed below as Algo- 
rithm 1, where Aj is the channel reliability value of the jth bit, R i j [ k ]  
is the check-to-bit message from check node i to bit node j at the 
kth iteration, Qu[k] is the bit-tocheck message from bit node i to 
check node j at the kth iteration. C [ i ]  is the set of check nodes in- 
volving bit node i, R[i] is the set of bit nodes involved in check node 
i. $(s) = -; 
log (tad(;)) 
= $-'(=),and 
6.3 is a sign correction 
factor that depends on IR[i] 1 and the sign of the terms in the summation 
of equation (GZ). 
Algorithm I TwwF'hase .Mes\agc-hsslng Algorithm .. 
fort = 1 r o m . j  = 1 tondo 
Q; 101 - 
0 
k c l  
while k < k, 
do 
forj = 1 rondo 
lorplli E CLi] do 
Qjilk] c X j  + 
Qrj[k - 11 .... ..........._. ... ( G l )  
i#iTtCV] 
fori = 1 to m d o  
f o r & j € R [ i ] d a  
$(1Qjg[k]1)] .6,j ......_........ 
(G2) 
k + k + l  
end while 
A parallel decoder implementation of the two-phase schedule is con- 
strained by the complexity of the physical interconnect required to es- 
tablish the graph connectivity.and hence does not scale well for mod- 
erate (> 2K) to large code lengths (e.g.. a regular (3,6)-LDF€ code 
of length 2048 requires 2 x 24,576 = 49,152 interconnect wires as- 
suming messages axe represented using 4 bits). 
Serial architectures were considered in [9] in which wmputations 
are distributed amongsta number of processing elements that commu- 
nicate through memory instead of a complex interconnect The over- 
head is a substantial increase in memory that amounts to four times 
the Hamming weight of the parity-check matrix. A heuristic approach 
aimed at simplifying implementation complexity was pmpsed in [IO] 
by relaxing the inequality i # i' 
in (GI). However, this leads to con- 
siderable loss in coding gain due to correlation between the messages 
and premature ending of dewding iterations. 
The memory requiremenu can be considerably reduced by overlap- 
ping the computations of both phases of the message-passing algo- 
rithm in a merged-schedule message-passing algorithm according to 
Algorithm 2 shown below and the corresponding decoder architecture 
inFig.2. Sincetheupdatesinequation (GI) 
areadditiveinnalure(i.e., 
the condition i # i' 
can be satisfied by first computing the total sum 
A, + ~ , r C U I R , ~ j  
[k - I ]  and then subtracting the violating messages 
R i j [ k  - I]), only one copy of the bit-tocheck messages is maintained 
in a buffer Q for each bit holding this total sum (refer to Fig. 2). Up- 
.dated check messages to the bit under consideration are accumulated 
in a temporary buffer P of size n maintaining a single running sum of 
the bit-tocheck messages instead of multiple copies pertaining to dif- 
ferent check nodes. Unlike [IO], a copy of the violating check-to-bit 
messages Ri;[k - 11 is saved in a buffer R of size m x P so that it is 
subtracted from the cumulative sum in the next iteration to implement 
the condition j # j' in (G2). At the end of each iteration, P and Q 
are interchanged and P i s  reloaded with the Xj's. 
Algorithm 1 Merged-Schedule Messagc-Passing Algorithm 
for J = 1 10 18 do 
Q j [ O ]  c Pj[O] + Aj 
fori = 1 1om.j E R[i]do 
QjlOl 
t- 0 
k - l  
a h i l c k < M A X m R d o  
fori = 1 tomdo 
for dl j E R[i] do 
R+lklct/r[,E 
~ ~ ~ Q j ~ [ k - l ] - R i j r [ k - 1 ] ] )  
'6.3 .. (G3) 
P j [ k ] - P j [ k - l ] + R , j [ k ]  
)#>'€R 
4 
for j = 1 U) n do 
Qi Ikl 
4 
lkl 
Pj [k] c A; 
k c k + l  
end while 
The architecture stores ne + 2n messages as opposed to 4nc. a sav- 
ings of (75 - 50/c) %. The SlSO decoders implement equation (G3) 
with the + function p&ed 
in a lookup table (LUT). Multiple SISO 
decoders scheduled to operate on distinct bits instead of two as shown 
in Fig. 2 can be used to increase throughpt. Exm logic must be added 
to ensure correct operation in Case some conflicts are not removable 
through scheduling. 
Fig. 2. 
rithm. 
Ikcoder architecture implementing the merged-~hedulc MP algo- 
111. TURBO 
DECODING 
OF LOW-DENSITY CODES 
A. An Alternative Wew ofLDPC Codes 
Gallager [4] constructed ensembles of regular (e, r)-LDF€ codes of 
length n by defining the parity-check matrix H,,, 
of2 code c'& a 
concatenation of e submauices, each containing a single 1 in each col- 
umn as shown in Fig. 3. The first of these submuices H' having s i x  
1 x n defines a super-code C' as the direct sum of n/r parity-check 
1384 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:03:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
sub-codes ( ~ , r  
- 1). Note that C' satisfies a subset of the parity- 
check equations of C, and hence C is a subspace of C'. The other sub- 
matrices H', . . . , H' are pseudo-random permutations of HI, each 
of which defines a super-code C' on the corresponding subset of the 
parity-check equations. Hence, C is the intersection of the super-codes 
C', . . . , C'as 
shown in Fig. 4. Gallager also showed [4] that LDFC 
codes are asymptotically good when the number of super-codes is at 
least three. Figure 3 shows an example of a parity-check matrix of a 
regular (3,4)-LDFC code of length 16 as the concatenation of 3 sub- 
matrices. 
n 
--I rllrlloooolooooloooot *I 
nt 
"' ii 
0000 0000 1 1 1 1  0000 
0000 0000 
0000 0000 0000 1 1  1 I I c~ 
0 0 0 0  i 
1 1  1 
0100 0001 1000 0001 t C '  
............ ............. . . . ~ ~ . ~ ~ ~  
.... ............ 
1000 0010 0010 1000 *, 
a, 1 5 /L~ooll~oooo~oool~oloB/l 
0 0 0 0  1 1 0 0  0 1 0 0  0 0 1 0  
.
.
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
~
 
~~ ........... ............. ..... ~~~~~. 
Fig. 4. A e& 
C as &e inlenecdon of three super-codw C', Cz. and C3 
B. The Turbo Decoding Scheme 
The previous definition of LDFC codes is reminiscent of parallel 
concatenated turbo codes [5], and hence it is natural to apply the turbo 
decoding technique to decode LDFC codes employing constituent 
SISO decoders to decode eacb of the super-codes. From this observa- 
tion, it follows that the decoder memory requirements for LDFC codes 
reduce to those of turbo codes since most practical L D K  codes can be 
constructed from a small number of super-codes. For each bit. extrin- 
sic probability values are computed given that the bit belongs to the 
first code C'. ms extrinsic information is fed as a priori information 
through an interleavet to the SISO decoder working on C'. The sec- 
ond SlSO dewder next generates updated extrinsic probability values 
considering now the bits belong to C2. The p m s s  is repeated on all 
of the remaining super-codes. A single update of messages based on 
one super-code is called a sub-itemtion, and a round of updates across 
all the super-codes constitutes a single decoding iteration. At the final 
iteration, hard decisions are made based an the posterior probability 
values read (after &-interleaving) from the SISO decoder operating 
on the last super-code. 
The trellis of each super-code is a direct sum of 7~ f r syndrome MI- 
lisesofa(r,r-1) singleparity-checkcodeasshowninFig.5. Hence, 
the SISO decoders of the super-codes consist of independent simple 
SISO decoders that can operate in parallel on each of the constituent 
single parity-check sub-codes. 
(duUu.lr.la) 1 
I 
' I  
Fig. 5. 
The Nrbo decoding algorithm applied to the LDFC code in Fig. 3 
viewed as the i n l e d o n  of thrre supa-eodes. The EonatiNent sub-codes of 
the sup-codes me (4,3)-SPC codss with simple %state mllise~ of length 4. 
The SISO decoders can either implement Gallager's message update 
equation as given in equation (G2) or the BCJR algorithm [SI. In [6], it 
was shown that the BCJR algorithm is better from an implementation 
point of view since it is less prone to quantization noise. 'Ibis follows 
from the fact that on a short Z-state weltis, it is possible IO work with 
metric differences (Ao 
p2 - 01) rather than absa- 
lute metrics and hence maximize the dynamic range of the metrics and 
void overflow. Another imponant feature is the reduced complexity of 
the BCJR algorithm when applied to a 2-state trellis where the forward 
state metric update equation is simply given by 
az - W. Ap 
-X;+Q(-X;) 
i f A q  t IXji, 
X;+Q(X;) 
~ 
ifAa; 5 +;I, 
for j = 1,. . . , c, where Ao;+l is the updated forward metric differ- 
ence at the (j + 1)-st trellis section. X; is the prior reliability value of 
the jth bit, and Q ( x )  is a univariate correction function that gives the 
quantized correction factor that minimizes the error between 5 and the 
ideal value. Similar equations can be derived for the backward state 
metric updates Ap; and the output reliability computations A; (refer 
to [S, 61 for terminology). Note that (1) can be implemented simply as 
a Compare-Select (CS) block using two comparators. two 2's comple- 
menters, a multiplexer and a LUT which stores the correction factors 
Q ( x )  and generates the corrected metric as shown in Fig. 6(a). assum- 
ing comparators are implemented using adders. A similar argument 
holds for the implementation of Ap and A. The SISO decoder can 
then be built from these CS units according the architechlre shown in 
Fig. 6(b). A parallel SISO decoder in which the Ao and AD recur- 
sions are updated simultaneously starting from both ends of the trellis 
can be used to reduce decoding latency. 
An important advantage of the turbo decoding algorithm is that 
it converges faster than the two-phase schedule (as shown through 
simulations in Section V) since new messages are compuled based 
on updated values from each sub-iteration rather than old messages 
from the previous iteration. At the same SNR, the algorithm requires 
20% - 50% fewer iterations to converge. and can achieve up to an 
order of magnitude improvement in coding gain for a small number 
1385 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:03:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
0) 
Fig. 6. (a) Compare-Select unit implementing the forward state metric differ- 
ence~ 
update Aa of (I ). and @) Archilccrure fm the SISO deeodsr. 
of iterations and moderate-to-high SNR's. ?his is obviously favorable 
from an implementation point of view since it improves decoding la- 
tency. Moreover, it was absrved through simulations that the turbo 
decoding algorithm performs always bener than the two-phase sched- 
ule regardless of the wde properties (e.g., regularlimgular. girth, ex- 
panding coefficient). 
C. Exlension ro Genemlized Low-Densiry Codes 
The class of LDPC codes can be extended IO generalized low- 
density (GLD) codes [7,8] where the consistent sub-codes of the super- 
codes are (no, 
ko) linear block codes instead of SFC codes. The turbo 
decoding algorithm can then also be applied to decode this class of 
codes, In [8] it was shown the1 this class is asymptotically good when 
the number of super-codes is two (i.e.. two super-wdes concatenated 
by one intedeaver). For practical applications, efficient codes can he 
built from primitive. shonened, or extended binary Hamming or BCH 
sub-codes. Since only two super-codes are considered, this class of 
codes coincides exactly with parallel concatenated turbo codes 131 con- 
srmcted from two convolutional codes and an interleaver. 
The pa&-check 
matrix HG of a GLD code of length n with 
(no, ka) block wdes as constituent sub-wdes is defined using the 
parity-check matrix HL of a regular (c, no)-LDPC code consisting 
of two submavices each of size nlr x n. kt H, be the parity-check 
matrix of the (no, h) constituent sub-code. Then the zeros in each 
row of HL are replaced by a zero column vector of length (no - ko). 
and the no non-zero elements of each row are replaced by one of the 
no distinct columns of H,. For example, Fig. 7(a) shows the expan- 
sionofarowinH~ having8onesinto4rowsinHcusingan(8,4,4) 
extended Hamming code as a constituent sub-code. 
To reduce hardware complexity, the BCJR algorithm is applied to 
the minimal Irellis of the constituent code [I 1) which can be obtained 
for example using the Kschischang-Sorokine algorithm [121. Further 
optimizations such as trellis sectionalizarion [ I l l  can be applied to 
the minimal trellis to reuse or reduce state metric computations. Fig- 
ure 7@) shows.th$ sectionalized minimal Irellis of the (8,4,4) ex- 
tended Hamming code. The architecture of the corresponding forward 
state metric compulation unit (a-Unit) of the BCJR algorithm based on 
this trellis is shown in Fig. 8. The architecture uses the Add-Compan- 
Select (ACS) unit.for inremrediate state mevic computations. Similar 
0 0 0 i 0 1 , 0 0 1 0 I 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0  
.... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  I t o o  1 1 0 0 0  
0 0 0 0 0 1 ' 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0  
mwsm ", 
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0  
0) 
Fig. 7. 
(a) Conshuction of HG with an (8,4,4) ertended Hamming con- 
stiNent subcode h m  HL having 8 mes prr -. 
@) A scctionalized minimal 
mllis of the (8,4,4) extended Hamming d e .  
architectures for the backward and output mevic computations can be 
built. which can be assembled together with the 0-Unit in a fashion 
similar to the one in Fig. 6(b) to build a SlSO decoder for the con- 
stituent Hamming code. 
i- 
o."nit 
Fig. 8. ArchiteeNre of the forward $Late meuic compulation unit of the B U R  
algorithm bawd on the sectionalired minimal trellis of the (8,4,4) extended 
Hammingcode. 
IV. DECODER ARCHITECTURE 
An architecture implementing the turbo decoding algorithm for low- 
density codes (both LDPC and GLD codes) is presented in this section. 
The other major benefit of the turbo decoding algorithm, besides the 
improved decoding latency due to its faster convergence characteris- 
tics. is its reduced memory requirements in a decoder implementation. 
Unlike the two-phase schedule where all intermediate messages be- 
tween bit nodes and chcck nodes in the undedying hipartite graph musl 
be saved, only the panial hit messages that result from decoding each 
super-code need to be saved. In fact, for c concatenated super-codes. 
only the partial bit messages from (c - 1) of the super-codes need to 
be saved. In essence, since the overall code is decoded by decoding the 
super-codes in tandem in'one iteration, newiy generated bit messages 
from preceding super-codes are direcrly used to generate bit messages 
of succeeding super-codes on the same iteration. This eliminates the 
constraint of saving multiple bit and check messages. 
1386 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:03:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Figure 9 shows an architecture implementing the turbo decoding 
algorithm for low-density codes. The same architecture can be used to 
decode both LDPC as well as GLD wdes where only the constituent 
SISO decoders of the super-codes differ (i.e., Fig. 6(b) with the slate 
metric computation unit shown in Fig. 6(a) for LDPC codes or in Fig. 8 
for GLD codes). The bit messages are stored in n circular buffers each 
having (c - 1) stages forming an (c - 1) x n army wrresponding 
to (c - 1) of the c super-codes, as shown in Fig. 9. A set of d SlSO 
decoders operate in parallel on a row of the axray at any given sub 
iteration through the (de-)multiplexers. The parameter d is a VLSI 
design parameter which constitutes a tradeoff between throughpt and 
interconnect complexity in the (de-)multiplexen. 
At the s m  of every new iteration, messages corresponding to super- 
code 2 occupy the mils of the circular buffers, and those for the last 
(ah) 
super-code occupy the heads. During the hrst subiteration corre- 
sponding to updates from super-code 1, appropriate messages are read 
from the buffers through the MUXs and then accumulated to form the 
total reliability values available with respect to super-code 1 (note that 
the resulting sum does not include the messages previously generated 
by super-code 1 itself). Each read operation from the buffers rotates 
the buffers by (c - 2) positions so that the messages to be updated by 
the SlSO decoders are available at the heads of the buffers. The SlSO 
decoders generate the corresponding updated messages for super-code 
1 which overwrite old messages comsponding to super-code 2 (at the 
heads of the buffers) since these are not used in producing new mes- 
sages for super-code 2 in the next subiteration. A subiteration com- 
pletes when all the n buffers are updated. The process is repeated in 
the remaining (c - 1) subiterations. The sequence of buffer updates 
when the number of super-codes is c = 4 is shown in the Fig. 9(b). 
Note that to minimize switching activity in the decoder (and hence re- 
duce power consumption), a pointer can be used to update memory 
instead of having the actual memory contents physically rotate. 
SlSO 
SlSO 
I 
I 
DECODER1 
1 '.. I 
DECODERd 
"&-I 
16- 
1 
1 
mb-. 
(b) 
Fig. 9. 
(b) Sequence of updates for one of the circular buffers for e = 4. 
(a) Decoder architecture implementing &e tu& decoding algorithm. 
V. SIMULATION 
RESULTS 
The performance of the turbo decoding schedule is compared with 
the two-phase message-passing algorithm by simulating two LDPC 
codes C, and CZ over a memoryless AWGN channel assuming BPSK 
modulation. C1 isaregular(3,5)-LDPCcodeoflength 1200,whileCz 
is a regular (4,7)-LDPC code of length 4200. 100,000 frames were 
simulated using a maximum of 32 decoding iterations. Figures 10(a) 
and IO@) show the BER plots for CI and CZ, 
respectively. The fig- 
ures demonstrate that at the same S N R  and using the same number of 
iterations, the turbo decoding schedule achieves higher coding gain, 
especially at 5 - 10 iterations (e.g., an order of magnitude improve- 
mentat 2.2dBusingS ilerationsforC1.) 
The number of iterations required for convergence using both algo- 
rithms is plotted versus S N R  in Fig. IO(b) and Fig. 10(d). As shown, 
the turbo decoding schedule requires significantly less iterations to 
converge, where in some cases it requires anly kalf the number of 
iterations to converge as compared to the two-phase schedule. 
Figure 11 shows a side-by-side comparison of the performance of 
the turbodecoding schedule and the two-phase schedule in decoding 
a rate-; length 1440 irregular LDPC code Cacons tructed from Ra- 
manujan graphs [13]. The turbodecoding schedule attains almost two 
orders of magnitude improvement in coding gain at 2.4dB over the 
two-phase schedule after ten decoding iterations. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
A new turbo decoding schedule for LDPC codes has been presented. 
Compared with existing approaches, the proposed schedule exhibits 
faster convergence behavior, and requires less storage area in a decoder 
implementation. A memory efficient decoder architecture based on the 
turbo decoding schedulehas been presented for LDPC and GLD codes. 
The architecture is independent of the code's parity-check matrix in 
the sense of Gallager's consuuction, and has comparable complexity 
to turbo decoder architectures in terms of message communication, 
but significantly simpler computational complexity. Future work will 
include further optimizations of the message transport network of the 
decoder.as well as handling irregular LDPC codes. 
REFERENCES 
111 P. R. Kshischang, B. 1. Frey, and H.-A. Lacligcr, *Factor graphs and 
the sum-pmdun algorithm:' 
IEEE Tmns. on Info. Theory, vol. 47. PP. 
49G.519, Feb.2 001. 
12) N. Wiberg, 
Codes and decoding on genemi graph, Ph.D. thesis, 
Linkiiping University, Sweden. 1996. 
I31 C. Berm", A. Glavieur, and P. Thitimajshim. "Near Shannon Limit 
Error-Correcting Coding and Decoding: Turbo Codes:' in IEEEInr. Con$ 
on Communications. 1993. pp. 1W1070. 
141 R. G. Gallager, Low-Densiry PorityCheck Codes. MI? Res% Cambridge, 
MA, 1963. 
151 L. R. Bahl. J. C w b .  F. Jelinek. and J. Raviv. "Optimal decoding of 
linear codes for minimizing symbol emorrate:' IEEE Tmm on 1.7. pp. 
284-287. Mar. 1974. 
(61 M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, "Low-Power VLSl Decoder Archi- 
171 M. Lenunaier and K. S. Zigangimv. "Iterative decoding of generalized 
low-density parity<heck codes," in Pmc. of ISlT 1998, Aug. 1998. p. 
149. 
(81 1. Boums, 0. Pothier, and G. amor, "Generalized IOW density (tanner) 
codes:' in Pmceediags oflCC'99, Vancouver.1 une 1999, pp. 441445. 
191 E. Ye0 et al.. "VLSI architectures for iterative decoders in magnetic 
recording channels:' 
IEEE Trans. on Mognerics, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 748- 
755, Mar. 2001. 
[IO] E. Ye0 et al., "High Throughput Low-Desity Panty-Check h o d e r  Ar- 
chitecrures:' in Pmc. IEEE GiobccomZWI. San Antonio. 7X.N ov 2WI. 
forLDFC Codes:' in ISLPED 2W2, 
,Wonky, CA, Aug. 2002. 
pp. 3019-3024. 
A. Vardy, 'Trellis ~tmct~re 
of codes," in Handbook of Coding Theory, 
Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam 1998. 
F. R. Xshiscbang and V. Sorokins. "On rhc rrellis suvgture of block 
codes:' IEEE Tmmnr. on hJo. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 1924-1937. 1995. 
M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, "Consrmction of LDPC codes from 
Ramanujan graphs," in Confemnre on Info. Sciences and Syalsm 2W2, 
Princeton Universiry.Ma r. ZW2. 
1387 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:03:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
n 
~. 
,I.. 
>*_ 
Fig. 10. BER and convergence rate vs. SNR curves using the “
h
g
 
schedule and the hwphase schedule: (a>@) for code C1.m d (+(d) for codc C2. 
.9 
,..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
:. 
i 
5 ,  . . .  ;. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
........ 
’
\
 
q
:
 
. . . . . . .  
~ 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.... 
Fig. 11. 
m P b .  
1388 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:03:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
