ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland,June 30 -July 5, 2002

Matched Information Rate Codes for Binary IS1 channels’
Xiao Ma, Nedeljko Varnica and Aleksandar KavEiC
DEASMarvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 {xiaoma,varnica,kavcicl}@hrl.harvard.edu

Abstract - We propose a codingldecoding strategy to ap- output vector for each branch and determine its ending state; 5 ) de-

proach the channel capacities for binary intersymbol interfer- termine the input vector for each branch. We have constructed design

ence (ISI) channels. The proposed codes are serially concatenated rules for completing all 5 steps of the procedure. Using these rules,

codes: inner matched information rate codes and outer irregular for the dicode channel and the target rate T = 1/2, we have con-

low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The whole system is it- structed a 10-state MIR code with = k / n = 2/3. The i.u.d. in-

eratively decodable.

formation rate I s is plotted in Figure 1.

According to the Corollary, there must exist at least one linear

I. SUMMARY

(coset) code that approaches IS and hence I ( Q ) . For practical reasons, we utilize low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes as outer

Binary IS1 channel models are appropriate models for information codes, which can be optimized by a method similar to that of [7].

storage systems [ l ] . The behavior of such a channel can be repre- From Figure 1 , we see that the threshold of the optimized LDPC code

sented by a trellis [ 2 ] .Here we describe a more general time-invariant trellis model. At time t 2 0, the trellis has S states, which are in-
dexed by S d=ef {0,1, . . . ,S - 1). Exactly 2 k branches emanate from each state. A branch at time t > 0 is determined by a four-tuple

surpasses the i.u.d. rate of the channel

bt = (st-1, zt, yt, s t ) . Here, the two symbols st-1 and st denote

the two states connected by this branch; the symbol xt E (0, l}k

denotes a binary input vector; and the symbol yt E R” denotes a

,,“a

real-valued output vector. We assume that yt and st are determined

uniquely by st-1 and zt. We assume that the trellis represents an

,=lR

indecomposable finite state machine. Throughout this paper, we as-

sume that the initial state s~is given. The trellis can be considered

as an encoder (with rate k/n)which transforms a (binary) sequence

x? into a (real-valued) sequence yp. Assume that y? is transmitted
through a known memoryless channel and noisy observation $ is

received. Denote by qsz the conditional probability P x t ~ ~(ti l s-)l, where i is the decimal representation of xt. Denote by Q = ( q s 2 )the
collection of these conditional probabilities and assume qsi > 0.
The (average) mutual information [3] between X y and 2,” is a
function of Q , I N ( Q )def I ( X y ;Z r ) . We can prove that
ef Theorem I : I ( & ) lim & I N ( Q ) exists. N+CC
Theorem 2: I ( Q )is achievable.
If all entries of Q are equal to 2Tk,I ( Q )is called i.u.d. (indepen-

% -6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

SNR(dB)

Figure 1: Asymptotic performance of the MIR code for the 1 - D channel. These three curves I L , I s , and 10 cross the rate 0.5 bitskhannel-use at 0.30 dB, 0.42 dB and 0.84 dB, respectively. We believe that the 0.12 dB loss between the IL and I s can be recovered by using a more complicated MIR code. Combined with outer linear (coset) codes, the asymptotic coding gain over I o is 0.42 dB. The point ‘0’shown in this figure is the threshold location of the optimized outer irregular LDPC code.

dent uniformly distributed) information rate. Corollary: The i.u.d. information rate can be achieved by a linear (coset) code.
For a given Q, the rate I ( Q )can be estimated [4][5]. Furthermore,
an iterative algorithm [6] has been proposed to maximize I ( Q ) over all valid matrices Q . The challenging problem is to design practical codes to achieve I ( Q )and hence to approach the channel capacity. A

REFERENCES
K. A. S. Immink, P. H. Siegel and J. K. Wolf, “Codes for digital recorders,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 2260-2299, Octoher 1998.
G. D. Fomey, “Maximum-likelihoodsequence estimation of digital sequences in the presence of intersymbolinterference,”IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 18, pp. 363-378,March 1972.

general method to design serially concatenated codes is proposed. The inner codes are trellis codes that transform typical i.u.d. se-

R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1968.

quences into sequences that match the distribution matrix Q. The criterion is to minimize ( I s - I(Q)I over all trellis codes under certain complexity constraints. Here we use Is to denote the i.u.d. informa-
tion rate of the superchannel (the concatenation: trellis code + chan-
nel). We call such a code a matched information rate (MIR) code. The construction procedure is 1) split the target rate T as T = ~ ~ ~
2) determine the inner trellis code state space; 3) determine the frequency for each possible noiseless output vector; 4) determine the

D. Amold and H.-A. Loeliger, “On the information rate of binary-input channels with memory,” in Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Communications 2001, (Helsinki, Finland),June 2001.
H. D. Pfister,J. B. Soriaga, and P. H. Siegel, “On the achievableinformation rates of finite state IS1 channels”, in Proceedings IEEE Global Communication Conference 2001, (San Antonio, Texas),November 2001. r~~t; A. KavEiC, “On the capacity of Markov sources over noisy channels,” in Proceedings IEEE Global Communication Conference 2001, (San Antonio, Texas),November 2001.

’Thiswork was supportedby the National Science Foundation under Grant NO. CCR-0118701.

N. Vamica and A. KavEiC, “Optimized LDPC codes for partial response channels,” to appear in ISIT’02.

0-7803-7501-7/02/$17.00@2002 IEEE.

269

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:01:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

