ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30 -July 5,2002

On Circulant Low Density Parity Check Codes
Yu Kou, Jun Xu, H e n g Tang, Shu Lin and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
E-mail: ykou, junxu, hngtang, shulin, ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu

Abstract - This paper presents three classes of low density p", respectively. No two rows (or two columns) of this matrix can

parity check codes constructed based on the cyclic structure of have more than one "1-component'' in common. The null space of

lines in finite geometries. Codes in these classes are either cyclic this matrix gives an LDPC code C(') of length y n with minimum
+ or quasi-cyclic,and they perform well with iterative decoding. distance at least p" 1whose Tanner graph does not contain cycles

1. FINITEGEOMETRIEASND CYCLIC STRUCTURE

of length 4. This code is called a type-I circulant EG-LDPC code. It is quasi-cyclic. For y = 1,it is cyclic. For any choice of m,s, and p ,

There are two well known families of finite geometries, Euclidean and projective geometries over finite fields [l]. A finite geometry consists of a finite number of points and a finite number of lines. Two lines are either disjoint or they intersect at one and only one point.

we can construct a sequence of type-I circulant EG-LDPC code with
y = 1,..., K . Let H ( 2 )be the transpose of IT('). The null space
of H(') gives an LDPC code of length TL with minimum distance at
+ least yp" 1. It is called a type-I1 EG-LDPC code and is cyclic. For

In this summary, we only consider code construction based on Euclidean geometry (EG). An m-dimensional EG over GF@"), denoted EG(m,p"), consists ofpmSpoints andp("-')"(pmS - l)/(ps - 1) lines. Each point is an m-tuple over GF@") and the all-zero mtuple is called the origin of the geometry. Each line consists of p"

any choice of m,s, and p , we can construct a sequence of type-I1EGLDPC codes. For each submatrix of H ( ' ) , we can split each column into p s new columns of the same length with its weight p" distributed into the new columns in a rotating manner such that the weight of each new column is one. This column splitting of each submatrix in

points. Let EG*(m,p") be the sub-geometry obtained by remov- H ( 2 )results in a y n x np" matrix H,!$i with column weight y and

ing the origin and lines passing through the origin from EG(m,p"). row weight p". This matrix is exactly in Gallager's original form for

Then EG*(m,p " ) consists of n = pmS - 1 non-origin points and the parity check matrix of an LDPC code [2]. Therefore, the null

( p ( m - ' ) S - l ) ( p m s - l)/(ps - 1)lines not passing through the ori- space of H,$?i gives a circulant EG-Gallager LDPC code with mini-
+ gin. Let L: be a line in EG*(m,p"). The incidence vector of L is an mum distance at least y 1and its Tanner graph is free of cycles of
n-tuple VL = ( V I ,w 2 , ...,w,) over GF(2) whose components corre- length 4. This code can also be put in quasi-cyclic form.

spond to the n points in EG*(m,p") and the jth component vj = 1 if and only if the jth point of EG*( m , p " )is on the line L and wj = 0

111. EXAMPLES

otherwise. The weight of this incidence vector is p = p". If we cycli-

Figure 1 shows the

cally shift the incidence vector of a line, we obtain the incidence vec- error performances of

tor of another line. Cyclically shifting the incidence vector of a line several type-I circulant

n times results in n incidence vectors of n different lines. Based on EG-LDPC codes con- 10

this cyclic structure, the incidence vectors of the lines in EG*( m , p S ) structed based on the l o ~

can be partitioned into K = ( p ( m - l ) S - l)/(ps - 1)cyclic classes,

cyclic classes of incidence vectors of lines in

3
gin-

each class consists of n = pmS - 1incidence vectors. The incidence

vectors in a cyclic class can be obtained by cyclically shifting any EG*(3, 23) and decoded

incidence vector in the class n times.

with iterative decoding using the sum-product

11. CIRCULANETUCLIDEAGNEOMETRYLDPC CODES

Let Q I , Q 2 , ...,Q K denote the K cyclic classes of incidence vectors
of lines in EG*(m,p"). For each cyclic class Qi, form an n x n
square matrix Hc(iw)hose rows are the incidence vectors of the lines

in Qi. The rows in H c ( i )can be arranged in such a way that each row is the cyclic shift of the row above it and the first row is the cyclic shift of the last row. With this arrangement, each column of H c ( i )is

a downward cyclic shift of the column on its left and the first column

is the downward cyclic shift of the last column. The set of columns of

H c ( i )is the same as the set of rows in reverse order. Therefore, the columns of Hc(ia)re also the incidence vectors of the lines in Qi.

This matrix is known as a circulant. Both row and column weights
of Hc(ia)re p". Due to the intersecting stmcture of the lines in a
finite geometry, no two rows (or two columns) from either the same
circulant H c ( i )or from two different circulants Hc(ia)nd H c ( j )can
have more than one "1-component'' in common.
For 1 5 y 5 K , form y circulants Hc(l),...,Hc(y)based on

y cyclic classes of the incidence vectors of lines. Then construct an
n x y n matrix H ( ' ) with the circulants Hc(l),...,Hc(y)as subma-

trices in a row. The row and column weights of

are yp5 and

algorithm (SPA). All the codes have minimum

,o,

l

l

l

.

I

e

,

I

l

S

E& ,e,

distance at least 9. We see that they perform close to their Shannon limits. For example, at the BER of l o p 5 , the

Figure 1: Error performances of several
type-I circulant EG-LDPC codes based on EG'(3, 23) and two circulant EGGallager LDPC codes with SPA.

(4599,4227) code constructed based on 9 circulants performs within

1 dB from the Shannon limit, and the (4088,3716) code constructed

based on 8 circulants performs 1 . 1 dB from the Shannon limit. Also

included in Figure 1 are the error performances of two circulant EG-Gallager LDPC codes (the two longer codes) constructed based on the cyclic classes of the incidence vectors of lines in EG* (3, 24) and decoded with SPA. These two codes perform 0.65 and 0.87 dB from their Shannon limits, respectively.

REFERENCES [l] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and
Applications, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ., 1983.
[2] R. G. Gallager, "Low density parity check codes," IRE Trans. Inform. Theory,vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:04:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

