OPTIMIZED IRREGULAR GALLAGER CODES FOR OFDM TRANSMISSION 
V. Mannoni1.2, D. Deelerq' and G. GeUez 
'E.TlS, ENSEA/UCP/CNRS-8051,6 avenue du Ponceau 95014Cergy-Pontoise. France 
'LAM-URCA UFR-Science, Moulin de la Housse BP 1039 51687 Reims, France, valerian.mannoniQuniv-reims.fr 
Abstraet - We present an optimized channel coding scheme 
for OFDM transmitter. Traditional coding methods use reg- 
ular codes, in the sense that each bit panicipates in the same 
way to the channel encoding. Our a p p c h  consists in using 
a priory assumption on the channel available at the transmitter 
in order to optimize the d i g  scheme. We have considered 
the irregular Gallager block codes in OUT study. Simulations 
provide evidence of the usefulness of OUT approach with a gain 
.0f2dBatabiterrorrateequaltolO-~ foroptimizedirregular 
coding scheme compared to regular one. 
Keywords - OFDM transmissions, LDK codes, Gaussian 
Approximation, frequncy selective channels. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
HE mulucamer modulations have been received much 
. 
attenhon d m g  these last few years, especially for high- 
bit-rate transmissions with the Orthogonal Frequency Divi- 
sion Multiplexing (OFDM) standan [l] or with the Discrete 
Multitone Transmission (DMT). These modulations are par- 
ticularly suited, for transmissions over dispersive channels 
(i.e. seleqive in the frequency domain). Indeed, the OFDM 
system transforms the Frequency Selective (FS) channel into 
a set of oarrowband Gaussian IS1 free sub-channels. How- 
'ever, the frequency selectivity implies that some sub-channels 
are smxlgly weaked. To overcome this problem, several 
methods such as the power allocation (DMT) [l] and/or the 
channel coding [Z] have been used. This paper deals with the 
semnd scheme also called Coded OFDM (COFDM). Among 
the differentsexisting codes, Gallager codes (alsocalledLow- 
Density Parity-Check codes (LDPC)) 
present a great interest 
for COFDM transmission [2],'and it is mentionned in [4], that 
there overperform the interleaved RS-TCM in DMT applica- 
tions. We have shown in [3], that in OFDM transmission , 
with channel knowledge at the transmitter, the protection by 
irregular LDPC codes is a good strategy. We address here 
the problem of optjmiziig the Gallager codes, in the sense of 
minimixing the errorprobability at a given Ea/No. Anumer- 
i d  method, based on a Gaussian approximation of decod- 
ing messages, has been recently presented to determine the 
'asymptotic behavior of LDPC codes on 'AWGN channel [5]. 
This method allows an easely design of good LDPC codes for 
AWGN channels. We present a simple method b optimize 
the LDpC codis for transmissions over FS based to the study 
of their asymptotic behavior and to the differential evolntion 
T 
. .' 
.. 
' 
algorithm. 
0-7803-7589-0/02/$17.00 02002 IEEE 
222 
This paper is organized as follows. In section II, we give 
a brief review of the LDX cod? and of their optimization 
scheme for AWGN channels. The section HI presents the 
transmission scheme and the optimization of the LDPC codes. 
We illustrate the performance of OUT approach by simulations 
in Section IV and a conclusion is given in section V. 
11. BASIC ON OPTIMIZATION 
OF IRREGULAR 
LOW-DENSITY 
l?ARITY-CHECK CODES 
A. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes 
As welt as Turbocodes, LDPC codes can achieve reliable 
transmission for a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) 
extremely close 
to the Shannon limit on the AWGN channel [6]. Moreover, 
these codes present certain advantages, such as a simple de- 
scription of their structure and the easyness to make then 
irregular. So, These LDPC codes provides a good frame- 
work in order to optimize their structures for a wide range 
of channels. Optimization of the code irregularity has al- 
ready been performed for ~.ariouS channels, including Binary 
[6] [7l, AWGN [5] and Rayleigh channels [SI. The LDPC 
block codes are defined by a sparse parity check mafrix and 
can be represented by an intuitive visual methd, the factor 
graph representation. A factor graph is a bipartite graph con- 
stitued by two sets of nodes : variable nodes repsentkg the 
codeword and function notles representing the parity checks. 
A code where the connection degrees are constant for each 
variable nodes and for each check nodes is called a regular 
code; otherwise it is called irregular [9]. Fig. 1 illustrates the 
factor graph of an irregular LDFC code. Such a code is usu- 
ally specified by two pdynomials : X(z) = Crzy Aiz1-l 
and p(z) = CzTpizi-l where A; and pi correspond to 
the fraction of edges which are connected to the data and 
check nodes respectively, with a connection degree i; t,,,, 
and tmoz redresents the maximal data and check nodes con- 
nection degree, resptively. For example, the code described 
in Fig. 1 can be defined by A(z) = fz6 + $z3 + fz and 
p(z) = :z8 + $z5. We can also define two others polyno- 
mials X'(z) = 
&si-' and p'(z) = 
p,z"-' 
where A; = 
represents the fraction of data nodes 
the frac- 
tion of check nodes with a connection degrees i. So, using 
these two polynomials, the code presented in Fig. 1 become 
X'(z) = kz6 + bz3 + $z and p'(z) = bz8 + $z5. 
trmor ' 
'with a connection degrees i and pi = 
PIMRC 2002 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:10:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Y 
Fig.1. FactorGraphofarakR= 1/2irregularLDFCcode 
and the connection degree profile according to the fraction of 
data nodes. 
B. Decoding W P C  Codes using Belief Propagation 
LDFC codes are usually decoded by an iterative probabiis- 
tic algorithmknown as the Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm 
[lo]. FM a finite codeword length, the factor graph of LDPC 
codes contains many cycles which lead to a snbptimal cal- 
culation of the A Posteriori Robabities (APR) 
[IO]. Each 
iteration of BP is composed into two steps : The data pass 
and the check pass which update the messages on the variable 
nodes and the check nodes, respectively. Usually, to improve 
the clarity it is more convenient to use Log-Likehood Ratios 
(LLRs) as messages. Let w and U be the output message of a 
variable and check node, mpectively. Under the data pass on 
a variable node with a coMection degree equal to i, the output 
message w is equal to the sum of all incoming LLRs: i.e., 
n=O 
whereu,,n=I ,..., i-1,aretheincomingLLRsfromallthe 
variable node neighbors excepted the check node that gets the 
message w, and uo is rhe observed LLR of the ontpnt bit ass0 
ciated with the variable node. For the first decoding iteration, 
all the un are set to zero forn = 1, ..., i - 1. During acheck 
pass, we use the "tanh rule" to express the ontput message U : 
i-1 
U 
Wrn 
tanh- = n tanh- 2 '  
2 ,  m=1 
where wm, m = 1, ..., tr - 1, are the incoming LLRs from 
the check node neighbors (excepted the data node that gets 
the message U), and U is the message sent to the remaining 
neighbor. 
After few iterations of BP we can calculate the a posteriori 
ratio w foreach data nodes : 
C. Gaussian Appmm~mation : a Menn to Pmdict Asymptotic 
Behavior on AWGN channel 
If the channel is Gaussian with zero mean and variance 
U;, then the message LLR observed uo is also Gaussian with 
m a n  2/ui and variance 4/00. In [5], Chung has obserVed 
that during the decoding step, the messages w (U resp.) from 
the variable (check respectively) nodes are Gaussian with 
mean'm, (m. respectively) and variance 2m, (2m. respec- 
tively). So, only the mean is necessary to estimate the mes- 
sage densities. He also notes that the Gaussian approximation 
is rather a good approximation for the variables nodes outputs 
w, but not so good for the check nodes outputs U. We can state 
here that Gaussian approxin&ionhas been shown suiXciantly 
a c c m  to provide a good threshold estimation. 
Wen, fromequation (I), the mean mu,, of the output mes- 
sage of a variable node with a degree i is given by : 
(1) 
m:; = m,o + (i - 1 ) m y )  
(4) 
where m,o is the mean of observed LLR uo and I denotes the 
I-th iteration. Under "local tree assumption" which ensure 
the inkpendance between the w,, the updated mean mi) at 
the 1-th iteratioocan be express : 
mt') = 
1j-l) (5) 
/?#{ 
l-.[,- c Ai$(rnlf!) 
trmoz 
temoz 
j=1 
: i-2 
where $(&) 
is equal to 1 -.E tanhT 
(Cf. [5]). Us- 
ing (4) .and (5) iteratively, we can follow the evolution of 
m?) along the decoding iteration. Now, it is e,asy to calculate 
the threshold corresponding to a noise level below which m L 
tends to infinity when I tends to infinity. This correspond to 
a block error probability converging to zero when the number 
of BP iteration tends to infinity. m e  criterion used by Chnng 
to optimize the LDFC codes on the AWGN channel is to get 
the smallest noise threshold code. 
[ 
."'I 
' 
111. OPTIMIZED IRREGULAR LDPC CODES FOR OFDM 
Io order to obtain LDFC codes with good performances 
over FS channels, we optimized their structure according to 
the channel specuum shape. As a preliminary to this opti- 
mization, we studied the asymptotic behavior of LDPC codes 
using the Gaussian Approximation. 
A. Communication System 
The communication system is described & Fig. 2. The in- 
formation bits U, are encoded by one of the LDPC codes and 
the resulting codeword is sent to the OFDM transmitter. After 
a serial to p a d e l  conversion the bits are BPSK-&~KI ( 0 1  
and l:-l) on the N, subcarriers to obtain a block of symbols 
X& = 1, ..., Nc). Then, this block is hansform into a time 
d o k  sequences by the inverse discrete Fonrier'uansfm 
223 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:10:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(IDW. TO ensure orthogonality of the sub~arriers the cyclic 
prelix is added between each block of symbols. At the re- 
ceiver, after ,=moving the cyclic prefix, the DFT transforms 
the sequence y, 
in the kquency domain Yk. Iherefore,'the 
FS channel is transformed into a set of instantapus channel 
(6) 
and Yk Can be WTite': 
& = H k X k  i- 
Nk 
, 
Vk = 1, ...,Nc 
with Hk being the kth c h k e l  spectrum coefficient, xk the 
kth symbol and Nk the AWGN with 
mean and variance 
U;. Then;a freqnency domain equalization (MMSE) can be 
easily applied to 
and after pardel to serial converSion the 
signal Rk = KkYk iS Sent.to channel decoder. we finally 
iteratively decode the noisy ,codeword to obtain an estimate 
8, of the input sequence. 
Fig. 2.- OFDM transmission system 
B. Gaussian Approximation over FS Channels 
A rransmission over a FS chanuel implies that some sub- 
carriers are suOngly weaked. Hence, the signal to noise ratio 
(SNR) in the su&anim is not the same for all the bits of the 
codeword. To provide g o d  reliability, the bits must be pro- 
tected according to the Sw. 
%, the position of connection 
degree on the codeword becomes an essential parameter. To 
describe aq LDPC code, it is necessary tdinsert a snpplemen- 
tary parameter (pi) corresponding to the data nodes COM~C-' 
:tion de* 
i position in the factor graph: The code is then 
specified by-a new polynomial X(z) = d2T02 XIp')z'-'. 
To find.the hest code profile ([Xi], bi], k]), 
it is necessary 
to observed the asympt&c\behavior of LDPC codes over a FS 
channel nsing the Ganssi? approximation as in subsection D- 
C. 
Assume that the-all-zero codeword is sent (xk = 1 Vk), 
the ohserved log-likehod ratio from the equalizer U ok can be 
writen : 
For these reasons, we use a rectangular approximation of the 
channel by splitting it into t,zrnoz - 1 parts at the output of the 
OFDM modulator where t 
- 1 corresponds to the number 
ofconnection degrees (Cf. Fig. 3). EachHu part has a width 
equal to A; and corresponds to $e spectrum band where we 
transmit the bits with a connection degree i. In this hand the 
pdf fUo,i of the LLR ObSeNed message can he approximated 
by aGaussianpdf: f"0.i = N(m,o(H~i),'Lm,o(H~i)) 
with 
~ , , O ( H L J  = 9 
being the mean of the LLRS coming from 
the subcarriers that carry a bit with connection degree i and 
where Hfii is the channel mean value on this band (Cf. Fig. 
3). Then, from equation (1). the mean mu,, 
W. of the output 
Fig. 3. Rectangular approximation of a FS channel shape. 
message of a variable node with a degree i is given by : 
m:,; = rn,O(HLj) + (i'- 1 ) m y )  . 
(7) 
At the I-th iteration, an incoming message li to a check node 
will have the following Gaussian mixture density : f,? 
= 
dy 
~1p')~(m!:, 
2m:,\): so, the following update iule 
is equal to : 
j - 1  
j=1 
(8) 
Now, using (7) and (8) iteratively, we can follow the evolution 
of m$ along the decdmg iteration for a FS channel. 
Chuhg optimize the LDPC codes according the minimum 
threshold value [5]. Here, we present and motivate an alterna- 
tive approach based on the bit m.probability minimization. 
First of all, contrary to the threshold minimization which 
corresponds to a block error probability converging to zero, 
we need only to minimize the bit error probability. We can 
express this probability of m
r
 
on the information bits Pe I at 
the 1 - th iteration as : 
' 
. 
p ( R k l X k  
= ') 
= ?$(HL+N,) 
Vk = 1, ...,A', 
%k = 1% p(RklXk'= -1) 
. 
Ub 
So, the LLR message uo has a Gaussian pdf with mean 
2Hi/uz "d v&ce 
4H:lu;. As the variance is also equal 
to twice the mean agd that during all the d e c d i g  step, then, 
only the mean.is necessary in the evolution of the Gaussian 
approximation. 
As the codeword length is unknow, the calculation of the' 
mean observed message mUO must he review and simplify. 
.(9) 
In order to justify our approach, we have drawn (Fig. 4) 
thik probability obtained nsing the equation (9) in function 
of EbINO. For this illusnation, we used a regular LDPC 
code, an optimized code obtained with the &nimization of ' 
224 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:10:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the threshold and an optimized code obtained with the mini- 
mization of the bit e m  probability at a given EbINO = 5.3 
dB. 
-*. 
Fig. 4. Bit error probability comparison between the thKe 
considered asymptotic coding scheme over an ADSL channel. 
These curves correspond to the performances for an in6nite 
codeword length when in ow problem the codeword length 
is finite. However, we can observe on the Fig. 4 that for a 
weak EalNo, the LDPC code obtained by the minimization 
of the bit error probability outperforms the two other coding 
scheme. We can also notice that this code does not exhibit a 
threshold phenomenon. Moreover, in OFDM signalling the 
codeword length is small, this means that the "local tree as- 
sumption " becomes invalid. Then, the LDPC codes with a 
small length can not present a threshold phenomenon: Fi- 
nally, using these remarks, we can conclude that the bit error 
probability minimization is well suited to OFDM transmis- 
sions. 
C Optimization with Diffmential Evolution 
The objective, in this subsection, is to find the LPDC codes 
parameters which yields the smallest probability of error on 
the information bits. This problem is a nonlinear cost func- 
tion minimization problem with continnous space parameters, 
a problem where differential evolution has been shown to 
be very effective and robust [ll]. Reviously this technique 
has been snccessfully applied to the design of good irregular 
LDPC codes for dfierents channels. Differential evolution is 
a parallel direct search technique. We begin by the initializa- 
tion step which consists in randomly choosing a set of vectors. 
Then, iteratively, we use the mutation, the recombination and 
the selection principles, to find the best vector, i.e. t h m  that 
minimize the y s t  function. By updating all the vectors of the 
set in parallel, the algorithm can help the vectors to take off 
the local &ima 
and to prevent misconvergence. 
IV. RESULTS 
A. Optimization of the LDPC Code Pmfie 
In this section, we present the strncture of optimized LDPC 
codes with two differents FS channels : A typical ADSL 
channel and a channel with a non monotonous spectrum de- 
noted by chB. Before the profile optimization, we fix some 
parameters : R = 112, p(z) = z' and t,,,, 
= 10. To ob- 
tain the optimized code for the transmissions over the ADSL 
channel, we minimized the bit error probability (using (9)) at 
EbINO = 5.3 dB. For the chB we have 
' ' ' 1 the bit 
error probability at Eb/NO = 4.4 dB. 
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 illustrate the connection degree sequence 
of LDPC code obtained after optimization with respect to the 
channel s p e c m  for, respectively, ADSL channel and for 
chB. On the two figures, we can Observe that the connection 
degree is constant and minimum (equal to 2) on the bandwith 
used to transmit the redundant bits. On the other half of the 
bandwidth, the connection degree is inverse proportional to 
the SNR in the snb-bands. We can explain this by the follow- 
ing remark : a bit which is connected to a large number of 
check nodes is well protected against the additive noise, be- 
cause it gets lot of informations coming from the other bits 
during the decoding process. So, an information bit trans- 
mitted on a subcarrier with a small SNR must have a large 
connection degree. 
Fig. 5. 
ADSL channel spectrum. 
Data nodes connection degrees in respect to the 
I 
-.- 
Fig. 6. Data nodes connection degrees in respect to the chB 
spec- 
B. Perfonnances 
The aim of this section is to illustrate the results obtained 
with optimized LDPC codes on a OFDM commnnication sys- 
225 
, 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:10:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
tern Moreova, we wish demonstrate the interest of optimized 
irregular protection for OFDM systems. In our simulations, 
the number of subcarriers N ,  is set to 1024, the length of the 
cyclic prefix is set to 12 and the LDPC codeword length N 
is equal to N,. Considering of the codeword length, the de- 
coding step of the LDPC codes has heen performed with 30 
iterations of BP. 
Fig. 7 illustrates the performance on the ADSL channel. 
For an e m r  probability equal to 
we can note an in- 
provement of 2 dB for the optimized code compared to the 
regular one, with roughly the same decoding complexity. The 
same remarks hold true for the chB channel with an improv- 
ment of 1.25 dB illusuated on the Fig. 8. On the Fig. 7, we 
have also perform the sinnlations with the optimized code 
(obtained with the ADSL channel) and the regular one on the 
AWGN channel. These results show that this gap is greater 
in the case of FS channel than for the AWGN channel. For 
transmissions over AWGN channel with an error probability 
equal to 
we observe a little impmment of 0.2 dB for 
the optimized code. This is a well known result hecause on 
AWGN channel illusuating that an irregular code is better that 
a regular one [9]. However, since the gap is greater when we 
use our codes on the FS channel, we can conclude that our 
codes are well suited for these hansmissions. 
.. 
\ 
L 
Fig. 7. Performancecomparison between the two considered 
coding scheme with a rate R = 1/2 over a standard ADSL 
channel and over the AWGN c h m L  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
....... 
....,....,..... ~: 
~ 
I 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
.
.
 
3
4
 A ; :, ; r: 
L ; L ! 
-** 
Fig. 8. Performance comparison between the two considered 
coding scheme with a rate R = 112 over the chB channel. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have optimized the structure of the LDPC 
codes for transmissions over FS channel. The optimization of 
the irregularity has heen done using the evolution of a Gaus- 
sian approximation along the decoding iterations. In prac- 
tice, we used a genetic algorithm - diEferenrial evolution - in 
order to minimize the asymptotic (codeword length tends to 
infinity) bit e m r  prohabili1.y. We have also shown in this pa- 
per that the use of irregular LDPC codes is of great interest 
in ADSUOFDM transmission when some information about 
the propagation channel is available at the uansnitter. For 
several FS channels, including typical ADSL channels, we 
have shown through simulations that the inprovemeutcan he 
up to 2 dB at Pe = 
when comparing the regular versus 
the optimized Gallager codes. 
We truly believe that combining irregular coding and a clas- 
sical power loading algorithm would yield even better results. 
REFERENCES 
[I] J. A. C. Bingham, “Multicarrier Modulation for Data 
Transmission: an Idea whod T i e  has Come,” IEEE 
Commun. Mag., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 5-14,May 1990. 
[2] W.Y. Zou and Y. Wu, “COFDM : An Overview,” IEEE 
Tram. onBmad., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. I-8,March 1995. 
131 D. Declercq, G. Gelle, and V. Mannoni, “Irregnlar Chan- 
nel Coding for OFDM Transmission,” in Pruc. of the 
ISCTA’O1 Symposium, 2001. 
[4] A. Mahadevan and J. M. Morris, “On LDFC codes for 
ADSL,” in F’roc. ofthe CISSO1 Confmnce, 2001. 
[5] S. Y. Chnng, R. Urbanke, and T. J. Richardson, “Analysis 
of Sum-Product Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check 
Codes Using a Gaussian Approximation,” IEEE Pans. 
Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no., pp. 657-670.Feb2001. 
[6] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, 
“Design of Capacity-Approaching Low-Density Parity- 
Check Codes:’ IEEE lions. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, QO. 
2, pp.619-637,Feb2001. 
[7] A. Shokrollahi, and R Stom, “Design of EEicient Era- 
sure Codes with-Differential Evolution,” preprint, 1999. 
[8] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, 
“Perfor- 
mances Analysis and Code Opbization of of Low- 
Density Paritycheck Codes on Rayleigh fading,” IEEE 
1 Selec; Arras in Comm., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 924-934,May 
2GQ1. 
191 M.G. Luby and al., “Analysis of low density codes and 
improved designs using irregular graphs:’ in Pmc ofthe 
30th ACMSTOC, 1998. 
[lo] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very 
sparse mamces,” IEEE Trans. Infirm. Theory, vol. 45, 
no. 2, pp. 3994,Jan 1999. 
[ll] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential Evolution - A Sim- 
ple and Efficient Heuristic Adaptative Scheme for Global 
Optimization Over Continons Space,” Journal of Global 
Optimization, vol. 11, pp. 341-359, 1997. 
226 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:10:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
