ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30 -July 5,2002

An Alternate Algorithm for Calculating Generalized Posterior Probability and Decoding

Toshiyasu Matsushima
Waseda University Shinjuku, Tokyo, JAPAN e-mail: toshi8matsu.mgmt .waseda.ac.j p

Tomoko K. Matsushima
Polytechnic University, Sagamihara, JAPAN

Shigeichi Hirasawa
Waseda University, Shinjuku, Tokyo, JAPAN

I. INTRODUCTION
The accurate and efficient calculation of ordinary and generalized posterior distributions is an important problem in the several research fields such as decoding, AI, statistics and statistical mechanics. The condition of generalized posterior distributions is not given by the deterministic values such as X = z, but by the distributions such as P ( X = z) = p,. If
the condition is P ( X = x ) = 1 then the generalized posterior distribution is an ordinary posterior distribution.
In this paper, a procedure using the sum of the e-projection
vectors shall be proposed. Since the procedure is suitable for parallel algorithms, an alternate algorithm for calculating generalized posterior distributions on log linear models is given by the procedure. The proposed algorithm works well for the codes with short loops.

11. A CALCULATION PROCEDURE FOR GENERALIZED
POSTERIOR PROBABILITY
A generalized posterior distribution P ( X I S 1 , ... ,Sl) given the conditions that S, is P ( y i ) = p z is calculated by iter-
ating the e-projection on the submanifold satisfies the each condition S, from a prior distribution [4]. In this paper, an-
other procedure for calculating generalized posterior distributions shall be proposed. A generalized posterior distribution
P ( X I S 1 , .. .,Sl) is deduced from iterating the translation by
the sum of the e-projection vectors on the submanifold of Si from a prior distribution P ( X ) .

111. AN ALTERNATE ALGORITHM ON LOG LINEAR
MODELS

A log linear mode is represented by the followingjoint prob-

ability. P(z1,.. . ,Zn)

=

q(N1)dNz)’ ’ . q(N1)
ff q ( D p ’ ’ ’ q ( D J ) R J’

(1)

where X i s ’ a discrete random variable. a-~( N ; ) =

I

I

q ( z l ( i ) , . . . , z n i ( i )a) nd q ( D j ) = . q ( x l ( j ) , . , z d j ( j ) ) .

t ( N i ) = . {XI(<),. . , z n i ( % )i} E {l,. . . ,I} and t ( D j ) =

, { q ( j ) ,. . . x d j ( j ) } j E {I,... , J } are called numerator term

and denominator term respectively. Abbreviate t ( N i ) ,t ( D j )

t o Ni,Dj respectively. In Formula(l), N,C N k is not satisfied for any i E (1,.. . , I } and any IC # i.

The neighboring node set of a denominator term node is

defined as follows: If for any I , Dj C Dl is not satisfied then

S”(Dj) = {NiIDj c Ni},else S N ( D j )= {NiI(Dj c N,)A

(VNk E s N ( D j ) ( k# i)Ni n Nk E ss(oj))},where s s ( D j ) = {Dl 1Dj c 01).The neighboring node set of a numerator term

node Ni is defined by S D ( N i )= {DjlNiE S”(0j)).

The above mentioned models may be represented by a

graph using two types of nodes that is given by connecting

each denominator term node to all numerator term nodes in its neighboring node set with arcs. The denominator term nodes

differ from intersection nodes in Junction graphs[l][a]. Al-

though an intersection node is connected to two clique nodes,

a denominator term node may be connected t o more than two

numerator term nodes. We shall propose a new alternate propagation algorithm
on the graphs for calculating marginal posterior probabilities.

‘Let M s be a m-flat submanifold in a distribution space M , and let a distribution p be a point in M . Iff the point q is given by the e-geodesic projection of p to M s , q = argminqEMD(pllq) where
D(pllq) is the Kullback information between p and q.

Two contrary directed propagations repeat alternately in the algorithm. In the first type of message propagation, all numerator term nodes propagate each message to the all connected denominator term nodes. In the contrary message propagation, all denominator term nodes propagate each message t o all connected numerator term nodes.
-,--\ - ’,
The procedure may be calculated by the one formula that is compounded from the two formulas mentioned above. The compounded procedure is similar t o Generalized Distribution Low(GDL) [l]in the case of the calculation for ordinary posterior probability.
The marginal posterior probability of each random variable is calculated bv
If the graph has no%Lis, thepropose algorithm halts and calculates exact marginal posterior probabilities.
The algorithm is regarded as an alternate type algorithm for HUGIN algorithm[2]. Although HUGIN algorithm only works on Junction trees, the proposed algorithm can work on the Junction graphs. And the probability model class for which the proposed algorithm calculates exact marginal posterior probability is wider than that of the sum-products algorithm[3]. Needless to say, HUGIN algorithm and the sumproducts algorithm can not calculate generalized posterior distributions. From these view points, the proposed algorithm is regarded as a generalization of these algorithms.
Iv. A N APPLICAlION T O DECODING
Although a main problem of decoding does not need the calculation of generalized posterior probability, the proposed algorithm may be applied to decoding. The previous research papers reported the sum-products algorithm does not work well for the factor graph with short loops. In the case that short loops overlap together, the clustering on factor graph raises up a computational explosion.
However, the proposed algorithm can guarantee the exact marginal posterior probability with respect t o the probability model that has overlapped short loops of length 4 in a factor graph. For example, the proposed algorithm is applied t o the LDPC codes of short codelength n = 500 with short loops that is constructed randomly. It is shown from several simulations that the bit and the block error rate of the proposed algorithm are better than those of the sum-products algorithm. The proposed algorithm also works well for tail biting codes.
REFERENCES
[l] S.M. Aji, R.J. Mcliece, The Generalized Distributive Law, IEEE Trans. IT, Vo1.46 No.2, 2000.
[2] F. V. Jensen, A n introduction to Bayesian networks, University College London Press, London, 1996.
[3] F.R. Kschischang, B.J. Fey and H. Loeliger, Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm, .[EEETrans. IT, Vo1.47No.2, 2001.
[4] T. Matsushima, T.K. Matsushima and S. Hirasawa A n Iterative Algorithm f o r Calculatin,g Posterior Probability and Model Representation , Proceedings of IEEE Int. Symp. on IT, 2001.

0-7803-7501-7/02/$17.00@2002IEEE.

338

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:06:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

