ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30 -July 5,2002

LDPC Decoding Using Multiple Representations

Kenneth Andrews, Sam Dolinar., and Fabrizio Pollara’ Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
e-mail: {andrews, sam, fabrizio}@shannon.jpl.nasa.gov

Abstract - For a particular block code, a multitude of different parity check matrices could be chosen to represent the code constraints. We demonstrate that belief propagation decoders based on different parity check matrices often respond in different ways, and that for a given complexity, it may be preferable to use several decoders for fewer iterations, than to run a single decoder for many iterations. We also propose some additional decoder architectures that use multiple representations of the parity constraints.
I . MULTIPLEDECODERS
An ( n , k ) Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) code is conventionally decoded with a belief propagation (BP) decoder that passes messages on a graph based on a parity check matrix H for the code [l].Check matrices are far from unique, for they can be constructed from any n - k independent vectors from the dual code.
BP decoders are suboptimal, and can find false minima or fail t o converge. The former is a particular problem when BP decoders are used with legacy codes with regular structures, such as convolutional codes. For a given code and noisy channel output vector, different LDPC decoders (i.e. based on different H matrices) may respond in different ways. We illustrate that by applying several decoders to each received vector, a superior overall decoder results. For each received vector, we try one decoder and if it finds a codeword in a fixed number of iterations, we accept the result; if not, we try a second decoder, and so on until the supply of decoders is exhausted.
This is exhibited in Figure 1 for the (24,12) extended Golay code. This highly structured code has 759 weight-8 check equations, so we constructed ten H matrices from these, each describing an irregular LDPC decoder with check nodes of degree 8 and variable node degrees between 2 and 9. They were randomly constructed, with the constraints that no check equation is used more than once, each H is full rank, and each variable node has degree greater than 1. The top curve in the figure shows the bit error rate of one such LDPC decoder (200 iterations maximum), and the middle curve shows the result of the ten together, where the final output is taken from the first decoder that finds a codeword within 200 iterations (or a symbol-by-symbol majority vote if none finds a codeword). The bottom curve belongs t o the maximumlikelihood-codeword decoder.
Total decoder complexity is not much increased, because each subsequent decoder need only be used if the prior decoders fail. Moreover, complexity may be reduced by allowing fewer iterations per decoder, because a subsequent decoder may more quickly resolve a problematic case.
lThis work was funded by the IND Technology Program and performed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

‘7’

”

”

%

’” 10-2

\

- 7 - 01

I
5 E@o, dB

\ 6

Figure 1: Performance of conventional LDPC, multiple sequential LDPC, and maximum likelihood decoders for

the (24,12) extended Golay code.

11. ALTERNATIVDEECODERARCHITECTURES
Rather than run the several LDPC decoders sequentially and independently, each with its own H matrix, they may run simultaneously and exchange soft information. We have investigated some of the many possible architectures.
For some regular codes, it is straightforward to construct a family of H matrices for several decoders; for others this is difficult. Instead, one may construct a single extended H matrix, containing redundant rows beyond the n - k required to specify the code, as explored by Lucas et. al. in [2]. Experiments with convolutional codes show that in some cases, the information provided from the additional constraints more than offsets the performance loss caused by the introduction of additional loops t o the gra,ph. This increase in the number of loops can be countered by selective message propagation within each iteration; such message scheduling on an extended check matrix includes all the architectures discussed as special cases.
111. CONCLUSION
Modified decoder architectures based upon redundant parity check equations provide opportunities t o improve belief propagation decoder performances. Our experiments with small codes show some effective strategies. Further research is necessary, and a better theoretical understanding of overspecified constraints is particularly important.
REFERENCES [l]R. Gallager, “Low Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Trans.
Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1968. [2] R. Lucas, M. P. C. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative
Decoding of One-Step Majority Logic Decodable Codes Based on Belief Propagation”, IEEE Truns. Comm., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931-937, June 2000.

0-7803-750-17/02/$17.00@2002IEEE.

456

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:11:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

