ISlT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30 - July 5,2002

Design of LDPC Graphs for Hardware Implementation
Jeremy Thorpe California Institute of Technology e-mail: jeremyasystems. caltech.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
A methodology for generating bipartite graphs for LDPC codes which both exhibit good performance under
message passing decoding and are ammenable t o direct hardware implementation is described. To this end, we define a novel quantitative measure of the "loopiness" of a graph, as well as a quantitative measure of the cost of direct hardware implementation, and use the well-known simulated annealing algorithm t o simultaneously minimize both quantities. Finally, we simulate the decoding of several rather short codes t o show that the performance is indeed predicted by our loopiness measure.

11. PERFORMANANCDECOMPLEXITCYRITERIA
Regular LDPC's are characterized by a bipartite graph G = (V,C ,E ) , where any edge in E connects a vertex in V with a vertex in C. The vertices in V represent symbols from a finite field t o be transmitted over a channel, while the vertices in C represent parity-check equations of the adjacent edges.
We introduce two quantities related t o G which can be efficiently calculted and predict the performance and implementation cost, respectively, of G.
The first is a measure of loopiness which counts all of the loops in a graph, weighted exponentially by length:

L(G)= Nisi
i=2,4 ...

(11.1)

111. OPTIMIZATION
We search for a minimum of the following energy function:

+ E ( G ) = C L .L(G) C W .W ( G )

(111.1)

using the well-known simulated annealing algorithm. The simulated annealing algorithm iteratively perturbs the graph by swapping the right endpoints of two edges in the graph t o generate a graph GI. G' is accepted by the algorithm (and thus replaces G in the following iteration)
as a probabilistic funciton of E ( G )- E(G') and p.
Because there is flexibility in selecting the coefficients CL and C W ,we can generate a parametric class of graphs which trade loopiness (error-correcting performance) for wirelength (implementational complexity). The following two codes graphs of regular (3,6) codes with n = 216 were obtained using different ratios of CW t o CL.

I,.,,,.,,,

0

I

I

r

a

10

I*

I.

(6

<I/

.a-

0

L

1

I

10

I*

1.

-1

I8

./

graphs optimized primarily for loopiness (left) and

wirelength (right)

where Ni represents the number of loops of length i in G. An appropriate value of a must be chosen for this sum t o converge. L(G) has the property that it can be calculated efficiently using a message-passing algorithm on G (though not the same algorithm used for decoding).
Second, we define an approximate implementation cost
t o the length of the edges relative t o a fixed layout of C and V . We use the notation le1 to refer to this length, as
well as the term wirelength, since it directly corresponds t o the length of wires in direct hardware implementation.

The block error probabilities of very similar (though slightly longer, n = 500) codes transmitted over an AWGN channel and decoded by message-passing decoding are compared in the following chart.

The particular value n = 1 corresponds t o total wirelength, which is related t o chip area, and n = CO corresponds t o maximum wirelength, which is related t o maximum chip speed.
'This work was supported by NSF grant CCR-0118670 and grants from the Sony Corp., Qualcomm Inc., and Caltech's Lee Center for Advanced Networking.

The code with graph optimized for loopiness only (bottom curve) outperforms the random code, while the code with highly distance-optimized graph (top curve) takes a performance hit.

0-7803-7501-7/02/$17.00@2002 IEEE.

483

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:08:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

