Low Complexity LDPC Codes for Partial Response Channels 
Hongwei Song, Jingfeng Liu and B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC) 
Camegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
(hongwei, jingfeng, kumar)@ece.cmu.edu 
Absnau-This paper constructs and analyzes a class of 
regular LDPC codes with column weight ofj=2, in contrast to 
the often-used123 setting. These codes possess several significaut 
features. First, they are free of L-cyde, and can be easily 
constructed for a large range of code rates. Secondly, the panty 
check matrix of the code can be represeuted by a simple set, thus 
leuding itself to a low complexity implementation. Thirdly, the 
proposed codes concatenated with proper precoder outperform 
JX LDPC codes for partial response (PR) channels. Finally, they 
exhibit block error statistics significautly differeut from LDPC 
codes with 123, making them more Compatible with Reed- 
Solomon error correction codes. The LDPC coded partial 
response (PR) channel is formulated as a dynamical model and 
analyzed usiug density evolution technique, which is used to 
explain the behavior of the conwtennted system. A high rate 
(W9) 
code with block size 4608 is constructed as an example, nod 
its bit error rate @ER), block error statistics, and decoding 
convergeuce over ideal PR channel are investigated using 
simulation. The simulatiou results are cousistent with the 
density evolution analysis, both indicating that LDPC codes with 
f 2  are attractive for partial response channels. PR targets for 
maguetic recording channel are used as examples to illustrate 
the performance of the proposed codes. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The excellent performance of tuba codes and lowdensity 
parity-check (LDPC) codes [I] in additive white Gaussian 
noise (AWGN) channels has stimulated great research 
interest in their application to future data storage channels [2- 
31. While LDPC codes can be iteratively decoded using sum- 
product algorithm with moderate computation complexity, 
simulations show that when a block failure occurs, there 
could be large number of errors out of a block of 4000 hits 
[3], which may fail an outer error correction coding like 
Reed-Solomon (RS) code. Although LDPC codes constructed 
from random parity check matrices give excellent BER 
performance on average [I], the memory required to specify 
the nonzero elements of such a random matrix can be a major 
challenge for hardware implementation. Construction of good 
LDPC codes with structure is particularly important for 
magnetic recording application, where data rates of IGbps 
may be needed in near future. 
Recently, Kou, Fossorier and Lin [4] proposed consbuction 
of (quasi) cyclic LDPC codes based on the finite geometries, 
and pointed out their relation to balanced incomplete block 
designs (BIBD). Johnson and Weller [5], and Vasic [6], 
consbucted regular LDPC codes from Kirkman triple 
systems, a well-studied problem in combinatorics. One 
advantage of constructing such LDPC codes is that these 
codes are quasi-cyclic and their Tanner graphs are free of 4- 
cycles. However, the finite geometry LDPC codes and the 
codes based on Kirkman triple systems have a large number 
of 6-cycles, which may be detrimental to their error 
correction capability. LDPC codes with large girth (i.e., the 
length of the smallest cycle in a graph) are constructed by 
progressively establishing edges between bit and check nodes 
in an edge-by-edge manner in [7]. 
Since Gallager proved that the typical (n, j, k) LDPC mde with 
column weight123 has a minimum distance that increases 
linearly with n for given j and row weight &, and that the 
minimum distance of an (n, 2, k) code can increase at most 
logarithmically with the block length [I], column weightp3 
became a popular and de facto choice for LDPC codes. 
However, for applications such as magnetic recording and 
optical recording systems requiring IO-’’ type corrected bit 
error rate (BER), an outer RS code is usually employed to 
guarantee low corrected BER. Therefore, the primary design 
criterion for the inner code should be that its block m o r  
statistics are compatible with the outer RS code. This aspect 
is probably more important than searching for inner codes 
with large minimum distance. We have seen in [2-31 that 
even a simple convolutional code with a small minimum 
distance exhibits good BER performance at low SNR and 
block error statistics compatible with RS code when 
concatenated with partial response (PR) channel and decoded 
iteratively. Motivated by these observations, we design and 
investigate the performance of a class of low complexity 
LDPC codes with column weight j=2 for partial response 
channels. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We start with 
two methods to explicitly construct quasi-cyclic LDPC codes 
with column weight 2 that don’t have 6-cycles. Section Ill 
describes the channel model we employ which comprisesj=2 
LDPC codes and PR channels. In Section IV, we formulate 
the LDPC coded PR channel as a dynamical system and 
analyze its convergence using density evolution technique. In 
Section V, we compare using simulations the BER 
performance as well as block error statistics of j=2 LDPC 
codes to the j 2 3 LDPC codes over PR channels. Finally, 
Section VI contains a summary of the main results and 
conclusions. 
11. F 2  LDPC CODE CONSTRUCTION 
It is known that the existence of short cycles in the Tanner 
graph prevents the iterative sum-product decoding from 
converging to the optimal solution. Thus, one commonly 
applied constraint is that the maximum overlap between any 
two columns in the parity check matrix should he one [I], 
i.e., there is no 4-cycle in associated Tanner graph. LDPC 
codes constructed fium Kirkman triple systems satisfy this 
0-7803-7632-3/02/~17.00 02002 IEEE 
1294 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:59:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
overlap constraint, but have a large number of 6-cycles. This 
section discusses two methods to systematically construct 
quasi-cyclic LDPC codes that don't have 6-cycles. 
2.1 Disjoint Difference Sets (DDS) LDPC Codes 
By a (v, j, 1)-DDS [8] in an additive group z 
of order v, 
we mean a family ( 4  I i ;  I,f 4 
I I) of subsets of 2,. each of 
cardinality of j, and such that among the differences 
( a - b l a , b E  D j ; a # b ; i E  I )  each 
nonzero 
element 
g E Z" occurs at most once. For example, the two sets 
D,=(O,1,4),D,=(O,2,7) forma(13,3,2)-DDS.Itcanbe 
readily verified that each nonzero element g e  z,,occurs 
exactly once among the difference between two elements in 
the DDS. 
Lemma 1. A (v, j, f) 
-DDS specifies a 4-cycle-free, quasi- 
cyclic LDPC code (nj ,k), with block length n = vf , column 
weightj and row weight k = jf . 
The pmof of the above Lemma is parallel to that of 
Theorem 2 in [9], and thus is omitted here. We shall show 
bow to map disjoint difference sets to the parity check 
matrices of LDPC codes. 
Let Dj={ajl=0,aj2 
,_.., 
a@}. Ocai,< ... < a , < v b e  
a set of a (v, j ,  f)-DDS employed to construct LDPC codes of 
column weight j and codeword length n = V f  . We defme an 
incidence vector hi = [$, h !,,..., h iu-, ] of the set Dj , with 
him = 1 if m is an element of 0,. him = 0 otherwise. We 
can obtain a square matrix of sue v ,  Hi, by using hi and its 
v - 1 cyclic shifts as rows. Thus a parity check matrix 
H =[H, A, ... A,] can be constructed from the (v, j, 1)- 
DDS. Examples of constructing LDPC codes From Steiner 
triple systems are given in [5-6], which are special cases of 
Lemma I with j=3. However, Steiner-type LDPC codes 
cannot avoid 6-cycles. 
Lemma 2. Regular LDPC codes with column weight 
j 2 3 specified by (v, j, f)-DDS have 6-cycles. 
Proof 
Without 
loss 
of 
generality, 
we 
assume 
0, 
= (O,a,b} ,O < a < b < vis a set of (v, 3, +DOS. The 
matrix H, obtained from D, = (0, a ,  b) is circulant, so we can 
compute the indexes of nonzero elements (i.e., Is) for each 
column. For example, the 1's of its {0, b -a, b} -th columns 
are located at {O,v - b, v - a } ,  {b - a,v + b - 2a, v - a } ,  
(0, b - U ,  b) entries, where + and - are modulo v addition 
and subtraction. Notice that the indexes 0, b - a, and v - a 
appear twice, so they form a cycle of length 6. 
It's 
straightforward to extend to column weight j greater than 3 
cases, since the vXv square matrix H,can be viewed as 
(I) square matrices, each with column weightj=3 
Lemma 2 implies that quasi-cyclic LDPC codes that don't 
have 6-cycles can have only column weight j=2. We propose 
an approach to construct such LDPC codes in Lemma 3. 
Lemma 3. LetQ =(O,a, laj < v/2), i = 1,2 ,..., f , be a 
(v,Z,f)-DDS, 
where v 
is 
an even 
number and 
s = {aI, a,, ..., a,} is a set of odd integers, then the LDPC 
code specified by the (v, 2,t) -DDS is quasi-cyclic, and free 
of 4-cycles, 6-cycles. 
Proof The properly of being 4-cycle-free comes directly 
from Lemma 1, sa we shall only prove the nonexistence of 6- 
cycle. Without loss of generality, let us consider three square 
matrices B,,H,,H, based on the disjoint difference sets 
{&aj}, i=1,2,3. The index difference of the nonzero 
elements for each column is either a, or v - a, in H, , a, or 
v-a2 in H,, a30r v-a3 in H,, which are all odd 
numbers, because v is even and a;, i = I, 2 ,,.., t , are odd. 
Two odd numbers cannot add up to odd number, thus, it's 
impossible to find three columns that form a closed path of 
length 6. 
Based on Lemmn 3, we are able to construct codes with a 
large range of code rates. For example, forv= 512, we can 
construct up to v/4 = 128 disjoint difference sets (O,ai} 
with odd integers ai, which can be employed to construct 6- 
cycle-free LDPC codes. Thus, LDPC codes of block length 
n = v t  and rate 
l - v / ~ = ( t - I ) / r .  t=2,3, ..., 128 
are 
available (actual code rates may be slightly higher, because 
the parity check matrix H has rank v - 1, i.e., it is not of full 
Another significant feature of the code is its simple 
structure. A set s = {a,, a2, ..., a,} completely describes its 
parity check matrix, which greatly reduces the memory and 
bandwidth issues involved in hardware implementation. 
Encoding for these codes can be achieved with linear 
complexity using a shift register in much the same way as 
cyclic codes [9]. 
2.2 Run-length limited @mi-cyclic LDPC Codes 
Figure I depicts another way of constructing quasi-cyclic 
LDPC codes that do not have 6-cycles. Instead of using 
Gallager's construction [I], i.e., randomly permuting the 
columns of the submatrices 2 to j ,  we compose the second 
submatrix as a series of k x k identity matrices (k-4 for this 
example). It is readily seen that the LDPC code (n, 2, k) is 
quasi-cyclic, and doesn't contain shon cycles, i.e., 4-cycles 
and 6-cycles. The block length of the code is k' . Several 
codewords can be combined to form a large block size. One 
reviewer pointed out that this construction leads to single 
parity check code based turbo product codes (TPUSPC) [IO]. 
As pointed out in [I I], the upper half of the parity check 
matrix forces each block of k successive msmitted hits to 
have even parity. Thus, a LDPC code with odd k is 
automatically a run-length limited code with maximum run- 
length of Is equal to 2(k-I). If k is even, the original LDPC 
code can be modified by adding a constant vector to all 
codewords in the code to satisfy 'a maximum .run-length of 
2(k-I)forbothOsand Is[ll]. 
rank). 
I295 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:59:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 
o
o
o
o
t
1
1
1
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
 
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
 
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
d
O
O
O
O
l
l
t
l
 
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
 
0
l
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
t
0
0
0
1
0
0
 
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
 
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
 
Fig.1 Example of a (l6,2,4) regular LDPC code 
A regular LDPC code with column weight j and rate R has 
a row weight k = j/(l - R )  . Table I lists examples of run- 
lengths that are achievable with various code rates and 
column weights j =2, 3 and 4. For applications requiring high 
code rate such as magnetic recording systems, the run-lengths 
are not of much use forj=3 and 4, whereas the run-lengths for 
j=2 LDPC codes may be of practical interest. 
Table I. Run-length constraints of regular LDPC codes 
j=2 
j=3 
j=4 
9/10 
For a regular LDPC code of column weight j 2 3, about 
4 j additions per bit are required per iteration of sum-product 
algorithm, while only 2j+2 additions per bit are required for 
codes with column weight j = 2 .  Hence, j=2 reduces 
computational complexity by a factor of 2 and 3, over j =3 
and 4, respectively. 
Ill. CHANNEL MODEL 
We model the recording system as a perfectly equalized 
partial response channel, i.e., h(D)=(I-D)P(I+D)q, where 
p, q 4, I, 2, and assume additive white Gaussian noise. A 
block diagram of the overall system is shown in Fig. 2. The 
main difference between system employing DDS-type LDPC 
codes and that using random LDPC codes is the presence of a 
random interleaver. Since DDS-type LDPC codes are highly 
structured, an interleaver is required to make the encoded 
sequence random-like. Some deterministic interleavers may 
lead to better performance for structured codes, but they are 
not considered in this paper. 
__-- 
.
.
 
Fig. 2. Schematic of iterative decoded channel model 
To detect in a manner compatible with soft iterative 
decoding, the BCJR algorithm [12] is used in the channel 
detector. As in turbo equalization, soft information exchange 
occurs between channel detector and LDPC decoder. 
Different number of iterations in LUFC decoding is possible 
for every iteration between the channel detector and the 
LDPC decoder. Given that the computational complexity of 
the channel detector using BCJR algorithm is much higher 
than that of the LDPC decoder using sum-product algorithm, 
more iterations in LDPC decoding and fewer iterations for 
channel detector is prefened. We perform 3 iterations in 
LDPC decoding before feeding the extrinsic message back to 
the channel detector as a priori information. Iterations are 
terminated when a valid codeword is obtained. Maximum of 
5 iterations between the channel detector and LDPC decoder 
are allowed if the LDPC decoder doesn't And a valid 
codeword. 
IV. DYNAMIC MODEU FOR DECODER 
CONVERGENCE 
Recently, Richardson and Urbanke [I31 introduced a 
technique called density evolution to track the probability 
density function (pdf) of the extrinsic information messages 
as this density evolves from iteration to iteration. This 
method has stimulated a lot of interest in studying the 
asymptotic performance of concatenated systems. El Gama1 
and Hammons [14], Divsalar et ai [I51 considered the 
decoder module as a signal-to-noise ratio transformer with 
the assumption that the extrinsic information in iterative 
decoding can be modeled by a Gaussian pdf. Narayanan [161' 
applied this technique to study the effect of precoding on the 
convergence of turbo equalization for PR channels. Under 
i.i.d. and Gaussian assumptions, the mean of the extrinsic 
information is used to calculate the thresholds for TPCISPC 
codes and LDPC codes over PR channels in [IO]. In this 
paper, we use the same Gaussian assumption (i.e., an i i d .  
Gaussian pdf with mean m and variance U * ) ,  and define the 
signal-to-noise ratio of the extrinsic information as 
SNR A m' / U *  . The usual signal-to-noise ratio measuring the 
quality of the channel symbols is denoted in this paper as 
E,IN,. 
Consider the input and output SNRs for the concatenated 
system shown in Fig. 3. For a given value of E,IN,, the 
output SNR of each module is a function of its input SNR, 
denoted by f, for channel detector and f, for LDPC 
decoder. We have 
SNRct = fc(SNR,:, E, I No) 
SNR; = f, ( SNR,' ) 
(1) 
(2) 
I
Fig. 3. Dynamical model for LDPC cod-d PR channel 
For a channel detector using the BCJR algorithm, no 
simple analytical expression for the transfer function is 
available. We estimate the transfer function empirically via 
Monte-Carlo- simulation, assuming that the input a priori 
information from LDPC decoder is i.i.d. and Gaussian with 
mean m and variance U' = 2m. 
For the LDPC decoder, Chung et a/ [I71 developed a 
technique known as Gaussian approximation to update (as 
follows) the extrinsic information of bit node and check node 
1296 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:59:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
at 1, LDPC decoding iteration (readers are referred to [ 171 for 
detailed derivation): 
bit to check: 
check to bit: 
m p  = my. + ( j  - l)m(l-" 
(3) 
mil' 
I = 
( I  -[I -e( my1)]-') 
(4) 
where j and k denote column weight and row weight of the 
LDPC code, m, , m" and mv. are the mean of the density of 
message passed from bit to check, fmm check to bit and from 
inner channel detector to LDPC decoder, respectively. The 
function #(x) is defined as 
<..It 
@W{ I-lj'"h($Tdu 
6- 
x > o  
1 
x = o  
(5) 
AAer several LDPC decoding iterations, the message with 
mean j . my' is passed back to the channel detector as apriori 
information. 
Density evolution technique is initially proposed to 
evaluate the ensemble and asymptotic performance of LDPC 
codes, assuming that the length of the code is very long and 
there are no cycles in the code graph. For codes with cycles, 
the i.i.d. assumption is still valid before the message travels 
all the nodes in the shortest cycle. Computer simulations 
indicate that the Gaussian approximation analysis using 
Eq.(3)-(5) is fairly close to the simulated results of the 
constructed 6-cycle-free j=2 LDPC code with block length 
4608 within the first tbree iterations. 
V. SIMULATION RESULTS 
Following Lemma 3, we constructed a (v=5 12, j=2, t=9)- 
DDS LDPC code with block length n = vf = 4608, code rate 
r = (r - I) I f  = 8 19. For comparison purpose, also presented 
are the results for random LDPC codes of the same block 
length and code rate, but with column weights 3 and 4. We 
use 3 iterations in LDPC decoding before passing the soft 
information to the channel detector as a priori information, 
though the optimal choice of number of iterations should 
depend on the value of SNR: . 
.
,
 
- 
PR4 
a 
EPR4. WI+d) 
c EPR4 
I 
I 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
SNRCln 
Fig. 4. Transfer function ofchannel detector for various PR 
targets at E, I No = 4.75dB 
Figure 4 shows the transfer function f,(SNR;, 
E, I No) of 
the channel detector at E, I No = 4.75dB for PR4, EPR4 and 
PR2 channels without precoder and an EPR4 target with a 
precoder. PR4 target has the largest output SNRot if 
SNR:=O, i.e., we have no apriori information. However, the 
three PR channels have similar outputs when SNR,: is high. 
This indicates that PR4 target outperforms EPR4 and PR2 
channel for the first iteration (SNR:=O) 
at E, / N. = 4.754'8, 
but the three PR channels have similar performance if SNR: 
is improved upon LDPC decoding. Similar behavior was 
observed for various PR targets and at large range values of 
E, IN.. Figure 4 also shows SNRL Vs. SNR: 
for EPR4 
channel with precoder 1 /(I 
D') . Precdmg results in poor 
SNR performance at the first iteration, but has a larger slope 
for high SNR:, 
which was also observed and discussed 
elsewhere [14-15]. 
In Fig. 5, we show SNR; 
as a function of SNRL for high 
rate (819) LDPC codes of column weights j =2, 3, 4 and 6, 
with 3 LDPC decoding iterations. As we can see, in the low 
input SNR region, LDPC codes with+ 
performs the best. 
As SNR: 
increases, codes. with larger column weights 
converge faster than codes with smaller ones. 
Fig. 5. Gaussian approximation analysis for LDPC codes of 
column weight j=2, 3, 4 and 6, with 3 LDPC decoding 
iterations. 
Figure 6 plots the transfer function /,of j=2, rate=8/9 
LDPC decoder with 3 decoding iterations, the channel 
detector transfer function fi'(SNR:, 
E, / No) with E, IN, 
increasing from 4.0dB to 7.0dB by 0.5dE%, and the evolution 
of the SNR between the two modules as well. It can be seen 
that the S N R  does not increase above a certain value even for 
infinite number of iterations. That maximum SNR value is 
known as a fixed point [13-151. Since the concatenated 
system converges to the fired point after sufficient number of 
iterations, we may get the overall S N R  of the system as 
1297 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:59:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
SNR = SNR; ( f i e d )  + SNR:( fired) 
(6) 
Where SNRL(fu;.d),SNR:(fied) are the SNR values at 
the fixed point. If i.i.d. Gaussian pdf is assumed, the BER of 
the system for a given value of E. / N. can be computed 
- 
I
"
 
from the overall SNR using the standard Q function as 
BER = Q(& 
(7) 
.. 
Fig. 6. Iterations and convergence of LDPC coded PR4 
channel. 
Figure 7 shows the predicted BER versus E, / N o  (LDPC 
code rate considered) results for PR4 channel computed using 
Eq. (7). Also plotted are the simulation results for (v, 2, 1)- 
DDS LDPC coded PR4, EPR4 and PR2 channels without 
precoder. As we can see, the predicted BER plot matches 
well with the simulated results in the studied BER region. We 
also notice that PR4 target outperfom EPR4 and PRZ at low 
E, /No, 
but all thee exhibit the same BER performance at 
medium-to-high E, I No, which is consistent with the density 
evolution analysis shown in Fig. 4. 
... :. 
q i ;\; 
i q; -: 
....-. 
. - I . : : : . :  
- - .  
...... 
? 
. . . . . . 
, 
. . . . . 
..... 
.... 
.... . 
K 
::I- 
.... 
1 
Fig. 7. Predicted and simulated BER Vs. E, I No plots for 
(v, 2, +DDS LDPC coded PR4, EPR4 and PR2 channels. 
Figure 8 compares the BER performance of the (v, 2,[)- 
DDS LDPC code to random LDPC codes with column 
weight j = 3 and 4 for EPR4 channel. As Fig. 8 shows, the 
(v, 2, t)-DDS LDPC code outperforms LDPC codes with j=3 
at low SNR, but it perform worse when the BER values are 
better (i.e., smaller) than certain BER threshold (2.0~10~). 
Codes with column weights j = 2, 3 outperfom codes with 
j-1 by about 0.25dB over the BER range investigated, which 
are consistent with Gaussian approximation analysis in Fig. 5. 
The plot also shows the performance of (v. 2, 1)-DDS LDPC 
code with - 
precoder. It is important to note that j=2 
LDPC code with the precoder slightly outperforms j=3 LDPC 
code without precoder. As has been shown in [16], the use of 
precoder results in about IdB loss Onj=3 LDPC coded EPR4 
channels with iterative son decoding. Since the inclusion of 
precoding adds little encoding and decoding complexity to 
the channel, (v, 2, r)-DDS LDPC code concatenated with 
precoded PR channel appears to be attractive both from the 
complexity and the performance point of views. 
1 
l b D '  
- - - - - - -  
r...~...?~~~ 
.,... 
r - - - v - - -  
4 
45 
5 
55 
6 
6 5  
7 
75 
8 
E , 4  (da) 
Fig. 8. BER as a function ofE6 I No for various LDPC coded 
EPR4 channels. 
Although BER comparisons are important, they do not 
reveal the overall system performance in storage applications 
since an outer RS code may be required. Therefore, we 
investigate the block error statistics of the DDS LDPC codes. 
We show in Fig. 9 the number of blocks as a function of the 
number of errors per block for j=2 DDS LDPC code without 
precoding. A large number of blocks have no errors, and the 
total number of blocks with no errors is not being shown in 
this figure for the sake of clarity. We also list in the subplot 
the E, / No and BER level, the number of blocks simulated. 
For the three cases simulated, we observe that the number of 
errors per block (given that the block is in error) is typically 
constrained within a small number of bits. We show in Fig. 
10 similar block error statistics as in Fig. 9 but for j=3 LDPC 
code. Although LDPC code with j=3 outperfom code with 
j=2 in terms of BER performance at E,lN,=5.5 dB, j=3 
code results in two blocks with more than 100 errors out of 
19728 trials, which may be beyond the error correction 
capability of an outer RS cpde. In contrast, only up to 25 
errors per block are observeu ior the j=2 LDPC code among 
167072 simulated blocks. Thus, LDPC codes with j=2 seem 
1298 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:59:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
to offer more compatibility with an outer RS code at the same 
channel E, IN, . 
10000 
5CQOL-1 
E,iNO=5.5dB. BER=97ed, lfBlrrk%=167072 
O
O
 
5 
10 
I 5  
20 
25 
I 
Po0i 
EJN.=5.6?dB. BER=B.le-5,lBbcLll=22869 
16 1 
d 
14 
_i 
10 I 1  12 13 J 
14 
Fig. 9. Block error statistics ofj=2 DDS LDPC code without 
precoder over EPR4 channel. 
'0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
I20 
140 
160 
I 
E,iN0=5.5dB. BER=8.0es.#B~ka=19728 
20 
40 
60 
80 
1-24 
1-24 
1 
Ep0=5.63dB, BER=9e-7, LBbcks=15103d 
L 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
n o t m a  
OO 
Fig. IO. Block error statistics of LDPC code with j=3 over 
EPR4 channel. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have discussed two methods to construct 
quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with column weight 2 that do not 
have 6-cycles. One approach is based on (v, 2, +disjoint 
difference sets. We also pointed out that there are other 
methods to construct column weight-2, structured LDPC 
codes that are free of 6-cycles. This other structured code 
may also satisfy run-length limiting consh'aints. Through 
analysis 
and 
simulations, 
which 
includes 
decoding 
convergence analysis using density evolution technique, we 
were able to predict the BER performance which matches 
well with BER performance seen iii simulations. Examining 
the resulting block error statistics, these codes appear to be 
compatible with outer Reed Solomon codes usually employed 
in data storage applications. Based on our studies, we can 
draw following conclusions regarding the applicability of 
these structured LDPC codes to data storage channels: 
A large family of LDPC codes free of 4-cycles and 6- 
cycles can be constructed from 
(v,2,f) -disjoint 
difference sets, withcode rates (t-l)/t, f=2,3 ,.._, v I 4 .  
. 
Its panty-check matrix can be completely described by a 
set of order Y, which may greatly reduce the memory and 
bandwidth complexity in hardware implementation. 
Density evolution technique is a useful tool to analyze 
the convergence of the LDPC coded PR channels. Using 
this technique, we predicted the BER performance of the 
j=2 LDPC coded system which matches well with 
simulation results. 
LDPC code with j=2 show block error statistics more 
compatible with outer RS codes, compared to LDPC 
codes with j 2 3. If used with precoded channel, they 
slightly outperform j=3 LDPC codes, while offering 
lower computation and implementation complexity. 
REFERENCES 
[I] 
[2] 
131 
R. G., Oallager, LowDerrriry Parity Check Cwles, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, 1963. 
1. Sauvignier, A. Pried", M. O k g ,  P. Sicgel, R. E. Swanson, and 
I. K. Wolf, "Turbo codes for PR4: parallel Versus serial 
concatenation," ploc. 1999 Inler. Con! Commun., June 1999. 
H. Song, E. V. K. Viiaya Kumar, E. Kunas, Y. Yuan, L L. McPheten, 
and S W Mclaughim. "llrralne decoding far panlal mspmr~ (PRJ 
qurlizcd msgnei+opiical (MO) dau storage channels," IEEE JSAC. 
v0t 19. DD i74.8n3.mi 
[4] 
[5] 
[6] 
Y. Kou,'S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, "Low density parity check codes 
based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more," submitted to 
IEEE T m m  Infiorm. 7 $ w y ,  1999. 
S. 1. Johnson, and S .  R. Weller, "Const~cti~n 
of lowdensity parity 
check codes from Kirkman triple systems," IEEE Globemm 2001, San 
Aotonio, TX, November 2001. 
B. Vasic, "Sl~cbmd iteratively decodable eodes based on Steiner 
systems and their application in magnetic recording," 1EEE Globmom 
2001, San Antonio, TX, November 2001. 
[7] X. Hu, E. Eleflhefiou, and D. h o l d ,  "Progressive edge-gmwth Tanner 
graphs," Pme IEEE Global Teleeommun. Cont. San Antonio, TX, 
Nov. 2001,pp. 995-1001. 
[8] Z. Chen, P. Fan and F. Jin, "Disjoint difference sets, difference hiangle 
Sets, and related codes," IEEE T m .  Inform. T h w y ,  Vol. 38, pp. 518 
-522, 1992. 
[9] R. Toumssnd, and E. Weldon, "Selfarthogonal quasi-eyclic codes," 
IEEE Trans. Infonn. Theory, vol. IT-13, No.2, pp. 183-195, April, 
1967. 
[IO] I. Li, K. Narayanan, E. K u m ,  and C. N. Gmrghiades, "On the 
performance of high-rate TPUSPC Codes and LDPC codes over panial 
response channels," to appear on IEEE Tmns. Commun. 
[I I] D. Mackay and M. Davey, "Evaluation of Gallager codes for short 
blmk lenmh and hieh rate aodications". Proceedinm oflMA workhoo 
.. 
[ 131 T. J. Richardson, and R. UrbanLe, "The capacity of lowdensity parity- 
check codes under message-passing decoding," IEEE Trans. Inform. 
Theov, vol.4l,No.2,pp. 599-618, FebruaIy 2001. 
[I41 H. El Gama1 and A. R. HmmOnS Jr., "Analyzing the hrrbo decoder 
using the Gaussian approximation," IEEE Tmns. Info-, 
Theoy, vol. 
41,pp.611-686, Feb.,2001. 
[I51 D. Divsaslar, S. Dolinar and F. Pollara, "Iterative Turbo Decoder 
Analysis Based bn Density Evolutions," IEEE 
JoumnlonSele. Area. Commun., Vol 19,pp. 891-907, MayZOOI. 
[I61 K R. Narayanan, "Effect of preceding on the convergence of Nrbo 
equlizafion for p h a l  response channels," IEEE Journal on Sele. AI-. 
Commun., Vol 19, pp.686-698, April 2002. 
[ I l l  S. Y. Chung, "On the const~etion of some capacity-approaching coding 
schemes," Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusens lnstihlte Technology, 
September 2Mx). 
1299 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:59:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
