On Implementation of Min-Sum Algorithm for Decoding Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes’

Farhad Zarkeshvari, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Associate Member, ZEEE

farhad, ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca

Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre

Dept. of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University

1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, CanadaKlS 5B6

T e l + I 613 520-2600 ext. 8026, Fax: +1 613 520-5727

columns and the rows of the parity check matrix H,
Abstract - This paper is concerned with the respectively. A ‘1’ located at position ( i , j ) of H

implementation issues of the so-called min-sum algorithm corresponds to an edge between bit-node j and check-node i.

(also referred to as max-sum or max-produet) for the Iterative decoding algorithms, also called “message-passing

decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The algorithms,” are performed by exchanging messages between

effects of clipping threshold and the number of check-nodes and bit-nodes through the edges of the graph, in

quantization bits on the performance of mio-sum both directions and iteratively. The messages could be

algorithm a t short and intermediate block lengths are “hard” andor “soft” information. and the operations

studied. It is shown that min-sum is robust against performed in bit and check nodes to generate messages

quantization effects, and in many cases, only four depend on the nature of the decoding algorithm and the

quantization bits suffices to obtain close to ideal message type@). In its conventional form, an iterative

performance. We also propose modifications to min-sum decoding algorithm starts by creating initial messages at bit

algorithm that improve the performance by a few tenths nodes from the observations at the output of the channel and

o f a dB with just a small increase io decoding complexity. the channel characteristics. It then passes these messages to

the check nodes through the edges of the graph. Iterations

then start, by each iteration consisting of two steps: 1) check

1. INTRODUCTION

nodes processing the information coming from the bit nodes

Gallager introduced low density parity check (LDPC) codes and passing back new messages to the bit nodes. These

in 1962 [IO]. They were however, soon forgotten due to messages usually reflect the estimate of check nodes from the

limited computational resources at the time which made the value and reliability of bit nodes. 2) bit nodes processing the

corresponding iterative decoding algorithms look messages sent by check nodes and sending back updated

impractical. It was not until the invention of turbo codes [5] information about their value and the associated reliability to

that researchers realized the phenomenal strength of iterative check nodes. In each iteration, hard decision on the value of

coding schemes, and the attractive performance/complexity each bit is made at bit nodes and the algorithm stops if the

tradeoff that they offer. In particular, for the past few years, hard-decision assignment for bits satisfies all the check

there has been a great amount of research devoted to LDPC equations, or a maximum number of iterations is reached.

codes and the performance and the complexity of associated There are a wide range of iterative algorithms for decoding

iterative decoding algorithms [1-4]. In the coding LDPC codes, each offering a particular tradeoff between

community, it is now widely accepted that in many error performance and decoding complexity. The best

applications, LDPC codes are serious competitors for turbo performing algorithm is known to be “belief-propagation”

codes and more research is underway to analyze, design and (BP) or “sum-product” [SI. It converges to a posteriori

eficiently implement LDPC encoders and decoders.

probabilities (APP) for bits if the TG is cycle-free [9].It is

An LDPC code C, like any other linear block code, can be also considered to be the most complex iterative algorithm to

T- fully described by its pari check matrix H, through the implement. In this work, we focus on another well-known
parity-check equations CH -0, E E C . For LDPC codes iterative decoding algorithm: “min-sum” (MS). Other

however, the parity-check matrix happens to be sparse (only common names for min-sum are “max-product’’ and “max-

a small fraction of elements are nonzero). Iterative decoding sum,” depending on the type of messages and the

algorithms are naturally described using a graph of the code corresponding operations performed in bit and check nodes.

constructed based on H. Such a graph is called a Tanner As for MS, the messages are log-likelihood ratios (LLR). On

graph (TG) [14]. To describe TGs and the associated cycle-free graphs, MS converges to the maximum-likelihood

decoding algorithms, we assume that the codes are binary. A (ML) solution for codewords [9].MS can also be considered

TG is a bipartite graph that contains two types of nodes, bit as an approximation to BP algorithm in log-likelihood ratio

(symbol) nodes and check nodes, corresponding to the domain [9]. Although, in general, the error performance of

MS is a few tenths of a dB inferior to that of BP, it is much

’ This work has been supportcd in pan by Zarlink Semiconductor Carp. simpler to implement, and does not require an estimate of

(formcdy, Mite1 SemiconductorCarp.)under a research coowct.

noise power (see the description of MS in Section II). Also, if

0-7803-7632-3/02/$17.0002002 IEEE

1349

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

one only considers the convergent cases, the performance of Bit node steo:

MS may be significantly better than that of BP [15]. Moreover, in this work, we show that the implementation of

MS is more robust against quantization error compared to a

similar implementation for BP algorithm. In the rest of the paper, we briefly explain the MS algorithm (this LLR domain description of the algorithm appears to be

Hard decision ond stopping criteria (at bit nodes):
w, = m y ) + Em,,,

(4)

the simplest to implement). We then discuss the effects of

keN(s)

clipping threshold and the number of quantization bits on the

performance of MS algorithm. We observe that although

(5)

quantization in general degrades the performance, clipping can provide improvement, ana that in many cases the overall effect is such that only 4 bits of quantization results in near or even better than ideal performance. This is versus 6 bits for a similar implementation of BP algorithm 1131. We also propose simple modifications that can considerably improve the performance of MS with negligible cost in complexity.

The algorithm stops if the estimated hard-decision
assignment, consisting of .? 's, is a codeword, or a maximum
number of iterations is reached. As described above, the algorithm only requires addition and minimum operations, hence the name "min-sum." (Note that the product in (2)is equivalent to a binary exclusive OR

Surprisingly, one of the modified MS algorithms with only 4 if -1 and 1 are mapped to 1 and 0, respectively.)

quantization bits can outperform the ideal BP algorithm.

In. CLIPPING AND QUANTIZATION

11. MIN-SUMALGORITHM

To implement the min-sum algorithm, we consider the

...,a Suppose that each hit q of a codeword E = (cl,

is

mapped to the bipolar signal xi = ( - I f , and transmitted over

received values to be clipped symmetrically at a threshold Q,,
and then uniformly quantized in the range [-cm, 4,There

a binary input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) are Zq - 1 quantization intervals, each represented by q

channel. At the output of the channel, we have I = & + n, quantization bits. The central quantization interval is

where 9 is a Gaussian random vector independent of E and symmetric with respect to the origin and is represented by 0.

with independent and identically distributed elements. Each The rest of the intervals are pair-wise symmetric with respect

element niof 8 is a zero-mean Gaussian random variable with to the origin and are represented by integer numbers with

varianced = N,IZRE,, in which R is the rate of the code, and Eb and N o12 are the average energy per information bit

opposite signs. Operations in both bit and check nodes are performed in fixed-point arithmetic. Additions in bit nodes are performed in such an order to minimize the possibility of

and the power spectral density of AWGN, respectively. For overflow (it is easy to see that this is equivalent to such a communication scenario, the min-sum algorithm starts sequentially adding values with opposite signs, when

from fi, as the initial message

at bit node ci, and possible). In the case of overflow in bit node computations

estimates E by performing the following operations iteratively (note that all the messages are LLR, and s = q and p
represent a neighboring pair of bit node and check node, respectively):

(overflow does not happen in check computations (2)), the
result is mapped to 2(4-1-' 1 or - (2'9-1'- 1) dependingm the
sign being positive or negative, respectively.
As we will see in Section V, clipping can improve the performance of MS algorithm and with optimized Q,,only 4

Initialization:
m3+p= my' = ri

quantization bits provides near ideal performance. This is compared to 6 bits for the implementation of BP algorithm in LLR domain [131.

n Check node step:

mp4, =

sgn(m,+,) Min I mt+* I '

(2)

teN(pl\i

tcN(p1b

where N ( ~\ ) is the set of all the neighboring bit nodes of

p other than s , and sgn(x) = 1 or -1, depending on x 2 0 or

< 0, respectively. Incorporating in (2) only the messages coming along other adjacent edges to p than the one

connected to s guarantees that only extrinsic information is
passed along t o s .

w .MODIFICATIOTNOSMIN-SUM
Min-sum algorithm has less complexity and lower sensitivity to quantization compared to BP algorithm in LLR domain. This however comes at a cost in performance. For a given code and a given channel model, and a prescribed error rate, MS requires up to a few tenths of a dJ3 more transmitted power than BP. There has been some recent work to partially close this gap and come up with new versions of iterative decoding algorithms that provide performancelcomplexity tradeoffs that are between those of MS and BP, see, e.g., [6]. In the following, we present new modifications to MS

1350 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithm that can improve the performance with small increase in complexity. As we are mainly concemed with practical implementation of decoding algorithms, we emphasize on modifications that can be incorporated in the quantized version of MS with minimal effort. The careful inspection of MS and BP algorithm in LLR domain reveals that the two algorithms perform the exact same operation in bit nodes (addition) and the difference is only in the operations performed in check nodes. Suppose we
have a check node p with degree 3, and let m, and m2 be the
input messages to p with lmll S lm21and d = Imzl- Im,l. Also,
let denote the output message by m3. For BP, we then have
This has the same sign as the message in (Z), but a different
++ magnitude. Now, assuming that e'"lel"'l 1, Im31 can be
simplified as
(7)
. ..
The function In($ /(I + e d ) )is plotted in Fig. 1. It is always
negative and larger than -0.69 for d 2 0. The right hand side
of (7) is then nonnegative for /mil 2 0.69.
Comparing (7) to the magnihlde of the message in (Z), one
can see that the term f ( d )= In(ed /(I + ed)) is the correction
factor that should be added to the magnitude of the output messages of check nodes in MS algorithm to make them
almost the same as those of BP. For a check node p ,let e be
the incident edge with the smallest incoming message in absolute value. Let denote this message by nq. In MS algorithm, the absolute value of all the outgoing messages
from p is equal to ImJ, except for the message sent out along
e. The absolute value of this message is equal to Im../, where Q is the second smallest incoming message in size. Based on our simulations, by applying the Correction factor f ( d ) to
these outputs, more than 90% of the performance gap between ideal MS (floating-point arithmetic with no clipping or quantization) and BP is closed. The precise imptementation of f ( d ) is however complex. To simplify the
implementation, different approaches, such as using a lookup table, approximating ,-(@ with a pair-wise linear, or
simply a stepwise function can be adopted. Each approach will result in a different performance-complexity tradeoff.
More in the line with the latter approach, we devise two very
simple correction steps for the quantized version of MS to be applied to the size of the outgoing messages from check nodes (signs remain the same as those in conventional MS. Similar changes can also be applied to the ideal MS): 1)
Conditional correction: For each edge e, let mLz\ndenote
the extrinsic incoming message with the smallest absolute value. Then the sue of the outgoing message along e is max
0%:,, I - k,, Oj, r f h e r e is an incoming extrinsic message m

other than

with Imlc[ \,if\ , /,,,I-) I+k2] for some

<.-

e.-

predeterminedpositive and non-negative integers k, and k2,

respectively. Otherwise, the size of the outgoing message will
remain a s / , w I. 2 ) Unconditional correction*: [8] For each

I._.
edge e, the size of the outgoing message is m a 4 ,,,!f I - k,

0),for some predeterminedpositive integer k. As we will see in the next section, these simple modifications improve the performance of MS by a few tenths of a dB, with the unconditional correction being superior in most cases.

V. SIMULATIONRESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
To study the effects of clipping and quantization, we have performed simulations on a number of LDPC codes. Here, we only present the results for an irregular code with length n=1268, and dimension k=456. The code is constructed by construction 2A [ I l l in [12]. More simulation results can be foundin [16, 171. To show the improvement obtained by clipping, the bit error rate @ER) under ideal and clipped MS are given in Fig. 2. Results for BP algorithm are also given as reference. The optimum clipping threshold (resulting in the smallest BER) appears to be almost a constant over a wide range of signal-
to-noise ratios (SNR). In Fig. 2, the clipping threshold is
fixed and is chosen to he cm = 2. For all the simulation results in this paper, the maximum number of iterations is
chosen to be 200. Also, for each SNR, up to IO' codewords
are simulated. It can be seen that clipping closes up to almost half of the performance gap between MS and BP. This is due to upper bounding the overconfident reliabilities at the output of check nodes, which is expected to improve the performance of MS. To investigate the effects of quantization, the BER curves resulted from ideal MS and quantized MS with different number of quantization bits are plotted in Fig. 3. The clipping threshold is fixed and is chosen to be 2. At each SNR, and for each given number of quantization bits, the effect of clipping threshold on BER is investigated. This is plotted in Fig. 4, at SNR=ZdB. It can he seen that the optimum threshold is almost the same for different number of quantization bits,
and is approximately equal to 2. It is also observed that the optimum clipping threshold is not very sensitive to SNR and is almost constant over a wide range of SNR values. Fig. 3 shows that by using 4 bits to represent the received values and messages, one can obtain near or better than ideal

A similar algorilhm, called "offset BP-based has bcetl independently developed by 1. Chsn and M. Fosrorier [7, 81.They have also analyzed the algorithm using density evolution. It is shown in [7] that the continuous
version ofthis algorithm is only slightly inferior to the normalized BP-based algorithm of [6]. It is however, important to note that the scope of this work is different than that of [7] as our focus is an LDPC eodes with small and
intermediate block lengths for practical applications. The density evolution resulll of 17, 81, which arc based on assumptions such e independence among messages throughout lhc decoding process, are more appropriate for
large block lengths.

1351
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

performance, and not much can be gained by increasing the number of bits beyond 4. In fact, for the number o fbits larger than 6, the results practically coincide with those for 6 bits. Fig. 5 contains MS results of (1268,456) code with the conditional and unconditional correction steps for 4 quantization bits. Results of standard MS with 4 quantization bits and BP are also given as reference. For the simulations, k=k,=l and k2=0. These values appear to result in the best performance. With the unconditional correction step, improvement of up to 0.3dB compared to standard MS over a wide range of SNRs is obtained. Interestingly, the unconditional correction of MS performs superior to the conditional one, and very close to the ideal BP. For some other codes, even larger improvements have been observed [16, 171. In some cases, MS with unconditional correction step clearly outperforms ideal BP [16, 171. This indicates that algorithms which are optimal on cycle-free graphs do not necessarily deliver the best performance on graphs with cycles.
VI. CONCLUSION
The effects of clipping and quantization on min-sum algorithm are investigated. It is shown that with the optimum clipping threshold, a 4-bit uniform quantizer and 4-bit messages provide near (sometimes even better than) ideal performance. The optimum clipping threshold mainly depends on the code and is rather insensitive to SNR and the number ’ of quantization bits. We also propose simple modifications to min-sum algorithm that can improve the performance with minor increase in complexity. Min-sum with unconditional correction step appears to be the most promising algorithm for implementation. It performs almost the same as, or sometimes even better than, beliefpropagation with much less complexity.
REFERENCES
“Concatenated coding techniques and iterative decoding: sailing loward channel capacity,” special issue of IEEE J. Selected Areas Comm., vol. 16, no.2, Feb. 1998. ‘Codes an graphs and iterative algorithms:’ spccial issue of IEEE Tram. Info-. 7 h e o p vol. 47, no. 2, Feb. 2001. ‘Thc tuba principle: from theory to practice I,” special issue of IEEE J. SelecledAreas Comm.,vol. 19, no.5, May 2001. “The tu& principle: from theory to practice 11,” spccial issue of IEEE J. SelecledAreas Comm., vol. 19, no.9, Sept. 2001. C. Bemu, A. Glavicux and P.Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit c r m r s o m t i n g coding and decoding,” in Pmc. IEEE Inl. Con! CO-. (ICC), pp. 1067-1070, 1993. J. Chen and M. Fassorier, ‘Wear optimum universal belief propagation based deeoding of lowdensity paritysheck codes,” IEEE T r m Comm.. vol. 50, no.3, pp. 406-414, Much 2002.
1. Chcn and M. Forsorier, “Dcnsity evolution for two improved BPb a s d decoding algorithm of LDPC codes,“ IEEE Comm. Len.,vol.
6, no.5 , pp. 208-210, May 2002. J. Chen and M. Fossoria, “Density evolutionfor BP-based decoding algorithm of LDPC codes and their quantized version,” accepted for presentationin IEEE Globeom. 2002. G. D. Fomcy, Jr.. “On iterative dswding and the two-way

algorithm,” in Proc. Inl. Symp. on Turbo Coder ond Related Topics, Bnst, France, pp. 12-25,Sept. 1997. R. G. Gallager, “Law dcnsity parity check codcs,” I R E Tram. Inform. Themy, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962. D. J. C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, ‘WearShannon limit performance of low dolsity parity check codes,” Electmn. Lell., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645-1646.1996. Y.Mao, A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good lowdensity paritysheek M d c s at rhon block lengths,” Pmc. IEEE Inr
Conz on Comm. (ICC ), vol. I,pp. 4144,2001. L. Ping, W. K. Lcung, “Decoding lowdensity parity check codes with finite quantization bits,” IEEE Comm. Lell., vol. 4, pp. 62 - 64
,No. 2, Feb. 2000. R. M. Tanner, “A ncursive appmach lo low wmplcxity d e r , ” IEEE Tram. Info-. 7hheotyyv, ol. IT-27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
Y.Wciss and W. T. Freeman, ”On the optimality of solutions of the
mar-pmduct belief-propagation algorithm in arbi- graphs,” IEEE Tram. Info-. 7hheory. vol. 41, pp. 736-744,Fcb. 2001 F. W e s h v a r i and A. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min.
sum algorithm for decoding lowdensity parity-check d c s . ” submilled to IEEE Tram.on Comm., June 2002. F. Zarkeshvari. “Implementation of iterative d c d i n g algorithm on digital VLSI platforms,” MSe. dissertation, CarlctonUniv., Ottawa,
Canada, 2002.

Fig. 1. Cametion factor fld) for min-sum algorithm

I

3s-
<

(I

I.

I.

3.

-U

2

Y

1.

Fig. 2 BER awes for (1268.456) irregular cods decoded by idcal min-sum

(o), elippcd min-sum (no character)and belicfpmpagation (e).

1352 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

..:......i ....i ...............
d .....

:
.

..

.....

.. .

.

.

.

. .

....................................................................s.:. ....... .................

=

.

-13
Fig. 3: BER curves for (1268,456) cadc dccodcd by ideal and quantized minsum (ca = 2).

I

I

I

I

I/

I
I
5

I /I

I

I

Al

Fig. 4: The effect of clipping thresholdc+ on emor performanccof quantircd min-sum for (1268.456) codc at m-2 dB.

...

- ...

.

..

. ......

.

..

...

......

.....

1353
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:57:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

