Towards Energy Effective LDPC Decoding by
Exploiting Channel Noise Variability
Thomas Marconi∗, Christian Spagnol†, Emanuel Popovici† and Sorin Cotofana∗
∗Computer Engineering Lab, TU Delft, the Netherlands, E-mail:{T.Marconi,S.D.Cotofana}@tudelft.nl
†Electrical & Electronic Engineering, University College Cork, Ireland, E-mail: c.spagnol@ue.ucc.ie, e.popovici@ucc.ie
Abstract—In communication systems, channel quality varia-
tion is a well known phenomenon, which fundamentally influences
the decoding process. While most of the time, the transmission
takes place in good signal to noise conditions, to satisfy QoS
requirements in all cases, telecom platforms rely on largely over-
designed hardware, which may result in energy waste during most
of their operation. In this paper we propose to exploit the channel
noise variability and adapt the platform operation conditions
such that QoS requirements are satisfied with the minimum
energy consumption. In particular, we propose a technique to
exploit channel noise variability towards energy effective LDPC
decoding amenable to low-energy operation. Endowed with the
channel noise variability knowledge, our technique adaptively
tunes the operating voltage at runtime, aiming to achieve the
optimal tradeoff between decoder performance and power con-
sumption, while fulfilling the QoS requirements. To demonstrate
the capabilities of our proposal we implemented it and other state
of the art energy reduction methods in conjunction with a fully
parallel LDPC decoder on a Virtex-6 FPGA. Our experiments
indicate that the proposed technique outperforms state of the
art counterparts, in terms of energy reduction, with 71% to
76% and 15% to 28%, w.r.t. early termination without and
with DVS, respectively, while maintaining the targeted decoding
robustness. Moreover, the measurements suggest that in certain
conditions Degradation Stochastic Resonance occurs, i.e., the
energy consumption is unexpectedly diminished due to the fact
that unpredictable underpowered components facilitate rather
than impede the decoding process.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is well known that channel quality variation may oc-
cur in communication systems as a result of, e.g., multi-
path, interferences, mobility, and environmental conditions [1].
When the quality is low a large number of errors might occur
during the transmission and high performance error correctors
are required to recover the original message. However, if the
quality is good, the system experiences less errors case in
which decoders with lower decoding capabilities are enough
to fulfill the Quality of Service (QoS) requirements. Since the
systems are designed to meet a target acceptable error rate even
in the worst-case scenario, e.g., the highest expected channel
noise level, the decoders are over-designed. Thus decoders
have excess performance during good channel conditions and
as the worst-case, i.e., bad condition, rarely occurs, significant
energy consumption is wasted during most of their operation.
In view of this observation, the main question that we
are addressing in this work is ”Can we adapt the decoder
performance to the channel status to prevent energy over-
consumption?” We positively answer this question by propos-
ing a technique to trade off performance with energy while
fulfilling error rates requirements by exploiting channel noise
variability towards energy effective Low Density Parity Check
(LDPC) decoding [2]. Decoding at the required performance is
the key idea behind our method to diminish energy consump-
tion and we determine the operation conditions resulting in
the highest energy savings by actively monitoring the channel
noise. More specifically, we diminish the supply voltage value
when the channel is in a good condition to save energy and
vice versa we increase it when the channel is getting worse
for meeting the target error rate. To be able to properly adjust
at run time the power supply voltage to the channel status
we perform at design time a decoder pre-characterization, i.e.,
we measure decoder’s Frame Error Rate (FER), Bit Error
Rate (BER), and energy/bit under voltage scaling on a variety
of noisy channels. The main objective is to minimize the
energy consumption while preserving the decoder performance
in terms of FER and BER. The operating voltage adaptation
is done based on the estimated Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR)
of an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel with
Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) modulation.
Although our technique is applicable to any electronic
system for which the power supply vs performance relation can
be pre-characterized, in this work, we experimentally evaluate
it for an LDPC decoder implemented on Field-Programmable
Gate Array (FPGA). We utilize as discussion vehicle an
LDPC decoder based on Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR) Belief
Propagation (BP) algorithm implemented with fully parallel
architecture. The decoder is automatically generated and the
energy consumption is measured directly on the FPGA board
by accessing the PMBus through the USB interface adapter. In
contrast to [3], we adjust the supply voltage value by directly
controlling the board internal power supply, thus we do not
rely on an external power supply or need to operate board
modifications for effective and efficient voltage scaling exper-
iments. We note that we report measured data, gathered from
experiments on a Virtex-6 FPGA, and not from theoretical
analysis, e.g., density evolution, EXIT charts, or from, e.g.,
Monte-Carlo simulation.
For comparison purpose we mapped into the FPGA three
versions of the considered LDPC decoder as follows: (i)
equipped with our technique, (ii) with powering off capa-
bility/early termination (ET) technique, e.g., [4], operated at
nominal supply voltage value, and (iii) with a hybrid scheme
combining ET and the Dynamic Voltage Scaling (DVS) tech-
niques in [3]. Our experiments indicate that the proposed
technique outperforms the other schemes, resulting in 71%
to 76% and 15% to 28% energy reduction w.r.t. ET without
and with DVS, respectively, while maintaining the required
978-1-4799-6016-3/14/$31.00 c⃝2014 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:19:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
decoding performance. Moreover, we observe that in certain
condition Degradation Stochastic Resonance (DSR) [5], [6] oc-
curs, i.e., timing errors caused by voltage scaling improve the
decoding performance, and by implication diminish the energy
consumption, due to the fact that unpredictable underpowered
components facilitate rather than impede the decoding process.
In summary, the main contributions of this work are: (i)
A technique for exploiting channel noise variability, (ii) Mea-
sured results from FPGA based experiments demonstrating the
energy savings capabilities of the proposed method, (iii) A new
way to perform voltage scaling on commercial FPGAs without
relying on an external power supply, and (iv) Evidence of DSR
occurrence in LDPC decoder implementations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Energy
reduction techniques related to voltage scaling for LDPC
decoders are reviewed in Section II. In Section III, we present
the proposed technique in the context of an LDPC decoder and
evaluate it in Section IV. In Section V, we close the discussion
with some conclusions.
II.
RELATED WORK
Many approaches have been proposed to reduce energy
consumptions of LDPC decoders but in this section, we only
discuss techniques related to voltage scaling and highlight
their similarities and differences from our technique. Generally
speaking voltage scaling has been frequently applied in Com-
plementary Metal–Oxide–Semiconductor (CMOS) integrated
circuits as by reducing the supply voltage we can gain energy
efficiency at the expense of a longer circuit delay. However,
as timing violation may occur if the circuit delay gets longer
than the clock period, existing approaches either avoid this
situation by tuning the operating frequency accordingly or
correct potential errors by means of additional hardware.
To reduce LDPC decoders energy consumption, Dynamic
Voltage Frequency Scaling (DVFS) based on the estimation
of the maximum number of iterations was proposed in [7]
and [8]. In [9] a Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) estimator is
utilized to guide the operating frequency scaling based on
the target throughput and channel conditions. Subsequently,
assisted by an error detector and a critical path replica, the
suitable voltage that ensures no timing violation is determined.
In [10] Reduced-Precision Replicas (RPR) of the bit and check
nodes are utilised to detect and correct voltage scaling induced
errors while in [11], Voltage Over-Scaling (VOS) and RPR are
combined.
In our proposal, the best operating voltage is chosen based
on knowledge of the underpowered LDPC decoder behavior.
The operation supply voltage is chosen such that the decoding
performance of the decoder operated at the typical voltage,
measured in terms of FER/BER, is maintained or a specific
target decoding performance is achieved. Similar to [9], we
utilize the SNR estimator of existing communication systems
but we do not modify the frequency in order to maintain
the throughput and we allow for timing violation as long as
the target performance is still achievable. We do not make
use of additional hardware for error detection/correction or
reduced precision replicas thus our approach results in smaller
hardware overhead. In [10][11], the supply voltage is fixed at
runtime while our method adjusts the supply voltage according
to the channel conditions at runtime. Last but not least our
technique doesn’t require any decoder modifications hence it
can be easily combined with other techniques.
III.
PROPOSED TECHNIQUE
The main concept behind the proposed technique is pre-
sented in Figure 1. Maintaining the decoding performance (in
terms of FER/BER) to its required value by actively monitoring
the channel noise is the key idea to prevent energy over-
consumption. More precisely, we turn the supply voltage up
when the channel is getting worse for meeting the target error
rate and vice versa we turn it down when the channel is
in a good condition to save energy. The question is “How
far can we turn the supply voltage down in good channel
conditions or up in bad channel conditions?” If we increase
the voltage too much when the channel is getting worse, we
may spill energy, while if the voltage is not big enough, the
target error rate cannot be satisfied. Similar situations may
also occur when turning down the voltage in good channel
conditions. To determine the appropriate decoder operating
voltage at a specific channel condition, we need to know the
decoder behavior by means of a pre-characterization process
as detailed in Subsection III-A. The pre-characterization results
are then used to compute the decoding operating voltage for
any specific channel condition. These values are stored in an
LUT and utilized in guiding the decoder to meet the required
target error rate while consuming as low energy as possible in
the adaptation process detailed in Subsection III-B.
Channel Quality
Time
Good
Bad
Decoder
Getting 
worse
Getting 
better
Variable
Supply Voltage
Turn 
up
Turn 
down
Channel 
Target Error Rate
Pre-characterization at design time
Adaptation at runtime
Channel Quality Variation
Fig. 1: Channel Noise Aware Energy Effective Decoding
A. Pre-characterization
It is clear that the decoder has to be aware of the chan-
nel condition for taking the best runtime decisions. Another
important information the decoder needs to have is its own
behavior when operating at different supply voltages and for
various channel conditions in terms of performance/correction
capability and energy efficiency. For this reason, in order to
equip the decoder with the required knowledge, we need to
make real measured data known to the decoder. Thus, during
pre-characterization, we need to measure decoder FER, BER,
and energy/bit on a variety of noisy channels and voltage
conditions. There are 3 steps to do pre-characterization: (1)
generation, (2) setup, and (3) run as depicted in Figure 2.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:19:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Parity 
Check 
Matrix H
BN
Hardware
Generator
CN
CN
CN
CN
CN
CN
CN
BN
BN
BN
BN
BN
BN
BN
BN
…..
…..
ADD
SM-2C-SE
SM-2C-SE
SUB
SUB
SAT
SAT
ADD
2C-SM-
ABS-
PhiLUT
SUB
…..
SUB
Inv
Phi
LUT
…..
2C-SM-
ABS-
PhiLUT
Inv
Phi
LUT
X
O
R
XOR
…..
XOR
(a) Step 1: Generation
Laptop
ML605 Board
USB JTAG
Power 
Supply
Monitor 
&
Controller
(MC)
UART
MDM
Micro
Blaze
LDPC
Decoder
USB UART
Virtex-6 FPGA
BRAM
PLB
LDPC 
Monitor & 
Controller(MC)
USB
PC
USB UART
USB JTAG
PMBus
USB
Interface
Adapter
PMBus
ML605 Board
(b) Step 2: Setup
Maximum 
Iteration 
Register
(MIR)
Iteration 
Counter
(IC)
Status
Register
(SR)
BER 
Counter
(BC)
Decoder 
Output 
Frame
(DOF)
Decoder 
Golden 
Frame
(DGF)
Decoder 
Input
(DI)
Reset
Up 
Counter
Wrong 
Result
Compute 
BER
Run 
Decoder
Load Data
OK
Give Up
Done
Rst=’1'
(DOFтDGF) and (IC<MIR)
(decoder_done=’1') and 
(DOFтDGF)
DOF=DGF
Controller
(c) Step 3: Run
Fig. 2: Decoder Pre-characterization
Generation (see Figure 2a) is the process of creating the
decoder for pre-characterization. The decoder VHDL code
is produced by a tool designed for the automatic generation
of LDPC decoder fully parallel IP cores starting from an H
matrix, regular or irregular, and the number of bits to represent
the channel message. The presented results are obtained using
a MacKay A matrix [12] with dimensions n=1000, k=500, and
4-bit 2’s complement fixed point number representation of the
message. Each fixed point number consists of 1 sign bit, 2
integer bits, and 1 fractional bit. The implemented decoder is
based on Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR) Belief Propagation (BP)
or the sum-product algorithm [2]. The maximum number of
iterations is set at 100. Two clock cycles are needed for each
iteration. The Check Node (CN) converts each 2’s Complement
(2C) number to a Sign Magnitude (SM) number using its
2C-SM converter. The absolute value of this SM number
is then computed by ABS. This absolute value is further
processed to obtain its 𝜙(𝑥) = −𝑙𝑜𝑔(tanh(𝑥/2)) = 𝑙𝑜𝑔( 𝑒𝑥+1
𝑒𝑥−1)
function. The function 𝜙is even and has the property that
𝜙−1(𝑥) = 𝜙(𝑥) for 𝑥> 0. In this work, each 𝜙or 𝜙−1 function
is approximated by a 4-bit Look-Up Table (LUT) denoted
as phiLUT or invphiLUT in the figure. To ease automatic
hardware generation in a parametric way, all related 𝜙(𝑥)
values are added (using ADD). The output of ADD is then
subtracted (using SUB) by each specific 𝜙(𝑥) value. The
subtraction result is then fed to 𝜙−1(𝑥) function to obtain the
magnitude bits as part of sign magnitude representation at the
output of CN. In similar way like processing absolute value,
each sign bit is processed separately using XOR. Each SM
number at the input is converted to 2’s complement number
(denoted as SM-2C) and then sign extended (presented as SE)
by 𝑁+2
2
before being processed further, where N is the number
of connected CNs. The same reason like CN for making
an easy automation of hardware generation, all related input
values of each Bit Node (BN) are added (using ADD) and then
subtracted (using SUB) by each specific output value of the
SM-2C-SE. Since the result can be a number that cannot be
represented by the number of bits of representation, we need
to process it further by taking its saturated value using SAT
operation.
Setup is the process of building the experimental platform
in Figure 2b. A PC is used for synthesizing the hardware
platform targeting Xilinx Virtex-6 FPGA: XC6VLX240T-
1FFG1156 using Xilinx CAD tools version 13.4. The PC
is also used for downloading the bitstream file to the Xil-
inx ML605 board through the USB JTAG interface and for
monitoring/capturing the number of iterations, FER, and BER
through the USB UART. The energy/bit is obtained using
the Fusion Digital Power Designer from Texas Instrument
running on the Laptop through Texas Instrument USB Interface
adapter by reading PMBus, accessing Power Supply Monitor
and Controller inside the board. This technique allows for
separately controlling and monitoring each on-board specific
internal power supply. The measurements are done only for
the internal circuits of the FPGA. The supply voltage is
adjusted by directly controlling the internal power supply of
the FPGA of the targeted board, keeping other supply voltages
unchanged. In contrast to [3], no additional external power
supply is needed. To simulate realistic scenarios we use an
AWGN channel with BPSK modulation (with mapping 0 →1
and 1 →−1) for our experiments. The generated input vectors
are fed to the decoder by the MicroBlaze processor resident
on the FPGA.
Run is the process of running the decoder on the ex-
perimental platform for pre-characterization purpose as de-
picted in Figure 2c. This functionality is mainly operated by
LDPC Monitoring and Controller (MC). The MC monitors
the condition of decoding, feeds LLRs to the decoder, and
computes BER. The Maximum Iteration Register (MIR) stores
the maximum number of iterations allowed for decoding. This
register is initialized by the MicroBlaze. If the decoder reaches
the maximum number of iterations without reaching a valid
code word, i.e., correcting the errors, MC goes to “Give Up”
state. Soft messages in form LLRs are fed by MC to the
LDPC decoder through the register Decoder Input (DI). This
register can be accessed by the MicroBlaze through the PLB
bus. The Decoder Golden Frame (DGF) is the original frame
sent by the transmitter and conveyed by the MicroBlaze to the
MC for evaluating purposes. By comparing this frame with
the Decoder Output Frame (DOF), the controller determines
the decoding success rate for computing FER and BER. The
computed BER is stored in the BER Counter (BC) and can be
accessed by the MicroBlaze. The Status Register (SR) indicates
the decoder status and it is accessible by the MicroBlaze. The
possible states are: (1) successful decoding denoted as “OK”
state, (2) giving up decoding stored as “Give Up” state, or (3)
wrong result decoding written as “Wrong Result” state means
that the decoder can satisfy all check nodes but it is not the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:19:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
right frame as it was sent by the LDPC encoder. This can
happen if the severity of noisy channel alters the frame to
another valid codeword, which is considered as an error. The
MC enters “Compute BER” state and starts to compute BER
when errors occur.
Based on Post-PAR Static Timing Report of Xilinx tools,
the minimum clock period is 19.992 ns (i.e., the maximum fre-
quency is 50.020 MHz). The actual implementation is clocked
at 50 MHz. Therefore, the throughput at its maximum itera-
tions is 250 Mbps for all experiments. The pre-characterization
results when varying the power supply value from 1V to 0.67V
and the channel SNR from 10dB to 1dB are presented in
Figure 3 as follows: (a) Average number of iterations, (b) FER,
(c) BER, and (d) Energy/bit (nJ/bit). Each SNR has its own
minimum supply voltage after which the number of iterations
starts to increase sharply as one can observe in Figure 3(a). In
general, the increase starts earlier for lower SNR channels and
this behavior can be related to the fact that the decoder can
do self-correction easier for higher SNR channels where there
is not much noise involved. Each SNR has its own specific
minimum supply voltage after which its number of iterations
goes to the maximum number of iterations which is 100. For
the majority of the results it can be seen that when the supply
voltage is lowered, the number of iterations stays constant for
a while and then increases for the decoder to tackle timing
errors. It is unexpected but interesting to note that sometimes,
the average number of iterations decreases even if the supply
voltage is reduced, which suggests that sometimes the timing
errors can help the decoder converging to the correct codeword.
This phenomenon is called Degradation Stochastic Resonance
(DSR) [6] or Stochastic Resonance (SR) [5] and it can be also
observed in Figure 3(b) and (c) where we present the measured
results for FER and BER, respectively. This suggests that
voltage reduction can sometimes help improving the decoder
performance. Finally, in Figure 3(d), the measured energy/bit
for various SNRs is presented. The energy/bit decreases by
scaling the voltage, however, after a certain point, an increase
in energy/bit is visible as the effect of increasing of number
of iterations diminishes the energy gain we get from reducing
the voltage, the law of diminishing returns.
B. Adaptation
The voltage scaling controller for the targeted LDPC
decoder depicted in Figure 4 operates as follows. It gets
SNR information from the SNR estimator and changes the
operating supply voltage at runtime based on the knowledge
it has from the measured information gathered during the pre-
characterization stage. We note that given that in communica-
tion systems with adaptive coding and modulation, the SNR
estimator is a standard system component. The basic principle
of the adaptation is to trade off over-needed performance for
energy saving through active channel quality monitoring. More
precisely, we turn down the supply voltage when the channel is
in good condition, hence allowing energy saving. However, for
preserving target performance, it is required to turn the voltage
up when the channel SNR is getting worse. The objective is to
minimize the energy not the voltage while ensuring the decoder
achieves its needed performance. Note that minimizing the
voltage may not always improve the energy efficiency, because
the number of iterations of the decoder may increase due to
induced timing errors. Thus, this diminishing returns effect
needs to be considered when choosing the operating voltage.
We developed two different adaptation strategies as fol-
lows: (i) the conservative approach which guaranties that the
original decoder performance is always preserved and (ii) the
aggressive approach which only concentrates on achieving the
required target performance. To maintain identical performance
while ensuring higher energy efficiency for the channel con-
dition characterized by 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑛, the operating voltage 𝑉𝑛is
moved towards the point where the energy/bit is minimized
and at the same time the FER and BER remain identical to
those of the decoder operated at the typical voltage 𝑉𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙.
By its conservative nature this approach may still sometimes
result in energy waste as it tries to mimic the worse case
designed decoder and not to just fulfill the target performance
requirements. In view of this the aggressive strategy is de-
signed to enable the decoder to adapt itself such that it delivers
the required correction capability while minimizing the energy
consumption.
To discuss how the Voltage Scaling Controller (VSC)
determines the operating voltage of the decoder formally,
some definitions are introduced as follows.
Definition 1: 𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙(𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙) is the FER (BER)
corresponding to the supply voltage 𝑉𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙.
Definition 2: 𝑉𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙
𝑚𝑖𝑛
(
𝑉𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙
𝑚𝑖𝑛
)
is the minimum
supply voltage for which FER ≤𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙(BER ≤
𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙) is satisfied.
Definition 3: 𝑉𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
𝑚𝑖𝑛
(
𝑉𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
𝑚𝑖𝑛
)
is the minimum
supply voltage for which FER ≤𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(BER ≤
𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡) holds true.
Definition 4: 𝑉(𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦/𝑏𝑖𝑡(𝑥,𝑦))
𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡
is the voltage corresponding
to the minimum energy/bit value within the voltage range
[𝑥, 𝑦], 𝑥< 𝑦.
Based on these definitions, the conservative approach
required
operating
voltage
at
signal-to-noise
ratio
𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑛
denoted
as
𝑉𝑐
𝑛(𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑛)
can
be
computed
as
𝑉
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦/𝑏𝑖𝑡
(
𝑚𝑎𝑥
(
𝑉
𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙
𝑚𝑖𝑛
,𝑉
𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙
𝑚𝑖𝑛
)
,𝑉𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙
)
𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡
.
Similarly the aggressive approach operating voltage tar-
geting 𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡or 𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡at signal-to-noise ra-
tio 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑛denoted as 𝑉𝑎𝐹𝐸𝑅
𝑛
(𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑛) and 𝑉𝑎𝐵𝐸𝑅
𝑛
(𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑛)
can be calculated as 𝑉
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦/𝑏𝑖𝑡
(
𝑉
𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
𝑚𝑖𝑛
,𝑉𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙
)
𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡
and
𝑉
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦/𝑏𝑖𝑡
(
𝑉
𝐵𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡
𝑚𝑖𝑛
,𝑉𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙
)
𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡
, respectively.
For example, using the above equations, the conservative
approach can operate the decoder at 𝑉𝑐
𝑛= 0.75V preserving
the performance (i.e., FER=0.498 and BER=0.041) of the
original LDPC decoder operated at 𝑉𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙= 1V. In this
situation much less energy is consumed (i.e., 71% of energy
saving) as illustrated in Figure 4b. According to the aggressive
scaling we adjust the power supply value to 𝑉𝑎
𝑛= 0.71V while
maintaining FER ≤𝐹𝐸𝑅𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(i.e., FER=0.0166), reducing
the energy by 74% as illustrated in Figure 4c. Note that to
minimize the adaptation process energy overhead all of these
computations are performed at design time and their results
are placed in an LUT mapping 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑛to 𝑉𝑛.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:19:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(a) Number of Iterations 
(b) Frame Error Rate (FER) 
(c) Bit Error Rate (BER) 
(d) Energy/bit (nJ/bit) 
EŽƌŵĂů͗^ƵƉƉůǇsŽůƚĂŐĞљ-хdŝŵŝŶŐĞƌƌŽƌƐј-хηŝƚĞƌĂƚŝŽŶƐј 
WŚĞŶŽŵĞŶŽŶ͗^ƵƉƉůǇsŽůƚĂŐĞљ-хηŝƚĞƌĂƚŝŽŶƐљ 
(Timing errors help decoder) 
(Degradation Stochastic Resonance)  
EŽƌŵĂů͗^ƵƉƉůǇsŽůƚĂŐĞљ-хdŝŵŝŶŐĞƌƌŽƌƐј-х&Zј 
WŚĞŶŽŵĞŶŽŶ͗^ƵƉƉůǇsŽůƚĂŐĞљ-х&Zљ 
(Timing errors help decoder) 
(Degradation Stochastic Resonance)  
EŽƌŵĂů͗^ƵƉƉůǇsŽůƚĂŐĞљ-хdŝŵŝŶŐĞƌƌŽƌƐј-хZј 
WŚĞŶŽŵĞŶŽŶ͗^ƵƉƉůǇsŽůƚĂŐĞљ-хZљ 
(Timing errors help decoder)  
(Degradation Stochastic Resonance)  
The effect of 
increasing of number 
of iterations 
diminishes the energy 
gain  
Fig. 3: Pre-characterization Results
SNR1 SNR2 SNR3 SNR4
SNR5
SNRn
Supply 
Voltage
FER or BER
V1
c
SNRn
Vn
cfor conservative approach
Vn
afor aggressive approach
V2
c V3
c
V4
c V5
c
Vn
c
FERtarget or BERtarget
Vn
a
(a) Design
  
  
  
  
  
  
(0.75V, 0.041) 
 
(0.75V,0.498) 
(0.75V, 1.688nJ/bit) 
 
(1V, 5.857nJ/bit) 
(1V,0.498) 
(1V, 0.041) 
71.174% of 
energy saving 
 
the same performance 
(FER=0.498) 
the same performance 
(BER=0.041) 
(b) Conservative Approach
(1V, 0.499nJ/bit) 
(0.71V, 0.127nJ/bit) 
(0.71V, 0.0153) 
(1V, 0.014) 
74.58% of 
energy saving 
 
Satisfy the target performance 
(FER=0.0166) 
(c) Aggressive Approach
Fig. 4: Adaptation
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:19:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IV.
EVALUATION
To evaluate our technique, we utilize the platform and
LDPC decoder as in the pre-characterization stage augmented
with the following energy reduction schemes: (i) powering off
capability using Early Termination (ET) technique operated at
the original supply voltage as presented in [4], (ii) a Hybrid
Early Termination Scheme (HS) which includes the DVS
technique in [3], (iii) our Conservative Approach (CON), (iv)
our Aggressive Approach targeting FER (AGF), and (v) our
Aggressive Approach targeting BER (AGB).
We evaluated the energy consumption of all the approaches
when changing the channel SNR from 2dB to 10dB and the
results are plotted in Figure 5. The energy/bit is obtained by
accessing Power Supply Monitor and Controller inside the
ML605 board through PMBus. Because AGF and AGB result
in identical energy consumptions their plots are overlapped in
the figure.
One can observe in Figure 5 that: (i) Regardless of SNR
value ET always consumes more energy than the other ap-
proaches and this can be explained by the fact that it has no
capability to adapt to channel conditions. Energy consumed by
ET decreases when the channel quality is getting better due
to its early termination capability. At good channel quality,
number of flipped bits decreases. Fewer flipped bits make
decoding faster to converge and as a result, ET turns it power
off earlier, reducing the consumed energy. (ii) Our technique
always outperforms both ET and HS. However at low SNRs
(2 to 3 dB) the energy reduction is limited (only 10-15%
and 15-23% reductions over HS, for CON and AGF/AGB,
respectively) by the fact that there is not that much excess
performance to exploit. However, for less noisier channels, i.e.,
SNRs from 3 to 10 dB, more excess performance is available
and CON achieves a 22-28% energy reduction over HS thanks
to its adaptability to exploit channel noise variability; (iii)
Because of its additional DVS technique, HS consumes 66%
less energy than ET. CON (AGF/AGB) consumes around 71%
(73%) and 76% (76%) less energy than ET, for bad and good
channel quality, respectively; and (iv) At high SNR values
CON, AGF, and AGB consume almost the same energy due
to diminishing returns effect, while at low SNR values both
AGF and AGB provide 15% energy reduction over CON.
We note that given that our technique does not alter the
operating frequency it results in a better performance in terms
of decoding throughput when compared to other decoders
utilizing dynamic frequency scaling technique.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have proposed a technique towards energy
effective decoding by exploiting channel noise variability to
transform excess performance for energy saving. Based on
FPGA experiment results, conservative approach consumes 71
to 76% and 15 to 28% less energy while maintaining the
same decoding performance compared to early termination
without and with DVS, respectively. Because of its robustness-
on-demand technique, aggressive approach meets target error
rate with up to 15% additional energy efficiency compared to
conservative version. In addition, our decoder decodes input
frames without throughput degradation thanks to its strategy of
keeping the operating frequency at the same speed. Moreover,
0.01
0.1
1
10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Energy/bit(nJ/bit) 
SNR (dB) 
ET
HS
CON
AGF
AGB
Fig. 5: Experimental Results
the FPGA-based experiments suggest that in certain conditions
Degradation Stochastic Resonance occurs, i.e., the energy
consumption is unexpectedly diminished due to the fact that
unpredictable underpowered components facilitate rather than
impede the decoding process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme of the European Union, under the Grant Agreement
number 309129 (i-RISC project).
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Tse, Fundamentals of wireless communication.
Cambridge univer-
sity press, 2005.
[2]
R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Information Theory, IRE
Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, January 1962.
[3]
C. Chow, L. S. M. Tsui, P.-W. Leong, W. Luk, and S. J. E. Wilton, “Dy-
namic voltage scaling for commercial fpgas,” in Field-Programmable
Technology, 2005. Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Conference
on, Dec 2005, pp. 173–180.
[4]
A. Darabiha, A. Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Power reduction
techniques for ldpc decoders,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of,
vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug 2008.
[5]
L. Gammaitoni, P. H¨anggi, P. Jung, and F. Marchesoni, “Stochastic
resonance,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 70, pp. 223–287, Jan 1998.
[6]
N. Aymerich, S. Cotofana, and A. Rubio, “Degradation stochastic
resonance (dsr) in ad-avg architectures,” in Nanotechnology (IEEE-
NANO), 2012 12th IEEE Conference on, Aug 2012, pp. 1–4.
[7]
W. Wang, G. Choi, and K. Gunnam, “Low-power vlsi design of ldpc
decoder using dvfs for awgn channels,” in VLSI Design, 2009 22nd
International Conference on, Jan 2009, pp. 51–56.
[8]
X. Zhang, F. Cai, and C.-J. Shi, “Low-power ldpc decoding based
on iteration prediction,” in Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2012 IEEE
International Symposium on, May 2012, pp. 3041–3044.
[9]
Y. Ahn, J.-Y. Park, and K.-S. Chung, “Dynamic voltage and frequency
scaling scheme for an adaptive ldpc decoder using snr estimation.”
EURASIP J. Wireless Comm. and Networking, vol. 2013, p. 255, 2013.
[10]
E. Kim and N. Shanbhag, “Energy-efficient ldpc decoders based on
error-resiliency,” in Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), 2012 IEEE
Workshop on, Oct 2012, pp. 149–154.
[11]
J. Cho, N. Shanbhag, and W. Sung, “Low-power implementation of
a high-throughput ldpc decoder for ieee 802.11n standard,” in Signal
Processing Systems, 2009. IEEE Workshop on, Oct 2009, pp. 040–045.
[12]
D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of
low density parity check codes,” Electronics letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp.
1645–1646, 1996.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:19:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
