IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, FEBRUARY 1, 2014
619
High-Throughput Energy-Efficient LDPC Decoders
Using Differential Binary Message Passing
Kevin Cushon, Student Member, IEEE, Saied Hemati, Senior Member, IEEE, Camille Leroux, Member, IEEE,
Shie Mannor, Senior Member, IEEE, and Warren J. Gross, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, we present energy-efficient architec-
tures for decoders of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes using
the differential decoding with binary message passing (DD-BMP)
algorithm and its modified variant (MDD-BMP). We also propose
an improved differential binary (IDB) decoding algorithm. These
algorithms offer significant intrinsic advantages in the energy
domain: simple computations, low interconnect complexity, and
very high throughput, while achieving error correction perfor-
mance up to within 0.25 dB of the offset min-sum algorithm.
We report on fully parallel decoder implementations of (273,
191), (1023, 781), and (4095, 3367) finite geometry-based LDPC
codes in 65 nm CMOS. Using the MDD-BMP algorithm, these
decoders achieve respective areas of 0.28
, 1.38
, and
15.37
, average throughputs of 37 Gbps, 75 Gbps, and 141
Gbps, and energy efficiencies of 4.9 pJ/bit, 13.2 pJ/bit, and 37.9
pJ/bit with a 1.0 V supply voltage in post-layout simulations. At a
reduced supply voltage of 0.8 V, these decoders achieve respective
throughputs of 26 Gbps, 54 Gbps, and 94 Gbps, and energy effi-
ciencies of 3.1 pJ/bit, 8.2 pJ/bit, and 23.5 pJ/bit. We also report on
a fully parallel implementation of IDB for the (2048, 1723) LDPC
code specified in the IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T) standard. This
decoder achieves an area of 1.44
, average throughput of 172
Gbps, and an energy efficiency of 2.8 pJ/bit with a 1.0 V supply
voltage; at 0.8 V, it achieves throughput of 116 Gbps and energy
efficiency of 1.7 pJ/bit.
Index
Terms—Binary
messages,
energy-efficient,
high-
throughput, iterative decoding, LDPC codes, VLSI.
I. INTRODUCTION
L
OW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK (LDPC) codes are a
class of linear block codes that are well known for their
near-capacity error correction capabilities under iterative mes-
sage-passing decoding [1], [2]. The inherently parallel nature of
Manuscript received March 01, 2013; revised July 07, 2013 and October 30,
2013; accepted November 03, 2013. Date of publication November 26, 2013;
date of current version January 14, 2014. The associate editor coordinating the
review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Zhiyuan
Yan.
K. Cushon and W. J. Gross are with the Department of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada (e-mail:
kevin.cushon@mail.mcgill.ca; warren.gross@mcgill.ca).
S. Hemati is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844 USA (e-mail: shemati@uidaho.edu).
C. Leroux is with the Institut Polytechnique de Bordeaux, CNRS IMS, UMR
5218, Bordeaux, France (e-mail: camille.leroux@ipb.fr).
S. Mannor is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion—Is-
rael Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel (e-mail: shie@ee.technion.ac.
il).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2013.2293116
these codes allows very high throughput to be achieved. How-
ever, parallel decoding presents challenging issues with compu-
tational complexity and routing congestion in VLSI implemen-
tations [3].
This is particularly true for energy efficient designs. Many ap-
plications for LDPC codes are power and energy-sensitive, such
as portable battery-powered communications, datacenters, and
energy scavenging devices. However, large numbers of complex
computational units result in high silicon area, while congested
routing networks cause significant additional energy to be lost
through interconnect parasitics.
In cases where energy efficiency is a design priority, these
issues regarding logic and interconnect complexity must be
addressed. Structured LDPC codes permit efficient partially
parallel designs with simplified routing requirements, such as
[4], although reduced parallelism results in reduced throughput.
These designs also require additional message-storage memo-
ries, so although the power overhead from congested routing is
decreased, the overhead from memories is increased.
Highly parallel designs have a major advantage in the power
domain, in that they can achieve a given throughput for lower
power than a less parallel design through the use of voltage
and frequency scaling (VFS) [5]. A number of highly par-
allel designs have been proposed, using various architectural
schemes to simplify the routing and logic. Bit-serial min-sum
[5], [6] and pulse width min-sum [7] use single-wire message
exchange schemes that also result in simpler computational
nodes. Split-row decoding [8] partitions the message-passing
graph to reduce the amount of global wiring. Another in-
terconnect reduction technique is message broadcasting [9].
Grouped-parallel decoders of structured codes have also been
shown to be an effective energy efficient design [10].
Another approach is to use a decoding algorithm requiring
simpler computational units and fewer interconnections, trading
off some error correction performance for improved efficiency.
At the extreme of the simplicity range are hard decision algo-
rithms, such as the Gallager A and B algorithms [1], bit flipping
[11], and majority-based algorithms [12]. While decoders based
on these algorithms generally have high throughput, low com-
plexity, and high energy efficiency, they have relatively poor
error correction performance compared to the soft-decision
sum-product algorithm (SPA) and min-sum algorithm (MSA).
Between the extremes are a variety of different decoding
algorithms, each offering a different balance between com-
plexity, speed, and error correction performance. Some notable
examples are hybrid hard-soft algorithms, like weighted bit
1053-587X © 2013 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
620
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, FEBRUARY 1, 2014
flipping [13], and differential decoding with binary message
passing (DD-BMP) [14].
While DD-BMP has been shown to achieve error correction
performance equal or superior to MSA when used with LDPC
codes based on finite geometries (FG-LDPC codes) [15], it
has never before been implemented in hardware. FG-LDPC
codes, while very powerful, are also highly complex, which
has been an obstacle to their widespread use [16]. In this paper,
we revise the DD-BMP algorithm to make it more amenable to
VLSI implementation, and implement fully parallel decoders
using DD-BMP and modified DD-BMP (MDD-BMP) in 65 nm
CMOS for (273,191), (1023,781), and (4095,3367) FG-LDPC
codes. We show that these algorithms overcome the implemen-
tation complexity of FG-LDPC codes, and demonstrate low
area, high throughput, and high energy efficiency competitive
with other state-of-the-art decoder designs.
We also present a new decoding algorithm called IDB, for
“improved differential binary” message passing, which is suit-
able for decoding LDPC codes other than FG codes. It was
noted in [14] that DD-BMP exhibits poor error correction per-
formance with non-FG codes. In this work, we find that this poor
performance is due to trapping sets [17] and propose two algo-
rithmic modifications to overcome them: degeneration, and re-
launching. We then implement a fully parallel IDB decoder for
the (2048,1723) Reed-Solomon-based LDPC code specified in
the IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T) standard [18], and show that it
achieves significant improvements in area, throughput, and en-
ergy efficiency over other decoders with similar error correction
performance.
The motivation for this work is that DD-BMP has a number
of intrinsic qualities that are of particular interest for energy-ef-
ficient VLSI LDPC decoding. As noted in [14], binary mes-
sages and simple computational units translate to lower area
and power consumption in VLSI chips. Furthermore, DD-BMP
message exchange is highly amenable to broadcasting, which
allows the wiring overhead to be reduced even further. These
qualities allow for efficient fully parallel decoder architectures
and high clock frequencies, giving DD-BMP very high average
throughput. Voltage and frequency scaling (VFS) can be ap-
plied, trading off throughput for reduced dynamic energy con-
sumption.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides an overview of LDPC codes and the DD-BMP de-
coding algorithm. Section III describes the VLSI architecture
of the implemented DD-BMP and MDD-BMP decoders, while
the implementation results and comparisons with other decoders
are presented in Section IV. Issues with the use of these algo-
rithms to decode non-FG codes are explored in Section V, with
Section VI specifically addressing trapping sets. The IDB algo-
rithm is described in Section VII, while implementation results
for IDB are presented in Section VIII. Finally, concluding re-
marks are presented in Section IX.
II. FG-LDPC CODES AND THE DD-BMP ALGORITHM
LDPC codes are classified into several types based on the
method used to construct them. One of these types is based
on Euclidean (EG) and projective (PG) geometries over finite
fields, collectively known as finite geometric (FG) codes [15].
These codes are known to have excellent error correction
performance and high minimum distances. In addition, their
encoding can be performed in linear time with simple feed-
back shift registers. However, FG-LDPC codes have a much
higher number of edges in their Tanner graph representations
and higher degree nodes than many other types of LDPC
codes. The (273,191), (1023,781), and (4095,3367) FG-LDPC
codes used in this work have variable and check node degrees
of (17,17), (32,32) and (64,64) respectively. This high
complexity has been an obstacle to their widespread use, as
noted in the hybrid soft bit-flipping decoder presented in [16].
This implementation is highly routing-limited, even with a
partially parallel architecture. With DD-BMP and its variants,
however, we have produced efficient VLSI implementations of
FG-LDPC codes, demonstrating that these powerful codes are
not too complex for widespread application. It should also be
noted that DD-BMP is not limited to use with FG-LDPC codes,
as it has also been found to perform well with any code with
high row and column weights [14].
The DD-BMP algorithm implemented in this work is based
on [14]. A number of changes have been made to make it more
amenable to VLSI implementation. In particular, a random
process used during initialization has been eliminated, the hard
decision bits are not functions of their previous values, and
convergence detection is performed with parity checks as in [5]
and [7], rather than a syndrome check.
First, the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs)
of the received bits
are read from the channel:
(1)
where
is the
th transmitted bit, and
is the
th value re-
ceived from the channel.
Next, the variable nodes are initialized with quantized LLRs:
if
if
if otherwise.
(2)
where
is the memory corresponding to the edge between
variable node
and check node
,
is the LLR clipping
threshold, and
is the number of bits of quantization. For the de-
coder implementations presented in this paper, we use
and
, and thus our quantization step is 0.328125,
giving the quantized values the equivalent of 4.39 integer bits
(including sign) and 1.61 fractional bits. However, for the sake
of simplicity, quantized values are treated internally as
-bit
signed integers as per (2), and thus differ from the “true” LLR
values by a scaling factor equal to the quantization step.
The variable-to-check messages are determined by the signs
of the values in the corresponding memories:
(3)
where
is the single-bit message from variable node
to
check node
at iteration
, with
being initially set to 0, and
is a sign function modified so that
.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CUSHON et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT ENERGY-EFFICIENT LDPC DECODERS USING DIFFERENTIAL BINARY MESSAGE PASSING
621
Fig. 1. DD-BMP check node schematics for non-broadcast (a) and broadcast
(b) versions. Each input and output connects to a neighbouring variable node
designated by the subscripts
through
. In the broadcast version, a single
output
connects to all neighbouring variable nodes.
The check node operation consists of:
(4)
where
is the single-bit message from check node
to vari-
able node
at iteration
, and
is the set of variable nodes
incident to check node .
At this point, the iteration count
is incremented and the
variable node operation updates the memories
as follows:
(5)
where the arbitrary scaling factor
has been added to the orig-
inal algorithm to improve performance.
The hard decision bits of each variable node are computed by
a majority vote of the sign bits of each memory
and the
initial channel data
:
if
if otherwise.
(6)
The check and variable node operations are repeated itera-
tively until either a valid codeword is detected, or the iteration
count
reaches a limit
.
III. ARCHITECTURAL DESCRIPTION
The check node function of DD-BMP is implemented in
CMOS with a network of XOR gates, as shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1(a) shows a direct implementation, with separate con-
nections to and from each adjacent variable node. The check
nodes can also be adapted to a “broadcasting” type as shown in
Fig. 1(b). In this architecture, the 2-input XOR gates are relo-
cated to the variable nodes, where their intrinsic contribution
to the global check result is removed locally, and each CN has
a single “broadcast” output. Because sign computation makes
up the entirety of the CN operation in DD-BMP, this results in
a decoder that is logically equivalent to the non-broadcasting
version. However, the broadcasting version yields a simpler
inter-node connection structure which tends to produce better
results with automated place-and-route tools. In [9], broad-
casting resulted in a 26% reduction in the average node-to-node
Fig. 2. DD-BMP variable node schematic. Each input and output connects to
a neighbouring check node designated by the subscripts
through
.
wire length of a generic fully parallel decoder of a (2048, 1723)
Reed-Solomon (RS)-based LDPC code [19].
The variable node schematic is shown in Fig. 2. It consists
of 2-input XOR gates at the inputs to implement broadcasting,
an adder network to compute the sums of the input messages,
and accumulators to perform the memory operations. The binary
logic 0 and 1 respectively correspond to the
1 and
1 mes-
sages used in DD-BMP. The accumulators take the sums of the
incoming CN-to-VN messages as input, and change their stored
value by the corresponding amount. The stored values saturate
at the maximum positive and negative numbers to prevent over-
flow. The variable-to-check messages are taken from the sign
bits of these accumulators. The initial values of the accumula-
tors are set to
. Finally, the hard decision bit is determined
by a majority vote of all accumulator signs, plus the sign of the
initial channel data.
Modified DD-BMP (MDD-BMP) is a variant of the original
algorithm in which only a single memory is assigned to each
variable node, replacing the unique variable-to-check messages
with a single global message. Hence the memory update func-
tion of (5) is replaced with:
(7)
The variable node schematic for MDD-BMP is shown in
Fig. 3. This simplification results in a loss in BER performance,
though it also greatly reduces the complexity of the variable
node. We demonstrate that in the case of MDD-BMP, the per-
formance degradation is small, while the complexity reduction
is significant, so using MDD-BMP in VLSI implementations is
well justified. Furthermore, it allows the broadcasting concept
to be applied to the variable-to-check messages. In this work,
we present results for decoders based on both DD-BMP and
MDD-BMP.
At the system level, these architectures posses several merits
that are useful in energy-efficient designs. The variable and
check nodes are both simple, which translates to lower area
and power consumption in VLSI chips. Furthermore, binary
message exchange and broadcasting reduces wiring overhead.
Since several successive messages opposing the value stored
in a VN must be received before the sign of the VN changes,
switching activity is also low [14]. Furthermore, DD-BMP
is amenable to efficient highly parallel architectures. Unlike
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
622
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, FEBRUARY 1, 2014
Fig. 3. MDD-BMP variable node schematic. Each input is from a neighbouring
check node designated by the subscripts
through
, while a single output
is broadcast to all neighbouring check nodes.
some recent fully node-parallel decoder architectures such as
bit-serial min-sum [5] and pulse width min-sum [7], iterations
in DD-BMP complete in a single clock cycle. As a result,
DD-BMP tends to converge to a valid codeword rapidly, giving
it a very high average throughput. Voltage and frequency
scaling (VFS) can be applied, trading off throughput for re-
duced dynamic energy consumption.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
We implemented DD-BMP and MDD-BMP decoders for a
(273,191) FG-LDPC code, as well as an MDD-BMP decoders
for (1023,781) and (4095,3367) codes using TSMC 65 nm
7LM single-
CMOS technology. Due to high memory re-
quirements, implementations of the larger codes with DD-BMP
turned out to be impractical. All decoders are fully parallel, and
use an early termination scheme based on parity check satis-
faction. In addition, none of the decoders employ pipelining,
and therefore iterations complete in a single clock cycle with
no additional latency.
All results presented herein are based on post-layout simu-
lations of ASIC standard cell designs, and include the clock
tree, with back-annotated delays and wiring parasitics. Each de-
coder was produced using the same design flow: we used Ca-
dence RTL Compiler Ultra for logic synthesis, Cadence EDI
System for place and route, Synopsys VCS for post-layout sim-
ulation, and Synopsys Primetime for power estimation. All pre-
sented results use “typical” operating conditions. For nominal
supply voltage, these are TT process,
, and
. For reduced supply voltage results, these are TT process,
, and
. Results for both voltages are
obtained using design kit libraries.
Fig. 4 shows the BER performance of our implementations,
along with baselines of min-sum (MSA) and offset min-sum
(OMS). All use 6 quantization bits and 31 maximum iterations.
With these parameters and codes, OMS delivers performance
within 0.1 dB of floating point SPA (FP-SPA). These measure-
ments all use random codewords, with binary phase-shift keying
(BPSK) modulation, and noise added using an emulated ad-
ditive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. These results
were obtained with software simulations, and in the case of
the (273,191) code, with a prototype implemented on a Xilinx
Virtex-5 LX330 FPGA.
The number of quantization bits
and scaling factor
are
selected to give the best trade-off between performance and
area. For the (273,191) decoders,
and
are used,
while for the (1023,781) and (4095,3367) decoders,
and
are used. As shown, decoding of the (273,191) code is
Fig. 4. BER performance of the codes in this work decoded with DD-BMP,
MDD-BMP, offset MSA (OMS), and MSA. All simulations use 6 quantization
bits and 31 maximum iterations.
slightly worse than MSA with both DD-BMP and MDD-BMP.
The longer codes exhibit performance between OMS and MSA
when decoded with MDD-BMP, with the (1023,781) code per-
forming 0.7 dB worse than OMS and 0.4 dB better than MSA
at a BER of
. The (4095,3367) code delivers the best rela-
tive performance, being about 0.4 dB worse than OMS and 0.5
dB better than MSA. Standard MSA performs quite poorly with
these codes, because numerical saturation occurs in the high-de-
gree VNs. Thus, DD-BMP and MDD-BMP can perform better,
despite having less inter-node information exchange. In addi-
tion, the updating rules of DD-BMP and MDD-BMP are based
on relaxed successive substitution, which underestimates the re-
liability of check node outputs. This has been shown to improve
the error correction performance of iterative decoders in general
[20]. MSA, by contrast, overestimates check-to-variable mes-
sages compared to SPA. These problems can be solved with
OMS, although it is very costly to implement, due to the high de-
gree check nodes in these codes. These results demonstrate that
DD-BMP and MDD-BMP achieve good error correction per-
formance that is suitable for many applications, despite having
far lower complexity than MSA. Notably, a highly parallel de-
coder based on MSA or its variants would be too complex for a
practical VLSI implementation of the longer FG-LDPC codes.
Simulation results for throughput, average iteration count,
power consumption, and energy efficiency are shown in
Figs. 5, 6, 7, and 8 respectively. The data sets for both nominal
supply voltage
and reduced supply voltage
are obtained by post-layout simulations using
standard cell libraries for each of the respective supply voltages.
In these simulations the decoders are operated continuously.
Once the decoder signals completion, either through conver-
gence detection or by reaching the iteration limit, another
codeword is immediately loaded and decoding begins again.
The values for energy efficiency were calculated by dividing
power by throughput.
The full ASIC implementation results are summarized in
Table I, alongside results for comparable previously published
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CUSHON et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT ENERGY-EFFICIENT LDPC DECODERS USING DIFFERENTIAL BINARY MESSAGE PASSING
623
Fig. 5. Average throughput for the implemented decoders.
Fig. 6. Average iteration counts for the implemented decoders.
decoders. For the shorter codes, DD-BMP and MDD-BMP
have highly area-efficient implementations, despite their high
node degrees and edge counts, demonstrating that FG-LDPC
codes can be efficiently implemented in VLSI. In the case of
the (4095,3367) code, the huge number of edges (262,080) and
high node degrees lead to severe routing congestion, which
results in much lower utilization, clock frequency, and energy
efficiency. Despite this, our implementation of the (4095,3367)
code is still practicable. Furthermore, its decoding throughput
exceeds 200 Gbps for values of
above 5.5 dB. It also has
the largest BER performance gain over MSA, and the smallest
gap to OMS performance.
Due to differing codes and other parameters, it is difficult to
make fair comparisons between this work and other energy-effi-
cient designs. However, scaled throughput per unit area and en-
ergy per decoded bit are considered to be the most meaningful
efficiency metrics for comparing decoders under similar condi-
tions [21].
Two different designs for an energy-efficient min-sum
decoder are presented in [8] and [10], the former using a
Fig. 7. Average power for the implemented decoders.
Fig. 8. Average energy per decoded bit for the implemented decoders.
split-row approach and the latter using a grouped-parallel
approach. Compared to [10], MDD-BMP with the (1023,781)
code achieves 6.1 times greater throughput per unit area and
approximately 3.1 times the energy efficiency after scaling to
a 1.0 V supply voltage. Compared to the split-row decoder
in [8], this MDD-BMP decoder achieves 2.8 times greater
throughput at nominal supply voltage, but has 35% higher en-
ergy consumption per decoded bit after supply voltage scaling
to 1.0 V. However, since [8] uses a 1.3 V supply, scaling would
considerably reduce its throughput, and MDD-BMP has 10.6%
better energy efficiency at the nominal voltages.
In addition, both [8] and [10] use a (2048,1723) LDPC code
that is known to have an early error floor—the offset MSA
of [10] exhibits an error floor at
that is over-
come with post processing. Split-row [8], which uses normal-
ized MSA with check node heuristics, only provides results
down to
and does not investigate the presence
of an error floor. FG-LDPC codes, on the other hand, are well
known for the absence of early error floors. This is confirmed by
the BER measurements in Fig. 4, which show that DD-BMP and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
624
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, FEBRUARY 1, 2014
TABLE I
IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS AND COMPARISONS WITH OTHER WORKS
Averages are measured at
in this work, at
in [8], at
in [10], and at
in [16].
Energy scaled to 1.0 V and 65 nm process.
Average throughput per unit area scaled to 65 nm at constant frequency.
MDD-BMP do not exhibit any error floor above
,
even with the short (273,191) code.
The hybrid soft bit-flipping (SBF) decoder in [16] uses a
(1057,813) FG-LDPC code very similar to the (1023,781) code
used in this work, and achieves performance approximately
0.2 dB better than MDD-BMP. However, even with a partially
parallel architecture, this algorithm is more computationally
intensive and highly routing-limited, and throughput is much
lower than fully parallel designs. DD-BMP and MDD-BMP
also achieve better energy efficiency after scaling for process
technology and supply voltage.
V. MDD-BMP WITH OTHER LDPC CODES
Although we have shown that differential binary (DB) al-
gorithms are an effective, energy-efficient means of decoding
FG-LDPC codes, it is not always practical or possible to use an
FG code. In particular, communications standards mandate the
use of standard codes, and there are currently no standards that
use FG codes.
Simulation results in [14] show that DD-BMP can effectively
decode randomly generated LDPC codes, as long as the VN
degree is high enough, but suffers from poor error correction
performance otherwise. We have also verified that MDD-BMP
has poor decoding performance for a (2048, 1723) RS-based
LDPC code with
of (6,32) [19]. This code is used in
the IEEE 802.3an standard for 10 Gbps Ethernet (10GBASE-T)
[18], and is also a common benchmark code for highly parallel
LDPC decoder implementations.
Fig. 9 plots the BER/FER performance of this code decoded
using MDD-BMP with
,
and
, and
offset min-sum (OMS) with
and
. MDD-BMP
performs considerably worse than OMS with this code, and ad-
ditionally exhibits a high “error floor”—a region in which the
slope of the curve falls significantly above a certain signal-to-
noise ratio.
The topic of error floors and their causes in LDPC codes has
been the subject of several previous works. It is well known
Fig. 9. BER/FER performance of IDB with the (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code,
compared to the original MDD-BMP algorithm with 100 iterations, and 4-bit
OMS with 20 iterations.
that a major cause of error floor behavior is the presence of in-
herent structural flaws in the code’s graph. Due to these flaws,
certain error patterns occurring in small sub-graphs are main-
tained or strengthened under iterative message passing. Conse-
quently, the decoding algorithm is “trapped” in this error pat-
tern, and fails as it is unable to correct it.
In [22], this phenomenon was observed in a (2640,1320) Mar-
gulis LDPC code. The cause was identified as “near-codewords”
on account of the stability of these structures under iterative de-
coding, despite them not being valid codewords. The term trap-
ping sets was introduced in [17] to describe in general the pat-
terns which cause these failures in LDPC codes over an AWGN
channel. An
trapping set is defined as a subgraph con-
sisting of
erroneous VNs (the “weight” of the set), with an
extrinsic message degree (EMD) of
(i.e., the number of unsat-
isfied CNs incident to the erroneous VNs).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CUSHON et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT ENERGY-EFFICIENT LDPC DECODERS USING DIFFERENTIAL BINARY MESSAGE PASSING
625
The related concept of stopping sets, which determine error
floor performance of LDPC codes over the binary erasure
channel, was studied in [23]. Error floor behaviour has also
proven to be a major issue in the (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code,
as the 10 Gbps Ethernet specification mandates very low BER
performance. The dominant trapping sets of this code, termed
absorbing sets, are defined as a special subclass of trapping set
which is guaranteed to be stable under Gallager bit-flipping de-
coding [24]. Additional analysis of the formation and dynamics
of absorbing sets is performed in [25].
There have also been a number of implementation-oriented
methods proposed for lowering the error floors of LDPC
codes by overcoming or avoiding trapping sets. A prominent
example is [10], which presents a hardware implementation
of an OMS decoder for the (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code em-
ploying a post-processing decoding stage. This technique has
proven highly effective at overcoming the dominant (8,8)
absorbing set of this code, and thereby lowering the error
floor. Another hardware implementation in [26] proposes an
iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking, which attempts
to collapse trapping sets by identifying participating bits and
flipping them. The stochastic decoders in [27] and [28] can
employ redecoding, which restarts decoding with a different
random number generator seed—since these algorithms are
probabilistic, decoding may thus take a different trajectory
and avoid trapping sets that caused a previous attempt to fail.
Similarly, in dithered belief propagation, random processes are
used in attempts to avoid or break out of trapping sets [29].
Likewise, early error floors and poor error correction perfor-
mance are issues that must be solved for DB algorithms to be of
practical use with general (non-FG) LDPC codes. In this work,
we will focus on the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code, due to its im-
portance to the IEEE 802.3an standard, the large body of prior
work investigating its trapping sets, and its high popularity as an
implementation target for highly-parallel decoder architectures.
VI. TRAPPING SETS
A detailed examination of the failure cases of MDD-BMP
with the (2048,1723) code revealed that decoding failures in
the error floor region occurred due to trapping sets with very
low weights and high EMDs. The dominant set among these is
a (4,12) trapping set, the subgraph of which is shown in Fig. 10.
It is easy to see how this configuration fails under MDD-BMP
decoding: each of the erroneous VNs receives 3 messages op-
posing the incorrect bit, and 3 reinforcing it. These messages
sum to 0, and so the state of the VN does not change. The de-
coder is therefore deadlocked and unable to correct these errors.
This set can, in fact, be considered an absorbing set in the
context of MDD-BMP, because it is stable under bit-flipping op-
erations. This arises because MDD-BMP employs VN message
broadcasting (i.e., each VN computes a single global message,
which is sent to all neighbouring check nodes). We therefore de-
fine a weak absorbing set as a set of VNs, such that at least
of each VN’s neighbouring CNs are connected to the set an even
number of times. This differs from the absorbing set definition
given in [24] and [25], in which strictly greater than
of
each VN’s neighbors must have an even number of connections
to the set. We henceforth refer to this as a strong absorbing set to
Fig. 10. The dominant (4,12) trapping set of the (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code
under MDD-BMP decoding.
distinguish it from a weak one. The (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code
contains a great number of weak absorbing sets. Many of these,
such as the (4,12) set detailed above, are very small in size and
have very large multiplicities, and thus result in the severe error
floor seen in Fig. 9 [17]. Furthermore, the use of binary mes-
sages exacerbates the vulnerability of MDD-BMP to trapping
sets, as a strong extrinsic message cannot overcome a group of
weak intrinsic messages. One consequence of this is that once a
(weak) absorbing set is entered, it cannot be escaped, regardless
of the LLR values in the participating VNs.
VII. AN IMPROVED DIFFERENTIAL BINARY ALGORITHM
While a variety of algorithmic methods have been proposed
for lessening the impact of trapping sets, none are particularly
applicable to MDD-BMP, or to the weak absorbing sets that
dominate its error floor with the 10 Gbps Ethernet LDPC code.
For instance, in the post-processing decoding phase of [10],
the magnitudes of messages from unsatisfied check nodes are
scaled up, while messages from satisfied check nodes are scaled
down, but this technique is ineffective with binary messages.
The backtracking algorithm of [26] attempts to escape trapping
sets by flipping VNs connected to unsatisfied CNs, but this is
only effective for trapping sets with few candidates. The random
sign flip (RSF) technique of [29] faces a similar issue. Other
techniques, such as bi-mode [30] or gear-shift decoding [31],
significantly increase the complexity of VLSI implementations.
We propose instead two low-complexity modifications to the
MDD-BMP algorithm, called degeneration and relaunching.
We refer to MDD-BMP with either or both of these modifica-
tions as IDB, for “improved differential binary” decoding algo-
rithm. The degeneration technique modifies the VN operation
such that an offset
is subtracted from the differential value at
each iteration. The MDD-BMP variable node update function
of (7) is thus modified to:
(8)
This will cause the stored value
to “degenerate” towards
zero over time, unless the message sum has a magnitude equal to
or greater than . Also note that if
and the message sum
are sufficiently small,
will oscillate between positive and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
626
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, FEBRUARY 1, 2014
negative values on successive iterations. The primary purpose
of this is to provide a mechanism to break up weak absorbing
sets. The VNs in such a set with
connections to falsely
satisfied CNs will have an incoming message sum of zero, and
will therefore eventually change sign and possibly cause the set
to collapse. Returning to our (4,12) weak absorbing set example
in Fig. 10, it can be readily seen that flipping the sign of one or
more VNs will quickly correct the remaining VNs.
However, while the degeneration technique is effective at
overcoming the weak absorbing sets that beleaguer MDD-BMP,
it is ineffective at correcting strong absorbing sets. This is be-
cause flipping a VN in a strong absorbing set would require a
large value of
, which would then cause correct bits outside
the set to be erroneously flipped and propagate errors through
the entire graph. In fact, strong absorbing sets, including the
infamous (8,8) set that has been the subject of much scrutiny in
priorworks, makeupthe dominantfailure modes of IDB withde-
generation. We also observe that these sets are encountered with
much greater frequency than in OMS. As noted above, the use of
binary messages contributes to this, as an absorbing set cannot
be disrupted by a small number of strong extrinsic messages.
In order to further improve the performance of IDB, we
propose another algorithmic modification called “relaunching”.
Prior works have noted that since the decoding outcome is
dependent on the initial state of the decoder, an unsuccessful
decoding attempt can possibly be corrected by applying small
perturbations to the initial state and retrying. For example,
the concept of “redecoding” for stochastic LDPC decoders is
used in [32] and [27]. As stochastic decoding is a probabilistic
process, redecoding re-attempts decoding with the same initial
channel LLR values, but a different random number generator
(RNG) seed. Similarly, the random initial state (RIS) technique
proposed in [29] re-attempts decoding with random changes
applied to the initial channel data.
With the relaunching technique, we divide the decoding
process into multiple phases denoted by an index . At the start
of each phase, the variable nodes are reset to the initial channel
LLR values with an offset applied as follows:
(9)
where
is a non-negative function of the decoding phase
and VN index
. Decoding then proceeds normally, until a
valid codeword is detected or
iterations have passed. If the
decoder did not converge to a valid codeword,
is incremented
and the next phase of decoding begins, or if
is the final phase,
failure is declared and decoding stops.
The relaunching technique is similar to RIS in that it attempts
to circumvent decoding failures by re-attempting decoding with
different initial channel values. However, in relaunching, the
changes applied to the initial channel values are deterministic,
their magnitudes can never be increased or their signs flipped as a
result of these changes, and different phases
may use different
values for the parameters
and
in the VN update function.
The IDB decoder implemented in this work uses the decoding
schedule shown in Table II. This schedule was developed empir-
ically to balance decoding performance and maximum latency.
TABLE II
DECODING SCHEDULE FOR IDB WITH RELAUNCHING
Fig. 11. Cumulative and marginal FER/BER performance of IDB with
relaunching, at
, using the schedule shown in Table II.
The initial phase applies a uniform offset of 1 to the initial LLR
data. The relaxation factor
of 1 reduces error correction per-
formance for this phase, but also reduces the average number
of iterations, thus giving higher average throughput. The next
phase uses the same uniform offsets with
. In succes-
sive phases, offset values from 1 to 5 are assigned sequentially
to each
. All phases have a degeneration factor of 1, and 45
maximum iterations, giving the overall decoding process 315
maximum iterations.
The error correction performance of IDB is shown in Fig. 9,
along with OMS (
,
) and MDD-BMP (
,
) as baselines. The parameters used for IDB with
only the degeneration technique are
,
,
,
and
, while IDB with both the relaunching and degener-
ation techniques uses
and the schedule from Table II
(labelled in the legend as 7
45 iter.) As these results show,
degeneration is hugely successful in improving the error correc-
tion performance over MDD-BMP. The error floor is reduced
by at least 2 orders of magnitude, and BER performance within
0.7 dB of OMS is achieved in the waterfall region. The im-
provement from relaunching is less dramatic but still significant,
about 0.4 dB around
. Notably, this gives IDB
error correction performance comparable to split-row min-sum
[8], stochastic [27], and relaxed half-stochastic algorithms [28],
but with much lower computational complexity.
The cumulative and marginal error correction performance
per relaunching phase at
is plotted in Fig. 11.
The marginal error rate of a phase
is defined as the propor-
tion of frames (or bits) that are not successfully decoded during
phase , out of all frames (or bits) in which phase
is reached.
These results show the effectiveness of relaunching at correcting
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CUSHON et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT ENERGY-EFFICIENT LDPC DECODERS USING DIFFERENTIAL BINARY MESSAGE PASSING
627
Fig. 12. BER performance of IDB decoding with other LDPC codes, along
with MDD-BMP and OMS for comparison. All decoders use 6 bits of quantiza-
tion. IDB uses the decoding schedule from Table II, OMS and MDD-BMP use
20 and 45 maximum iterations respectively.
frames that could not be decoded successfully with a single
phase of IDB. In addition, despite the high maximum number
of iterations for the overall decoding process (315), we observe
that the vast majority of frames decode successfully in the first
phases, meaning that the average number of iterations is much
lower (see Fig. 15).
Fig. 12 shows the error correction performance of IDB de-
coding with other LDPC codes with other construction methods:
(648,324) and (648,540) irregular quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC
codes from the Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11n) specification [33], and a
(660,484) regular progressive edge growth (PEG) based code,
with
. As expected, MDD-BMP and IDB
perform quite poorly with the Wi-Fi codes, due to the presence
of large numbers of degree-2 VNs in these codes. IDB fares
slightly better with the (648,540) code, as it has fewer of these
low degree nodes, but is still 0.6–1.0 dB worse than OMS.
The performance of IDB with the (660,484) PEG-based code
is considerably better, greatly improving over MDD-BMP
and approaching within 0.4 dB of OMS at its closest point.
However, IDB also exhibits a severe error floor with this code.
These results again show that for best results, DB decoding
algorithms should be used in conjunction with codes that lack
low degree VNs.
VIII. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR IDB
As with DD-BMP and MDD-BMP, we have created an ASIC
standard cell implementation of an IDB decoder, and used
post-layout simulations to estimate the throughput, power con-
sumption, and energy efficiency. This implementation is of the
(2048,1723) RS-LDPC code used in the 10 Gbps Ethernet spec-
ification, with 6 bits of quantization, and employs degeneration
and relaunching according to the decoding schedule shown in
Table II. This implementation employs the same process tech-
nology (TSMC 65 nm 7LM single-
CMOS), software tools,
design flow, and operating conditions as specified in Section IV,
and again post-layout simulations are used to obtain all circuit
Fig. 13. Layout view of the IDB decoder implementation.
TABLE III
IDB DECODER CRITICAL PATH (TYPICAL OPERATING CONDITIONS)
performance metrics. Fig. 13 shows a screenshot of the layout
view of the IDB decoder within Cadence EDI.
A top level block diagram of the implemented IDB decoder
is shown in Fig. 14. Architecturally, the IDB decoder is highly
similar to MDD-BMP, the algorithm from which it is based.
As before, this decoder is not pipelined, and each iteration
completes in a single clock cycle. The degeneration function
is implemented internally by the accumulators. Relaunching
requires a channel data buffer to retain the original values of
throughout the decoding process, which is labelled “
buffer”
in the figure. The values for
—that is,
—are
computed in parallel with arithmetic modules between the
buffer and the accumulators. Thus each relaunch takes a single
clock cycle and can be performed concurrently with the final
iteration of the previous phase. The
control signal causes
the accumulators in each VN to load
at the start
of each decoding phase. The decoding phase
is generated by
the controller state machine and distributed to all VNs, where
it is used to determine
and
(
is constant for each
given VN). As before, early termination is based on parity
checks generated at the CNs. If all parity checks are satisfied,
decoding stops and the next frame is loaded into the
buffer.
Otherwise, decoding continues according to the schedule in
Table II.
The critical path of the IDB decoder is traced in red in
Fig. 14. It begins at the accumulator output of one VN, passes
through a CN and on to a neighbouring VN, ending at the
VN’s accumulator registers. Table III details the critical path
and the delay accrued through each segment. Despite the lack
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
628
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, FEBRUARY 1, 2014
Fig. 14. Top level block diagram of the IDB decoder, showing a check node, 2 neighbouring variable nodes, and other top-level components. The critical path is
traced in red.
TABLE IV
IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR IDB AND COMPARISONS WITH OTHER WORKS
Energy scaled to 1.0 V.
Average throughput per unit area scaled to 65 nm at constant frequency.
of pipelining, IDB achieves a much faster critical path than
min-sum based decoders due to simpler node logic. In partic-
ular, the IDB check node is simply a
-input XOR gate, and
does not need to find the smallest magnitude among the input
messages. The VN adder tree is simpler, as it needs only to
add
inputs of 1 bit each. In addition, the smaller silicon area
results in lower buffering and interconnect delay for the long
inter-node connections along the critical path.
The implementation results of the IDB decoder are summa-
rized in Table IV, along with other state-of-the-art decoders
using the (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code as comparison. IDB
presents very large improvements in area, throughput, and
energy efficiency. In terms of silicon area, IDB is 48% smaller
than the next smallest decoder design, which is the partially-par-
allel layered OMS decoder of [34]. It is 57% smaller than [27],
which is the next smallest fully-parallel architecture.
At
, the average throughput of IDB is
171.8 Gbps, which is 7% greater than the throughput reported for
relaxed half-stochastic (RHS) [28], and approximately 3.5 times
greater than [10]. The average throughput of the IDB decoder at
is 126.3 Gbps, which is an improvement of
36%oversplit-rowmin-sumatthesamesignal-to-noiseratio[8].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CUSHON et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT ENERGY-EFFICIENT LDPC DECODERS USING DIFFERENTIAL BINARY MESSAGE PASSING
629
TABLE V
WIRING COMPLEXITY OF THE IMPLEMENTED DECODERS
Despite the much lower computational complexity of the IDB
algorithm, IDB achieves error correction performance compa-
rable to min-sum and stochastic-based decoders. At a BER of
, correction performance is approximately 0.05 dB better
than split-row min-sum, and 0.05 dB and 0.1 dB worse than
MTFM-based stochastic and RHS, respectively. However, IDB
requires an iteration limit of 315 to reach this level of perfor-
mance, which is much higher than most other architectures. As
a result, the worst-case latency and minimum throughput of IDB
compare poorly. However, the MTFM-based stochastic decoder
of [27], with an iteration limit of 400, is the highest out of all
the surveyed decoders. Additionally, as noted in [35], a signifi-
cantly higher minimum throughput can be guaranteed with input
buffering.
Table V shows a comparison of the wiring complexity of the
IDB decoder with the DD-BMP and MDD-BMP decoders. The
total wiring length of the IDB decoder is 10.957 m, which is
64% lower than the 30.598 m reported for the same code in [10].
The reduction can be attributed to the smaller die size of IDB,
as well as the use of broadcasting for inter-node (interleaver)
wires. These results also clearly demonstrate the wiring advan-
tage of MDD-BMP and IDB over DD-BMP. The DD-BMP
(273,191), MDD-BMP (1023,781), and IDB decoders have sim-
ilar die sizes and utilization factors, but DD-BMP has a much
higher average interleaver wire length, due to the need to send
unique VN-to-CN messages.
IDB also demonstrates major improvements in the iterative
decoder performance metrics defined in [21]. IDB achieves
energy per decoded bit of 2.78 pJ/bit at
, and
3.65 pJ/bit at
. This is 13 times lower than the
offset min-sum decoder of [10], and 58% lower than split-row
min-sum at the same values of
. Finally, in terms of
throughput per unit area, IDB’s result of 119.3
at
5.5 dB is 3.3 times greater than RHS, and 87.7
at
4.55 dB is 4.6 times greater than split-row min-sum.
Fig. 15 plots the average throughput and average number of
decoding iterations for the implemented IDB decoder over a
range of values for
. Throughput is low at low values
of
, due to the high decoding iteration limit and a large
proportion of frames failing to decode. However, throughput in-
creases greatly over the waterfall region, as the average number
of decoding iterations decreases. This result demonstrates the
large difference between average and worst-case performance
for IDB—despite a maximum iteration limit of 315, the average
is under 7 for
above 4.5 dB.
The average power consumption and energy efficiency of the
IDB decoder are plotted in Fig. 16. Power consumption is high
Fig. 15. Average throughput and iteration count for the implemented IDB de-
coder.
Fig. 16. Average power consumption and energy per decoded bit for the im-
plemented IDB decoder.
at low
, because degeneration in deadlocked VNs causes
interleaver wires to toggle continuously between 0 and 1. Power
is lower in the waterfall region, but afterwards increases mono-
tonically due to the increasing frequency of loading new frames
into the decoder, which consumes more power than ordinary
decoding iterations. Energy per decoded bit decreases mono-
tonically with
, due to the decreasing average number of
decoding iterations (and thus computational effort) needed to
decode each frame.
In addition, the low area and power consumption of IDB de-
coders make designs with multiple parallel decoders a prac-
tical possibility, which we refer to as a multi-core decoder. We
note that an IDB decoder architecture with 2 or 3 cores would
have a lower area than [8] or [10], assuming insignificant over-
head circuitry. If each processing core is assigned a different
frame to decode, an
-core decoder would increase the average
throughput by a factor of
over a single-core decoder, while
throughput per unit area and energy efficiency remain roughly
constant. Furthermore, because the relaunching technique of
IDB consists of several independent decoding attempts, each
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
630
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 3, FEBRUARY 1, 2014
core could also be assigned to work on different phases of the
same frame, reducing the maximum decoding latency and in-
creasing minimum throughput—an advantage that is not avail-
able to most other decoding algorithms.
IX. CONCLUSION
This paper has introduced the IDB algorithm, and presented
LDPC decoders using the DD-BMP, MDD-BMP, and IDB
algorithms. We demonstrate fully parallel implementations of
(273,191), (1023,781), and (4095,3367) FG-LDPC codes in
65 nm CMOS, overcoming the implementation complexity of
these powerful codes. These decoders achieve BER perfor-
mance up to 0.5 dB better than MSA, as well as low complexity,
high throughput, and excellent energy efficiency. Our imple-
mentation of the (2048,1723) IEEE 802.3an LDPC code using
IDB achieves BER performance within 0.25 dB of offset MSA,
and has much lower area, higher throughput, and greater energy
efficiency than other decoder architectures with similar error
correction performance. Because these designs achieve very
high throughputs, VFS can be applied to reduce their power
consumption while still maintaining sufficient throughput
for high-speed communications applications. Compared to
other recent energy-efficient LDPC decoder implementations,
DD-BMP, MDD-BMP, and especially IDB offer favorable
trade-offs for area, throughput, error correction performance,
and power consumption. Due to the low area of IDB relative
to other designs, multi-core decoders are feasible, and would
increase both the minimum and average decoding throughput.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes.
Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density
parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2
low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,
vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[4] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder
implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, Aug. 2009.
[5] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Power reduction
techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43,
no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[6] T. Brandon, R. Hang, and G. Block et al., “A scalable LDPC decoder
ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange,” Integr. VLSI J.,
vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 385–398, 2008.
[7] K. Cushon, C. Leroux, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. Gross, “A
min-sum iterative decoder based on pulsewidth message encoding,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 893–897, Nov. 2010.
[8] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “A low-complexity message-
passing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[9] A. Darabiha, A. Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Block-interlaced
LDPC decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. II, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74–78, Jan. 2008.
[10] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An
efficient 10GBASE-T ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error
floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr.
2010.
[11] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Improved bit-flipping decoding of
low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no.
4, pp. 1594–1606, Apr. 2005.
[12] P. Zarrinkhat and A. Banihashemi, “Threshold values and convergence
properties of majority-based algorithms for decoding regular low-den-
sity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp.
2087–2097, Dec. 2004.
[13] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the mod-
ified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[14] N. Mobini, A. Banihashemi, and S. Hemati, “A differential binary mes-
sage-passing LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 9,
pp. 2518–2523, Sep. 2009.
[15] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes
based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[16] J. Cho, J. Kim, and W. Sung, “VLSI implementation of a high-
throughput soft-bit-flipping decoder for geometric LDPC codes,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1083–1094, May 2010.
[17] T. J. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu.
Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[18] 10
Gigabit
Ethernet:
IEEE
Standard
for
Information
Tech-
nology-Telecommunications
and
Information
Exchange Between
Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Require-
ments Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection
(CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE
Standard 802.3an-2006, Aug. 2006 [Online]. Available: http://stan-
dards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.3an-2006.pdf
[19] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-
density parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes
with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp.
317–319, Jul. 2003.
[20] S. Hemati and A. Banihashemi, “Dynamics and performance analysis
of analog iterative decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC)
codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 61–70, 2006.
[21] F. Kienle, N. Wehn, and H. Meyr, “On complexity, energy-and imple-
mentation-efficiency of channel decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.
59, no. 12, pp. 3301–3310, Dec. 2011.
[22] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ra-
manujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes
Theor. Comp. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, Oct. 2003.
[23] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-
length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure
channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun.
2002.
[24] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic,
“Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based
LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201,
Jan. 2010.
[25] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior
in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp.
3248–3264, Jul. 2010.
[26] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Hardware implementation
of a backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder for lowering the error
floor of Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol.
58, no. 12, pp. 2931–2943, Dec. 2011.
[27] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and
W. Gross, “Majority-based tracking forecast memories for Stochastic
LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 9, pp.
4883–4896, Sep. 2010.
[28] F. Leduc-Primeau, A. J. Raymond, P. Giard, K. Cushon, C. Thibeault,
and W. J. Gross, “High-throughput LDPC decoding using the RHS
algorithm,” in Proc. Design Architect. Signal Image Process. (DASIP)
Conf., Oct. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[29] F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Dithered
belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 8,
pp. 2042–2047, Aug. 2012.
[30] Y. Han and W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[31] M. Ardakani and F. Kschischang, “Gear-shift decoding,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1235–1242, Jul. 2006.
[32] F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Relaxed
half-stochastic belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no.
5, pp. 1648–1659, 2013.
[33] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and
Information Exchange Between Systems Local and Metropolitan Area
Networks-Specific requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Stan-
dard 802.11-2012 (Revision of IEEE Standard 802.11-2007), 2012, pp.
1–2793.
[34] A. Cevrero, Y. Leblebici, P. Ienne, and A. Burg, “A 5.35 mm2
10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC decoder chip in 90 nm CMOS,” in IEEE
Asian Solid State Circuits Conf. (A-SSCC), Nov. 2010, pp. 1–4.
[35] S. Sweatlock, S. Dolinar, and K. Andrews, “Buffering requirements for
variable-iterations LDPC decoders,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Work-
shop, Feb. 2008, pp. 523–530.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CUSHON et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT ENERGY-EFFICIENT LDPC DECODERS USING DIFFERENTIAL BINARY MESSAGE PASSING
631
Kevin Cushon (S’10) received the B.Sc. degree in
Computer Engineering and the M.Sc. degree in Elec-
trical Engineering from the University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada, in 2005 and 2008 respectively.
Since 2008, he has been with McGill University in
Montréal, Canada, where he is currently working to-
wards the degree of Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering.
His research interests are in the design and imple-
mentation of high-performance and energy-efficient
VLSI systems, iterative error-correcting decoders,
and application-specific computing architectures.
Saied Hemati (S’01–M’06–SM’08) received the
B.Sc. and the M.Sc. degrees in Electronics Engi-
neering from Isfahan University of Technology,
Isfahan, Iran, in 1993 and 1997, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from
Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2005.
From 1997 to 1999, he worked at the Integrated
Electronics Industry (IEI), Isfahan, Iran. From 1999
to 2001, he was a researcher at the Research and Ed-
ucation Center of Isfahan Telecommunication Com-
pany, Isfahan, Iran. From 2005 to 2007, he was an
NSERC postdoctoral fellow and a part-time professor at the School of Infor-
mation Technology and Engineering at the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada. He was an assistant professor at the Department of Electrical Engi-
neering at Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 2008. He was with
the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada as a senior researcher and lecturer from 2008 to 2012.
Then he was an Associate Professor with the Electrical Engineering Department
at Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden and he joined the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Idaho, Moscow, ID,
USA in August 2013. His research interests include the theory of operation and
the design and implementation of iterative error-correcting decoders.
Dr. Hemati is the recipient of several awards and scholarships, including
the Senate Medal for outstanding academic achievement, a ReSMiQ (Le Re-
groupement Stratégique en Microsystèmes du Québec) postdoctoral fellowship,
an NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada)
postdoctoral fellowship, a CSA (Canadian Space Agency) NSERC postdoctoral
supplement award, a CITO (Communications and Information Technology On-
tario) research excellence award, an Ontario Graduate Scholarship, an Ontario
Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology, and the best paper award in
the CITO Knowledge Network Conference in 2002.
Camille Leroux (S’06–M’08) received his M.Sc. de-
gree in Electronics Engineering from the University
of South Brittany, Lorient, France, in 2005. He re-
ceived his Ph.D. degree in Electronics Engineering
from TELECOM Bretagne, Brest, France, in 2008.
From 2008 to 2011 he worked as a Post Doctoral
Research Associate in the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department at McGill University, Mon-
treal, QC, Canada. He is an Associate Professor at
Institut Polytechnique de Bordeaux since 2011. His
research interests are in the design and hardware im-
plementation of signal processing systems and computer architecture. He was a
visiting student in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at Aal-
borg University, Denmark, in 2004 and at the University of Alberta, Canada, in
2005.
Shie Mannor (S’00–M’03–SM’09) received the
B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering, the B.A.
degree in mathematics, and the Ph.D. degree in
electrical
engineering
from
the
Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, in 1996, 1996,
and 2002, respectively. From 2002 to 2004, he was
a Fulbright scholar and a postdoctoral associate at
M.I.T. He was with the Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at McGill University from
2004 to 2010 where he was the Canada Research
chair in Machine Learning. He has been with the
Faculty of Electrical Engineering at the Technion since 2008 where he is
currently a professor.
His research interests include machine learning and pattern recognition, plan-
ning and control, multi-agent systems, and communications.
Warren J. Gross (S’92–M’04–SM’10) received
the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada,
in 1996, and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from
the University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada,
in 1999 and 2003, respectively. Currently, he is an
Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, McGill University,
Montréal, Québec, Canada. His research interests are
in the design and implementation of signal processing
systems and custom computer architectures.
Dr. Gross is currently Chair of the IEEE Signal Processing Society Technical
Committee on Design and Implementation of Signal Processing Systems. He
has served as Technical Program Co-Chair of the IEEE Workshop on Signal
Processing Systems (SiPS 2012) and as Chair of the IEEE ICC 2012 Workshop
on Emerging Data Storage Technologies. Dr. Gross served as Associate Editor
for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING. He has served on the
Program Committees of the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, the
IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, the
International Conference on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications and
as the General Chair of the 6th Annual Analog Decoding Workshop. Dr. Gross
is a Senior Member of the IEEE and a licensed Professional Engineer in the
Province of Ontario.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
