2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers
1
Optimal Joint Viterbi Detector Decoder (JVDD) over AWGN/ISI Channel
1Kheong Sann Chan, 1Sari Shafidah Binte Shafiee, 1Elidrissi Moulay Rachid, 2Yong Liang Guan
1Data Storage Institute (DSI), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research) 2Nanyang Technological University, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,

Abstract—Communication channels today use a state-of-the art iterative detector/decoder system on its receiver end to detect and decode the transmitted bits. This iterative detection system is comprised of a soft output detector, either the soft output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) or the Bahl, Cocke, Jelinek and Raviv (BCJR) algorithm, and the Sum Product Algorithm (SPA) is used in the decoder. Although iterations of the soft information between these detector and decoder blocks gives rise to good performance over an inter-symbol-interference (ISI)/additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel when the codeword length (CWL) is large, the iterative detector is sub-optimal. This suboptimality originates from the SPA algorithm that itself is suboptimal whenever there are cycles in the factor graph, in particular, when there are short cycles. Any practical code will have cycles in its factor graph. A second source of suboptimality is the iterative process itself. There exist iterations both within the SPA decoder and between the decoder and the detector.
In this work, the authors propose a novel detection/decoding algorithm coined the Joint Viterbi Detector Decoder (JVDD) that functionally replaces the iterative detector/decoder in the channel. Unlike the iterative detector/decoder, the proposed algorithm performs detection and decoding on a single structure and is optimal over an ISI/AWGN channel when there are sufficient computational resources. In this work we describe the JVDD algorithm and perform preliminary analysis on its performance and complexity under various conditions.
Index Terms—Viterbi, LDPC, SPA decoder, joint detection decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
Development of iterative detection and decoding schemes has brought about significant improvements to communication systems in recent years. In the conventional iterative detector, a soft-output detector such as the Soft Output Viterbi Algorithm (SOVA) [1], or the Bahl, Cocke, Jelinek, Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [2] is run over a trellis followed by the Sum Product Algorithm (SPA) [3] which runs on a factor graph [4] (FG). A typical communication block diagram is illustrated on the upper part of Figure 1, while the competing joint Viterbi detector/decoder (JVDD) algorithm is shown below. While the iterative detector has good performance over inter-symbol interference (ISI)/additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, it is suboptimal. This suboptimality originates from a couple sources. Firstly the SPA is suboptimal whenever the coding FG has cycles, in particular, it performs quite poorly when the FG has short cycles. In practice, all code FGs have cycles, although effort is invested to remove the short cycles from the code. Secondly the iterative process

R=

K N

K

N

Encoder

ck

uk

zk AWGN/ISI
Model

BCJR

SPA

Detector

Decoder cˆk

uˆk

JVDD cˆk

Fig. 1. Communication system block diagram depicting the state-of-the art iterative detector/decoder on the top and competing joint Viterbi detector decoder on the bottom. Both systems attempt to return the best guess at the transmitted code word cˆk.

itself induces suboptimality. This can be observed from the fact that additional iterations in the detector yield improved performance, demonstrating that at the end of each iteration, performance is suboptimal. Iterations occur both within the SPA decoder and between the soft-output detector and the SPA decoder, so these are both sources of suboptimality.
These sources of suboptimality in the current iterative detector motivate the search for schemes that have a chance of achieving optimality. Joint detection/decoding is a promising candidate. Previous work on joint detection/decoding include [5] and [6] in which the authors have converted the softoutput detector from a trellis-based algorithm to a FG based algorithm, and using the SPA over it. The detector FG and decoder FG can then be combined into a joint FG representing both the detector and decoder, and the SPA can be run over it. It was found that the performance of the detector implemented on a FG does not outperform the BCJR or SOVA algorithms, as both are optimal over the ISI/AWGN channel. In this work we take the opposite approach; instead of converting the optimal trellis-based SOVA/BCJR to a FG, we seek to implement the joint detector/decoder over a trellis. This is the approach of the JVDD. This approach has the advantage that it replaces the suboptimal SPA algorithm with the optimal Viterbi algorithm and does away with all iterations. Thus the JVDD removes both above-mentioned sources of suboptimality in the iterative detector.
In the iterative detector shown in Figure 1, the detector block has knowledge of the channel while the decoder has knowledge of the code. Information is thus iterated between the detector and the decoder until a sufficiency criteria has been met. The JVDD block has knowledge of both the channel and the code in order to do detection and decoding jointly. This information is used to decide which paths to keep and which paths to discard within the JVDD trellis.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4799-2358-8/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

282

2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers
2

−−
− −+
+

− +

−− −
+

+− −
++ +

− +
+

− +
+

metric thresholding

+
parity checks

Fig. 2. The JVDD trellis depicted in this figure is divided into two sections. In the metric thresholding section, channel bits are detected in similar fashion to the regular Viterbi algorithm. Metrics are computed and survivors with larger metrics are discarded. In the parity bit section, additional computations are performed whenever the bit corresponds to the last one in any row of the parity check matrix H. The parity check for each survivor is evaluated, and the survivor is discarded if it violates any parity check. Thus at the end of the trellis, only survivors corresponding to legal codewords make it through.

In this paper, we propose and discuss the JVDD approach to coded data transmission over an ISI/AWGN channel, describe in detail how the algorithm is formulated and address practical issues associated with it. We propose a class of codes (JVDD codes) that are tailored to ease the complexity of the JVDD. We analyze the performance of the JVDD through simulation, studying the effect of various JVDD and coding parameters.
II. JOINT VITERBI DETECTOR/DECODER ALGORITHM
The JVDD operates on a trellis, similar to the regular Viterbi algorithm. A sample such trellis is shown in Figure 2. The JVDD has two sections corresponding to the two parts of the trellis depicted in Figure 2: the metric thresholding and parity checks sections.
In the “metric thresholding” section of the trellis, the JVDD executes the usual Viterbi algorithm, computing metrics for each incoming survivor to a node and discarding larger-metric survivors. One difference between the JVDD and the regular Viterbi algorithm, is that the JVDD defines a threshold, which each survivor’s metric must exceed before it is discarded. Thus only survivors with metrics near (within the threshold of) the minimum metric (for a particular node) are retained. Note that this means the number of survivors grows as the algorithm progresses and that the rate of growth is controlled by the threshold parameter. Larger thresholds lead to better performance and greater computational complexities while smaller thresholds lead to poorer performance with smaller computational complexities.
In the “parity checks” section of the trellis, the JVDD performs parity checks on each incoming survivor path to a given node and discards paths which fail the syndrome check: cHT = 0. We recall that the parity check matrix H, is an M × N matrix where M is the number of parity checks and N is the number of channel bits. Each row of H corresponds to one of the M parity checks and the syndrome check equation for a single row (check) of H can be written as chiT = 0, where hi is the ith row of H. This check on the ith row of H can occur during the JVDD algorithm at the time when the channel bit corresponding to the last “1” in hi is detected. Hence the checks in the JVDD “parity checks” section occur at nodes that correspond to the last “1” of a row in the parity check matrix H. The region in which these parity checks occur is labeled the “parity check” section of the trellis in Figure 2 and in general, tends to happen towards the end of the trellis,

since that is typically where the last “1” in each row tend to be clumped.
At this point, it becomes clear that the JVDD algorithm makes use of knowledge of both the channel and of the code corresponding to the operations in the “metric thresholding” section and the “parity bits” section respectively. To be more precise, the operations in the “metric thresholding” section actually occur throughout the entire trellis, computing metrics and discarding survivors with metrics that exceed the minimum metric by threshold. Correspondingly, the “parity bits” operations actually occur at very specific time-instances in the trellis, for those time indices k corresponding to the last “1” of a particular row in H.
The gist of the design of the JVDD algorithm, is to find and return the minimum metric legal codeword (MMLC), i.e.: the legal codeword (defined by the parity check metric H) that has the minimum metric (defined by the coefficients of the channel). We can see that the JVDD attempts to achieve this through the two previously mentioned sections of the trellis. The minimum-metric part is addressed by the Viterbi algorithm in the “metric thresholding” section and the legalcodeword part is addressed by the discarding all survivors that violate the codeword constraint in the “parity checks” section.
However it should be noted that the JVDD does not guarantee to return the MMLC, which is the optimal decision over a coded AWGN/ISI channel. The JVDD could fail to return the MMLC if the MMLC path temporarily acquires a larger metric over a part of the trellis that causes it to be discarded during the threshold comparison with a competing path. If any other survivor in the trellis happens to achieve a metric that is more than threshold smaller than the MMLC at any point in the trellis, then the MMLC could be discarded early on in the trellis before reaching the parity checking section. Since we wish the JVDD to return the MMLC, this is undesirable and the only way to prevent this is to use a larger threshold which results in greater computational complexity. The JVDD will be suboptimal as long as there is a chance that it is discarding the MMLC, but it becomes optimal as threshold increases, at the cost of greater computational complexity. The challenge for the JVDD is about choosing appropriate values for the parameters to try to achieve near-optimal performance for reasonable complexities.
When threshold is large enough, the MMLC is assured to survive to the end of the trellis. As threshold → ∞, no survivors are killed in the “metric thresholding” section and the MMLC is sure to make it through both sections to emerge the winning survivor from the trellis. However the complexity will approach that of the brute-force detector. If the threshold parameter happens to kill the MMLC early on in the trellis, then it is possible that the no survivors make it through the trellis, i.e. at some point, all survivors end up killed by the parity checks. In this situation, the JVDD has a couple of options. Firstly it can return an default error codeword such as the all-zero codeword. Secondly, it can go back to the start of the trellis, increase the threshold parameter and run the algorithm again. Other more complex options exist, but in this preliminary work, these are the two possibilities we propose.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
283

2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers
3

Fig. 3. Top figure: pictorial depiction of random LDPC code. Bottom figure: pictorial depiction of a sample JVDD code. Black pixels represent 1 while white pixels represent 0 in these figures
III. COMPLEXITY MANAGEMENT OF THE JVDD
The major issue surrounding the JVDD is managing its computational complexity, which is akin to managing the number of survivors in the trellis. The main way of managing the number of survivors is by tweaking the threshold parameter. In this section we describe other ways of managing the complexity.
A. Limiting the maximum number of survivors
A second complexity-limiting parameter can be introduced that we call the maxNoSurv parameter. As the name suggests, this is the maximum number of survivors that the JVDD will allow. It is implemented by ordering the list of survivors by their metrics and keeping the maxNoSurv smallest metric survivors at each time-step in the trellis. This is an alternative method of keeping/killing survivors to the threshold parameter. The maxNoSurv parameter is used just to ensure that the number of survivors in the trellis remains under a predetermined value and thus, manageable. There is also, however, a performance penalty associated with this parameter.
B. JVDD codes
The JVDD can be run using any type of block code and it was initially tested with random LDPC codes. The low-density requirement of LDPC codes comes from the SPA algorithm. The JVDD has no such restriction on the code and high-density parity check matrices can be used if desired. A random LDPC code is depicted in the top half of Figure 3. As can be inferred from this figure, the distribution of the last 1 in each row is likely to be clumped towards the end of the matrix. The implication is that survivor-killing in the parity checking part of the JVDD, will occur towards the end of the trellis. This is an undesirable feature as the number of survivors would have grown exponentially until the parity checking section. By contrast, JVDD codes distribute the last 1 in each row more evenly through the H matrix.
One class of JVDD codes referred to as Gaussiandistribution, linear diagonal (GDLD) codes are proposed and a sample code is shown in the bottom half of Figure 3. The key feature of this code structure is that the last 1 in each row lies along a diagonal and is more uniformly distributed through the H matrix, rather than clumped towards the end of the matrix as in the case of the random LDPC code. This results in the visually diagonal structure of the matrix. The name of this class of codes comes from the fact that the ones in the matrix are placed deterministically along the diagonal and

randomly to the left of the diagonal of the matrix with a onesided Gaussian distribution. The first parameter of the GDLD code is the standard deviation σ of this Gaussian distribution. The second parameter of GDLD codes is an offset parameter of the diagonal. Instead of running the line down the main diagonal, it can be offset a certain number of pixels to the right. This has the effect of starting the parity check section later, but at the same time, it gives more protection to the last few bits of the code which would otherwise be very weakly protected. The third parameter of GDLD codes is the rowweight, or number of ones dropped to the left of the diagonal, per row.
The key feature of the GDLD JVDD code is that parity checking in the JVDD can occur throughout the trellis, rather than just at the end. This feature controls and limits the number of survivors in the JVDD trellis, since the parity checking operation cuts down on the number of survivors. We have also proposed and tested Gaussian-distribution parabolic diagonal (GDPD) codes in which the main diagonal follows a parabola rather than a straight line, but we only report the performance of the GDLD codes here as they seem to perform better.
C. Higher SNR
Another feature that controls/limits the number of survivors in the JVDD trellis is the operating SNR. At low SNR, due to the noise, many survivors will make it within the threshold of the minimum metric survivor for each node. This will mean that the number of survivors will grow more quickly at low SNRs. Conversely, at higher SNRs, the probability of competing survivors making it inside the threshold of the minimum metric survivor becomes less, and the JVDD complexity will be lower. It should be noted that the JVDD and the competing iterative detector should operate at comparatively high SNRs at which the frame error rate is acceptably low. This may favour the computational complexity for the JVDD.
D. Shorter codeword lengths
The longer the CWL, the longer the trellis, and the more opportunity there is for the MMLC to be ousted from the survivor list by competing survivors. Thus longer CWLs tend to require larger threshold and/or maxNoSurv parameters leading to higher complexity. Conversely at shorter CWLs, the JVDD tends to outperform the iterative detector by substantial margins at reasonable complexity as will be seen in the simulation results section. Applications requiring longer CWLs require extra effort to make the JVDD tractable while for shorter CWLs, the JVDD performs close to optimal at reasonable thresholds and complexities for the given code.
E. Lower rate codes
One final way to mitigate the computational complexity of the JVDD is to use codes with lower rates in conjunction with the abovementioned JVDD codes. This reduces the complexity because codes with lower rates have a greater number of parity checks per channel bit leading to more frequent survivorkilling in the JVDD trellis than when using higher rate codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
284

2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers
4

Fig. 4. Iterative detector results and JVDD results varying the threshold parameter (left two plots) and maxNoSurv parameter (right two plots). Solid curves correspond to the JVDD code while dotted curves corresponds to the random LDPC code. Code rate is R = 0.95 in both cases. The left figure (in each plot set) is the FER performance while the right figure (in each plot set) is the average number of survivors. CWL=256.

The fact that lower rate JVDD codes have lower complexity suggests a coding trilemma or three-way trade-off in the push for the best possible codes and coding/decoding schemes. In magnetic recording, there is a well known media-trilemma which is a fundamental three-way trade-off between SNR (grains per channel bit), writeability, and thermal stability [7]. One can optimize any of the three parameters at the expense of one, or both of the remaining two. We postulate a similar trilemma for coding within the context of the JVDD.
The three parameters of the coding trilemma are: the computational complexity, the frame or bit error rate performance and the code rate. The performance and the complexity can be traded off one for the other at a constant code-rate by tweaking the threshold and maxNoSurv parameters. Increasing threshold/maxNoSurv improves the performance in exchange for more computational complexity, while decreasing these parameters has the opposite effect. It would be desirable to have both good performance and reasonable complexity, and we can, but at the expense of the code-rate. Reducing the code rate increases the number of parity check bits per channel bit and each parity check cuts the number of survivors in the JVDD trellis reducing complexity.
IV. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS
In this section, we present results for the following sets of simulations. Firstly, we investigate the effects of varying the threshold and maxNoSurv parameters. Subsequently the effects of varying CWL and code rate are investigated. We show results for both random LDPC and JVDD codes and we compare the performance of the JVDD with the iterative detector/decoder. For the random LDPC code, the column weight is 3, and the 4 cycles are removed from the code. For the JVDD code we test here, the row weight is 50, σ = 100 and the offset parameter is equal to 70. The results in this section use the implementation of the JVDD that increases the threshold and goes back to the beginning in the event that no survivor makes it through the trellis.
A. Varying Threshold
In this simulation set the CWL is held fixed at CWL=256 and the maxNoSurv parameter is not used in the JVDD. Simulations are run for both the iterative detector and the JVDD algorithm using both a random code and a JVDD

GDLD code, both with a code rate of R = 0.95. The threshold is varied from 0.5 to 2 in steps of 0.5. The results are shown in the left two plots of Figure 4. The performance of the iterative detector/decoder with 6 iterations is also shown for reference. These figures show that as threshold increases, performance improves, but complexity (in terms of the average number of survivors per bit) also increases. Both random LDPC code (dotted line) and JVDD code (solid line) are shown in this figure and it is observed that the JVDD code sometimes does better, sometimes does worse in terms of performance, but the complexity is much lower, although at higher SNR’s the difference between the JVDD and random codes is less. As noted in the previous section, the complexity decreases as SNR increases, as fewer paths make it inside the threshold at higher SNRs. We see that the JVDD is outperforming the iterative detector/decoder by 1-2 dB depending on value of threshold, both for JVDD and random LDPC codes. It’s also noted that the performance improvement for the JVDD saturates with increasing threshold indicating that the performance could be approaching optimality for this particular code.
B. Varying maxNoSurv
The right two plots in Figure 4 show the effect of the maxNoSurv parameter at a constant threshold=2. The CWL is again fixed at 256 and simulations are again run for both random LDPC and JVDD codes. maxNoSurv=0 is equivalent to turning it off. In this particular set of simulations, there is not a large performance difference between maxNoSurv=500 and maxNoSurv=5000. We attribute this to the fact that the CWL is relatively short and a large number of survivors is not as needed in the JVDD when the CWL is short. The complexity plot on the right is again showing a decreasing complexity for increasing SNRs for all codes and significantly reduced complexity of the JVDD codes over the random LDPC codes. We should mention here that these complexity plots apply only to the JVDD, as the iterative detector’s complexity does not depend solely on the number of survivors in its trellis, but on a more complicated formula including the number of connections in the SPA FG, the number of iterations in the SPA and between the SPA and the soft-output detector. We will also mention that although the maxNoSurv parameter is not so critical at these CWL’s,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
285

2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers
5

Fig. 5. Results of the JVDD and iterative detectors varying the code rate R. Right two plots are for CWL=512, left two plots are for CWL=1024. The left plot in each set shows the performance as a function of code rate for the JVDD (solid curve) and iterative (dotted curve) while the right plot in each set shows the average number of survivors of the JVDD for different SNRs.

it is an important parameter at longer CWLs when the number of survivors can quickly become unmanageable.
C. Varying code rate and CWL
In this experiment set, we show the effect of varying the code rate and the CWL of both the iterative detector and the JVDD. Figure 5 shows the results with the left two plots corresponding to CWL=512, while the right two are for CWL=1024. As the computational complexity becomes unmanageable for random LDPC codes at these longer CWLs, we only show the results for JVDD codes here.
We can see the increase in the average number of survivors (complexity) for the JVDD at CWL=1024 over CWL=512 at high code rates, but it drops more quickly as the code rate decreases. This is a pleasantly surprising result as it may mean that the JVDD could be computationally feasible at longer CWL’s by reducing the code rate. We notice that the complexity drops with reducing code rate, but the rate at which it drops seems to slow down after a certain point. The performance plots again show the JVDD (solid curves) outperforming iterative detector (dotted curves) in all circumstances tested. However it is noted that the margin by which it outperforms the iterative detector decreases with increasing CWL. This is attributed to two factors: firstly, the iterative detector becomes more efficient as the CWL gets longer. This is the main reason that the HDD industry is transitioning from sector sizes of 4k to 32k bits. Secondly at longer CWLs, the JVDD becomes more computationally complex causing the threshold and maxNoSurv parameters to be more restrictive leading to larger performance losses in view of the number of survivors they discard. Not only is this necessary from the standpoint of hardware implementation of these algorithms, it is also necessary for us to generate the results in a reasonable time and with reasonable memory consumption.
As has been observed in the previous simulation sets, we also observe in Figure 5 that the computational complexity of the JVDD drops increasing with SNR.

condition being the sufficiency of computational resources. At short CWL’s(≤ 512), it is found to be relatively easy to approach the optimal performance limit without incurring excessive computational complexity, but at longer CWLs, this becomes more of a challenge. The mechanism through which the JVDD fails to achieve optimality, is by discarding the MMLC during the metric thresholding portion of the algorithm.
Based on the expected number of survivors in the JVDD trellis, we have postulated several approaches through which the JVDD complexity can be managed. This includes appropriate selection of the threshold and maxNoSurv parameters, using JVDD codes, higher SNRs and lower code rates. The effect of these parameters on the average number of survivors in the JVDD trellis is also demonstrated and verified in the simulation results section. The main challenge for the JVDD is achieving optimal performance at longer CWLs with reasonable complexities. For channels with shorter CWLs, the JVDD wins in all areas over the iterative detector and should be the algorithm of choice for any such applications.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoecher, A Viterbi algorithm with soft decision outputs and its applications, Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, pp. 47.11-47.17, Nov 1989.
[2] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT20, pp. 284287, Mar. 1974.
[3] Hongwei Song and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Partial Response Channels, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, pp. 56-66, January 2004.
[4] Giulio Colavolpe and Gianpietro Germi et al, On the Application of Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm to ISI Channels, IEEE Trans. Magn. Vol.53, No.5, pp. 818-825, May 2005.
[5] Alessandro Tomasoni and Luca Reggiani, Non-Binary Message-Passing Algorithms for Magnetic Channels with Data-Dependent Noise, Annual Congress GTTI 2008 - Session: Digital Transmissions.
[6] Mohammad H. Taghavi and Paul H. Siegel, Graph-Based Decoding in the Presence of ISI, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Vol. 57, No. 4, pp. 2188-2312, April 2011.
[7] H. J. Richter, The transition from longitudinal to perpendicular recording Graph-Based Decoding in the Presence of ISI, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 40 (2007) R149R177.

V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have formulated a novel joint detector and decoder, the JVDD, that is shown to outperform the state-ofthe art iterative detector/decoder over an AWGN/ISI channel. The JVDD is conditionally an optimal detector/decoder, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
286

