RECONFIGURABLE FEC CODES FOR SOFTWARE-DEFINED OPTICAL TRANSCEIVERS

Christoforos Kachris1, Georgios Tzimpragos1,2, Dimitrios Soudris2, Ioannis Tomkos1

1Athens Information Technology

2National Technical University of Athens

Peania, Greece

Athens, Greece

{kachris, getzim}@ait.edu.gr

ABSTRACT
Flexible Optical Networks can optimize the network resources by offering increased spectral utilization. However, these networks require the use of novel software-defined Optical Transceivers that can adapt their features to the channel’s requirements. This paper presents a novel optical transceiver architecture using a reconfigurable FEC coding scheme for flexible optical networks. The proposed approach can dynamically support different versions of FEC codes (with different overheads, code lengths, and LLR-widths) based on the network’s Quality-of-Service requirements, whereas it can also be applied for the dynamic reconfiguration of the DSP units and the realization of dynamic coded-modulation schemes. The proposed approach has been implemented into an FPGA platform. The performance evaluation shows that the reconfiguration time is always less than 12 ms, which means that the proposed scheme could be utilized in many optical networks, where the reconfiguration time (e.g. for the optical switches or the WSS) is in the order of a few ms.
Keywords: FEC codes, LDPC, FPGA, flexible optical networks, optical transceiver, reconfigurable.
1. INTRODUCTION
The emergence of bandwidth-consuming and highly dynamic services, dictates the evolution of old fixed optical networks that were based on wavelength division multiplexing (WDM). To be more specific, there is a growing awareness that the bandwidth of deployed optical fiber is approaching its limit. It is, thus, important to maximize the use of scarce network resources - such as the fiber bandwidth – in order to accommodate the ever-increasing traffic demand. Additionally, the traffic fluctuation of these networks creates new challenges regarding their flexibility. The term "flexibility" refers to the ability of the network to dynamically adjust its resources - such as the optical bandwidth, the modulation format and the FEC coding according to the requirements of each connection and/or service.
Recent research advances propose new transmission schemes for the future core networks,

aiming to cope with the high-capacity and flexibility requirements. Flexible Optical Networks are promising candidates for providing the required higher spectrum utilization [1],[2]. Software-Defined Optical Transceivers (SDOT) [3], [4], [5] are considered as a key enabler (together with Wavelength Selective switches-WSSs) for the implementation of such flexible architectures, due to the fact that they bring on several advantages, such as: x reconfigurable bandwidth allocation , x programmable modulation formats (BPSK, QPSK,
16-QAM), x programmable data rate, and x programmable FEC (offering tunability of the ratio
of the actual payload to the FEC).
These features can provide higher flexibility and better tunability based on the optical channel characteristics. The concept of transceivers capable of reconfiguring according to the relationships between optical impairments and performance characteristics is attractive from both a technical and an economical point of view. However, more advanced electro-optical components are required for the realization of such schemes. The development process of suitable electronic components is not straightforward due to the optical networks’ strict requirements. Therefore, attention should be paid to their hardware implementation both due to their high complexity and the need to adapt effectively to different signal qualities, power requirements and expected transmission rates. The main scope of this paper is to present such a reconfigurable scheme, suitable for the realization of the electronic components of these high-speed flexible transceivers.
2. SOFTWARE-DEFINED TRANSCIEVERS FOR FLEXIBLE OPTICAL NETWORKS
In conventional optical networks, channels, once initially provisioned, are seldom reconfigured until they are decommissioned at end-of-life. However, recent advances in the domain of the software-defined optical transceivers (SDOT) for future flexible optical made possible the change of these fixed properties of optical channels [6]. The ability to flexibly manage and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:20:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

provision resources allows service providers to support a wide range of emerging dynamic high-bandwidth applications, including data center networking, cloud computing, and optical network virtualization.

Software-defined Reconfigurable Transmitter

QC-LDPC (FEC)

DSP

D/A

TX Optical

Software-defined Reconfigurable Receiver

QC-LDPC (FEC)

DSP

RX

A/D

Optical

(photodt)

Software-defined • Modulation format • Data rate • FEC

Digital Mixed-signal Optical

Figure 1. General architecture of the software-defined Optical Transceiver.

Currently, the existing software-defined optical transceivers are based mainly on the use of discrete components. However, such discrete SDOTs are usually characterized as bulky and power-hungry. Therefore, the efficient integration of all the necessary optical and electrical components into small footprint devices is absolutely required for their further deployment. Figure 1 depicts the high level architecture of such a possible implementation. To support the fine grain bandwidth allocation, the integrated transceivers should be able to support different flexible transmission technologies that are based on subcarriers such as optical OFDM and/or Nyquist WDM [7]. Furthermore, the integrated SDOTs will have to support different modulation formats and data rates. To be more specific, the described SDOTs will have to integrate advanced DSP circuits, able to sustain the high processing requirements of the optical OFDM and Nyquist WDM transmissions, with flexible and efficient FEC codes capable of getting dynamically reconfigured to meet the system’s requirements.

3. HARD-WIRED CONNECTIONS AND FLEXIBILITY Due to the rapid increase of network traffic in the last few years, many telecommunication operators have started transitions to 100 Gb/s optical networks and beyond. High speed optical networks need efficient Forward Error Correction (FEC) codes and Digital Signal Processing (DSP) to deal with the optical-impairments and meet the Quality-of-Service (QoS) requirements.
Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) play a key role for the development of such components due to their flexibility to allow development of future proof designs and their low cost. FPGAs are slower and much less dense than Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) in the same VLSI technology. However, the

high cost of the ASICs for small scale production makes FPGAs more attractive for applications with high computational complexity and small scale production. This speed and density difference arises mainly because of the slow and large programmable connections between FPGA logic blocks. One way to improve the speed and density of an FPGA is to substitute these programmable connections with fixed connections, which we call hard-wired connections. The routing and area gains from the adoption of such an approach have also been shown in [5]. The use of hard-wired connections in FPGA logic blocks, however, leads to a reduction in the flexibility of the FPGA compared to an FPGA that has only programmable connections between its blocks. Therefore, use of the reconfigurable nature of FPGAs should be made in order the developed designs to meet the network’s flexibility requirements.
The implementation complexity of a design has a direct effect on the expected power consumption, latency and resources utilization of the optical transceiver. For instance, Figure 2 and Figure 3 depict the relationships between resources utilization (FPGA LUTs) and throughput, and dynamic power consumption per bit and throughput, respectively, for the LDPC encoder design presented in [9],[8].
Figure 2. Implementation results exploration ((x,y), where x denoted the FEC code rate and y the
QC-LDPC sub-block size), when throughput and the dynamic power consumption per bit are defined as
criteria for the QC-LDPC encoder design.
Figure 3. Implementation results exploration ((x,y), where x denoted the FEC code rate and y the
QC-LDPC sub-block size), when throughput and the total number of LUTs are defined as criteria for the
QC-LDPC encoder design.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:20:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Moreover, Figure 4 illustrates the relationship between the resources utilization, the codeword length and the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) magnitude-width for the design of QC-LDPC decoders.
Figure 4. FPGA implementation results of a column-layered QC-LDPC decoding scheme.
The existence of such trade-offs motivates the development of flexible schemes, suitable to meet the strict timing requirements of optical networks and still capable of getting reconfigured in order to meet the traffic transceiver’s requirements in terms of power consumption, reliability and redundancy (overhead).
4. DYNAMICALLY ADAPTIVE QC-LDPC CODES FOR FLEXIBLE NETWORKS
The architecture of the proposed scheme is shown in Figure 5. As can be seen, the node consists of the software-defined optical transceiver and the Flexible Optical Network Controller (i.e. SDN controller) that is used to control the node based on the application or the channel requirements. The optical network controller can be part of the control plane that is used to configure the network nodes. On the other hand the software-defined optical transceiver that belongs to the data plane can be configured to meet the specific channel requirements.
The software-defined optical transceiver is divided into two parts. The first part contains all the modules that are fixed for this transceiver, such as the optical components and the mixed-signal modules (modulators, A/D, D/A), whereas the second one is the reconfigurable part that can be configured dynamically without disrupting the operation of the first part and is based on an FPGA. As can be seen, the reconfigurable area contains the DSP modules and the FEC codes that are required for the error correction of the optical channel. The transceiver also contains the control processor that is used for the control and the reconfiguration of these modules. Outside of the transceiver, there is a storage unit (DRAM or FLASH module) that is used to store the library of the available implemented LDPC FEC codes. The various FEC codes are stored in the memory units as configuration files (bitstreams). A short description of the main steps of its operation follows.

Whenever it is required (e.g. due to different application or any change in the optical channel), the Flexible-optical Network Controller (i.e. SDN controller) is used to notify the transceiver that a new FEC code needs to be used. The control processor in the optical transceiver receives the commands from the Optical Network Controller, loads the corresponding FEC module from the storage unit and reconfigures the optical transceiver without disrupting the operation of the rest of the transceiver. The library of the FEC codes that are stored in the memory units can support different code rates, block sizes and LLR-widths depending on the channel requirements in the flexible optical network. When the control processor has finished the reconfiguration of the FEC module, it notifies the optical network controller that the transceiver has been configured. While the configuration takes place the incoming packets i.e. for the receivers are temporarily stored in a buffer. When the reconfiguration is finalized, the receiver can resume the processing of the packets from the buffer using the updated LDPC code for the FEC checking.
Software-defined Optical Transceiver Reconfigurable Area

QQC(QF-C(LEFC-(DCLEF-D)PLCEDCC)P)PCC

DSP

D/A

Optical

Control Processor

Load new modules from the library based on the channel DRAM requirements

Library of FECs (code rate, block size)

[1/2, 27] [1/2, 54]

Flexible Optical Network Controller

[2/3, 27] [2/3, 54]

[3/4, 27] [3/4, 54]
…

channel requirements (channel length, BER, dispersion, etc.)

Figure 5. Dynamic reconfigurable LDPC FEC code for flexible optical transceivers.
5. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
To evaluate the performance of the system, we have implemented the QC-LDPC codes into an all-programmable FPGA board by Xilinx [10]. The programmable board contains two ARM processors (used as the control processors) and a reconfigurable area that is used to host the LDPC FEC codes. The reconfiguration of the FEC codes is performed using a high performance programming peripheral controller (PCAP) that is used to transfer the configuration file from the memory to the programmable logic area. To

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:20:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

evaluate the performance of the system, the control processor reads the configuration commands through the serial port and performs the reconfiguration by loading the configuration files from the DRAM.
Table 1 shows the reconfiguration time for different LDPC codes. The library of the FEC codes supports all the possible combinations for 1/2, 2/3 and 3/4 code rates and 27, 54 and 81 block sizes. The reconfiguration time is the time that it takes for the control processor to load the configuration file (the version of the LDPC FEC code) from the memory unit (DRAM) to the reconfigurable part of the FPGA in the optical transceiver. As can be seen, the reconfiguration time is always less than 12 ms, which means that the proposed scheme could be utilized in many optical networks, where the reconfiguration time (e.g. for the optical switches or the WSS) is in the order of a few ms.

Table 1. Reconfiguration time for the FEC.

Codeword Block

length

size

(bits)

(bits)

Code rate

Area (LUTs)

Reconfig. Time

648

27

1/2

837

4.0 ms

648

27

2/3

756

3.6 ms

648

27

3/4

675

3.2 ms

1296

54

1/2

1674

8.1 ms

1296

54

2/3

1512

7.3 ms

1296

54

3/4

1359

6.6 ms

1944

81

1/2

2511

12.1 ms

1944

81

2/3

2187

10.6 ms

1944

81

3/4

2025

9.8 ms

The main advantage of the proposed scheme is that it can be applied not only for the FEC codes but also for the dynamic reconfiguration of the DSP units and the realization of dynamic coded-modulation schemes based on the channel requirements. For example, the same architecture could be used to configure the optical node with different version of DSPs modules depending on the channel requirements (chromatic compensation, equalization, etc.).

6. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, a novel implementation of reconfigurable LDPC FEC code that can be used in the design of optical transceivers for flexible optical networks was presented. The proposed scheme can be used to support different versions of the LDPC codes by loading and configuring the required version of the FEC code at run-time. The reconfiguration time is no more than 12ms, comparable

to the reconfiguration time of optical switches, WSS and other optical components. Therefore, the proposed scheme could be deployed in flexible optical networks that require the transceivers to support different feature to meet the fluctuated application/traffic requirements (e.g. net coding gain, FEC overhead, etc.).
11. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research leading to these results is partially supported by the ASTRON project (Adaptive Software-defined Terabit Transceiver for flexible Optical Networks) with funding from the European Communitys Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/ 2007-2013] under grant agreement n. 318714.
12. REFERENCES
[1] I Tomkos, S Azodolmolky, D Careglio, E Palkopoulou, A Tutorial on the Flexible Optical Networking Paradigm: State of the Art, Trends, and Research Challenges, Proceedings of the IEEE, pp. 1-21, 2014
[2] M. Jinno, T. Ohara, Y. Sone, A. Hirano, O. Ishida, and M. Tomizawa, Elastic and Adaptive Optical Networks: Possible Adoption Scenarios and Future Standardization Aspects,IEEE Communications Magazine, October 2011
[3] P Zakynthinos, et al., Advanced Hybrid Integrated Transceivers to Realize Flexible Terabit Networking, IEEE Photonic Society News, June 2014
[4] M. Jinno, Multi-flow Optical Transponder for More Efficient Multi-layer Elastic Optical Networking, ECOC 2011
[5] Jane M. Simmons and Adel A. M. Saleh, Network Agility Through Flexible Transponders, IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 19, no. 5, 2007
[6] Brian T. Teipen, Michael H. Eiselt, Klaus Grobe, Jörg-Peter Elbers, Adaptive Data Rates for Flexible Transceivers in Optical Networks, Journal of Networks, vol. 7, no. 5, May 2012
[7] Kim Roberts, Charles Laperle, Flexible Transceivers, ECOC, We.3.A.3, 2012
[8] G. Tzimpragos, C. Kachris, D. Soudris and I. Tomkos, "A Low-complexity Implementation of QC-LDPC Encoder in Reconfigurable Logic", International Conference on Field Programmable Logic (FPL 2013), Porto, Portugal, Sep. 2013
[9] G. Tzimpragos, C. Kachris, D. Soudris and I. Tomkos, "Automatic Implementation of Low-Complexity QC-LDPC Encoders", International Workshop on Power and Timing Modeling, Optimization and Simulation, (PATMOS 2013), Karlsruhe, Germany, Sep. 2013
[10] Zynq-7000 Extensible Processing Platform Overview, In Xilinx Technical Report, DS190, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:20:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

