IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 7, JULY 2014

1131

Hardware-Oriented Construction of a Family of Rate-Compatible Raptor Codes
Hady Zeineddine, Louay M. A. Jalloul, Senior Member, IEEE, and Mohammad M. Mansour, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A family of architecture-aware Raptor codes is constructed. The proposed construction scheme is targeted to design rate-compatible structured codes that span a wide range of rates and block sizes while still having hardware-efficient decoder implementations. The codes match the corresponding fixed-rate LDPC codes in error-correcting performance, decoding convergence speed, and message-memory requirements. Three novel steps are incorporated in the scheme: 1) a new group-based design of the code source matrix; 2) an architecture-aware row splitting-after-merging technique to construct irregular precodes; and 3) structured LT row-encoding. A code instance was designed accordingly and compared to standardized LDPC codes. The error-rate performance closely matches that of LDPC, whereas the convergence speed and message count gaps are narrowed down to values between [1.1×, 1.8×] and [1.1×, 1.3×], respectively.
Index Terms—Hybrid ARQ, LDPC codes, LT codes, Raptor codes, rate-compatible codes, architecture-aware code design.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE DESIGN of rate-compatible codes has gained widespread attention, mainly due to their ease of integration with hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) schemes to enhance communication throughput. Rate-compatibility is achieved through code puncturing or extension (e.g., [1], [2]). In [3], near-capacity LDPC code (LDPCC) sequences were obtained through extension.
Raptor coding [4] can be viewed, broadly, as a subclass of LDPC code extension [5]. A Raptor code consists of a highrate precode concatenated with a rateless LT code [6]. Raptor codes are characterized by the following important features: 1) the minimum distance of a code sequence can be well approximated by characterizing the weight spectrum of its precode, 2) concatenating an increment to the encoded frame does not change the number of bit-nodes in the decoding graph, and 3) its asymptotic performance can be optimized using density evolution methods. In [7], Raptor codes were considered for HARQ schemes and shown to have superior performance to LDPCCs at low SNR.
Due to the two-code structure of Raptor codes and their distinctive encoding nature, the design of architecture-aware Raptor codes that preserve good correcting performance at short block lengths (up to few kilobits) is more challenging than the case of LDPCC construction. In [8], a hardwareoriented construction of Raptor codes was introduced. This
Manuscript received November 26, 2013; revised April 30, 2014; accepted May 2, 2014. Date of publication May 13, 2014; date of current version July 8, 2014. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini.
H. Zeineddine and M. M. Mansour are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon (e-mail: hma41@aub.edu.lb; mmansour@aub.edu.lb).
L. M. A. Jalloul is with Broadcom Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA 94086 USA (e-mail: jalloul@broadcom.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2014.2323364

letter proposes a new architecture-aware construction scheme based on [8] that achieves the following four major objectives: 1) support equally-spaced block lengths, 2) achieve LDPClike performance over a wide range of code rates, 3) enhance convergence speed of decoding, and 4) reduce the memory overhead for storing messages. To achieve these goals, three novel steps are introduced: 1) a new group-based design of the source matrix, 2) a precode construction framework that allows the construction of relatively low-rate irregular precodes, and 3) LT structured row-encoding. The overhead is a moderate increase in the complexity of check-node processing.
II. SCHEME FRAMEWORK
The first step in constructing a code instance of the proposed family is to determine the triplet (K0, K, N ), K0 being the information block size, K the LT bit-node size, and N the number of transmitted bits. The proposed construction is tailored to comply with the framework in [8], in order to preserve its hardware-oriented features. The key points of this framework are as follows: First, a K-column source matrix HB, with a fixed row weight of M , is generated from a smaller M -column matrix B, via replication in a similar manner to protograph LDPC construction (e.g. [2]). Second, row merging is applied on a K-column submatrix of HB, to obtain a regular precode parity-check matrix, HP. Third, row-splitting is applied on the rest of HB, to form the LT generating matrix HL. Such framework is primarily tailored to hardware efficiency in decoding, where both precode and LT decoding are mapped to row processing of one single regular matrix HB. Processing a row of HB involves reading M bit-to-check messages from M bitnode memory banks, producing M new check-to-bit messages (corresponding either to LT or LDPC check-nodes), and then updating the corresponding M log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). Both turbo-decoding (TDMP) or two-phase (TPMP) message passing algorithms can be applied.
The proposed construction incorporates a new three-tier scheme to generate efficient code families, both hardwarewise and performance-wise. First, a new group-based design of matrix HB, is done as detailed in Section III. The design compactly defines a Raptor code family over equally-spaced values of K. It is tailored to allow efficient sequential and quasiparallel decoder implementations that can support a wide range of values of K. Second, a wider design space of the precode is explored in terms of rate and check-degree distribution in Section IV. A new hardware-constrained criterion is set to choose the precode rate. Then, row splitting-after-merging is used to construct relatively low-rate hardware-aware irregular precodes from HP. The third tier aims to enhance the code performance at high rates, and reduce the memory requirements and average number of required decoding iterations. This is achieved by a two-step framework that consists of generalizing LT row-splitting to LT “row-encoding”, and then constraining/structuring such encoding as detailed in Section V.

1089-7798 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t0s:/2in3d:3e7x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

1132

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 7, JULY 2014

III. SOURCE MATRIX CONSTRUCTION

row merging step is crucial to increase the maximum precode

The construction of the source matrix HB, and, consequently, HP and HL, in this scheme proceeds in the following steps:
1) Define a non-abelian group (G, ·) as the direct product of the dihedral group Dn and the order-pq group Cpq as follows:

check-degree to multiples of M . In addition, it allows to vary the maximum check-degree as K increases by merely varying V . Therefore, G is constructed to be non-abelian. Second, choosing the dihedral group as a subgroup of G whose order controls |G| is motivated by the fact that dihedral groups of {Dn}n>1 have equally spaced orders, thus leading to equally spaced values of K = 2npqM .

G =Δ Dn ×Cpq = (xi ·yj, zg ·wh) | xi, yj ∈ Dn, zg, wh ∈ Cpq Dn = x, y | x2 = 1, yn = 1, x · y = y−1 · x Cpq = z, w | zp = 1, wq = 1, w · z = z2 · w
where n, p, q ∈ N. The group Dn has order |Dn| = 2n, Cpq has order |Cpq| = pq, and G has order |G| = 2n × pq. For the above relations to generate a group, the parameters n, p, q should satisfy the following: (i) p prime and q = p − 1; or p = 3 and q = 4, and (ii) n > 1. It is noteworthy that the elements of G can index any set of size 2npq. Hereafter, let K =Δ 2npqM , where M ∈ N is an arbitrary constant. 2) Construct a NR × M matrix B = [bij], bij ∈ G. 3) (Replication) Form matrix HB by replacing each entry bij by a 2npq × 2npq permutation submatrix; for each row ρ of index η ∈ G in the submatrix, the entry η · bij is set to 1. 4) (Row merging) Form the 2npq × 2npqM precode matrix HP by adding mod2 the first V 2npq-wide block-rows of HB. For the resulting row weight (i.e., precode bit node degree) of HP to be V , the corresponding entries bij in B must satisfy the condition bij = bi j, ∀ 1 ≤ i = i ≤ V , 1 ≤ j ≤ M. 5) The remaining (NR − V ) 2npq-wide block-rows of HB form the matrix HL, used to generate LT output bits (Section V).
For the Raptor graph to be 4-cycle free, the following inequalities must be satisfied by the entries of B, where each inequality is proceeded by the construction step inducing it:
3 : brj · bs−j1 = brj · bs−j1 , ∀ j = j , ∀ r, s ≥ 1 4 : brj · b−sj1 = btj · bu−j1 , ∀ 1 ≤ r, s, t, u ≤ V, 1 ≤ j, j ≤ M 5 : brj ·bs−j1 = btj ·bs−j1 ∀ 1 ≤ j = j ≤ M, ∀ 1 ≤ r, t ≤ V, s > V
For a single family of Raptor codes, the triplet (p, q, M ) is kept fixed while K = 2npqM varies (with n) in steps of 2pqM , the reason for which is clarified when discussing the architectural implications of the construction scheme.
The construction of G is motivated by several considerations. First, G is constructed to be non-abelian, because otherwise if G is abelian, the precode with parity matrix HP will include a large number of weight-2V precode codewords. An example weight-2V codeword can be found as follows: randomly pick 1 ≤ j = j ≤ M , x ∈ G; consider the 2npq bits corresponding

Architectural Implications: The third consideration is the simplification brought by the structure of (G, .) to the organization and access of the bit-node memory in the decoder. This is best, though not solely, manifested in the case of quasi-parallel architectures, where pq rows of HB are processed in one clock cycle. The memory is partitioned into M banks, each storing the posterior LLRs of 2npq consecutive bit nodes. For clarity, consider the access of messages corresponding to the submatrix of HB formed by replicating entry bji = (xb · yb , zt · wu). Each cycle, a distinct coset of Cpq in G is chosen, call it Cpq · x, x ∈ G, and the pq rows indexed by elements of the coset are processed. The messages to be read are then the posterior LLRs of the bit nodes indexed by elements of the coset Cpq · (x · bji). Then memory bank i can be organized into a 2n × pq partition, where each row of the bank stores the LLRs of the bit nodes indexed by a coset of Cpq in G. Since Cpq is a fixed-order subgroup of G, regardless of the order of G, the size of a memory row of bank i is then fixed for a Raptor family, while its count varies with n, a major simplification to the design of efficient memory implementation. Thereafter, memory access can be divided into two steps: address generation of the memory row and permutation of the pq messages read from the row. The product nature of G simplifies these two steps as explained next. Any coset of Cpq in G can be written as Cpq · (xa · ya , z0 · w0). When the rows indexed by such coset are processed, the LLRs read are for the bit nodes indexed by the elements of coset Cpq · (xa · ya , z0 · w0) · (xb · yb , zt · wu), which is a permutation by zt · wu of the coset Cpq · (xa+b · y(−1)b·a +b , z0 · w0). Memory row address generation is then reduced into two simple dihedral-related computations a + b (mod2) and (−1)b · a + b (mod n). This can be done by updating the address values obtained in the previous clock cycle, thus requiring hardware comparable in complexity to a simple incrementor modn. The second step is then done using a Cpq-dependent permutation network shown in Fig. 1. The network directs the LLRs read whose Cpq-subindex is zt · wu to the processor of the matrix row whose subindex is zt · wu · (zt · wu)−1. Since Cpq is fixed, the same permutation network can be used for all possible values of K, reducing substantially the overhead of the multi-length decoding capability on the interconnect network.
IV. PRECODE CONSTRUCTION FRAMEWORK
In the original Raptor code construction [4], the precode

to the replication of column j of B, and, among them, set exclusively the bits x · b−ij1 to 1, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ V . Similarly, consider the 2npq bits corresponding to the replication of the column j of B, and, among them, set exclusively the bits x · bi−j1 to 1, ∀ 1 ≤ i ≤ V . It can be checked that the resulting binary

rate approaches 1 and therefore its rate overhead is negligible. The precode check-nodes are then assumed to start decoding effectively when the mean of the exchanged messages becomes relatively high. For short block lengths (e.g., < 3000 bits), a high rate precode (∼1) would lead to a high number of short

vector is a weight-2V codeword. This means that row merging cycles in the code’s graph and a relatively high error-floor

results in a poor precode performance when G is abelian. The [9], thus degrading performance. Relatively low-rate regular

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:23:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZEINEDDINE et al.: HARDWARE-ORIENTED CONSTRUCTION OF A FAMILY OF RATE-COMPATIBLE RAPTOR CODES

1133

distribution is determined, the procedure of which is out of the scope of this letter. Then, a (K − K0)-row parity matrix is generated from regular matrix HP through the row splittingafter-merging step: Split each row ρ in HP into binary rows ρ1, ρ2, . . . such that ρ = ρ1 + ρ2 + · · ·, with + being addition in Z. Splitting is done according to a distribution on the space
of split-patterns that is derived from the intended check-degree
distribution. This derivation and the following splitting has a
similar procedure to the LT row-splitting in [8].

V. LT CODE CONSTRUCTION FRAMEWORK

LT output bits are generated using the matrix HL, formed as

Fig. 1. A pq-permutation induced by za · wb = (zt · wu)−1. The input message of a bit-node indexed by zi · wj is denoted by zi · wj for simplicity.

shown in step 5 of Section III. In [8], this is done through rowsplitting as follows: for every row of HL, the bits corresponding to 1-entries in the row are partitioned according to some

precodes, with rates > 0.9, were considered in [8]–[10], and the LT check-degree distribution was optimized using density evolution methods [10]. In lower rate precoding, with rates even lower than 0.9, regular LDPC precodes may not be optimal and a joint LT-LDPC degree optimization is needed. Consequently, the proposed precode construction framework consists of two steps. The first is to set a new criterion aiming at hardware efficiency besides performance, to determine the appropriate precode rate values. The second is to extend the construction in Section III to generate irregular lower rate precodes starting from a regular HP, according to some input precode check-degree distribution. This extension, called splitting-aftermerging, enables the construction of irregular precodes while preserving the underlying structural properties of HB, crucial for hardware-efficient row processing.
Hardware-Constrained Rate Criterion: The proposed criterion, heuristic in nature, seeks to reduce the minimum distance of the Raptor code under a hardware-oriented constraint. The criterion is needed to compare two possible precode rate values R0 and R0, and choose one of them. If the number of rate options considered is greater than 2, the comparison step can be applied iteratively, each time ruling out one option. Let d0, d0 be the minimum distances of the precodes with rate R0 and R0, respectively, dv, dv the respective average LT bit-node degrees, and V the average precode bit-node degree, assumed fixed across both rates. The approach compares the minimum distances of the two resulting Raptor codes, which are approximated by d0dv and d0dv, respectively. The two quantities dv and dv are related using the following simplifying constraint: the number of edges in the two respective Raptor graphs must be equal, that is (dv + V )/R0 = (dv + V )/R0. This constraint is hardware-oriented since in virtually all decoding algorithms, the operation count and memory requirements are a strong function of the edge-count, and thus the constraint approximately fixes these hardware-related figures when comparing the rate values. Thus, the condition for choosing R0 over R0 is having d0dv ≥ d0dv which is equivalent to:

distribution, and the bits in each partition are then XORed to produce one output-bit/check-node. The framework proposed here involves two steps. The first step is generalizing rowsplitting to LT row-encoding, by allowing the partitions, previously mentioned in LT row-splitting, to be overlapping. This step enables the second step, which inserts additional structure and/or constraints on the M -sized subcodes. As discussed next, the steps are targeted to 1) enhance performance at high code rates, 2) speed up convergence, and 3) reduce memory requirements. Each generated output bit is then assigned a unique value between 1 and Nmax, and for a rate R code, the bits with values < K0/R are transmitted.
Constraining/structuring LT encoding is, primarily targeted at constructing performance-efficient Raptor codes for rates close to the precode rate. By setting the rate K0/N close to K0/K, the LT code rate K/N approaches 1. Therefore, in pseudo-random LT bit generation, the number of LT checknodes in the decoding graph may be insufficient to recover the bit values within a reasonable number of iterations, even in the absence of noise. In [8], the highest-rate code obtained with comparable performance to LDPC was 2/3, with the average number of required iterations being 3× higher. To approach this problem, LT encoding must be done such that: in the absence of noise, every bit-node can be recovered by applying no more than a small number of LT-row operations described in [6]. One way to do this is to constraint row-encoding of the first 2npq rows of HL as follows: encode row ρ, such that M check-nodes are generated from the corresponding M bits, and exclusive local decoding of the resulting subcode is sufficient to retrieve the values of these M bits, in the absence of noise. The subcode graphs need not be identical among rows.
Memory Savings: In message-passing algorithms where exact check-node equations are applied, the number of stored messages is equal to the graph’s edge-count. LT row-encoding partially decouples the number of stored messages from the underlying edge count, thus reducing the required memory size as explained next. Local decoding of a subcode involves the following inputs/outputs: the inputs are M LLRs of the

d0 ≥ dv (dvr − V (1 − r))−1 d0.

corresponding M bit-nodes and the intrinsic LLRs of the corresponding check-nodes; the outputs are M LLR values. The

Since dv(dvr − V (1 − r))−1 decreases with increasing dv, it is M -word output is stored in memory to be used in the subse-

sufficient to test the inequality condition for the highest code quent iteration. However, since partitions can now overlap, the

rate of interest, corresponding to the minimum dv value.

number of edges in the subcode graph is > M .

Row Splitting-After-Merging: Following the choice of the Convergence Speed: Besides structuring, local decoding

precode rate K0/K, a corresponding precode check-degree increases the decoding convergence speed. This is illustrated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:23:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1134

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 7, JULY 2014
TABLE I AVERGAGE NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS AT FER OF ∼10−4

TABLE II MESSAGE COUNT COMPARISON: Ne, EDGE COUNT PER INFORMATION
BIT; Nm, MESSAGE COUNT PER INFORMATION BIT

Fig. 2. FER performance: Dashed curves correspond to Raptor codes, whereas solid curves correspond to LDPC. Unless otherwise stated, K0 = 1200.
in the following example of a LT code generator matrix (M = 6):

1 0

1 0

1 1

0 1

0 1

0 1

.

In decoding, each check constraint produces one extrinsic LLR value for the third bit (call these values v1 and v2, respectively). In TDMP, v1 is used in the processing of check constraint 2. On the other hand, v2 will be used in check 1 processing in the next iteration. Conversely, having these two constraints within 1 subcode implies that the processing of check-nodes 1 and 2 makes use of v2 and v1, respectively, within the same decoding iteration. This lowers the required number of decoding iterations. The number of overlaps is, however, limited when the acyclic condition is imposed on the subcode graph. This condition is motivated by the fact that the subcode local decoding is complicated by the existence of cycles.
LT row-encoding clearly increases the complexity of the check-node processing procedure described in [8]. An accurate estimation of such increase is outside the scope of this letter.

Structured LT row-encoding enhances decoding convergence speed as shown in Table I. The 3× gap reported in [8] for rate 2/3 is narrowed to 2× under TPMP decoding. Furthermore, by switching to TDMP, the average number of iterations in high-rate Raptor decoding decreases by a factor of 2.5−2.7×, compared to less than 2× for LDPC decoding. The gap is therefore narrowed further to 1.35× at rate 2/3.
The number of messages, stored in both LDPC and Raptor codes, is compared in Table II. The ratio of the LT message count to the LT edge count ranges between 0.67 and 0.75. Such reduction becomes more significant with low rates, as the LT edge count percentage of the code edge count increases. The Raptor message count, relative to LDPC, is reduced from 1.3× as reported in [8] to 1.1×, at rate 1/2. It is noteworthy that since the memory size must be equal to the highest possible message count, the most significant figure, area-wise, is that of the lowrate codes with the largest block-size.
Simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of the scheme as a framework for developing families of architectureaware Raptor codes. Further research is needed on methods to systematically set matrix B, the precode check distribution and LT subcode structures for a projected range of rates and block lengths.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS

REFERENCES

A code instance with source matrix parameters (n, p, q, M ) = (5, 3, 4, 12) is considered. Substituting (dv, V, R0, R0) by (2, 3, 0.9, 5/6), the condition d0 ≥ dv(dvr − V (1 − r))−1d0, reduces to ∼ d0 ≥ 4/3d0, and the precode rate is set to 5/6, therefore (K0, K) = (1200, 1440). Codes with rates down to 1/2 were constructed. Several LT-row subcode structures and precode row-split patterns were tried and those yielding the best correcting performance chosen. The code frame error rate (FER) performance was simulated over an AWGN channel with BPSK modulation, and compared to that of the LDPCCs defined in IEEE802.16 [11] for rates {5/6, 3/4, 2/3, 1/2}, under two-phase message passing (TPMP) decoding. The results are shown in Fig. 2. The code performance follows closely that of LDPC, unfavorably for high rates, with improving performance as the rate decreases. The LDPC waterfall curve is slightly steeper. A rate-1/2 code with K0 = 3600 was constructed using distributions on LT-row subcode structures and precode rowsplit patterns, that are extremely close to their counterparts in the code of length K0 = 1200. Its FER curve shows the general trend of steeper waterfall and shift towards capacity as K0 increases, demonstrating the scheme’s potential for application over a wide range of block lengths.

[1] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[2] S. Dolinar, “A rate-compatible family of protograph-based LDPC codes built by expurgation and lengthening,” in Proc. ISIT, Sep. 2005, pp. 1627–1631.
[3] T. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of rate-compatible protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2841–2850, Oct. 2012.
[4] O. Etesami and A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes on binary memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 2033– 2051, May 2006.
[5] T.-Y. Chen, D. Divsalar, J. Wang, and R. D. Wesel, “Protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes for rate compatibility with short blocklengths,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[6] M. Luby, “LT-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., Vancouver, BC, Canada, Nov. 2002, pp. 271–280.
[7] E. Soljanin, N. Varnica, and P. Whiting, “Punctured vs rateless codes for hybrid ARQ,” in Proc. IEEE ITW, Mar. 2006, pp. 155–159.
[8] H. Zeineddine, M. Mansour, and R. Puri, “Construction and hardwareefficient decoding of raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 2943–2960, Jun. 2011.
[9] A. Venkiah, C. Poulliat, and D. Declercq, “Rate splitting issue for finite length Raptor codes,” in Proc. IEEE Sarnoff Symp., Apr. 2008, pp. 1–5.
[10] A. Venkiah, C. Poulliat, and D. Declercq, “Analysis and design of raptor codes for joint decoding using information content evolution,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Jun. 2007, pp. 421–425.
[11] IEEE Standard for Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Std. 802.16, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:23:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

