IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
2469
A Flexible NISC-Based LDPC Decoder
Bertrand Le Gal, Christophe Jego, Member, IEEE, and Camille Leroux
Abstract—Low density parity-check (LDPC) codes, are widely
used for error correction in digital communication systems. Their
inclusion in communication standards requires to define decoders
able to support efficiently a set of codes with different code length,
code rates or code structures. In addition to this high flexibility,
these decoders still have to achieve high throughputs in order to
comply with standards requirements. In this paper, we propose
to address the problem of designing generic and efficient LDPC
decoders by using a nonsymmetric NISC-based architecture that
performs layered decoding. NISC architectures provide flexibility
with a limited loss in hardware efficiency. In addition, an auto-
mated design flow is used to efficiently assign computations to the
processing units (PU) and to map data to the memory units (MU).
Unlike previous works, the NISC decoder can include a number of
PUs that is different than the number of MUs. This nonsymmetric
characteristic provides a higher degree of freedom during the com-
putation/data assignment phase of the design flow. This whole de-
sign framework automatically generates an LDPC decoder able to
support any set of predetermined LDPC codes regardless of their
parameters. The automated nature of the design framework en-
ables to easily explore the design space for a given set of codes.
Compared to state of the art LDPC decoders, the automatically
generated decoders achieve higher hardware efficiency even for the
challenging-to-implement unstructured LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Automated design framework, flexible decoder,
LDPC codes, NISC architecture, SIMD matrix.
I. INTRODUCTION
L
OW-DENSITY Parity-Check codes [1] have become
one of the most popular forward error correction that
can achieve performance close to the channel capacity on a
variety of transmission channel models [2]. As LDPC codes
are especially attractive for digital communication standards,
they have been adopted as part of several channel coding such
as WiFi (IEEE802.11n), WiMax (IEEE802.16e), 10GBASE-T
(IEEE 802.3an) or Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB-S2, T2,
C2 and NGH). Standards usually require to support a variety of
code lengths and code rates. For instance, the WiMax standard
includes 19 code lengths and 4 code rates. This means that
the decoder should be able to decode 76 different codes. This
genericity requirement is usually made easier by a common
regular code structure that eases the design of the associated
decoder.
Manuscript received October 28, 2013; revised January 17, 2014; accepted
March 04, 2014. Date of publication March 13, 2014; date of current version
April 18, 2014. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript
and approving it for publication was Prof. Zhiyuan Yan.
The authors are with University of Bordeaux, IPB/ENSEIRB-MAT-
MECA,
IMS
Laboratory,
CNRS
UMR5218,
Talence,
France
(e-mail:
bertrand.legal@ims-bordeaux.fr; christophe.jego@ims-bordeaux.fr; camille.
leroux@ims-bordeaux.fr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2014.2311964
Unlike structured code, a unstructured code is defined by a
random matrix. The decoding performance of this code bene-
fits from its non-structured nature [2] while the hardware imple-
mentation is made difficult by its randomness. The overwhole
challenge is to define an efficient LDPC decoder architecture
able to support any set of codes with different parameters (code
length, code rate) and also different structures. Such a flexible
decoder would enable to select codes for their decoding perfor-
mance and not for their implementation-friendly structure.
A first approach to address this flexibility issue is to choose
LDPC decoder architectures based on Application Specific In-
struction Set Processor (ASIP) [3]–[7]. In these works several
codes are supported with high levels of data and instruction
parallelism. In ASIP-based LDPC decoders, a dedicated in-
struction set is devised to control a datapath consisting of
dedicated processing units (PUs) connected to
memory
units (MUs). The instruction set provides the flexibility while
the dedicated processing and memory architecture promotes
good hardware efficiency. The parallelism levels
and
are usually constrained by the structure of the codes to be
supported. For instance, for WiFi standard,
is
usually chosen because all the codes are constructed based on
sub-matrices of size 24. This means that i) these decoders can
only support a limited number of LDPC codes that have to
share a common structure, ii) the parallelism of the decoder is
not scalable. In addition, programming efficiently an ASIP is
a daunting task: scheduling computations during each clock
cycle on the overall PUs is not always feasible due to data
dependencies and memory access conflicts. ASIP designers
usually take advantage of the structure of the LDPC code to
facilitate the programming phase. However, for non-structured
codes, the scheduling/programming step is too complex to be
implemented by hand and requires some automatic tools to
schedule the computations and to generate the program. ASIP
approach is, in theory, able to process unstructured codes.
However the ASIP programming issue, coupled to the fact
that an extension to long codes is particularly challenging, has
limited these decoder designs to short length structured codes.
In [8] and [9], some No Instruction Set Computer (NISC)
based LDPC decoders are designed. Similar to instruction set
processor (ISP) architectures, a NISC compiler generates code
to control a datapath during each clock cycle. However, in-
stead of using any abstraction such as an instruction set, the
NISC compiler directly generates the control signal values of
each processing unit elements. It can thus achieve better par-
allelism level and resource utilization than conventional ISP-
based compilers. In [8], the NISC-based decoder is composed
of
and
. This architecture can be
programmed to support any kind of LDPC code. It implements
the standard message passing, also called Two-Phase Message
Passing (TPMP) scheduling.
1053-587X © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2470
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
Fig. 1. Bipartite graph representation.
In [9], a similar architecture is proposed to decode unstruc-
tured LDPC codes. The same TPMP scheduling is used but three
parallelism levels are investigated:
.
In this paper, unlike [8] and [9], we propose to study a non-
symmetric NISC architecture in which
and
are not nec-
essarily equal. The numbers
and
can be selected in order
to provide the most efficient resource usage under throughput
or hardware resource constraint. This provides a higher degree
of freedom during the computation/data assignment phase of
the design flow which keeps the PUs utilization rate high. We
also propose to overcome the limited programmability issue by
using an automated design flow that schedules the computations
on the different PUs and map the data on the different MUs.
Finally, the designed NISC-based LDPC decoder implements
layered decoding [10] which provides the same decoding per-
formance as TPMP scheduling for half the number of iterations.
This whole design framework can be used to automatically gen-
erate an LDPC decoder able to support a predetermined set of
codes under throughput/resource constraints. The hardware ef-
ficiency of the generated decoders is higher than state-of-the-art
flexible LDPC decoders even for the challenging-to-implement
unstructured LDPC codes.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the characteristics of structured and unstructured
LDPC codes are detailed. Section III reminds the LDPC de-
coding algorithm and its simplified versions. The proposed
NISC-based architectural model is described in Section IV.
Section V details the associated automated design flow.
Hardware implementation results and Bit Error Rate (BER)
performance are presented in Section VI. Finally, conclusions
are drawn in Section VII.
II. STRUCTURED AND UNSTRUCTURED LDPC CODES
A
LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a parity
check matrix H of size
rows and
columns. The
ratio
denotes the code rate. As shown in Fig. 1, an
LDPC code may be represented by a bipartite graph, also called
Tanner graph [11], in which the two types of nodes are the vari-
able nodes
and the check nodes
. In this
graph representation, the degree of a node is equal to the number
of nodes connected to it. The degrees of a variable node
and a parity check node
are denoted as
and
, re-
spectively. A code is considered regular if
and
are
Fig. 2. An illustration of structured and unstructured LDPC H matricies.
(a) WiMAX (576, 288); (b) Gallager (4000, 2000) [13].
constant for all ,
indices in the H matrix. Alternatively, an ir-
regular LDPC code does not have constant node degrees over
all rows/columns.
When designing LDPC codes for digital communication stan-
dards, the main issue is to obtain a wide range of codes in terms
of code length and code rate that have good decoding perfor-
mance. Moreover, the structure of an LDPC code should be as
regular as possible to ease the encoding and decoding processes
and thus the design of the encoder and the decoder architec-
tures. Most of the standards contain structured codes based on
quasi-cyclic QC submatrices. In Fig. 2(a), the H matrix can be
partitioned in blocks of 96
96 that can be processed over 24
processing elements [12]. Despite their hardware-friendly prop-
erties, structured codes are prone to produce Tanner graph with
short cycles. Moreover, the use of a structure limits the flexi-
bility in terms of code length and code rate.
On the other hand, unstructured/random codes enables a flex-
ible choice in parameters
and performance that achieves
the channel capacity [2]. However, the lack of structure in the
resulting H matrix increases the complexity of encoding and
decoding interleavers. For these reasons, only few works [8],
[9] address the design of decoders that can process unstructured
LDPC codes. The LDPC decoder proposed in this work sup-
ports both structured and unstructured codes.
III. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM
LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded using the Belief Prop-
agation (BP) algorithm. This algorithm operates on the bipar-
tite graph representation of the code by iteratively exchanging
messages between the variable and parity check nodes along
the edges of the graph [14]. The Min-Sum (MS) algorithm is
an approximation of the BP algorithm. It provides a significant
computational complexity reduction for a reasonable error cor-
rection performance loss. This performance degradation can be
partially compensated by using some correction factors in the
MS algorithm. The two well-known approximate MS versions
are denoted as normalized MS and offset MS [15]. Based on
these different improvements, many LDPC decoders were de-
scribed in previous papers. A review can be found in [16].
In previous works on flexible LDPC decoder design, the
TPMP scheduling is usually selected to exchange messages on
the graph. It makes PU and MU mapping easier especially for
structured codes. Counter to previous work, we have selected
the horizontal layered scheduling. It reduces the number of it-
erations by two for the same decoding performance. Moreover,
the horizontal layered approach is less complex than a vertical
layered approach for the check node processing of the MS algo-
rithm as explained in [17]. The difficult PU and MU mapping
is handled by an automated tool that assigns computations to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LE GAL et al.: A FLEXIBLE NISC-BASED LDPC DECODER
2471
PUs and maps data on MUs. In a horizontal layered schedule,
the check nodes are processed sequentially and the variable
nodes are directly updated by the corresponding check-to-vari-
able messages. The chosen horizontal layered offset Min-Sum
decoding algorithm is described in Algorithm 1. It is composed
of two main steps:
and
.
Algorithm 1: Horizontal Layered Offset Min-Sum Algorithm
init
,
,
and
,
repeat
for all j do
STEP
for all
do
Variable to parity check message
processing
Parity check node
update
end for
STEP
for all
do
Parity check to variable message
processing
if
otherwise
Variable node
update
end for
end for
until
The decoded bits are estimated by
is the channel observation related to the received bit
in
log-likelihood ratio (LLR) format.
denotes the a posteriori
LLR of the variable node
during the iteration
in the case of a
BPSK modulation over an AWGN channel of variance
.
corresponds to the LLR of the parity check node
during the
iteration .
and
denote the messages that are sent from
variable node
to parity check node
and from parity check
node
to variable node , respectively.
is the set of all
the parity check nodes that are connected to the variable node .
is the set of all the variable nodes that are connected to the
parity check node .
is the set of variable nodes that are
connected to the parity check node
except the variable node .
Fig. 3. NISC-based LDPC decoder architecture.
is the correction factor that is used in the offset Min-Sum ver-
sion in order to improve the accuracy of the extrinsic messages.
IV. NISC-BASED LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE
An alternative to ASIP architecture is NISC architecture [18].
Similar to ISP-based architectures, a NISC generates signals to
control a datapath during each clock cycle. However, instead
of using any abstraction such as instruction set, the NISC con-
troler stores control values in a ROM and directly send them to
each resource (PUs, MUs, interconnection network, etc). The
absence of instruction set makes the control of the datapath more
flexible. Indeed, in a NISC, at each clock cycle, any hardware re-
source in the architecture can be activated independantly. NISC-
based architectures can thus achieve better resource utilization
than conventional instruction-set based processors. This high
hardware efficiency comes at the cost of reduced programma-
bility. An automated tool is then required to generate the content
of the control ROM (Cf Section V). In this section, we describe
the architecture of a NISC-based LDPC decoder. This architec-
ture is automatically generated by the design flow described in
Section V.
A. Top Level Architecture
The architectural model is composed of a NISC controller as-
sociated with a homogeneous SIMD matrix as detailed in Fig. 3.
The SIMD matrix is a specialized form of parallel machine,
where
Processing Units (PUs) and
Memory Units (MUs)
process and store independent data (LLRs
), respectively. As
opposed to previous works, the proposed SIMD matrix has a
nonsymmetric structure in which the number of PUs and the
number of MUs may differ
. Each PU includes ded-
icated processing logic and a register file to store local data
(
messages). An interconnection network is implemented
to manage the exchange of LLRs
. This interconnection net-
work performs the interleave
and deinterleave
functions.
These functions enable to route messages between the variable
nodes and the check nodes. Finally, a system interface monitors
the data exchanges with the outside world.
B. Processing Unit Architecture
The PU architecture is detailed in Fig. 4. It is composed of
two cascaded blocks devised to operate in pipeline mode. These
blocks correspond to the two steps
and
of Algorithm 1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2472
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
Fig. 4. Processing Unit architecture.
Since a horizontal layered decoding strategy is adopted, a PU
performs the calculations for a parity check node
.
The first block is in charge of processing the variable to parity
check message
. Then,
and
are cal-
culated from the message
that corresponds to the variable
node .
clock periods are thus necessary to compute the
soft value
of the parity check node
in function of its
degree
.
During the second step
, the parity check to variable mes-
sage
of the parity check node
is updated. This task is
performed thanks to the sign
and the two minimum
values associated to the absolute value
. The two min-
imum values that were previously computed in the first block.
This message is then stored in the register file allocated to the
PU as shown in Fig. 4. The
value of the variable node
is also updated so that the new parity check to variable mes-
sage
is subtracted from
. In the second block,
clock periods are also necessary to complete all the computa-
tions. Moreover, some registers and a FIFO component are used
in order to properly synchronize the two stage pipelines of the
PU architecture.
C. Interleaver/De-Interleaver Network
The exchange of
between PUs and MUs is the major bot-
tleneck of the proposed NISC architecture. More specifically,
two check nodes may need to concurrently access to the same
, resulting in a memory conflict. An illustration of the check
node computation mapping on the PUs is provided in Fig. 5.
Check node computations called
are affected to some PUs
when there are no data dependencies between the nodes. For ex-
ample in Fig. 5(a), the check node computations
that are bound during cycles 0 to 3, do not share variable node
connections. Moreover, variable node soft values involved in
are stored in distinct MUs such that there are no
accesses conflict on memory banks. Fig. 5(b) shows the MUs ac-
cessed during each clock cycle for providing the required data to
the PUs. According to the node dependencies and memory ac-
cess conflicts, some PUs may be unassigned during some clock
cycles. But, in order to maintain the SIMD computation model
during the overall decoding process, useless computations using
dummy data are added (black boxes in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b)). As
Fig. 5. Execution of decoding computations on PUs and memory accesses in
MUs. (a) PU computation scheduling during clock cycles (Cx: check node x
centric computation); (b) R/W memory accesses during clock cycles (Rx: read
in RAMx, Wy: write in RAMy).
Fig. 6. NISC controller architecture.
mentioned in Section IV-B, steps
and
are pipelined and
can then be performed in parallel.
In order to guarantee data transfers, a well-known solution
consists in employing interconnection networks. A review about
this technique can be found in [19]. In the previous sub-section,
we have introduced a homogeneous SIMD matrix including
PUs and
MUs
. In order to handle the message ex-
changes between MUs and PUs, a multi-stage interconnection
network architecture based on a Benes topology is used. This
network type [20] is suitable for
to
permutations. It guar-
antees data transfers where
paths exist for each source/des-
tination couple. Moreover, the latency associated to a Benes
topology is constant and corresponds to the network diameter.
The conflicts are avoided only if all sources have different des-
tinations. Unfortunately, this constraint is not included in the
design process of standardized LDPC codes. Consequently, the
PU computations have to be scheduled to process LLR values
without any MU access conflict. Previous works such as [21]
[22], proposed methods to map the data into different MUs
without access conflict. In our case, the mapping of LLR values
in the
MUs is not constrained. This mapping is just an infor-
mation that has to be taken into account during the scheduling
of the PU executions. This is further explained in Section V-B.
D. NISC Controller Architecture
The controller of a NISC architecture drives all the control
signals of the homogeneous SIMD matrix during each clock
cycle. Fig. 6 detailed the components included in the controller
architecture. It has a fixed template and is composed of a se-
quencer, two address generators, a logic block and three ROM
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LE GAL et al.: A FLEXIBLE NISC-BASED LDPC DECODER
2473
Fig. 7. Automated design flow for the generation of the LDPC decoder.
memories. Two memories contain the control signal values for
the LLR MUs and the interleaver/de-interleaver network. The
control signal values for the PUs are directly generated via logic
from the sequencer.
V. AUTOMATED DESIGN FLOW
A. Introduction of the Design Flow
In addition to the NISC architecture, we propose an auto-
mated design flow depicted in Fig. 7. This complete flow gen-
erates the NISC-based decoder (SIMD matrix, controller, inter-
connexion network) and the control signals to be stored in the
control ROM. The process is constrained by the parity check
matrix of the LDPC code in order to take the data dependency
into account. The design flow can be constrained in several way.
We first describe the speed-constrained-flow in which the target
throughput and clock frequency have to be specified. Let us re-
call that, counter to previous NISC-based LDPC decoders, the
number of PUs and the number MUs are not necessarely the
same. This nonsymmetric characteristic provides more flexi-
bility on the parallelism degree which can then be adapted to
the throughput constraint. The different steps of the design flow
are illustrated by a pedagogical example given in Fig. 8.
The first step of the design flow is the analysis of the parity
check matrix of the LDPC code. It determines the degrees
and
of each variable node
and parity check
node
, respectively. The maximum parallelism level of
the SIMD matrix is also estimated. This information associated
to the Tanner graph representation of the LDPC code is used
to build a check node dependency graph. The check node
Fig. 8. Illustration of the scheduling-binding methodology on a pedagogical
example. (a) Tanner’s graph; (b) check node dependency graph; (c) scheduling
result; (d) mapping on PU.
dependency graph is composed of nodes
that represent
check node computations. Each node
is a cluster of a check
node
from the Tanner graph together with its associated
variable nodes. For example, node
in Fig. 8(b) is a cluster
that is composed of the nodes
. An edge
that connects the nodes
and
represents a variable node
dependency. Due to the horizontal layered decoding algorithm
constraints, connected nodes e.g.
and
cannot be executed
in parallel or in two consecutive stages. Thus, node
has to
wait that: (a)
computation is done and (b) variable nodes
that are shared between
and
are updated.
On the other hand, the speed constraints (throughput and
clock frequency) are used to estimate the required parallelism
levels for processing and memory parts:
and
. The
MUs are employed to store
LLRs. This means that each
MU contains
LLRs. The MU data assignment is per-
formed row-wise or column-wise depending on the designer
specification. These two data placements were preferred to
more complex methods due to their low cost in terms of adress
generation resources. However, this regular data assignment
introduces an additional constraint for the scheduling-binding
tasks because two conflicting values may be stored in a same
MU.
Then, the check node dependency graph is annotated with
memory mapping informations which results in a memory-con-
strained graph (Cf Fig. 8(b)). This graph is then used to
schedule the processing on
PUs that are available. The
scheduling step is performed in a way that: i) no data de-
pendency exists between check node computations that are
executed in parallel or in consecutive macro-clock cycles1
ii) MU accesses inside macro-clock cycles are conflict free
(no more than one MU access per macro-clock cycle). The
1A macro-clock cycle is equal to
consecutive clock cycles. A check
node computation and the variable node update require one macro-clock cycle,
respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2474
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
scheduling algorithm is detailed in Section V-B. In order to
maintain the SIMD computation model during the overall
decoding process, useless computations using dummy data
are added (black nodes in Fig. 8(d)). Finally, the scheduled
graph is exploited to generate the VHDL files describing the
architecture and the control signals to be stored in the ROM.
B. Scheduling and Binding Algorithm
The pseudo-code of the proposed scheduling and binding al-
gorithm is given in Algorithm 2. It aims at scheduling every
to a PU at a given macro-cycle.
From the CN dependency graph, a list of incompatible CN
couples called
is first built (Line 1). This list
contains the CN couples that share at least one VN, making
then unsuitable for a scheduling on the same macro-cycle or
on two consecutive macro-cycles. Moreover, two CN lists
are initialized
to store the CN computations that have been scheduled during
previous macro-cycles. These two lists are used for the CN
conflict management (Lines 2–3).
Then, for each macro-cycle
, the scheduling and binding
process (Line 5–45) is repeated until all CN computations are
scheduled. The first task consists in creating a list
that
contains the CN computations that are available for scheduling
(Line 6–8). For macro-cycle
,
is composed of all the un-
scheduled CN waiting for scheduling excepted the ones that
have data dependency with CN scheduled during macro-cycles
and
. The list
is then sorted according to a
priority function (Line 9).
The priority function sorts CN nodes in
list according to
the number of unscheduled CN nodes that are linked to them.
The CN nodes having the highest number of linked nodes that
are unscheduled have the highest priority (sorted at the begin-
ning of the list). This ordering technique reduces the algorithm
run-time. Finally the list
that stores the scheduled
CN nodes during the macro-cycle
is initialized (Line 11).
For each available PU in the architecture, a CN computation
to be executed is searched (Line 13). The CNs in the
list
are selected (Line 17) in decreasing priority order. Currently
evaluated CN is named
. The compatibility of
with previ-
ously scheduled CN in the current macro-cycle
is evaluated (Line 18). If there exists data dependency with at
least one CN in
,
is discarded and the process
moves to the next
in the
list (Line 19–20). Otherwise if
no data dependency exists, memory access conflicts are eval-
uated (Line 21). This step searches a solution to access MUs
according to memory access required by
compu-
tations. If no solution exists,
is discarded and move to the
next
value in the
list (Line 22–23). Otherwise,
is se-
lected as
for being scheduled in macro-cycle
on
.
The CN search process is stopped (Line 26), and the decision
is saved in the
list (Lines 34–35). Node
is re-
moved from
and
lists (Lines 36–37). As
long as there exists PUs that does not have CN computations to
execute at macro-cycle
, the process is iterated (Line 13).
In case the overall CN in
have been evaluated and no
ready to schedule node has been identified
, some
PUs are scheduled and bound to perform fake computations
(Lines 30–31). Then, the next macro-cycle can be processed.
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF GALLAGER LDPC CODES [13]
TABLE II
IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF LDPC DECODERS
ONTO A XILINX FPGA (XC6VLX240T). THE
DATA RATES ARE OBTAINED FOR 20
DECODING ITERATIONS
TABLE III
IMPLEMENTATION RESULT ESTIMATIONS OF LDPC DECODERS FOR AN ASIC
TECHNOLOGY (65 nm FROM STMICROELECTRONICS). THE DATA RATES ARE
OBTAINED FOR 20 DECODING ITERATIONS
The combined scheduling and binding process ends when all
CN computations are assigned to a PU and during a macro-
cycle.
Proposed scheduling and binding algorithm is based on
heuristics that have a polynomial complexity. This approach
provides a suboptimal solution compare to one that would
be obtained using a systematic enumeration of all candidate
solutions. This choice was made to guarantee a reasonable time
execution to schedule and bind largest frames from DVB-S2
standard.2 Moreover, as demonstrated in the experiment sec-
tion, solution efficiency is quite high. By using the proposed
approach the PU usage rate are higher than 90% most of the
time (as shown in Tables II and III).
C. Architectural Flexibility
Speed-Constrained Decoder: The design flow described in
the previous section enables to generate a NISC-based decoder
2Runtime is lower than 2 minutes on a laptop computer.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LE GAL et al.: A FLEXIBLE NISC-BASED LDPC DECODER
2475
for any LDPC code, regardless of its structure, code length or
code rate. The generated decoder has a nonsymmetric struc-
ture
and is designed to achieve a target throughput
specified by the designer.3 The framework enables a great de-
sign-time flexibility since it only takes a few seconds to gen-
erate a fully functionnal architecture. This means that one can
generate a variety of decoders with different speed constraints
in order to estimate the hardware cost of each decoder. It facil-
itates the design space exploration.
Resource-Constrained Decoder: The design flow also en-
ables to map a code to a fixed architecture: The designer can
define
and
values so that an LDPC code is scheduled and
bound on a predetermined architecture. The design flow gen-
erates the content of the control ROM according to the fixed
numbers of PUs and MUs. One should notice, that the decoding
of any LDPC code can be mapped on a fixed NISC-based archi-
tecture as long as the target decoder has a sufficient amount of
memory (MUs and registers in the PUs).
Dynamic Multi-Codes Decoder: Finally, the design flow is
able to generate a decoder that changes the supported LDPC
code at run-time. To do so, the design flow first generates one
decoder per code, then pick up the most constrained SIMD ma-
trix with the highest
value and the highest code length
. This
selected SIMD matrix can support all the codes included in the
LDPC code set. The generated controller contains one ROM per
code. At run-time, switching from one ROM to another one en-
ables to change the supported LDPC code. Alternatively, the
ROM may be replaced by a RAM so that the configuration can
be loaded dynamically from outside the decoder.4
This great flexibility comes from the association of i) the scal-
able NISC architecture that can be finely tuned to provide hard-
ware efficient architectures and ii) the automated design flow
that schedules and binds the decoding of any LDPC code of the
NISC architecture. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
time in the literature that both are proposed.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Hardware Implementation of NISC-Based LDPC Decoders
for Unstructured Codes
Designing NISC architectures for decoding unstructured
LDPC codes is a challenging issue. First, we use unstructured
codes to show that the proposed design framework is inde-
pendent of the code structure. Five Gallager LDPC codes are
selected. The code length
,
,
, the density of H and the
number of messages of these five LDPC codes are summarized
in Table I. The different node degrees and the message numbers
3The objective of the proposed compilation framework is to optimize the
number
of PUs for a given parallelism level
. Indeed, the scheduling-
binding of the PU executions is performed concurrently in order to take into
account the memory mapping. Thus,
, with
, PUs are allocated in
the LDPC decoder (PU that has no computation bound due to memory access
conflicts or data dependencies are removed).
4If RAM memories are used, the decoder becomes fully flexible at runtime.
Indeed, it is possible to first generate memory content using the compilation
framework under NISC architecture constraint for a new LDPC code. By this
way, the architecture is reprogramed to support the new LDPC code. The only
limitation comes from the NISC memory deeps that has to be at least equals to
the new LDPC code requirements.
Fig. 9. BER performance of the five Gallager codes.
directly lead to complex interconnections between MUs and
PUs and a large amount of memory, respectively.
In all experimentations, the following quantization scheme
was selected:
• 6 bits for
: (3,3)
• 8 bits for
: (3,5)
• 6 bits for
: (3,3)
This choice was performed to achieve a good trade-off
between hardware complexity and decoding performance. The
automated design flow was applied to generate five NISC-based
LDPC decoders dedicated to the decoding of the five selected
unstructured codes of Table I. The different architectures were
synthesized under a throughput constraint. They aim to prove
that our decoder architectures can achieve a throughput of
30 Mbps even if unstructured LDPC codes are considered.
The generated architectures were implemented on two targets:
a Xilinx Virtex6 FPGA (LX240T) and an ASIC technology
(65 nm from STMicroelectronics). Characteristics of the five
decoders are summarized in Table II and Table III for FPGA
and ASIC targets, respectively. The clock frequencies are fixed
to 100 MHz and 300 MHz for FPGA and ASIC technologies,
respectively. The implementation objective was to find the
parallelism level required to reach a throughput of 30 Mbps
with 20 decoding iterations. The PU utilization rate of each
decoder is greater than 88% which demonstrates the efficiency
of the proposed design approach.
Moreover, in order to fully validate the designed NISC
LDPC decoders, BER performance measures were carried out.
The five LDPC decoders were implemented on an experimental
setup including a computer associated with the Virtex-6 FPGA
ML605 evaluation kit. The LDPC encoder and the Additive
White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel are emulated on the
computer. After being truncated and rounded, LLRs
are sent
to the FPGA board through an Ethernet interface.
Fig. 9 compares the floating-point decoding simulation per-
formance with the fixed-point implemented decoders. For each
of the five investigated LDPC codes, the BER performance is
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2476
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
TABLE IV
HARDWARE COMPLEXITY AND THROUGHPUT COMPARISONS
WITH BEUSCHEL’S LDPC DECODER
plotted as a function of the SNR. For all the LDPC codes, the
decoding process uses the offset Min-Sum algorithm with 20
iterations.5 The NISC decoder prototypes show similar perfor-
mance when compared to floating-point simulation models. It
means that no degradation in terms of BER performance is in-
troduced by the decoder design and its implementation.
B. Comparisons With Previous Works
This sub-section compares the proposed NISC LDPC de-
coders with previous works related to unstructured LDPC
codes decoding. As previously mentioned in this paper, only
a few studies about the design of decoders for unstructured
LDPC codes can be found in the literature. To the best of
our knowledge, only works in [9] and [8] provide general
statements required for a fair comparison with the literature.
Comparison With Beuschel’s LDPC Decoder: In [9], a flex-
ible LDPC decoder architecture that can decode any structured
or unstructured LDPC code is detailed. This decoder architec-
ture has been implemented onto an FPGA device. The estima-
tion of the throughput is provided for different LDPC codes.
These throughputs were evaluated for a decoder architecture
with a degree of parallelism of at least 16, a clock frequency
of 74 MHz and an average number of 15 iterations per code-
word. The high flexibility of our approach allows us to generate
NISC-based LDPC decoders with constraints similar to [9]. For
a fair comparison of the results, generated decoders were con-
strained to 8 decoding iterations. Indeed, the horizontal layered
decoding algorithm implemented in the proposed architectures
converges two times faster than the TPMP algorithm used in [9].
Two times less iterations are thus required to achieve similar
BER performance as demonstrated by Monte-Carlo simulation
and FPGA prototype BER measurements.
Table IV provides a comparison in terms of hardware com-
plexity and throughput between the two approaches for two
unstructured LDPC codes:
and
. Decoders
and
were generated in such way that they can reach through-
puts similar to those achieved in [9] for LDPC codes
and
.
Note that decoders
and
achieve throughputs sim-
ilar to [9] with only 3 PUs and 3 MUs. On the other hand,
and
decoders were generated with a parallelism similar
to Beuschel’s decoders. The resulting NISC decoders demon-
strate a five times throughput improvement. These results show
that the NISC-based architecture makes a more efficient use of
processing and memory resources in comparison with [9].
Comparison With Masera’s LDPC Decoder: In [8], a 32-PU
version of a flexible LDPC decoder was synthesized and
5Using 20 decoding iterations generate slight performance degradations com-
pared to 50 iterations. They are less than 0.1 dB at
. It offers a
tradeoff between BER performance and computational complexity.
TABLE V
HARDWARE COMPLEXITY AND THROUGHPUT COMPARISONS
WITH MASERA’S LDPC DECODER
: a scaling factor equal to 4 has been applied for the comparison.
Fig. 10. BER performance comparisons between proposed decoder architec-
tures
and previous works for a given throughput constraint.
mapped onto a 130 nm CMOS standard-cell technology.6 This
version only supports the code
. Throughput is reported for
a 245 MHz clock frequency and 8 decoding iterations. Similar
experimentations were performed with decoder architectures
based on the proposed NISC architectural model.
ASIC logic syntheses were performed using Synopsys De-
sign Compiler tool with 65 nm STMicroelectronics standard-
cell library. For a fair comparison, working frequency was fixed
to 245 MHz. However, the designed decoders can achieve fre-
quencies of up to 300 MHz without additional hardware cost for
a 65 nm STMicroelectronics standard-cell library. Experimental
results are summarized in Table V.
First, a decoder
that includes
and
was generated. It reaches 54.8 Mbps which is 1.43
times higher than the throughput achieved with Masera’s LDPC
decoder. The average utilization rate of the PUs and the MUs is
quite low (22%) due to the data dependencies and the memory
access conflicts which result from the lack of structure of the
LDPC code. 12 PUs of the generated decoder
were never
used due to the high data dependencies. It was then possible to
remove these useless PUs without affecting the throughput. The
utilization rate is then increased from 22% to 37%. Note that the
number of MUs was not optimized in order to keep a fait com-
parison with [8].
6Note that no information about the semiconductor foundry was given by the
authors.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LE GAL et al.: A FLEXIBLE NISC-BASED LDPC DECODER
2477
TABLE VI
ASIP AND NISC IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF LDPC DECODERS ONTO A XILINX FPGA (XC6VLX240T).
THE DATA RATES ARE OBTAINED FOR 20 DECODING ITERATIONS
Secondly, a NISC decoder that processes several frames in
parallel was implemented in order to reach high throughput.
This decoder
processes 4 independent frames at the
same time. In this configuration, the number of PU increased up
to 28. The memory depth of the MUs is 4 times higher but the
register file depth in the PUs is only 2 times higher. Throughput
achieved by the decoder
is equal to 148.2 Mbps. This
improvement is mainly due to a higher PU usage rate which
reaches 74%.
Finally, a low cost hardware decoder architecture
was
designed to achieve the throughput of Masera’s LDPC decoder.
The objective was to reduce the number of PU and MU ele-
ments. For a 31 Mbps throughput constraint, a decoder that is
only composed of 6 MUs and 5 PUs was implemented. In this
configuration, the average utilization rate of the PUs is equal to
89%.
A comparison in terms of area is also given in Table V. Note
that a scaling factor of 4 was applied to our decoder area esti-
mations to compare implementation results obtained with two
different ASIC technologies. Gains of 2.2, 1.75 and 9.7 were
observed in favor of
,
and
decoders in
comparison with [8].
BER Performance Comparisons: NISC LDPC decoders can
achieve higher throughputs than [8], [9] for a similar parallelism
and lower complexity. One can then increase the iteration num-
bers of the NISC decoders
while keeping the throughput
equivalent to [8], [9]. The number of decoding iterations directly
impacts the BER performance of an LDPC decoder. Thus, 5
times more decoding iterations can be executed by the decoders
in comparison with Masera’s decoder and Beuschel’s de-
coders for a same throughput constraint. The enhanced decoding
performance introduced by the additional iterations can be ob-
served in the Fig. 10: Three sets of comparisons are represented:
• Masera’s decoder versus proposed decoder
dedi-
cated to Gallager LDPC code
with a throughput con-
straint of 30 Mbps.
• Beuschel’s decoder versus proposed decoder
ded-
icated to Gallager LDPC code
with a throughput con-
straint of 6 Mbps.
• Beuschel’s decoder versus proposed decoder
ded-
icated to Gallager LDPC code
with a throughput con-
straint of 5 Mbps.
The decoder
outperforms Masera’s decoder by more
than 1 dB if the BER is less than
. Moreover, decoders
and
outperform Beuschel’s decoders by about
0.3 and 0.4 dB at BER of
, respectively. These experi-
mental results demonstrate the efficiency of the LDPC decoders
based on the NISC architectural model.
C. Comparison With LDPC-Only ASIP Decoder
In [23], a flexible LDPC decoder architecture that can decode
any structured LDPC code is presented. This flexible decoder
architecture having a symmetric datapath
, based on a
soft-core processor was implemented onto an FPGA device. Ex-
periments were performed with this ASIP architecture to com-
pare its performances with our NISC architectural model.
Table VI provides a comparison in terms of hardware com-
plexity and throughput between the two approaches for unstruc-
tured LDPC codes. For each Gallager LDPC code, two decoders
were generated: one ASIP-based and one NISC-based. Since
ASIP architecture requires that
, the same constraint was
applied to the generation of the NISC decoder. However, one
should notice that some PUs of the NISC decoder only perform
fake computations due to data dependencies. These PUs could
be removed without affecting the throughput. All decoders were
synthetized using the Synopsys Synplify and Xilinx ISE 14.2
tools. The working frequency was fixed at 100 MHz for the
overall decoders. Due to the lower working frequency achieved
by ASIP based decoders after place & route, their decoding
throughput is about 10% lower. Concerning the hardware com-
plexity, the NISC-based designs consume about 20% less FPGA
slices and 20% to 40% less memory blocks.
These experimentations demonstrate that: (a) removing the
soft-core processor from the ASIP decoder architecture and
(b) enabling a nonsymmetric datapath
provides no-
ticeable improvements on hardware complexity and decoding
throughput.
D. Comparison With LDPC-Only/LDPC-Turbo ASIP
Decoders
In [4], [24] a flexible ASIP decoder architectures that can de-
code any kind of QC-LDPC codes is proposed. Other works
[25]–[28] investigated more complex architectures that can de-
code both QC-LDPC codes or turbocodes. As these ASIP archi-
tectures: (a) are able to decode multiple FEC standards (b) are
limited to decode QC-LDPC codes; it is very difficult to make
a fair comparison with our approach.
In order to provide an as fair as possible evaluation of
the performance of the proposed NISC approach, we gen-
erated decoders that supports the same LDPC standards
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2478
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
TABLE VII
COMPARISON WITH MULTI-MODE ASIP-BASED SOLUTIONS
(IEEE 802.11e and IEEE 802.11n) with as closed as pos-
sible throughput. However, throughput is proportionnal to
the decoder working frequency which is heavily impacted
by the ASIC technology. To enable fair comparisons, we
have designed a NISC decoder targeting an identical nor-
malized throughput. The normalized throughput was com-
puted
with
,
the reference design
throughput and
the reference design working fre-
quency. Note that 300 MHz is the working frequency of NISC
architectures on our 65 nm technology. Data fixed-point format
used is identical to related work ones, except for comparison
with
that do not provide such information.7
In order to compare the hardware complexity of the de-
coders, a normalized area occupation is included in Table VII,
, where
is the total area and
is the technology process of the related work. ASIP solutions
named
and
are LDPC-only ASIP architectures. These
ASIP that supports QC-only LDPC codes were designed to
support Wifiand WiMax standard requirements. Equivalent
NISC-based solutions were designed. As shown in Table VII,
throughputs achieved by NISC decoder are closed to the nor-
malized one. In these conditions, hardware complexities of the
NISC decoders are about 10% to 30% lower. ASIP solutions
to
support QC-LDPC and turbocodes. As shown in
Table VII, their hardware complexities are much higher that
NISC based solutions. However, these architectures support
both LDPC and turbocodes. This acknowledgement makes
quite impossible an evaluation of the NISC decoder efficiency
because its NISC-based PUs do not enable Turbo decoding
operations.
E. Comparison With GPU Decoders
A final comparison is provided in Table VIII. This table
compares throughput performance achieved by the proposed
architectural solution composed of
PUs working at 100 MHz
for different LDPC codes. To enable performance comparisons
with GPU devices that are massively SIMD architectures, we
applied a metric named TNDC (Throughput under Normalized
Decoding Cost) introduced in [29]. This value is expressed in
bit per second per processing unit per kiloHertz. TDNC and
7In this comparison, a 6-bits per message, 8-bits per variable format was used.
TABLE VIII
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED NISC DECODER VERSUS
GPU-BASED DECODERS
throughput results show that the proposed approach clearly out-
perform the overall previous implementation GPU solutions.
The gain is mainly due to the PU design but also the high usage
rate of the different PUs.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, LDPC decoders based on a NISC architectural
model are presented. The decoder architecture can be used for
decoding structured and quasi-cycle LDPC codes but also un-
structured LDPC codes. The architectural model is composed
of a controller associated with a homogeneous SIMD matrix.
Moreover, a complete automated design flow was defined to au-
tomatically generate the SIMD matrix, the memory mapping,
the PU execution specification and the NISC controller param-
eters. As a consequence, LDPC decoders dedicated to a specific
LDPC code or a set of LDPC codes compliant to one or more
digital communication standards can be automatically gener-
ated. Implementation results and measured BER performance
demonstrate the potential of proposed LDPC decoder architec-
tures in comparison with previous works on flexible channel de-
coders.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. IT, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On
the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the
Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb.
2001.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LE GAL et al.: A FLEXIBLE NISC-BASED LDPC DECODER
2479
[3] L. Dinoi, R. Martini, G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “ASIP de-
sign for partially structured LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 42, no.
18, pp. 1048–1049, Aug. 2006.
[4] M. Alles, T. Vogt, and N. Wehn, “FlexiChaP: A reconfigurable ASIP
for convolutional, turbo, LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp.
Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics, Sep. 2008, pp. 84–89.
[5] X. Zhang, Y. Tian, J. Cui, Y. Xu, and Z. Lai, “An multi-rate LDPC
decoder based on ASIP for DMB-TH,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf.
ASIC (ASICON), Oct. 20–23, 2009, pp. 995–998.
[6] S. Kunze, E. Matus, and G. Fettweis, “ASIP decoder architecture for
convolutional and LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits
Syst. (ISCAS), May 24–27, 2009, pp. 2457–2460.
[7] F. Naessens, A. Bourdoux, and A. Dejonghe, “A flexible ASIP de-
coder for combined binary and non-binary LDPC codes,” in Proc. 17th
IEEE Symp. Commun. Veh. Technol. (SCVT’10), Benelux, Enschede,
The Netherlands, Nov. 24–25, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[8] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible
LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no.
6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[9] C. Beuschel and H.-J. Pfleiderer, “FPGA implementation of a flexible
decoder for long LPDC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Field Programmable
Logic Appl., Sep. 8–10, 2008, ser. (FPL’08), pp. 185–190.
[10] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered
decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process.
Syst. (SIPS), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[11] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[12] T. Brack, M. Alles, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core
for WiMax 802.16e LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. 17th IEEE Int.
Symp. Pers., Indoor, Mobile Radio Commun., Helsinki, Sweden, Sep.
11–14, 2006, pp. 1–5.
[13] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse ma-
trices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 29–Jul. 4, 1997.
[14] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the
sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp.
498–519, Feb. 2001.
[15] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved
BP-based algorithms for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.
6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[16] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, J. Tousch, and J.-L. Danger, “Generic de-
scription and synthesis of LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2084–2091, Nov. 2007.
[17] M. Li, C. A. Nour, C. Jego, and C. Douillard, “Design and FPGA
prototyping of a bit-interleaved coded modulation receiver for the
DVB-T2 standard,” presented at the IEEE Workshop Signal Process.
Syst. (SiPS’10), San Francisco, CA, USA, Oct. 6–8, 2010.
[18] M. Reshadi and D. Gajski, “A cycle-accurate compilation algorithm for
custom pipelined datapaths,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE/ACM/IFIP Int. Conf.
Hardware/Software Codesign Syst. Synthesis (CODES+ISSS’05),
2005, pp. 21–26.
[19] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible
LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no.
6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[20] V. E. Benes, Mathematical Theory of Connecting Networks and Tele-
phone Traffic.
New York: Academic, 1965.
[21] A. Tarable, S. Benedetto, and G. Montorsi, “Mapping interleaving laws
to parallel turbo and LDPC decoder architectures,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2002–2009, Sep. 2004.
[22] C. Chavet and P. Coussy, “A memory mapping approach for parallel
interleaver design with multiples read and write accesses,” in Proc.
2010 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 30–Jun. 2, 2010,
pp. 3168–3171.
[23] B. Le Gal and C. Jego, “Design of an ASIP LDPC decoder compliant
with digital communication standards,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal
Process. Syst. (SiPS), Oct. 2012, pp. 19–24.
[24] F. Naessens, B. Bougard, S. Bressinck, L. Hollevoet, P. Raghavan,
L. Van der Perre, and F. Catthoor, “A unified instruction set pro-
grammable architecture for multi-standard advanced forward error
correction,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Process. Syst., Oct.
2008, ser. (SiPS), pp. 31–36.
[25] P. Murugappa, R. Al-Khayat, A. Baghdadi, and M. Jezequel, “A flex-
ible high throughput multi-ASIP architecture for LDPC and turbo de-
coding,” in Proc. Design, Automation Test in Eur. Conf. Exhibition,
Mar. 2011, ser. (DATE), pp. 1–6.
[26] C. Condo, M. Martina, and G. Masera, “VLSI implementation of a
multi-mode turbo/LDPC decoder architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1441–1454, 2013.
[27] G. Gentile, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “A multi-standard flexible
turbo/LDPC decoder via ASIC design,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo
Codes and Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 6–10, 2010, ser.
(ISTC), pp. 294–298.
[28] Y. Sun and J. R. Cavallaro, “Unified decoder architecture for LDPC/
turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., 2008, ser.
(SiPS), pp. 13–18.
[29] Y. Ying, K. You, L. Zhou, H. Quan, and X. Zeng, “A pure software
LDPC decoder on a multi-core processor platform with reduced inter-
processor communication cost,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst.
(ISCAS), 2012, pp. 2609–2612.
[30] G. Wang, M. Wu, Y. Sun, and J. R. Cavallaro, “GPU accelerated
scalable parallel decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Asilomar
Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 6–9, 2011, pp.
2053–2057.
[31] C.-C. Chang, Y.-L. Chang, M.-Y. Huang, and B. Huang, “Accelerating
regular LDPC code decoders on GPUs,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observations Remote Sens., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 653–659, Sep.
2011.
[32] G. Falcao, L. Sousa, and V. Silva, “Massively LDPC decoding on mul-
ticore architectures,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 22, no.
2, pp. 309–322, Feb. 2011.
[33] G. Falcao, J. Andrade, V. Silva, and L. Sousa, “GPU-based DVB-S2
LDPC decoder with high throughput and fast error floor detection,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 542–543, Apr. 2011.
Bertrand Le Gal received the M.Sc. degree in
electronics engineering from the University of South
Brittany, Lorient, France, in 2002 and the Ph.D.
degree in information and engineering sciences and
technologies from the University of South Brittany
in 2005.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the
IMS Laboratory, IPB/ENSEIRB-MATMECA Engi-
neering School, Talence, France. His research cur-
rently focuses on algorithm-architecture-matching
on both hardware (ASIC/FPGA) and software
targets (CPU/DSP/GPGPU). Application domain includes FEC decoders in
digital communications systems, video compression and video processing
applications.
Christophe Jego (M’05) received the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from the Universit Rennes 1, Rennes,
France, in 1996 and 2000, respectively.
He joined the Electronic Engineering Department
of the graduate engineering school TELECOM
Bretagne, Brest, France, as a full-Time Associate
Professor in 2001. In 2009, he received Research Ha-
bilitation from University of Bretagne Sud, Lorient,
France. Then, he joined the graduate engineering
school ENSEIRB-MATMECA, Bordeaux, France,
as a full-time Professor in 2010. Currently, he is
member of the CNRS IMS laboratory, UMR 5218. His research activities are
concerned with Algorithm-Architecture-Matching approach for FEC decoders
in digital communications systems. His work is about all aspects of mapping
algorithms to architectures to implementations.
Since 2013, he is member of IEEE Signal Processing Society Technical Com-
mittee on Design and Implementation of Signal Processing Systems (DISPS).
Camille Leroux received the M.Sc. degree in
electronics engineering from the University of South
Brittany, Lorient, France, in 2005. He received
the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering from
TELECOM Bretagne, Brest, France, in 2008.
From 2008 to 2011, he worked as a Postdoctoral
Research Associate in the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department, McGill University, Mon-
treal, QC, Canada. He is an Associate Professor at
Institut Polytechnique de Bordeaux since 2011. His
research interests are in the design and hardware im-
plementation of signal processing systems and computer architecture.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
