IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 11, JUNE 1, 2014

1157

Subcarrier Reliability Aware Soft-Decision LDPC Code in CO-OFDM Systems
Di Che, Hamid Khodakarami, An Li, Xi Chen, Trevor Anderson, and William Shieh, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— We propose a subcarrier reliability aware lowdensity parity-check (SRA-LDPC) soft-decision coding scheme for coherent optical orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (CO-OFDM) systems. The SRA-LDPC code takes consideration of varying signal-to-noise ratio performance among different OFDM subcarriers. At the SRA-LDPC encoder, flexible forward error correction is applied to different ranges of subcarriers. At the decoder, the algorithm keeps track of noise variance of each subcarrier and utilizes such variance for decoding. Our proposed algorithm is substantiated in a 120-Gb/s CO-OFDM system where near-dc noise originated from the local oscillator is detrimental to the system performance. The experimental results show that the SRA-LDPC code is effective in combating near-dc noise and enhancing the receiver sensitivity.
Index Terms— Optical fiber communication, OFDM, coherent detection, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code.
I. INTRODUCTION
C OHERENT optical orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (CO-OFDM) has become one of the promising candidates for the next generation long haul optical communication [1], [2], which offers high spectral efficiency, high receiver sensitivity, as well as robustness against chromatic dispersion. Coherent detection uses a local oscillator (LO) to down-convert a signal to baseband. In OFDM systems, the subcarriers near LO have a severely degraded signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) caused by the so-called near-DC noise [4]–[6]. While other subcarriers are error free, these subcarriers can still cause large amount of errors which greatly degrades the system performance. In wireless systems, near-DC subcarriers can be predicted by transmitter since LO at receiver has a stable frequency. Near-DC subcarriers are nullified to avoid the near-DC noise [6]. Unfortunately, for the optical counterpart,
Manuscript received January 16, 2014; revised March 3, 2014; accepted March 19, 2014. Date of publication March 25, 2014; date of current version May 6, 2014. This work was supported by the National ICT Australia (NICTA). NICTA was supported by the Australian Government through the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, and the Australian Research Council, ICT Centre of Excellence Program.
D. Che and T. Anderson are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia, and also with the National ICT Australia–Victoria Research Laboratory, Department of Electric and Electrical Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia (e-mail: dche2@student.unimelb.edu.au; trevora@unimelb.edu.au).
H. Khodakarami, A. Li, X. Chen, and W. Shieh are with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia (e-mail: hkh@student.unimelb.edu.au; lia@unimelb.edu.au; xi.chen@ee.unimelb.edu.au; shiehw@unimelb.edu.au).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this letter are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LPT.2014.2313726

the LO could drift in a relatively wide frequency range [7], [8] due to the uncertainty of laser wavelength. We can still nullify all the subcarriers in the drifting range [2], [3], while greatly sacrificing the spectrum efficiency (SE). Alternatively, precise wavelength control technology [7], [8] can be applied. However, it is desirable to devise a scheme that is compatible with most of the commercial lasers which still have widerange frequency drift when operated uncontrolled. A more reasonable approach is to retain all the subcarriers and use forward error correction (FEC) scheme to compensate the near-DC noise. Unequal error protection (UEP) [9], [10] FEC is widely studied in dealing with the situation where different parts of code words experience various levels of noise powers. Most UEP contains novel code construction and decoding algorithms, such as Plotkin-Type construction and multistage decoding in [10]. However, these UEP codes may not be suitable for the near-DC noise problem. First, brand-new UEP LDPC circuits need to be developed and tested, which would be costly; second, UEP is not optimized for laser wavelength drift, namely, the transmitter does not know which subcarriers need more protection.
In this letter, we propose an LDPC based coding scheme termed subcarrier reliability aware soft-decision LDPC code (SRA-LDPC), which can be achieved by the state-of-the-art FEC technologies. When applying LDPC codes to optical OFDM systems, the conventional LDPC decoder assumes that the noise variance of each variable node is constant so that the probability density distribution of each bit of being 0 (or 1) is identical for each node. However, in CO-OFDM systems, SNR diverges among different subcarriers, especially those near-DC subcarriers we mentioned above. Variable nodes are mapped to different subcarriers and thus have differing noise variance. We term the varying SNR performance as varying degree of subcarrier reliability. SRA-LDPC code conducts encoding and decoding based on the reliability of different subcarriers. To verify the effectiveness of SRA-LDPC code, we apply the SRA-LDPC scheme to a 16-QAM 120 Gb/s CO-OFDM system. It is found that error-free performance can be achieved in the presence of strong near-DC noise.
II. PRINCIPLE OF SRA-LDPC CODE
The SRA-LDPC scheme consists of two mechanisms: (i) at the encoder, strong FEC is applied to the subcarriers within LO drifting range which may have low reliability (low SNR), and (ii) at the beginning of decoding, decoder keeps track of the noise variance of the variable nodes. In this way, during

1041-1135 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1158

IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 11, JUNE 1, 2014

LDPC decoding, the noisy subcarriers carry less weight and will not contaminate the decoding process.

A. Decoding Mechanism

In soft-decision LDPC, log likelihood ratio (LLR) for each
variable node is computed to be later passed to the variable node [11]. Assuming bits b = bm−1bm−2· · · b0 are mapped to the complex constellation point c = c(b). We denote the received signal as r = c + n, where n represents additive white Gaussian noise. The LLR for the j-th bit of b is defined as:

L L R j = log

P(b j = 0|r ) P(b j = 1|r )

= log

p(r |b j = 0) p(r |b j = 1)

(1)

where P indicates a probability and p indicates a probability density function (pdf). We assumed the bits 0 and 1 are transmitted with equal probability. From the LLR definition, we know that when the absolute value of LLR is high, the probability difference between being 0 or 1 for variable nodes is large. Assuming the noise follows the Gaussian distributions with variance σ 2, for i ∈{0, 1}, p is expressed as:

p(r |b j = i ) =

p(r |b)

b:b j =i

=

1 2π σ 2 exp

−

r − c(b) 2σ 2

2

.

(2)

b:b j =i

In CO-OFDM systems, each constellation point c belongs to an OFDM subcarrier. We assume that each subcarrier has a quasi-stationary SNR performance within one OFDM frame, and we are able to use training symbols to estimate its noise variance σ 2. Applying each σ 2 to corresponding constellation point, we obtain the LLR for each variable node. Then, the LLRs are sent to LDPC soft decoding iteration as the initialized value. Soft decoding exchanges the information between check nodes and variable nodes of LDPC codes and calculates new LLR at each iteration until the parity check is satisfied. The soft-decoding scheme adopted in the experiment is the sum-product algorithm [12]. The simplified min-sum algorithm [13] can also be applied due to its easy implementation.

B. Encoding Mechanism
For CO-OFDM systems, subcarriers around the LO suffer from the near-DC noise and thus have an especially high BER. We categorize the OFDM subcarriers into two classes: (i) middle range: subcarriers located in the LO wavelength drift range, and (ii) outer range: subcarriers which are always free from near-DC noise no matter where the LO drifts. We assign strong FEC for subcarriers in middle range, and apply weak FEC to outer range subcarriers. Fig. 1 shows one example of spectrum assignment. Since the transmitter cannot predict the exact location of the LO, we gauge the maximum drift range of the LO, which is assumed 1.25 GHz in this letter as can be reasonably achieved with commercially available lasers.
In the following experiment, for the strong FEC coding scheme, we use a 13% regular quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC

Fig. 1. Spectrum assignment for SRA-LDPC code.
code concatenated with a 7% ITU standard RS code. RS (255,239) [14] is used as the outer coding to compensate the error floor. QC-LDPC (2295, 2042) of column weight 3 and girth 6 is adopted as the inner coding [15], [16]. For the weak FEC coding scheme, we use the 7% RS code mentioned above. An interleaver is arranged between the two concatenated codes.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A 120-Gb/s CO-OFDM system is constructed to evaluate the performance of the SRA-LDPC coding. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2. The data stream is first divided into two parts to apply two different FEC schemes described in the last section. The two parts of data are separately encoded with the SRA-LDPC encoding mechanism and then modulated onto the 16-QAM constellation. These two parts need to be mapped into different ranges of OFDM subcarriers. To choose the size of middle range subcarriers, we assume that the frequency range of the LO drift is 1.25 GHz in this experiment. For OFDM modulation, FFT size of 128 is selected in which the center 64 subcarriers are filled with data. The OFDM signals are generated by Matlab and then loaded to an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) which is run at sampling rate of 10 GSa/s. This results in optical signal bandwidth of 5 GHz. The center 16 OFDM subcarriers (from 24th to 39th subcarrier as shown in Fig. 1) are encoded with strong FEC. Twenty training symbols are used for channel estimation and subcarrier SNR estimation.
Due to the bandwidth limitation of the AWG, we employ optical band multiplexing using an optical tone generator. The optical tone generator consists of a CW laser and an intensity modulator, which produces three tones spaced at 5.15625 GHz. Such spacing is a multiple of the OFDM subcarrier spacing, which satisfies the orthogonal band multiplexing (OBM) condition. To simulate 2x2 MIMO polarization multiplexing, the signal after the I/Q modulator is split by a polarizationmaintaining (PM) coupler into two branches, with one branch delayed by one OFDM symbol. These two branches are combined with a polarization beam combiner (PBC), leading to the total raw data rate of 120 Gb/s. The polarization-multiplexed signal is subsequently coupled with an optical ASE noise loader using a 3-dB coupler, then fed into a coherent optical OFDM receiver, and sampled by a 50 GSa/s real time oscilloscope. The OFDM symbols are first recovered using standard 2×2 MIMO-OFDM procedures [2], and next sent to the FEC decoder which decodes data from different ranges of subcarrier separately. The number of bits used for BER computation is 7.35 million.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHE et al.: SRA SOFT-DECISION LDPC CODE IN CO-OFDM SYSTEMS

1159

Fig. 2. Experimental setup. AWG: Arbitrary waveform generator, PBC: Polarization beam combiner, LO: Local oscillator, ECL: External cavity laser, PD: Photo Diode, TDS: Time-domain sampling scope.

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Influence of Near-DC Noise
We first confirm that the near-DC noise is detrimental to the overall system performance. To illustrate this, the distribution of subcarrier SNR under different OSNR is shown in Fig. 3(a). The SNR is calculated from the variance of the signal constellation. For 3-band OFDM signal, the total number of filled subcarriers is 192. We can see that the SNR fluctuation is relatively small, except for those near-DC subcarriers which are represented by a deep ‘notch’. In this demonstration, the LO is located around the 95th subcarrier, where the SNR is much worse than the average level. We capture the constellations of the 19th subcarrier (far from LO) and the 95th subcarrier (near LO) in Fig. 3(a) as insets. While the two insets are plotted with the same axis scale, constellation of the 95th subcarrier is obviously more scattered than the one for 19th subcarrier. In fact, as can be seen in Fig. 3(b), while other subcarriers are almost error free at OSNR of 20, the BER for the 95th subcarrier exceeds 0.17. This means the near-DC noise does contribute most to the overall BER. There are three other subcarriers showing lower SNR (the 33rd, 97th, and 161th subcarrier), due to the contamination from the main carriers for the 3 bands added at the transmitter side. We do not apply special coding for them since the transmitter knows the exact location of the main carriers, and thus can nullify those subcarriers.
Fig. 3(b) further explains the decoding mechanism of SRA-LDPC code. When the absolute value of LLR is higher, the decoder makes the final decision for each variable node more reliably. Using the SNR illustrated in Fig. 3(a), we calculate the initialized LLR for LDPC variable nodes from different subcarriers by Eq. (1). Since each subcarrier contains 4 coded bits in 16-QAM, we average the absolute value of LLR over these 4 nodes and reach the subcarrier LLR, which characterizes the subcarrier reliability. The mean value of subcarrier LLR over all the OFDM symbols is shown in Fig. 3(b). Comparing the LLR curve at OSNR of 14 dB and 20 dB, we find that when the BER is low, the absolute value of LLR becomes high. The phenomenon is more obvious if we compare the BER and LLR curves at OSNR of 20 dB. The LLR curve has totally opposite trend compared with the BER. At the 95th subcarrier, while BER is the largest, the LLR is closest to zero. Subcarrier with higher BER means lower reli-

Fig. 3. (a) Subcarrier SNR distribution at OSNR of 14 and 20 dB. (b) BER performance for all subcarriers (primary axis) and absolute value of LLR for LDPC variable nodes within different subcarriers (secondary axis) at OSNR of 14 dB (left) and 20 dB (right).
ability, while the absolute value of their LLR is much smaller than the average. Therefore, in soft-decision iteration, this LLR will have less weight in each step of calculation. This reliability awareness guarantees that the decoder limits the ‘errorpropagation’ effect from those subcarriers with inferior SNR and contains their degrading impact on the decoding process.
B. Effectiveness of SRA-LDPC Code
Fig. 4 provides the BER performance measurement for our SRA-LDPC coding scheme. First from Fig. 4(a), we find that the near-DC noise significantly degrades the decoding performance: when 7% FEC is applied across all the subcarriers, an error floor of 10−4 exists even when the OSNR is extremely high. When the same 7% FEC is applied to only outer subcarriers, neglecting the middle subcarriers, errorfree performance can be achieved. This confirms that near-DC noise cannot be treated in the same way as the ordinary white Gaussian noise in decoding. Nevertheless, after applying our SRA-LDPC scheme, 20% FEC for the middle range and 7% for outer range, error-free performance is achieved, and the BER performance is almost identical to that of the outer range with the 7% FEC. Moreover, our experimental results show that the decoding mechanism of SRA-LDPC code is not only effective, but also essential to achieve error-free performance. As shown in Fig. 4(a), if we use constant noise variance of each subcarrier for decoding, there exists an error floor around 10−4. The near-DC noise severely contaminates the LDPC decoding, thus even 20% FEC cannot compensate it if we do not keep track of noise variance. We note that in Fig. 4(a) curves with FEC of “20% middle, 7% outer” have total data rate of 108.1 Gb/s while others have that of 107 Gb/s. This minor difference makes insignificant impact on the comparisons.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1160

IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 11, JUNE 1, 2014

20% FEC. In fact, SRA-LDPC code converts the uncertain LO drift problem to an averaged BER problem which can be successfully handled by the state of the art FEC technology.
V. CONCLUSION
We have proposed an SRA-LDPC coding scheme for CO-OFDM systems. The algorithm is adaptive to varying OFDM subcarrier reliability. Using SRA-LDPC code, we successfully remove the penalty caused by near-DC noise in a 120-Gb/s CO-OFDM system with a cost of 1.67% in terms of spectrum efficiency. Error-free performance is achieved in the presence of near-DC noise using SRA-LDPC code; even when applying strong 20% FEC to all subcarriers, SRA-LDPC code improves the receiver sensitivity by at least 1 dB compared with the conventional LDPC.

Fig. 4. BER performance for 120-Gb/s 16-QAM CO-OFDM signal using (a) 7% FEC for the outer range, and (b) 20% FEC for the outer range. For both scenarios, 20% FEC is used for middle range subcarriers. SRA: LDPC that uses SRA decoding. Conv.: Conventional LDPC decoder which uses constant subcarrier noise variance when calculating LLR.
We further study the effectiveness of SRA-LDPC decoding mechanism when 20% FEC is applied across all the subcarriers, without distinguishing the middle and outer ranges. Near-DC noise still significantly degrades the overall BER performance. When we neglect the near-DC subcarriers, the error-free OSNR sensitivity is about 15 dB. When we count near-DC subcarriers, the error-free OSNR sensitivity is larger than 16 dB, representing more than 1 dB degradation even if 20% FEC is used. In fact, no performance penalty caused by near-DC noise is observed when using SRA-LDPC code.
C. Performance Evaluation for SRA-LDPC Code
The key issue of combating near-DC noise is that only a few subcarriers near the LO are affected by noise, whereas the LO drift range is relatively wide. Normally we can use bit-loading [17] to apply low order modulation format at subcarriers with low SNR. For example, we apply 4-QAM through middle range in the experiment in Part IV(A). Since only the 95th subcarrier is strongly affected by the LO, we nearly sacrifice 50% spectral efficiency in the middle range. However, the 95th subcarrier still has a BER of over 0.02 for Q-factor of 6 dB with 4-QAM. Another method of handling “burst error” near LO is interleaving. Nevertheless, interleaving not only loses the SNR information for each variable node in LDPC codes, but also requires more FEC overhead since bit error in one subcarrier spreads to the whole frequency band. In contrast, SRA-LDPC code only requires 20% overhead at middle range of 16 subcarriers. Averaging this value to the whole frequency band of 192 subcarriers, the mean overhead is just 16 × 20%/192=1.67%. Moreover, by averaging the BER of 0.17 at LO subcarrier to 16 subcarriers in the middle range, the mean BER reduces to 0.01, far less than the threshold of

REFERENCES
[1] S. Chandrasekhar, X. Liu, B. Zhu, and D. W. Peckham, “Transmission of a 1.2-Tb/s 24-carrier no-guard-interval coherent OFDM superchannel over 7200-km of ultra-large-area fiber,” in Proc. ECOC, Vienna, Austria, 2009, pp. 1–2, paper PDP2.6.
[2] Y. Ma, Q. Yang, Y. Tang, S. Chen, and W. Shieh, “1-Tb/s single-channel coherent optical OFDM transmission over 600-km SSMF fiber with subwavelength bandwidth access,” Opt. Express, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 9421–9427, 2009.
[3] X. Yi, N. K. Fontaine, R. P. Scott, and S. J. B. Yoo, “Tb/s coherent optical OFDM systems enabled by optical frequency combs,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 28, no. 14, pp. 2054–2061, Jul. 15, 2010.
[4] S. Marsili, “DC Offset estimation in OFDM based WLAN application,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Dallas, TX, USA, 2004, pp. 3531–3535.
[5] W. Henkel, G. Taubock, P. Odling, and P. O. Borjesson, “The cyclic prefix of OFDM/DMT—An analysis,” in Proc. Int. Zurich Seminar Broadband Commun., Zurich, Switzerland, 2002, pp. 22-1–22-3.
[6] J. Luo, A. Kortke, and W. Keusgen, “Efficient channel estimation schemes for MIMO OFDM systems with null subcarriers,” in Proc. Veh. Technol. Conf., Calgary, Canada, 2008, pp. 1–5.
[7] B. G. Lindsay, K. A. Smith, and F. B. Dunning, “Control of long-term output frequency drift in commercial dye lasers,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 1656–1657, 1991.
[8] Y. Muroya, T. Nakamura, H. Yamada, and T. Torikai, “Precise wavelength control for DFB laser diodes by novel corrugation delineation method,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 288–290, Mar. 1997.
[9] L.-F. Wei, “Coded modulation with unequal error protection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 1439–1449, Oct. 1993.
[10] V. Kumar and O. Milenkovic, “On unequal error protection LDPC codes based on plotkin-type constructions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 994–1005, Jun. 2006.
[11] I. B. Djordjevic, M. Arabaci, and L. L. Minkov, “Next generation FEC for high-capacity communication in optical transport networks,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 27, no. 16, pp. 3518–3530, Aug. 15, 2009.
[12] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[13] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[14] T. Mizuochi, Y. Miyata, K. Kubo, T. Sugihara, K. Onohara, and H. Yoshida, “Progress in soft-decision FEC,” in Proc. OFC/NFOEC, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 1–3, paper NWC2.
[15] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[16] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[17] Q. Yang, W. Shieh, and Y. Ma, “Bit and power loading for coherent optical OFDM,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 20, no. 15, pp. 1305–1307, Aug. 1, 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:20:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

