Noisy Belief Propagation Decoder

Chu-Hsiang Huang Department of Electrical Engineering University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California Email: seanhuang0522@ucla.edu

Yao Li Department of Electrical Engineering University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California Email: liyao@ucla.edu

Lara Dolecek Department of Electrical Engineering University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California Email: dolecek@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract‚ÄîThis paper analyzes the fundamental performance limits of an LDPC Belief Propagation (BP) decoder implemented on noisy hardware and proposes a robust decoder implementation to improve the resilience to hardware errors. Assuming that the effects of hardware noise in various computational units, i.e., variable nodes and check nodes, can be approximated by Gaussian noise, we develop a Gaussian approximate density evolution for noisy BP decoders. By the Gaussian approximate density evolution, we find that zero residual error rate is achievable for noisy BP decoders as long as the message representations are of arbitrarily high precision. Noisy BP decoding thresholds are then derived for various regular LDPC codes. These decoding thresholds determine maximum allowable communication and computation noise for reliable communication. Next, we propose an averaging BP decoder implementation by averaging over the messages in all up-to-date iterations to cancel out the computation noise. Simulation results demonstrate that on noisy hardware, the averaging BP decoder significantly reduces the residual error rates when compared to the nominal BP decoder.
Review Topic: Coding and Decoding (A.2), Algorithm and Architecture Co-optimization (G.5).
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern CMOS circuits exhibit increasing variations in performance, power consumption, and reliability parameters. The design of digital systems built on such circuits must be aware of these variations. A promising alternative to overdesigning and guardbanding is to develop robust algorithms tolerant of hardware errors [1]. One of the first mathematical models for unreliable hardware was proposed by von Neumann who considered transient errors [2]. In the transient error model, each component fails independently of other components, and a current failure is independent of all past and future failures. Such a model provided a basis for fault-tolerant computing [3].
Recently, iterative decoders for modern channel codes on graphs on noisy hardware have attracted a great deal of attention. In [4], Varshney derived the capacity and certain concentration results of LDPC codes on noisy iterative decoders. Density evolution equations of noisy Gallager B decoders under transient and permanent hardware errors were derived in [5] and [6]. We additionally proposed in [7] and [8] an optimal resource allocation scheme based on the density evolution analysis to lower the decoder error floor induced by noisy hardware implementation. Density evolution analysis for the min-sum decoder under different hardware error models was investigated in [9] by Ngassa et al. and in [10] by BalatsoukasStimming and Burg. Leduc-Primeau and Gross in [11] proposed a clever message repetition scheme to mitigate computation errors arising in a noisy Gallager B decoder.

In contrast to the analysis in [5]‚Äì[10] that focused on more specialized decoders, we investigate the belief propagation (BP) decoder, a more general message passing algorithm. We analyze its performance and propose a robust decoder implementation of the BP algorithm to reduce the residual error rate under hardware noise. The BP decoders considered in this paper are subject to hardware errors that can be modeled as transient additive computation noise. Based on the additive computation noise model, we first analyze the fundamental performance limits of the noisy BP decoder via Gaussian approximate density evolution and derive the decoding thresholds that determine the maximum allowable communication channel and computation noise for reliable communication. We then propose a robust decoding algorithm, in which we reduce the effects of computation noise by the averaging operation. To be more specific,we determine the bit value for each variable node by the cumulative average of the messages in all up-to-date iterations instead of only using the message in the last iteration (as in the nominal BP decoder). We then demonstrate via simulations that on noisy hardware, the averaging BP decoder performs 10 times better than the nominal BP decoder for the example considered.
II. LDPC CODES AND NOISE-FREE BP DECODER
An LDPC code is a linear code that can be conveniently represented by a sparse bipartite graph composed of variable nodes, check nodes, and edges each connecting a variable node to a check node. In a (dv, dc)-regular LDPC code, each variable is connected to dv check nodes, and each check node is connected to dc variable nodes. The low edge density in the bipartite graph representation of an LDPC code allows for lowcomplexity local message-passing decoding algorithms that are known to approach the performance of high-complexity MAP (maximum a posteriori) decoding algorithms.
On the bipartite graph associated with an LDPC code, denote the set of check nodes connected to a variable node v as Nv, and denote the set of variable nodes connected to a check node c as Nc. Let yv be the decoder input at the variable node v, and xv ‚àà {+1, ‚àí1} be the transmitted bit corresponding to the variable node v. Denote the noise-free messages sent in the th iteration by mÀú ( ). More specifically, mÀú v( ,)c denotes the message sent from the variable node v to its incident check node c, while mÀú c(,v) denotes the message passed from check node c to its incident variable node v. Note that for BP decoders, a message is the log-likelihood ratio of the transmitted bit corresponding to a variable node v. For completeness, let us quickly summarize

¬ã,(((



$VLORPDU

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the main steps of the noise-free BP decoder, which aims to

correct errors from communication channel only.

‚Ä¢ (Initialization) At iteration = 0, each variable node v

sends

the

message

mÀú (v0,c)

=

ln

P (yv |xv =1) P (yv |xv =‚àí1)

to

each

check

node c, c ‚àà Nv.

‚Ä¢ (Check node) At each iteration , ‚â• 0, each check node

c sends a message mÀú (c,v) to each variable node v, v ‚àà Nc :

mÀú (c,v) = 2 tanh‚àí1(

tanh

mÀú v( 2

) ,c

).

v ‚ààNc\{v}

‚Ä¢ (Variable node) At each iteration , ‚â• 1, each variable node v sends a message mÀú (v,)c to each check node c, c ‚àà

Nv :

mÀú (v,)c = mÀú v(0,c) +

mÀú c(

‚àí1) ,v

.

c ‚ààNv \{c}

III. THE NOISY BP DECODER MODEL

In this paper, we consider a transmission over a communication channel that introduces additive Gaussian noise. In addition to receiving a noisy input from a communication channel, the noisy BP decoder is also subject to errors arising from unreliable hardware. In this work, we consider a transient error model for the BP decoder implemented on noisy hardware. Under this model and following von Neumann [2], the message computation in each iteration is subject to transient errors, and the transient errors on different messages and different (variable and check) nodes are assumed to be independent. Due to the transient errors, the actual message could be different from its prescribed value. We use the noisy computation model proposed in the stochastic computation framework [12], in which the noisy computation is modeled by passing a hypothetical noisefree computation result through a channel that models the effects of transient errors. We refer to this operation as the computation channel. We further assume that the effects of transient errors can be modeled as additive noise, and hence the messages exchanged in our noisy BP decoder at iteration are

mv( ,)c = mÀÜ (v,)c + wÀòv( ,c)

mc(,v) = mÀÜ (c,v) + wÀòc(,v) ,

(1)

where mÀÜ v( ,)c and mÀÜ (c,v) are the noise-free messages (before the computation noise is added), and wÀòv(,c) and wÀòc(,v) are the computation noises. Note that since the computation noise is additive and since the variable node operation is simply the summation of all incoming messages, we can combine the computation noise in check nodes and the variable nodes into a single term. Then, in our noisy BP decoder, a check node is the same as a check node in the noise-free decoder, and the variable node operation becomes

mv( ,)c = m(v0,c) +

mÀÜ c(

‚àí1) ,v

+

wv( ,c) ,

(2)

c ‚ààNv \{c}

where wv( ,c) = wÀòv( ,c) +

c

‚ààNv \{c}

wÀòc(

) ,v

is

the

aggregate

computation noise. We assume that all wv(,c)‚Äôs are identically

distributed. Note that m(v0,c) is the same as mÀú v(0,c) since we have the

same communication channel for noise-free and noisy decoders.

We characterize the performance of the noisy BP decoder by

the density evolution analysis in the next section.

IV. DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS OF THE NOISY BP DECODER
We assume that the transient computation noise wv(,c) is symmetric. Thus, according to [4], the error behavior of a noisy decoder is independent of the chosen codeword. We therefore assume that the all-zero codeword is transmitted. Following [4], we also assume the underlying bipartite graph for the decoder is cycle-free. Note that in our decoder, a zero bit is represented as ‚Äú1‚Äù and a one bit is represented as ‚Äú-1‚Äù. Density evolution of (noise-free) BP decoders is well known (see [13] and [14]). For a (dv, dc)-regular LDPC code, the density evolution of a noise-free BP decoder can be recursively expressed as:

PÀú = P0 ‚äó Œì‚àí1(Œì(PÀú ‚àí1)‚äó(dc‚àí1))‚äó(dv‚àí1).

(3)

Here, Œì is the distribution mapping corresponding to the tanh

operation in check nodes (as defined in [14][Section III.B])

so that Œì‚àí1(Œì(PÀú ‚àí1)‚äó(dc‚àí1)) maps the distribution of variable

node

messages

mÀú v(

‚àí1) ,c

,

v

‚àà Nc\{v} to the distribution of the

check node message mÀú c(,v‚àí1). The operation ‚äó is the convolution

of two (probability) distributions, defined as G ‚äó H(x) :=

R G(x ‚àí y)dH(y), where G, H are (probability) distributions, and P0 is the distribution of the initial message mÀú v(0,c).

Based on the density evolution of the noise-free BP decoder,

we derive the following lemma for the noisy BP decoder density

evolution.

Lemma 1. Assume wv(,c)‚Äôs are i.i.d. for all v, c and . Let ŒÝw be the distribution of wv(,c). Then, the density evolution of the noisy BP decoder can be expressed as

P = P0 ‚äó ŒÝw ‚äó Œì‚àí1(Œì(P ‚àí1)‚äó(dc‚àí1))‚äó(dv‚àí1). (4)

Proof: Since wv(,c) in (2) is independent of mv(0,c) and

mÀÜ (c

‚àí1) ,v

for

any

c

‚àà Nv\{c}, the distribution of mv( ,)c is the

convolution of the distribution of wv(,c) and the distribution of

mv(0,c) +

c

‚ààNv\{c} mÀÜ (c

‚àí1) ,v

,

which

is

PÀú

in (3). We then have

(4). Since the computation noise in check nodes is aggregated

into the computation noise in variable nodes, the check node

operation in the noisy decoder can be interpreted as the check

node operation in the noise-free decoder. Therefore, the Œì

mapping in (4) is the same as the Œì mapping in (3).

For any noise distribution ŒÝw, we could analytically derive P as well as the message error rate in each iteration by the

above lemma. Instead of analytically deriving P , which is quite

complicated, we use Gaussian approximate density evolution

techniques [15] to analyze the noisy BP decoder. Gaussian

approximate density evolution for the noise-free BP decoders

utilizes the facts that (a) when dv is sufficiently large, according to the central limit theorem, the variable node message is close

to a Gaussian random variable since it is the sum of many

independent random variables, and (b) when we assume the

communication channel noise to be Gaussian, the log-likelihood

ratios of the decoder input are Gaussian random variables with

mtheeancomœÉ2c2mh unanicdativoanriacnhcaennœÉe4c2lh

, where œÉc2h is the noise. Experimental

variance of results also

confirm the validity of such approximation [15]. Applying


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Decoding threshold pairs for different regular LDPC codes. The thick black lines are the computation noise range used in Section VI simulations.

the Gaussian approximate density evolution to the noisy BP decoder, we have the following lemma:

Lemma 2. If dv is sufficiently large, and if one of the two following conditions holds: (c) wÀòc(,v) and wÀòv(,c) in (1) are identically distributed with zero mean, (d) wÀòv(,c) in (1) is Gaussian with zero

mean, then P can be approximated by the Gaussian distribution

with

mean

2 œÉc2h

+Œº

‚àí1

and

variance

4 œÉc2h

+ œÉ2‚àí1 + œÉc2mp,

where

œÉc2mp is the variance of wv(,c), and Œº ‚àí1 and œÉ2‚àí1 are mean and

variance of c ‚ààNv\{c} mÀÜ (c ,‚àív1), respectively.

Proof: When dv is sufficiently large and when condition (c)

or (d) holds, by the central limit theorem, the aggregate compu-

tation noise, wÀòv(,c) + c ‚ààNv\{c} wÀòc( ,‚àív1), can be approximated by a Gaussian random variable with zero mean and variance

œÉc2mp. Then, given facts (a) and (b) mentioned in the preceding

paragraph, the initial message mv(0,c) is Gaussian distributed with

mapeparnoxœÉim2c2hateadndbyvaraiaGncaeusœÉs4ic2ahn,

and c random

‚ààNv \{c}

mÀÜ c(

‚àí1) ,v

can

be

variable with its mean

and variance denoted by Œº ‚àí1 and œÉ2‚àí1 respectively. Relying

on the fact that the sum of Gaussian random variables is still

a Gaussian random variable, with mean and variance being the

sums of the means and variances of the summand variables,

P is then approximated by a Gaussian distribution with mean

œÉ2c2hW+e

Œºad‚àía1ptanthdeva‚Äúrsieamncie-GœÉa4c2uhss+iaœÉn‚Äù2‚àí1m+ethœÉoc2dm,p

. a

variant

of

the

Gaussian approximation method, proposed in [16] to analyze the

density evolution of our noisy BP decoder. The semi-Gaussian

method requires that m(v,)c‚Äôs are approximately Gaussian; in our

setup, according to Lemma 2, the Gaussian assumption holds.

We iteratively estimate the mean and the variance of m(v,)c from

the estimates of the mean and the variance of mv( ,‚àíc 1). By

Lemma from a

2M, othnetem-CeaarnloeqsuimalsulœÉa2c2tiho+n

Œº ‚àí1 that

, where Œº takes the

‚àí1 is estimated mean and the

variance of mv( ,‚àíc 1) as input. Similarly, the variance of mv( ,)c, by fLreommmthae2s, aemqueaMls oœÉn4c2the-+CaœÉr2l‚àío 1si+mœÉucl2amtipo,nw. here œÉ2‚àí1 is estimated

V. DECODING THRESHOLD ANALYSIS
Based on the density evolution analysis in the previous section, we now derive the decoding threshold by the Gaussian approximate density evolution. In the previous work on noisy Gallager decoders, it was shown that perfect decoding (zero error probability) cannot be achieved when the computation

noise is present [4], [5]. Hence the decoding thresholds for noisy

Gallager decoders are defined as the maximum allowable com-

munication channel error rates for a target decoder residual error

rates (under certain hardware error rates) [4], [5]. Interestingly,

for noisy BP decoders under Gaussian computation noise and

the infinite-precision hardware (i.e., messages of arbitrarily large

dynamic range are represented with arbitrarily high precision),

we can still achieve zero error probability if the communication channel noise and the computation noise (wv(,c)) are small and if limwv(,)c‚Üí‚àû P (wv(,c)) = 0. This observation was also made in [4], and is explained as follows. The iterative decoding

process is able to raise the messages (log-likelihood ratios) to

infinity when the communication channel noise is small enough.

Since the computation noise magnitude is finite w.p.1, when the

messages are large enough (i.e., close to infinity), the effects of

the computation noise diminish.

Extending the definition of the decoding threshold for the

noise-free case (see [13]), we define the decoding threshold for a noisy BP decoder as a curve œÉch = œÉc‚àóh(œÉcmp) on the œÉch‚àíœÉcmp plane such that perfect decoding is achievable whenever œÉch < œÉc‚àóh(œÉcmp) and unachievable whenever œÉch > œÉc‚àóh(œÉcmp). Reversely, the curve can also be expressed as œÉcmp = œÉc‚àómp(œÉch), and perfect decoding is achievable whenever œÉcmp < œÉc‚àómp(œÉch) and unachievable whenever œÉcmp > œÉc‚àómp(œÉch).
In Fig. 1, we plot the decoding threshold curve derived

from the Gaussian approximate density evolution for different (dv, dc)-regular LDPC codes. We first observe that œÉc‚àóh decreases as œÉcmp increases. This means that the communication
channel noise level must be lowered if the computation noise

is large, so that the joint effect of the two types of noises does

not prohibit perfect decoding.

We also observe that when œÉch is large, a perturbation in œÉch results in a smaller change in the tolerance of computation noise,

while when œÉch is small, a perturbation in œÉch results in a larger change in the tolerance of computation noise. This phenomenon

is intuitively explained as follows. The mean of the initial log-

likelihood in œÉch for

ratio is smaller

œÉv2c2ahl,uweshiocfhœÉdcehc.reTahseesmfaesatnerowf itthhethsuebisnecqrueaesnet

iterating log-likelihood ratio messages display a similar trend.

As the maximum tolerable level of additive computation noise

on the log-likelihood ratio messages is positively correlated with

the magnitude of these messages, we expect a change in œÉch when it is smaller to lead to a larger change in œÉc‚àómp.

VI. AVERAGING LDPC BP DECODER

Under noise of moderate variance values, the residual error rate is bounded away from zero (i.e., when the (œÉcmp, œÉch) pair is up-right to the curve in Fig. 1). In this section, we focus on the BP decoder operating under noise of moderate variance values and propose a robust decoder implementation of BP algorithm to improve its performance. When we trace the trajectory of the messages in all iterations in the noisy BP decoder, we find that most of the messages corresponding to the incorrectly decoded bits alternate between correct and incorrect parities. The oscillation is in part due to the computation noise in (2). This observation inspires us to propose the averaging approach to mitigate the effects of computation noise. For the averaging


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

10‚àí1

Residual error rate

10‚àí2

10‚àí3

10‚àí4

Nominal BP decoder

Robust BP decoder

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

œÉcmp

Fig. 2. Residual error rate comparison for œÉch = 0.7.
100

10‚àí1

Residual error rate

10‚àí2

10‚àí3

10‚àí4 10‚àí53

Nominal BP decoder Averaging BP decoder

3.5

4

4.5

œÉcmp

Fig. 3. Residual error rate comparison for œÉch = 0.6.

approach, instead of taking the variable node messages in the

last iteration to determine the decoder output (as in the nominal

BP decoder), we use the average of the variable node messages

in all up-to-date iterations to determine the decoder output. It is

interesting that this concept is similar to the averaging method

in stochastic optimization where the gradient being used in

the iterative optimization procedure is noisy [17]. To be more specific, we compute the average variable node message, m¬Ø v(T,c),

as

m¬Ø v(T,c)

=

1 T

T

mv( ,)c.

(5)

=1

We determine the decoder output by m¬Ø (vT,c) when we terminate

the decoding process at the T th iteration. We call this decoder

the averaging BP decoder. The overhead of the averaging BP

decoder is simply the averaging operation, which is very small

compared with other fault-tolerant computing approaches such

as Triple Modular Redundancy [18]. Moreover, even when the

summation operation in (5) is noisy, as long as the magnitude

of the computation noise is finite, the effect of the computation

noise can be canceled out by dividing the summation by T

when the number of iterations T is large enough. In fact, since

we consider binary LDPC codes in this paper, the decoded bits

are determined only by the signs of m¬Ø (vT,c)‚Äôs. We therefore can

eliminate

1 T

from (5), and the decoded bits are determined from

T =1

m(v,)c.

We compare the residual error rates of the averaging BP

decoder with the nominal BP decoder under the noisy decoder

model (2) by simulations to demonstrate the advantages of

the averaging BP decoder. We use a (3, 6)-regular LDPC

code with code length 2640 [19]. The communication channel

noise is modeled by a zero-mean Gaussian random variable with variance œÉc2h. As an example, we consider œÉch = 0.6

and œÉch = 0.7. The maximum allowable œÉcmp values, i.e., œÉc‚àómp(œÉch), for the chosen code to achieve perfect decoding when œÉch = 0.6 and when œÉch = 0.7 are shown in Fig. 1. The range of the computation noise parameter œÉcmp is chosen to be an interval starting near œÉc‚àómp(œÉch) to show the effects of increasing computation noise on the residual error rates of the nominal decoder and the averaging BP decoder. The maximum iteration number of this averaging BP decoder is 40. Without loss of generality, we assume that the all-zero codeword is transmitted. Then, positive values correspond to correct parities and negative values correspond to incorrect parities.
Simulation results are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. We observe that the averaging BP decoder has lower residual error rates than the nominal BP decoder for the whole œÉcmp interval we simulated and for both communication channel noise cases. The residual error rate reduction reaches 10X in the low computation noise region with œÉch = 0.6. Note that the noise-free BP decoder has residual error rate around 10‚àí7.
Comparing the two cases where œÉch = 0.6 and œÉch = 0.7 respectively, we find that for larger œÉch (approaching the noisefree decoding threshold œÉc‚àóh(œÉcmp)), the improvement with the averaging decoder in the residual error rate over the nominal decoder is smaller. The phenomenon is reasoned as follows. When œÉch is close to the noise-free decoding threshold, with a higher probability, the initial and the subsequent iterating loglikelihood ratio messages are small, and it is highly probable that the computation noise reduces the messages to negative values. The decoding process is not able to change the signs of the messages back to positive when the message values are positive but small or even negative. Neither can the averaging operation in the averaging decoder help to change the signs, and so the residual error rate is close to that of the nominal BP decoder. However, when œÉch is sufficiently small, the initial log-likelihood ratio messages m(v0,c)‚Äôs are larger and thus able to pull the variable node messages (possibly negative due to corruption by computation noise) back to positive values. In this case, the operation in (5) is able to reduce the effects of the random computation errors, allowing the averaging BP decoder to achieve a lower residual error rate. This observation is interesting, in that it shows that even in the region of high communication channel signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), it is still possible to achieve the required performance on less accurate hardware by implementing the proposed averaging decoder.
Furthermore, we observe that in the œÉch = 0.7 case, the residual error rate gap between the nominal BP decoder and the averaging BP decoder increases as the computation noise increases. This can be explained as follows. When the computation noise is large and the messages are negative, they can add constructively to pull the messages to the positive values. However, when the computation noise is also small, this constructive combining is not of sufficiently large magnitude. This explains why the residual error rates are almost the same at the beginning of the two curves in Fig. 2.
Next, we use the quantizer bit-flipping model similar to the decoder error model in [9], [10], [20] and evaluate the averaging BP decoder performance under this model. In the quantizer bit flipping model, the variable (check) nodes compute hypothetical


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

≈£≈™≈µ
≈í≈∂≈¢≈Ø≈µ≈™≈ª≈¶≈≥ƒ° ≈£≈™≈µ ƒ©≈Ñ≈∞≈Ø≈∑≈¶≈≥≈µƒ°≈µ≈∞ƒ°
≈É≈™≈Ø≈¢≈≥≈∫ƒ° ≈ì≈¶≈±≈≥≈¶≈¥≈¶≈Ø≈¢≈µ≈™≈∞≈Øƒ™
≈£≈™≈µ

ƒØƒØƒØ

≈£≈™≈µ ≈É≈î≈Ñ

≈£≈™≈µ

≈É≈î≈Ñ

≈Ñ≈∞≈Ø≈∑≈¶≈≥≈µƒ°≈µ≈∞ƒ°

≈•≈¶≈§≈™≈Æ≈¢≈≠ƒ°

≈≥≈¶≈±≈≥≈¶≈¥≈¶≈Ø≈µ≈¢≈µ≈™≈∞≈Ø

≈£≈™≈µ ≈É≈î≈Ñ

Fig. 4. Quantizer bit-flipping model: mÀÜ stands for noise-free variable (check) node messages and m stands for real output messages of variable (check) nodes.
10‚àí1

10‚àí2

Residual error rate

10‚àí3

10‚àí4

Nominal BP decoder Averaging BP decoder

10‚àí54

6

8

10

12

14

pqe

x 10‚àí4

Fig. 5. Residual error comparison under quantizer bit-flipping model.

noise-free messages, and these noise-free messages are quantized and converted to the sign-magnitude binary representation. Each of the bits in the binary representation (including the sign bit) then passes through an independent binary symmetric channel (BSC) with cross-over probability p. The outputs of the BSCs are the binary representation of the real outputs of the variable (check) nodes (Fig. 4).
We compare the residual error rates of the nominal BP decoder and the averaging BP decoder under the quantizer bit-flipping model under different p values. Assume that the operation in (5) of the averaging BP decoder is noise-free. Our quantizers in the simulation use 5 bits to represent the magnitude part, ranging from 0 to 31. In order to keep the residual error rate on the same order as the residual error rates achieved in the previous simulation, we choose the communication channel noise parameter œÉch to be 0.75. Here we again use the (3, 6)-regular LDPC code with code length 2640 [19].
Simulation results are shown in Fig. 5. The residual error reduction under the quantizer bit-flipping model is larger than the reduction under the Gaussian computation noise model in the previous simulations. We have more than 100X residual error rate reduction in the entire p region we simulated. The large error rate reduction is attributed to the dominance of the sign bit errors in residual errors. As demonstrated in [9] and [10], after a few iterations, most of the residual errors in the nominal BP decoder are from the sign bit flips due to the computation noise. In the averaging BP decoder, the effects of sign bit flips are canceled out by the averaging over all messages in all up-to-date iterations, since for most of the variable and check nodes, sign bit flips occur in a few iterations only. Therefore, the averaging BP decoder achieves a much lower residual error rate than the nominal BP decoder.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied an LDPC BP decoder implemented on unreliable hardware. We first mathematically analyzed the

effects of hardware noise by a Gaussian approximate density
evolution and derived the decoding thresholds based on the ap-
proximation. Inspired by the observation of oscillating message
trajectories in the decoding process, we proposed an averaging
BP decoder by applying the averaging approach. Simulation
results demonstrated that the averaging BP decoder has lower
residual error rates than the nominal BP decoder under various
hardware noise conditions. Future work may involve developing
robust algorithms for various decoders, e.g., the polar code
decoders, and investigate the hardware error problem in more
general probabilistic inference and machine learning problems,
e.g. general message passing algorithms. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Research supported by NSF grant CCF-1029030. REFERENCES
[1] P. Gupta et al., ‚ÄúUnderdesigned and opportunistic computing in presence of hardware variability,‚Äù IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 8‚Äì23, 2013.
[2] J. von Neumann, ‚ÄúProbabilistic logic and the synthesis of reliable organisms from unreliable components,‚Äù Automata Studies, pp. 43‚Äì98, 1956.
[3] K.-H. Huang and J. A. Abraham, ‚ÄúAlgorithm-based fault tolerance for matrix operations,‚Äù IEEE Trans. on Computers, vol. 100, no. 6, pp. 518‚Äì 528, 1984.
[4] L. R. Varshney, ‚ÄúPerformance of LDPC codes under faulty iterative decoding,‚Äù IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4427‚Äì4444, Jul. 2011.
[5] S. Tabatabaei Yazdi, H. Cho, and L. Dolecek, ‚ÄúGallager B decoder on noisy hardware,‚Äù IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1660‚Äì1673, May 2013.
[6] C.-H. Huang, Y. Li, and L. Dolecek, ‚ÄúGallager B LDPC decoder with transient and permanent errors,‚Äù IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 15‚Äì28, Jan. 2014.
[7] S. M. S. Tabatabaei, C.-H. Huang, and L. Dolecek, ‚ÄúOptimal design of a Gallager B noisy decoder for irregular LDPC codes,‚Äù IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2052 ‚Äì2055, Dec. 2012.
[8] C.-H. Huang and L. Dolecek, ‚ÄúAnalysis of finite-alphabet iterative decoders under processing errors,‚Äù in IEEE ICCASP, Vancouver, Canada, May 2013.
[9] C. K. Ngassa, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, ‚ÄúMin-sum-based decoders running on noisy hardware,‚Äù in IEEE Globecom, Atlanta, GA, Dec. 2013.
[10] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and A. Burg, ‚ÄúDensity evolution for minsum decoding of LDPC codes under unreliable message storage,‚Äù IEEE Commun. Lett., 2014, accepted for publication.
[11] F. Leduc-Primeau and W. J. Gross, ‚ÄúFaulty Gallager-B decoding with optimal message repetition,‚Äù in Allerton Conference, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2012.
[12] N. R. Shanbhag et al., ‚ÄúStochastic computation,‚Äù in IEEE/ACM DAC, Anaheim, CA, Jun. 2010.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, ‚ÄúThe capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,‚Äù IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599‚Äì618, Feb. 2001.
[14] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, ‚ÄúDesign of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,‚Äù IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619‚Äì637, 2001.
[15] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, ‚ÄúAnalysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,‚Äù IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657‚Äì670, 2001.
[16] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, ‚ÄúA more accurate one-dimensional analysis and design of irregular LDPC codes,‚Äù IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2106‚Äì2114, 2004.
[17] B. T. Polyak and A. B. Juditsky, ‚ÄúAcceleration of stochastic approximation by averaging,‚Äù SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 838‚Äì855, 1992.
[18] F. L. Kastensmidt et al., ‚ÄúOn the optimal design of triple modular redundancy logic for SRAM-based FPGAs,‚Äù in DATE, Munich, Germany, Mar. 2005.
[19] D. MacKay, ‚ÄúEncyclopedia of sparse graph codes,‚Äù Available online: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html.
[20] M. May, M. Alles, and N. Wehn, ‚ÄúA case study in reliability-aware design: a resilient LDPC code decoder,‚Äù in DATE, Munich, Germany, Mar. 2008.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:21:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

