2696
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
A Low Complexity-High Throughput
QC-LDPC Encoder
Ahmed Mahdi and Vassilis Paliouras, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper introduces hardware architectures for
encoding Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity Check (QC-LDPC)
codes. The proposed encoders are based on appropriate factoriza-
tion and subsequent compression of involved matrices by means
of a novel technique, which exploits features of recursively-con-
structed QC-LDPC codes. The particular approach derives to
linear encoding time complexity and requires a constant number
of clock cycles for the computation of parity bits for all the
constructed codes of various lengths that stem from a common
base matrix. The proposed architectures are flexible, as they are
parameterized and can support multiple code rates and codes of
different lengths simply by appropriate initialization of memories
and determination of data bus widths. Implementation results
show that the proposed encoding technique is more efficient for
some LDPC codes than previously proposed solutions. Both serial
and parallel architectures are proposed. Hardware instantiations
of the proposed serial encoders demonstrate high throughput
with low area complexity for code words of many thousand bits,
achieving area reduction compared to prior art. Furthermore,
parallelization is shown to efficiently support multi-Gbps solutions
at the cost of moderate area increase. The proposed encoders are
shown to outperform the current state-of-the-art in terms of
throughput-area-ratio and area-time complexity by 10 to up to 80
times for codes of comparable error-correction strength.
Index Terms—QC-LDPC codes, encoding algorithm, sparse ma-
trix, LU decomposition, hardware LDPC encoder, multi-Gbps en-
coders..
I. INTRODUCTION
L
OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes are a
class of linear block codes with exceptional error-cor-
recting capabilities approaching capacity for several different
channels [1]. Computationally efficient iterative decoders allow
the exploitation of the excellent LDPC error-correction strength
in contemporary systems. Furthermore, the parallelism inherent
in the decoding algorithms can be exploited in several ways to
support high throughput rates [2]–[5]. A special class of LDPC
Manuscript received September 27, 2013; revised January 24, 2014; accepted
March 18, 2014. Date of publication March 31, 2014; date of current version
April 25, 2014. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript
and approving it for publication was Prof. Warren J. Gross. The research activ-
ities that led to these results, were cofinanced by Hellenic Funds and by the
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) under the Hellenic National
Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) 2007-2013, according to Contract no.
MICRO2-SE-B/E-II of the Project “Next Generation Millimeter Wave Back-
haul Radio” within the Programme “Hellenic Technology Clusters in Micro-
electronics—Phase-2 Aid Measure.”
The authors are with the VLSI Design Laboratory, Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department, University of Patras, 26500 Patras, Greece (e-mail:
mahdi@ece.upatras.gr; paliuras@ece.upatras.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2014.2314435
codes, called QC-LDPC codes, allows for efficient hardware
implementations of encoding and decoding algorithms by ex-
ploiting the structure of the corresponding Parity Check Matrix
(PCM), which is composed of circulant permutation matrices
[6], [7]. Due to their error correction strength, QC-LDPC
codes supporting a variety of code rates have been recently
adopted in several industrial standards such as wireless local
area networks (Wi-Fi, IEEE 802.11n,ac,ad) and the Digital
Video Broadcasting-Satellite-Second Generation (DVB-S2).
QC-LDPC decoders are proved to be well-suited for VLSI
implementation having low area complexity and supporting
flexibility [8], [9]. Dense-matrix operations substantially in-
crease the complexity of an LDPC encoder. Several authors
have proposed encoders that perform the direct multiplication
of the information word with the generator matrix, or with the
part of it which refers to the parity bits, in the case of systematic
codes [10], [11]. Li et al. describe two techniques for the deriva-
tion of the generator matrix of a circulant PCM using either a
single-step or a two-step procedure leading to single-step and
two-step encoder architectures respectively [10].
The derivation of the generator matrix requires operations
with the inverse of a submatrix of the PCM [10]. While subma-
trices of an LDPC PCM are necessarily sparse, their inverses can
be dense. Dense-matrix operations can be avoided by exploiting
certain properties that stem from a particular PCM structure,
such as the dual diagonal structure used in several standards.
Among several prior architectures that exploit dual-diagonal
PCMs, Kopparthi and Gruenbacher [12] avoid the computation
of a generator matrix by solving a suitably defined linear system
of equations to compute the parity bits using forward substi-
tution. Their approach exploits the dual diagonal structure of
the IEEE 802.16e PCM submatrix
which corresponds to the
parity bits. In the other side, [13] and [14] also use this dual
diagonal structure of
submatrix of IEEE 802.11n standard
codes PCM to determine the parity check symbols using for-
ward substitution.
Prominent among the encoder architectures are those based
on the Richardson-Urbanke (RU) algorithm [15]. Richardson
and Urbanke bring an LDPC PCM into an Almost Lower Trian-
gular (ALT) format by executing row and column permutations
thus maintaining the sparsity of the PCM. The derived ALT
PCM is partitioned into six submatrices that participate in a se-
ries of operations to derive the parity bits. The complexity of the
method is
, where
is shown to be bounded by
and
is small for several good codes. Lee et al. [16] implement the RU
algorithm in an FPGA. Multiplication by a small dense matrix is
replaced by the solution of a system using forward-substitution.
An issue with the RU technique is that column permutations
1053-587X © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: A LOW COMPLEXITY-HIGH THROUGHPUT QC-LDPC ENCODER
2697
may be needed to guarantee the non-singularity of a particular
submatrix whose inverse is required in the computation, thus re-
sulting in a necessarily non-systematic encoder. To address this
issue, Cohen and Parhi [17] propose a hybrid encoder, which
uses operations with the generator matrix to derive a subset of
the parity bits, while the remainder of the parity bits are com-
puted using the RU method. Fewer et al. also implement the RU
algorithm with a partly parallel architecture and special matrix
construction to increase encoding throughput [18].
Forward or backward substitution to solve a system and avoid
a corresponding dense matrix operation is commonly used in
several encoding techniques, including the RU method and the
direct generator-based techniques. Specifically, multiplication
by inverses of sparse matrices, which may be dense, can by
avoided by performing suitable back/forward substitution, in
the case that the corresponding multipliers are upper/lower tri-
angular. He et al. exploit a special lower triangular structure
of the PCM to define an architecture that performs a two-step
encoding procedure, based on the hardwired implementation
of multiplication by small matrices and of forward substitu-
tion [19].
Neal introduced an encoding method with linear complexity
[20], where LU decomposition is exploited to avoid the com-
putational cost of multiplication by a dense inverse matrix as
recently applied on the codes employed in CMBB [21]–[23].
Su et al. present an encoder based on LU-decomposition of
and perform forward/backward substitution using a four-step
procedure corresponding to (7) to compute the parity check
vector [23]. Our approach differs from [23] in that we apply
LU-decomposition on
and perform row-vector-matrix
multiplications.
Kaji studied the LU decomposition of
of PCMs of
non-QC LDPC codes in comparison with the RU algorithm
[24]. He has shown that LU decomposition of
leads to less
encoding complexity than RU encoding complexity, however,
his analysis does not deal with the structure of
and
in the case of QC-LDPC codes, where they could have less
nonzero sub-matrices than
.
In this paper we focus on hardware encoders for a partic-
ular class of structured LDPC codes, namely recursively-con-
structed QC-LDPC codes [25]. These codes have been found
to offer efficient solutions for low-BER applications, while re-
quiring moderate decoding complexity; they include the com-
monly used QC-LDPC codes as a special case. The contribution
of this paper is outlined below:
• Exploitation of the recursively-constructed QC-LDPC
codes structure by an introduced multi-level compression
scheme that reduces memory requirements, and is suit-
able for more general matrices composed of polynomial
circulants,
• Use of LU decomposition of
(not of
, as done
by other authors; i.e., [26], [23]) to further reduce memory
requirements in serial and shared architectures and to re-
duce hardware complexity in parallel architectures, due to
the reduction of the involved matrices,
• A low-complexity hardware encoding core suitable for
code words of length that spans few to many thousands
bits,
• Architectural exploration of encoders for QC-LDPC codes,
and
• Flexible design that requires a constant number of clock
cycles for encoding codes of various word lengths, which
share a common base matrix.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
reviews the encoding of systematic LDPC codes using the
PCM, and code construction. Section III details the proposed
encoding algorithm using LU decomposition and the proposed
architectures, while the impact of several aspects of the pro-
posed methodology is studied in Section IV. Section V presents
implementation results of the proposed encoders for various
codes of different lengths and code rates, and compares the
proposed encoding method and architecture to prior art. Finally
Section VI discusses conclusions.
II. QC-LDPC ENCODING BACKGROUND
A. LDPC Encoding Using PCM
In general, a systematic
LDPC code has
information
bits and
coded bits with code rate
. The parity-check
matrix
is of size
, and it defines a set of equations:
(1)
where
is a codeword. Let
and
be sub-matrices of
,
of size
and
, respectively, such
that
. Let codeword
be expressed as
,
where
is a vector of
information bits and
is composed of
the
parity bits. From (1), it follows that
(2)
(3)
For encoders based on (3), high encoding complexity is at-
tributed to the high density of
[15].
The high density of
in (3) requires substantial hard-
ware cost for the storage of the matrix. Furthermore, operations
with dense matrices are computationally intensive, therefore re-
quiring parallelism and hence additional hardware resources to
deliver high throughput. In certain cases, the structure of the
PCM allows for the reduction of encoding complexity, usually
by limiting the randomness of the code. Encoding architectures
based on the dual diagonal structure can be of low complexity;
they take advantage of the fact that the sub-matrices of the dual
diagonal are identity
matrices (or of same shifting factor),
and two of the three sub-matrices of the first columns of
have
the same value. Therefore, by solving a simple linear system, the
first parity bits are directly computed and the remainder of the
parity bits are obtained by simple forward substitution. How-
ever, in order that the method is kept simple, restrictions are im-
posed on the shifting factors of
. The proposed encoder archi-
tectures employ QC-LDPC codes of higher randomness than the
codes of IEEE 802.16e and IEEE 802.11n standards, and the ob-
tained BER performance is significantly improved as depicted
in Fig. 1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2698
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
Fig. 1. BER performance of
, (2016, 1512), and
(2016, 1008)
using normalized min-sum decoder with normalization factor
and
.
B. Iterative Code Construction
The PCM of QC-LDPC codes consists of
nonzero circu-
larly shifted identity
sub-matrices, in other words, circulant
permutation sub-matrices (also represented as monomials [27])
and
zero sub-matrices.
The construction of parity check matrix
of the QC-LDPC
used in the proposed encoder is performed off-line using a re-
cursive method [25], [27], [28] summarized as follows:
Let
be a binary base matrix of size
. This matrix is
recursively extended by an integer
, called extension factor,
to construct the
matrix of size
as follows:
For each column
of the base matrix
, we create a column
with size equal to
as follows:
• Every “0” in
is replaced by
zero sub-
matrix,
• Every “1” is replaced by
identity
sub-matrix
circularly shifted by shifting factor
, particular for each
nonzero element of
.
This process creates the new matrix
and can be applied again on
using an extension factor
which can be either different
from or equal to
. The procedure is repeated until we reach
the final PCM. QC-LDPC codes structured this way are also
called Multi-level QC-LDPC codes [25], [28]. This construc-
tion method has been proven to be suitable for implementation
of high-throughput scalable LDPC decoders with low area
complexity [29], [30]. Lin et al. have shown that decoders
which use multi-level QC-LDPC codes, referred to as hierar-
chical
-QC LDPC codes, achieve improved coding, increased
performance and adjustable degree of decoding parallelism
[29]. Also, extending recursively the base matrix facilitates the
construction of a PCM with controlled number of cycles [27],
[25]. Each extended matrix
is described by a unique base
shift matrix
. An example of such base shift matrix is
(4)
TABLE I
COMPUTATION OF
where the non-negative elements are shifting factors
while
denotes a zero sub-matrix.
The error correction performance of several codes constructed
as described above, has been thoroughly tested and proven by
means of hardware prototyping using a system composed of an
encoder, additive white Gaussian noise generator [31], a decoder
[32], and circuitry for counting errors. The BER performance of
two example QC-LDPC codes (
and
) in compar-
isontoWimaxcodesisshowninFig.1.Itcanbeobservedthatthe
corrective capability of the codes outperforms or is comparable
to the corresponding Wimax codes of the same length at the
waterfall, while the
exhibits lower error floor.The codes
were constructed as follows: A binary base matrix,
, of size
6
24, having similar density distribution with Wimax code
[33], has been randomly constructed, and randomly
extended by two extension steps,
for all lengths and
for 2K code,
for 4K code,
for
8K code and
for 16K code. The same process has
been followed to construct (2016, 1008) code, starting from the
12
24 Wimax binary base matrix. Note that codes adopted in
several international standards such as the Wimax, rely on one
extension step, thus restricting the PCM randomness degree.
Codesconstructedasdiscussedherehavealreadyfoundpractical
applicationina 60GHz GigabitEthernetwirelesslink[34],[35].
III. PROPOSED ENCODER: MEMORY COMPRESSION SCHEME
AND HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE
LUdecompositioncanreducethecomplexityduethemultipli-
cation by
in (3) which can be decomposed into a lower
triangular matrix
and an upper triangular matrix
, that is:
(5)
Therefore, using (3) and (5), encoding can be executed as
(6)
In case that not all the principle minors of
are non-singular,
the LU decomposition may not exist [23]; in this case an ex-
tended LU decomposition is possible:
, as
in [23] where
is a permutation matrix such that
(7)
Our experimental results show that LU decomposition of
of the proposed codes results to sparser matrices than
LU decomposition of
, as detailed in Section IV.A. The
proposed encoding method exploits the sparsity of the three
matrices
and
in (6) performing a three-step encoding
algorithm, listed in Table I. The sub-matrix
is off-line in-
verted within Galois Field
and then, the obtained result
is decomposed into a lower triangular matrix
and
an upper triangular matrix
using Gaussian Elimination [23].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: A LOW COMPLEXITY-HIGH THROUGHPUT QC-LDPC ENCODER
2699
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed hardware encoder.
TABLE II
COMPRESSED REPRESENTATION OF
. THIS ORGANIZATION ALLOW BETTER
CONTROL THAN HAVING DIFFERENT MEMORIES FOR EACH CONTENT, INDEX,
SHIFTING FACTOR OR EOC
Matrices
and
are precomputed, compressed and stored in
appropriated memories, as shown in following subsections.
A. Serial Encoder Architecture
An overview of the proposed hardware encoder architecture
is shown in Fig. 2. First we propose an architecture where the
operations are grouped into three identical stages, executed se-
rially. We first propose a single-level compression scheme, sub-
sequently extended to a recursive multi-level scheme. The par-
ticular technique to reduce the memory required to store a sparse
binary matrix, is to store the location of nonzero elements only,
is common, see for example [23].
The basic operation performed by each of the three stages of
the encoder core is row-vector by matrix multiplication (VMM).
We consider that each row vector is composed of sub-row vec-
tors each of length equal to
.
1) First Encoding Stage: In the first step
is involved.
To compress
, we consider it as a base matrix where its el-
ements represent the values of the
sub-matrices as illus-
trated in (4) and therefore, it can be stored as depicted in Table II.
For a code constructed in
steps, we use the notation
to de-
note
. EOC (End Of Column) is a one-bit flag, which, when
asserted, denotes that the entry to be subsequently read, refers
to the next column. Multiplication of a vector by a circularly
shifted matrix is equivalent to a corresponding circular shift of
the vector. Therefore we use a Logarithmic Barrel Shifter (LBS)
modified to perform circular shifts to implement the multiplica-
tion of sub-row vectors with the nonzero sub-matrices. All par-
tial products that correspond to a particular group of -columns
are accumulated by
exclusive-or gates and a -bit register, as
shown in Fig. 3. The employed compressing method ensures
that the memory required to store the matrices needed for en-
coding, depends on the density of each matrix rather than its
size. The size
of memory needed to store the nonzero ele-
ments of
is
(8)
Fig. 3. First-stage VMM Unit.
where function
returns the number of nonzero
sub-
matrices of matrix
and
is the length of the word shown in
Table II. Therefore (8) is written as
(9)
Multi-Level Compression of
: In the following, we extend
the common compression method, so that it takes into consider-
ation the recursive construction of the PCM. Substantial amount
of memory is required for keeping the location of nonzero sub-
matrices. For the case of recursively constructed codes (multi-
level codes), we depart from the common compression tech-
nique and show that it is possible to reduce the memory required
for index storage by further exploiting the matrix structure. In
the example of Section II.B, matrix
has two extension levels,
where
. Let
be the number of rows of
.
Let
denote the number of
bits required to express the row position of
nonzero
sub-matrices in
. In our example and for
, it holds that
then
. Even in case of
, where
is the last extension level,
can be
less when storing the indices of nonzero
sub-matrices as a function of the shifting factors
of the cor-
responding
nonzero sub-matrices in -th level. In a
multi-level extension, each row/column of
defines
rows/columns in
. In order to perform encoding by a
multi-level PCM, the row positions of the
sub-ma-
trices are required in the
matrix, together with the
corresponding shifting factors. Instead of directly storing this
information, significant storage reduction can be achieved for
multi-level PCM codes, by storing information regarding the
base matrix
and the corresponding shifting factors
, for
all levels . Specifically, let
denote the row position of a
nonzero
matrix at level . Starting from the indices
of nonzero elements in
, the sequence
and all the corresponding shifting factors, the specific values of
are iteratively computed, as discussed in the following.
The indices
of nonzero sub-matrices in each of the
-columns in the first level
equal to indices of nonzero
elements of each single column of
, i.e.,
.
Indices and shifting factors of nonzero sub-matrices of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2700
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
Fig. 4. Hierarchical compression of multi-level QC-LDPC codes.
is
number of rows of
.
and
respectively, and each 1-bit column
of each
sub-matrix,
are used to determine the indices
of the nonzero sub-matrices
of the next level
; sim-
ilarly for the subsequent levels. Each index and shifting factor
of level- are used to determine
indices at
st level.
The indices of required
)-bit sub-vectors of the input
vector involved in the multiplication operations are similarly
determined and stored, as shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 4 depicts that in
the first level,
and EOC of
and
of each
nonzero sub-matrix of each
-column of
are stored.
For each level , only shifting factors
are stored. Due to
the extension procedure, a nonzero element in
produces
nonzero elements in
, each located in a row of a
sub-matrix in
. Therefore, starting from
the row position (index) of a nonzero element in
, we can
compute the
indices for the corresponding nonzero elements in
. Let
denote the index of a nonzero element
in the th column,
, of a
sub-matrix
in
. Then
can be iteratively computed as
(10)
where
is the corresponding
shifting factor,
denotes the operation
modulo .
are
the indices of the sub-vectors needed for multiplication. Fig. 5
shows a circuit implementing the index computation of (10)
connected to subsequent units. For a two-level PCM, the re-
quired indices
, corresponding to the nonzero sub-ma-
trices in the second level, are computed using the particular
, the value of
and the corresponding shifting fac-
tors
of each nonzero sub-matrix in the first level.
and
are stored in individual ROMs, while values
of
are stored in registers. Note that the same concept can
be followed to determine the indices of EOC;
of each
-column is asserted,
, in the index of last nonzero
sub-matrix of each
-column, else
. In the multi-
level structure,
is active in the corresponding index
and can be determined using
:
(11)
where
. According to the
introduced iterative multi-level memory compression described
Fig. 5. Architecture of index computation circuit for ML-
.
Fig. 6. The unique types of the nonzero sub-matrices in
and
for
.
above, the total memory size
, required to store matrix
can be computed as follows
(12)
where
is the number of nonzero elements of
.
2) Second and Third Encoding Stages: Matrices
and
do not consist only of identity
, circularly shifted identity
(monomial), and zero sub-matrices thus they differ from the
structure of
, because of the inversion of
. It is found
by exhaustive search that the three matrices
and
consist of
zero sub-matrices and a limited number of types
of
nonzero sub-matrices. Furthermore, it is interesting to
note that the
nonzero sub-matrices are obtained by cir-
cularly shifting an even more limited set
of nonzero sub-ma-
trices. The occurrence of circulants is expected since the inverse
of a matrix composed of circulant sub-matrices is also a matrix
of circulant sub-matrices [36]. Also, sum, product and inverse
of circulants are also circulants [37]. The procedure of identi-
fying the set of types
is simple and is described by Algorithm
1. Function
in line 6 of Alg. 1, circularly shifts the
columns of matrix
by
positions. The particular details of
the structure of
and
are exploited to decrease the memory
required for their storage. Each type of nonzero sub-matrix is
assigned an integer as a unique identity tag. As an illustrative
example assume the PCM
of the 2K code where matrices
and
of the example LDPC code,
, have only
four types of 4
4 nonzero sub-matrices, i.e.,
, denoted as
to
and
in Fig. 6. Sub-matrix
has been
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: A LOW COMPLEXITY-HIGH THROUGHPUT QC-LDPC ENCODER
2701
TABLE III
COMPRESSED REPRESENTATION OF MATRIX
. THE OCCURRENCE OF
POLYNOMIAL SUB-MATRICES REQUIRES STORING RELATIVE INFORMATIONS
ABOUT THEM. A COMPRESSED REPRESENTATION OF
HAS IDENTICAL
STRUCTURE
observed in other codes, but not in
. We therefore extend
the strategy adopted for storing
to the case of matrices not
composed by circularly shifted identity matrices only. Specif-
ically we store the type of each particular nonzero sub-matrix
that has occurred and then we store the corresponding index (the
row position of the corresponding element of
or
), shifting
factor, identity tag and EOC, thus producing a compressed rep-
resentation for
and
, illustrated in Table III.
Algorithm 1 Identification of Types in a Matrix
Require: Matrix
Ensure:
, shifting factors
1: Partition
into non-overlapping
sub-matrices
2:
3: for all nonzero
in
do
4:
found
false
5:
for all shifting factors
do
6:
if
then
7:
found
true
8:
shifting factors
append(shifting factors, )
9:
end if
10:
if not found then
11:
12:
end if
13:
end for
14: end for
Therefore we first to multiply the sub-row vectors with the
corresponding sub-matrices using a Modulo-2 row vector-ma-
trix multiplier, called MAC, and subsequently circularly shift
the result by the corresponding shifting factor, as seen in Fig. 7.
The compressed representations of matrices
and
are stored
in two separate ROMs, while the first rows of each type are
stored in a Look-Up Table identified using a characteristic in-
teger as identity tag. Notice that a complete sub-matrix should
be stored, in case of non-circulants, instead of a single row. The
impact of this structure is studied in Section IV.B. The corre-
sponding sizes
and
for the storage of matrices
and
respectively, are given by
(13)
(14)
Fig. 7. VMM Unit of stages 2 and 3. The units which multiply the row vectors
with
and
have identical structure. They differ only in the contents of the
ROMs.
where
and
are the total number of unique sub-matrix
types of
and
respectively. It is noted that most LDPC codes
tested for the proposed encoder exhibit the same sub-matrix
types for
and
, so they can share the same memory.
Multi-Level Compression of
and
: Matrices
and
differ from
in that they are not composed of cir-
cularly shifted matrices, but they may contain polynomial cir-
culants, or even for the case of
and
being non-circulant
matrices. In other words, consider that the sub-matrix
is
extended by polynomial circulant
sub-matrices and
subsequently is extended by polynomial circulant
sub-matrices generating
. Therefore, ML-com-
pression can be applied to
and
by taking into
consideration in addition to the shifting factors, the sub-matrix
types also. For evaluating the ML-compression on higher-level
codes, ML-QC-LDPC matrices with three, four and five levels
of expansion have been constructed. It is interesting to mention
that some codes present polynomial circulant sub-matrices in
each level while others present different types of sub-matrices
in all levels except the last. Most of them are polynomial circu-
lant sub-matrices and the remainder are a set of “unstructured”
non-circulant sub-matrices with different number of nonzero el-
ements in each column/row. Therefore for matrices
and
, (10) is then written as follows
(15)
where the type
of the sub-matrix is taken into consideration,
as well as
, which enumerates the nonzero elements in the th
column of the extended matrix, to cover the case of multiple
nonzero elements per column. These parameters are arguments
to a function
in (15), which quantifies the role of each param-
eter. The exact definition of
depends on the code and can be
implemented as a look-up operation.
B. Shared Serial Encoder Architecture
A VMM unit can be shared among the three units of the en-
coder to reduce hardware complexity. In this case, unit MAC
employed in second and third steps is bypassed in the first step.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2702
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
Fig. 8. Encoder architecture with one shared VMM unit.
A shared VMM unit is shown in Fig. 8. The number of logic ele-
ments required to implement the shared VMM unit is estimated
as follows:
(16)
Note that the second VMM unit shown in Fig. 7 and the shared
encoder core shown in Fig. 8 can be used to implement effi-
ciently encoders based on polynomial QC-LDPC codes [38],
[39] without any changes. For large values of
, long critical
paths may occur in the MAC unit or the LBS network, there-
fore reducing clock frequency. Such issues are addressed by
introducing pipeline stages. Table VI compares the occupied
slices required to implement encoders of various code lengths
and therefore
, using either three VMM units or one shared
VMM unit.
C. Parallel Encoder Architecture
1)
-Parallel Encoder Architecture: The serial encoding
core multiplies row vectors by the corresponding compressed
matrices, one -column at a time. To decrease the encoding la-
tency, we can parallelize each multiplication by partitioning the
matrices
and
into
groups of -columns each, where
is the parallelism degree, and subsequently, multiply the input
vector by the
groups, in parallel as depicted in Fig. 9. When
the shared VMM of Fig. 8 is used, the hardware complexity
measured as the number of logic elements is
(17)
where
is given by (16).
Each VMM uses a local memory to store compressed infor-
mation regarding only
columns of the matrix
or
,
by which the parallelized unit multiplies, where
is the number
of the
-columns of the particular matrix. In the shared par-
allel architecture, with the organization shown in Fig. 10, the
Fig. 9. A parallel implementation of the first step comprises identical instances
of the same unit. Each instance accesses a ROM containing data required by the
particular instance only. Similarly for the second and third steps.
represents
the number of the included columns in each unit,
.
Fig. 10. Shared parallel architecture. (a) Dedicated VMMs for each of the
three steps. (b) Organization of shared VMMs, VMMs without MAC, and
interconnection with XOR trees.
computation of each row vector-matrix product is accelerated
using large numbers of VMMs. In order to reduce hardware
complexity, instead of using three separate units for each row
vector-matrix multiplication as in Fig. 2, a shared VMM array
is build, from VMMs capable of supporting all three vector-ma-
trix computations required by the encoder (Fig. 8), one at a time.
The maximum possible number of shared VMMs employed to
implement multiplication is defined by the number of nonzero
sub-matrices of
and
. In case that nonzero elements of
outnumber the nonzero elements in
or
, additional simpler
VMMs, i.e., not containing a MAC, (Fig. 3) are used. The -bit
sub-vectors which compose the result, are formed by XOR ad-
dition trees, which sum outputs of the VMMs operating in par-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: A LOW COMPLEXITY-HIGH THROUGHPUT QC-LDPC ENCODER
2703
Fig. 11. Full parallel core based on XOR logic. Inputs and outputs are stored
in shift registers.
allel. Upper bounds on the number of VMMs required for a
vector-matrix multiplication are given by
(18)
(19)
(20)
where
is the number of VMMs without a MAC required
for multiplication by matrix
, and
denotes the maximum
number of VMMs required for multiplication by matrices
and
, as shown in Fig. 10(a). Finally,
is the number of
VMMs without a MAC as the remainder of the processing can
be performed by the
shared VMMs, as shown in Fig. 10(b).
Parallelism of full vector - matrix multiplication proposed in
Fig. 10 is flexible and can be exploited efficiently for different
QC-LDPC codes by applying changes only on ROMs or FFs for
the case of the full parallel encoding architecture based on the
proposed code structure and memory compression. The archi-
tecture allows easy exploitation of area - throughput trade-offs.
2) Fully Parallel Encoder: Another VMM architecture can
be derived by replacing the shared VMM array by a simple
bit-by-bit modulo-2 vector-matrix multiplier, as the encoding
core of [11], using AND/XOR operations. Another technique is
hard-wiring the XOR operations and removing the AND logic.
Such an architecture is shown in Fig. 11. Once the information
bits are loaded in a shift register, multiplications are executed
in a single clock cycle. This requires a
-bit input shift register
and an
-bit output shift register.
It is clearly shown that the number of XOR gates,
, de-
pends on the number of aces in the corresponding matrix, there-
fore on the density of the first base matrix
. Since the den-
sity of
is directly related to that of
, therefore
, where
is the degree of column
and
and
is the number of columns of
. Also,
considering one pipelining stage after each step of the encoding
algorithm, the maximum delay critical path,
, depends on
the column which has the maximum number of nonzero ele-
ments in a column
of a matrix
. For the case
of
can be precomputed considering the density of
corresponding part of the
. Similarly
corresponding
to the multiplication by
and
can be computed following the
inversion and LU decomposition of
matrix as follows,
(21)
where
is the delay of two-input XOR gate and
is any
of
. The performance of the fully parallel architecture
for various code words lengths is shown in Table VII.
IV. EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED ENCODERS
In this section, we quantify the performance and the com-
plexity of the proposed encoder architectures. All encoders for
codes with rates 1/2 and 3/4 have been realized in hardware on
the Xilinx Virtex-5 FPGA device XC5VFX70T-FF1136-1 [40].
A. Impact of LU Decomposition of
The types shown in Fig. 6 are permuted sub-matrices with a
constant number of “1”s per row, while in some codes, every
row of the sub-matrix could have different number of “1”s or
even an all-zero row. For latter codes, matrix
is com-
posed of fewer types but it has been found to be about two to
five times more dense than both
and
matrices. Therefore,
even with as many sub-matrix types as up to 1000 as we found
in some codes, LU decomposition with the proposed prepro-
cessing method has been found to be more efficient encoding
method. Particularly, an irregular girth-6 LDPC code, denoted
, for which
, gives
and
matrices with four
different types of nonzero sub-matrices of Fig. 6. Therefore we
need a LUT of 4
4 bits to store them. In a similar girth-6
QC-LDPC code,
, while the number of types of
was 4 with 15321 nonzero sub-matrices,
presents 18 unique
types; some of them are circulant permuted sub-matrices, while
others are not. Matrix
of
presents 10 unique types,
therefore two LUT’s of 18
16 bits and 10
16 bits are re-
quired to store the
sub-matrices of
and
, where
.
However, the number of nonzero sub-matrices of both
and
is 2010, as low as 7.6 times less than the number of nonzero
sub-matrices of
. Relevant complexity reduction is also
observed for the girth-8
. Note that when matrix
is sparse, it is well-known that the so-called fill-in may occur;
i.e., its triangular factors
and
combined may have more
nonzero elements than
[41]. Such a sparse
oc-
curs in Wimax codes.
In this case, it is preferable to directly use matrix
for
encoding, since it has less nonzero elements than
and
. For
the proposed codes and encoders, where the sub-matrix
is
randomly constructed and extended by two levels, it is shown
that LU decomposition of
results to denser
and
than the
LU decomposition of
. The impact of the two decom-
positions on hardware complexity is quantified in Section IV.C
for the case of fully parallel architecture.
Table IV shows the number of required clock cycles and a
memory requirements comparison according to (13) and (14)
for encoders based on LU decomposition and direct multiplica-
tion by
of randomly constructed ML-QC-LDPC codes.
For
, we use the base matrix of IEEE Std. 802.16e-2005
[33], for a
and
A, and subsequently recursively extended it. Data reported in
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2704
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
TABLE IV
COMPLEXITY COMPARISON BETWEEN VARIOUS LDPC CODES FOR
AND CODE RATE 0.75 BASED ON
. AN ENTRY
MEANS THAT MULTIPLICATION WITH THE PARTICULAR MATRIX REQUIRES
CLOCK CYCLES, WHILE
BITS OF MEMORY ARE REQUIRED TO STORE
THE MATRIX
Table IV demonstrate that an architecture based on the LU de-
composition of
achieves lower complexity than the di-
rect use of
.
B. Impact of Multi-Level Memory Compression
Multi-level compression is used to reduce the memory
required to store the locations of nonzero sub-matrices.
To store the indices of these sub-matrices of
using
a compression scheme based on
of
,
we need a memory of
bits,
while
when
using
the second
compression
scheme
based
on
, we need a memory of
bits
bits. Memory reduction using the iterative
compression scheme can be 77.4% better than the first com-
pression scheme for
. This reduction comes at the cost of
a relatively simple circuit that implements (10). Specifically,
for the employed FPGA device, we only need six additional
slices to implement the circuit of index computation of (10).
Notice that the feedback path is not needed in case of two-level
extended matrices.
Matrices
and
of
exhibit
one
and
two
types,
respectively,
in
the
first
extension
level,
i.e.,
for
. The total memory required to store
the
indices
of
nonzero
4
4
sub-matrices
of
matrix
,
using
the
multi-level
compression
scheme,
is
bits. Similarly, for matrix
, a 1962-bit
memory is required. Note that types of nonzero 21
21
sub-matrices of
and
are also required to be stored. Small
lookup tables of 21 bits and 2
21 bits are needed for matrices
and
, respectively. Therefore 2748 bits are required for
matrix
and 2004 bits are required for matrix
, instead of
bits and 4408 bits shown in Table IV,
required by the single-level compression scheme. A memory
reduction by a factor of 2.18 is achieved in this way for the
storage of
and
.
The proposed multi-level compression scheme over multi-
level polynomial QC-LDPC codes presents a trade-off between
memory requirements and computational complexity. For the
cases that the implementation of
in (15), is complicated, the
TABLE V
COMPARISON OF SERIAL AND PARALLEL ARCHITECTURES
single-level compression scheme can be followed for
and
,
combined with a multi-level compression scheme for
.
C. Impact of Parallelism
Measurements show that the proposed parallel architecture
increases the encoding throughput with a moderate increase of
area complexity. Table V reports the encoding complexity of
for two cases, a serial one employing one VMM per
stage and a parallel one, employing two VMMs per stage. The
particular parallel architecture uses distinct VMM units and not
shared VMMs of Fig. 8. Table V reveals that the degree-2 par-
allel architecture increases throughput by a factor of two, while
area complexity is only slightly increased.
The highest throughput rate is achieved when executing each
step of Table I in one clock cycle where all nonzero sub-matrices
of each matrix of each encoding step are multiplied in parallel.
In this way, encoding requires three clock cycles to compute the
parity symbols.
Based on the analysis for the
-parallel architecture in
Section III.C.1 and (17)–(20), for
, matrix
has the
maximum number of nonzero sub-matrices equal to 1512,
while
and
have 495 and 366 nonzero sub-matrices, re-
spectively. Also for
, the VMM of Fig. 8 requires six
slices including a LUT-MAC sub-unit, while a VMM without
a LUT-MAC and an accumulator subunits, requires two slices
only. Therefore the estimated number of slices required to
implement the full parallel architecture is
.
In addition,
, 369, and 240 4-bit XOR gates are
required to implement additive trees for matrices
and
, respectively, leading to a total of approximately 30 k slices
for the encoding core only. Assuming input data availability,
a maximum path delay of 5 ns, and a latency of three clock
cycles, the estimated throughput could reach 134 Gbps. There-
fore, we can control the area-throughput trade-off by adjusting
the parallelism degree.
The fully parallel architecture of Fig. 11 has been mapped on
the used FPGA device, executing the three-step encoding algo-
rithm in a single clock. Using LU decomposition of
,
the critical path,
, without pipelining stages between the
three encoding steps, is determined by
, where
is the delay of a two-input XOR gate. Also for
, 13356
XOR gates are required to multiply by
, while 3048
XOR gates are needed to multiply by
and
. A proposed ar-
chitecture based on the LU decomposition of
requires
half the gates required by an architecture based on the LU de-
composition of
, which requires 5503 XOR gates. Table VII
depicts the number of required slices, operating frequency and
the achieved throughput of the fully parallel architecture of the
employed codes. The high number of required slices is due to
the shift registers needed to store the codewords.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: A LOW COMPLEXITY-HIGH THROUGHPUT QC-LDPC ENCODER
2705
TABLE VI
OCCUPIED SLICES AND ACHIEVED FREQUENCY OF SERIAL ARCHITECTURES
OF VARIOUS CODEWORDS LENGTHS.
IS THE SIZE OF LAST EXTENSION STEP
(SECOND STEP).
IS THE NUMBER OF REQUIRED CLOCK CYCLES, AND
AND
ARE THE ACHIEVED INFORMATION AND BLOCK THROUGHPUT,
RESPECTIVELY
TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE OF FULLY PARALLEL ARCHITECTURE. THE COMPUTED
THROUGHPUT EXCLUDES LOADING AND TRANSMISSION TIME
V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS AND COMPARISONS TO THE
STATE-OF-THE-ART
The proposed encoder architectures have been implemented
onto hardware for various codes described in Section II.B.
These codes share a common base matrix
having the
same degree distribution with Wimax
[33] and en-
coding requires a constant number of clock cycles. Table VI
lists the corresponding occupied area in the Xilinx Virtex-5
FPGA device XC5VFX70T-FF1136-1. The occupied slices
refer to the proposed serial architecture using single-level com-
pression. The architecture is found to be efficient for several
QC-LDPC codes, irrespectively of the employed number of
extensions, one or more, thus allowing it to be used for different
standards based on a QC-LDPC PCM structure.
Encoders in the literature are implemented in different
technologies and FPGA devices and target different codes and
applications. Therefore complexity and performance are not
directly comparable; however useful conclusions can be drawn.
Table VIII summarizes the related state-of-the-art encoders
stating several encoding parameters including also a compar-
ison of the Throughput-to-Area Ratio (TAR) of certain relevant
works to the TAR of the corresponding proposed architectures
measured at the same FPGA device of each relevant work. It is
shown that the proposed architectures compare favourably to
the prior art in the sense of flexibility and complexity, despite
the fact that most of the prior art focuses on simple QC-LDPC
or similar codes, while the proposed architecture focuses
on recursively-constructed QC-LDPC codes for low-BER
applications. For some cases [10], [11], we
use the Clock Cycles-Area Product (CCAP) as a complexity
measure to evaluate the architectures complexity. CCAP is a
complexity measure suitable for comparisons to prior art in the
case that the compared architectures are mapped to different
technologies and under the assumption that they operate with
the same clock frequency. We found that the latter assumption
is realistic when the encoder operates as a component in a
system, where the critical path is defined by a different com-
ponent. Therefore CCAP is used to compare architectures for
a given clock frequency. Also, to more clearly illustrate the
benefit of the proposed encoders compared to [11] and [12]
where a Wimax (2304, 1728) is employed, we have evaluated a
proposed implementation for a recursively-constructed (2304,
1728) QC-LDPC code, and compare their complexity to archi-
tectures of [11] and [12]. The BER performance of these two
codes is depicted in Fig. 12.
Chae and Park [26] apply LU decomposition on sub-ma-
trix
of a regular Gallager (non-QC LDPC) PCM, after
rearranging the columns and rows of the PCM to form a
non-singular
matrix, and hence, executing forward/back-
ward substitution. However, as detailed in Sections IV.A and
IV, for the proposed QC-LDPC codes, LU decomposition of
derives to sparser matrices than LU decomposition
of
. LU factorization of
has been also used by Su et al.
[23]. Since throughput depends on time complexity and clock
frequency, architectures in [26] and [23] are of relatively very
low throughput rate due to low clock frequency. Targeting also
low throughput applications, Wang and Chen have applied
LU decomposition of the PCM of the CMMB standard [21]
executing also forward and backward substitution. They require
581 ALUTs and a memory of 2 015 232 bits for the highly
structured LDPC CMMB (4608, 9216) and (2304, 9216) codes,
achieving a throughput rate of 32.44 Mbps and 67.16 Mbps,
respectively. The encoder design by Lee et al. [16], requires
870 slices and 19 block RAMs for a (2000, 1000) code. The
design can support different QC-LDPC codes and uses the RU
algorithm, restricting the structure of the PCM to an appro-
priate lower triangular matrix. They achieved a throughput of
44 Mbps, thus they implement many parallel encoder instances
to obtain higher throughput.
Li et al. [10] exploit the circulants in the structure of the ma-
trices involved in encoding using the Shift-Register-Add-Ac-
cumulator (SRAA) circuit as a building block for a variety of
architectures. The SRAA circuits require
clocks to multiply a
-bit vector by
circulant matrix. Our architecture utilizes
an LBS to perform the same basic operation in a single clock,
at the expense of a potentially longer maximum delay path.
Our approach departs from the approach of [10] since its com-
plexity depends on the density of the involved matrices, while in
[10] the size of the matrices dominates complexity where area
complexity depends on the size of information bits which is
very high for long code words especially for high code rates.
Furthermore, we minimize the complexity by exploiting the
existence of polynomial submatrices, the matrix factorization
and the multi-level code structure, while [10] does not address
memory requirements for the storage of the involved matrices.
In [10], loading the information bits into the encoding core and
multiplications are done in parallel. To compute all parity bits,
[10] requires -SRAA circuits, where
is
, where
is the
number of parity bits. This in fact is a partial parallel architec-
ture, where the indices of the non-zero submatrices in
are con-
secutive, while in our proposed architecture, indices depend on
the resultant inverted matrix. Storing all non-zero submatrices
requires large memories, making the technique of [10] ineffi-
cient. Particularly, for the (2016, 1512) code, the SRAA-based
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2706
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
TABLE VIII
A VIEW OF THE STATE OF THE ART INCLUDING COMPARISON OF THROUGHPUT-TO-AREA RATIO (TAR)
Fig. 12. BER performance of a (2304, 1728) recursively-constructed
QC-LDPC code compared to the corresponding Wimax code.
TABLE IX
AREA-TIME COMPLEXITY COMPARISON. ATP IS THE AREA-TIME PRODUCT
FACTOR AND
REPRESENTS A GIVEN GATE DELAY
serial encoder of [10] would require 1512 clock cycles to de-
termine the 504 parity bits using 1008 FFs, 504 XOR gates and
504 AND gates to implement the encoding core. We compare
to our proposed degree-
parallel architecture, which requires
clock cycles, a RAM of 2016 bits to store the infor-
mation bits, the intermediate results and the parity bits,
XOR gates,
AND gates and
FFs to implement
the shared core (one shared core requires 55 logic elements).
Using these measurements, Table IX lists the encoding required
total logic elements, number of clock cycles and the area time
product (ATP), where
,
for different codes and different related prior architectures.
Assume the common and practical case that the encoder is
integrated into a larger system, where the clock frequency is
part of system specification and is applied on several blocks
of the system. Therefore, for a frequency of 200 MHz, ATP
of the proposed degree-3 partial parallel architecture outper-
forms [10] by a factor of 1.7 due to the reduced CCAP, as
shown in Table IX. However clearly the proposed architecture
cannot accommodate faster clock without deeply pipelining the
shared encoding core. Considering the full parallel procedure,
the proposed full-parallel architecture requires the same number
of XOR gates with the two-stage architecture of [10] but it re-
quires only one clock to determine the parity bits while the
two-stage architecture of [10] requires four clocks for the case
of
. In the particular case, the two architectures have com-
parable critical path length.
Yasotharan and Carusone [11] use also the generator matrix
of IEEE 802.16e standard to compute the parity bits. Multiplica-
tion with
is executed using a Modulo-2 vector-matrix multi-
plier. The encoding architecture of [11] requires binary multipli-
cation between the input vector and a row vector
of the parity
sub-matrix of
computing one parity bit per clock cycle. They
require
AND two-input gates and
XOR two-inputs gates.
The Modulo-2 vector-matrix multiplier of [11] can not be flex-
ible for any LDPC code since for different codes, rows of the
parity matrices could have a different number on non-zero ele-
ments and therefore, a different multiplication tree is required.
Also they need to store all the generator matrix. As shown in
Table IX, our proposed architectures have 10.7 and 10 times less
area-time complexity than [11] for the codes (2016, 1512) and
(2304,1728), respectively.In conclusion, our proposed architec-
tures having a complexity which depends on the number of non-
zero submatrices/elements of the involved matrices are more ef-
ficient than [10] and [11] where they depend on the number of
information/parity bits (size of the involved matrices).
Targeting high-throughput applications, Cohen and Parhi
propose a hybrid encoder for IEEE 802.3an (10 GBase-T) based
on RS(2048, 1723) LDPC code implementing an encoding
method based on the RU algorithm [17]. The particular encoder
requires 6333 LUTs, 6356 FFs and 4525 slices for the fully
parallel Hybrid/RU architecture with a 4.642 ns clock period,
and the Hybrid/seq encoder requires 15618 LUTs, 11911 FFs,
and 8816 slices with a parallel-5 architecture with 4.377 ns
clock period. The PCM of the IEEE 802.3an (10 GBase-T)
standard LDPC code is structured, much more dense than
the employed codes, not based on QC-LDPC codes and
submatrix is not square, therefore, our proposed methodology
and architecture can not be directly applied. However, our
serial design of the (2016, 1512) encoder, implemented onto
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: A LOW COMPLEXITY-HIGH THROUGHPUT QC-LDPC ENCODER
2707
the same device, achieves 106.2 Mbps with 1035 occupied
slices, while the fully parallel architecture occupies 2538 slices
achieving a throughput of 403.2 Gbps. Our architecture and
[17] are not directly comparable since they are optimized for
different codes and different applications, however the itera-
tively constructed codes can be used, subject to meeting the
appropriately set BER specifications. The corresponding TARs
are reported in Table VIII. Using a different technique, Kop-
parthi and Gruenbacher [12] exploit efficiently the structure
of
submatrix of the Wimax standard. Their architecture is
based on forward substitution exploiting the particular struc-
ture of
, as it must be dual-diagonal and the sub-matrices
of the two diagonals must be identity
sub-matrices. Our
architecture is based on two-level extended PCMs, thus even
in case of dual-diagonal
and sub-matrices of the two diag-
onals are not necessarily identity matrices due to the random
extension, their architecture needs to be accordingly modified.
On the other hand our proposed method is directly applicable
in this case. Furthermore, by implementing a pipelined parallel
architecture, [12] achieves an information throughput (IT) of
5.17 Gbps occupying 12727 logic elements on a STRATIX
EP1S25FC672-6 FPGA device. Our proposed fully parallel
architecture requires 5904 logic elements of the particular
device achieving a information throughput of 191.8 Gbps,
considering the (2304, 1728) QC-LDPC code of same density
and behaviour (Fig. 12). Therefore, the TAR of our proposed
architecture outperforms the TAR of [12] by a factor of 80.
An encoding performance of more than 10 Gbps is achieved
by He et al. due to their simplified code structure [19]. Indica-
tively, they achieve 12.8 Gbps for block length of 2048 bits and
code rate of 3/4 requiring 432 gates. This shows that the used
codes are very sparse, also they show a BER plot of order of
only. Recently, Jung et al. have proposed a relatively high
throughput encoder for the IEEE 802.11n/ac standard which is
based on one extension step. They employed the forward/back-
ward substitution using partially parallel processing to achieve
7.7 Gbps throughput for the (1944, 1620) code [14]. This par-
allelism scheme derives to very high area complexity and low
operation frequency. They reported the usage of 96 K gates
for the encoder core, of all codes and code rates of the IEEE
802.11n/ac standard, working at 100 MHz when implemented
with 130-nm CMOS technology. Our proposed full parallel ar-
chitecture requires 65664 XOR gates and one shift registers of
length 1620 bits, maximum number of information bits, and 972
bits for the maximum number of the determined parity bits of all
involved codes and code rates. Assuming our fully parallel ar-
chitecture and the same clock frequency of [14], and excluding
the loading and transmission time, for the (1944, 1620) code, we
achieve an information throughput (IT) of 194.4 Gbps having
.
The versatile encoder architecture of Fewer et al. implements
special constructed codes allowing low hardware encoder/de-
coder complexity [18]. Based also on the RU algorithm and
forward substitution, parallel processing on several frames
at once, and implementation of a series of shift stages, the
design achieves a clock frequency of 278 MHz, due to the
pipelined accumulator, occupying 614 slices with 11 block
RAMs for a rate-0.75 code of length 6912 bits on Xilinx
Virtex-4 (XC4VLX2512-FF668) device, while the achieved
throughput depends on the number of frames processed in
parallel. However, the codes supported are of fixed length, the
density of employed codes and decoding performance below
in [18] are not present, so direct comparison is difficult.
The detailed comparisons above prove that the proposed ar-
chitectures, based on LU decomposition of
, memory
compression, various degrees of parallelism, compare favorably
with the sate of the art in terms of TAR—Area Time Complexity
by 10 to up to 80 times for codes of comparable error-correc-
tion strength. Furthermore the flexibility due to the joint code
and architecture construction, allows the proposed architectures
to adapt to various requirements. Finally the support of recur-
sively-constructed QC-LDPC codes, which are not accommo-
dated by the current state of the art, renders the proposed archi-
tectures suitable for low-BER applications.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have introduced a complete encoding methodology for
QC-LDPC codes. The recursive code construction allows flexi-
bility of creation of codes with good performance and low error
floors comparable to codes of the international standards, while
the architectures are flexible in the sense of supporting wide
range of code lengths and rates. The architectures have linear
complexity with respect to block length. The proposed encoder
is found to reduce complexity compared to previously reported
designs and allow efficient exploitation of design trade-offs
among parallelism, flexibility and throughput rate.
The proposed multi-level compression scheme jointly con-
sidered with the LU decomposition of
and the pro-
posed encoding architectures, introduced in this paper, address
the challenges of designing low complexity encoders of efficient
codes for a variety of throughput rates.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] H. Moussa, A. Baghdadi, and M. Jezequel, “Binary de Bruijn intercon-
nection network for a flexible LDPC/turbo decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS 2008), May 2008, pp. 97–100.
[3] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible
LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no.
6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[4] J.-Y. Lee and H.-J. Ryu, “A 1-Gb/s flexible LDPC decoder supporting
multiple code rates and block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Consumer Elec-
tron., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 417–424, May 2008.
[5] D. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware imple-
mentation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC’03), May 2003,
vol. 4, pp. 2708–2712.
[6] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasi-
cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.
52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[7] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On alge-
braic construction of Gallager and circulant low-density parity-check
codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun.
2004.
[8] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design
for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr.
(VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.
[9] J. Lin, Z. Wang, L. Li, J. Sha, and M. Gao, “Efficient shuffle network
architecture and application for Wimax LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. II: Exp. Briefs, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 215–219, Mar. 2009.
[10] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of
quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2708
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 62, NO. 10, MAY 15, 2014
[11] H. Yasotharan and A. Carusone, “A flexible hardware encoder for
systematic low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 52nd IEEE Int.
Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. (MWSCAS’09), Aug. 2009, pp. 54–57.
[12] S. Kopparthi and D. Gruenbacher, “Implementation of a flexible en-
coder for structured low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE
Pacific Rim Conf. Commun., Comput. Signal Process. (PacRim 2007),
Aug. 2007, pp. 438–441.
[13] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. R. Cavallaro, “High throughput, parallel,
scalable LDPC encoder/decoder architecture for OFDM systems,” in
Proc. IEEE Dallas/CAS Workshop Design, Appl., Integr. Software, Oct.
2006, pp. 39–42.
[14] Y. Jung, C. Chung, J. Kim, and Y. Jung, “7.7 Gbps encoder design for
IEEE 802.11n/ac QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. SoC Design Conf.
(ISOCC), Nov. 2012, pp. 215–218.
[15] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density
parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp.
638–656, Feb. 2001.
[16] D.-U. Lee, W. Luk, C. Wang, and C. Jones, “A flexible hardware en-
coder for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 12th Annu. IEEE
Symp. Field-Programmable Custom Comput. Mach. (FCCM 2004),
Apr. 2004, pp. 101–111.
[17] A. Cohen and K. Parhi, “A low-complexity hybrid LDPC code en-
coder for IEEE 802.3an (10 GBase-T) Ethernet,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 4085–4094, Oct. 2009.
[18] C. Fewer, M. Flanagan, and A. Fagan, “A versatile variable rate LDPC
codec architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 54,
no. 10, pp. 2240–2251, Oct. 2007.
[19] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, “Encoder architecture with throughput
over 10 Gbit/sec for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 21–24, 2006, pp. 3269–3272.
[20] R. Neal, IMA Programs on Codes, Syst., Graphical Models, “Sparse
matrix methods and probabilistic inference algorithms—Part I: Faster
encoding for low density parity check codes using sparse matrix
methods,” Aug. 1999.
[21] P. Wang and Y.-E. Chen, “Low-complexity real-time LDPC encoder
design for CMMB,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Inf. Hiding Multimedia
Signal Process., 2008, pp. 1209–1212.
[22] J. Hu and K. Jiang, “The improved lu-based decomposition
algorithm
for
sparse
matrix
of
ldpc
code,”
in
Frontiers
in
Computer
Education,
ser.
Advances
in
Intelligent
and
Soft
Computing, S. Sambath and E. Zhu, Eds.
Berlin, Germany:
Springer- Verlag, 2012, vol. 133, pp. 867–874 [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-27552-4_114, [Online]. Avail-
able:
[23] J.-N. Su, Z. Jiang, K. Liu, X.-Y. Zeng, and H. Min, “An efficient low
complexity LDPC encoder based on LU factorization with pivoting,”
in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. ASIC, Oct. 2005, vol. 1, pp. 107–110.
[24] Y. Kaji, “Encoding LDPC codes using the triangular factorization,”
IEICE Trans. Fundamentals Electron., Commun. Comput.Sci., vol.
E89-A, pp. 2510–2518, Oct. 2006.
[25] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Systematic recursive construction
of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 302–304, May
2004.
[26] S.-C. Chae and Y.-O. Park, “Low complexity encoding of regular low
density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2003 IEEE 58th Veh. Technol.
Conf. ., Oct. 2003, vol. 3, pp. 1822–1826.
[27] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from cir-
culant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8,
pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[28] C.-M. Huang, J.-F. Huang, and C.-C. Yang, “Construction of quasi-
cyclic LDPC codes from quadratic congruences,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 313–315, Apr. 2008.
[29] C.-Y. Lin, M.-K. Ku, and Y.-H. Chien, “Long length LDPC code
construction and the corresponding decoder implementation with
adjustable parallelism,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., May 2008,
pp. 1423–1427.
[30] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A flexible layered LDPC decoder,”
in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst., Nov. 2011, pp.
36–40.
[31] I. Paraskevakos and V. Paliouras, “A flexible high-throughput hard-
ware architecture for a gaussian noise generator,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2011, pp.
1673–1676.
[32] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved
BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[33] IEEE Std. 802.16e-2005 and IEEE Std.802.16-2004/Cor1-2005, 2006.
[34] N. Kanistras, I. Tsatsaragkos, A. Mahdi, K. Karagianni, V. Paliouras,
F. Gioulekas, E. Lalos, K. Adaos, M. Birbas, P. Karaivazoglou, M.
Koziotis, and M. Perakis, “Digital baseband challenges for a 60 GHz
gigabit link,” in Proc. 2011 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Electron., Circuits,
Syst. (ICECS), Dec. 2011, pp. 346–349.
[35] R. Makri, P. Tsenes, D. Economou, Y. Papananos, D. Dervenis,
M. Birbas, J. Kikidis, V. Paliouras, G. Kalivas, A. Birbas, P. Karaiva-
zoglou, Y. Stratakos, J. Korinthios, S. Siskos, A. Xatzopoulos,
J. Komninos, S. Katsikas, K. Voudouris, A. Rigas, G. Agapiou, and
P. Raxis, “Next generation millimeter wave backhaul radio: Overall
system design for GbE 60 GHz PtP wireless radio of high CMOS
integration,” in Proc. 2011 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Electron., Circuits,
Syst. (ICECS), 2011, pp. 338–341.
[36] I. Imam and L. Lamont, “An algorithm using the schur complement in
inverting large matrices,” in Proc. IEEE Southeast Conf. Energy Inf.
Technol. Southeast, Apr. 1989, vol. 2, pp. 421–426.
[37] R. M. Gray, Toeplitz and Circulant Matrices: A Review, ser. Founda-
tions and Trends in Communications and Information Theory.
Delft
, The Netherlands: Now Publishers Inc., 2006.
[38] S. Johnson and S. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low
encoding complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 79–81,
Feb. 2003.
[39] B. Vasic, “Structured iteratively decodable codes based on steiner
systems and their application in magnetic recording,” in Proc. IEEE
Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM’01), 2001, vol. 5, pp.
2954–2960.
[40] “Virtex-5 FPGA Devices,” Jul. 2011 [Online]. Available: www.
xilinx.com
[41] A. George and E. Ng, “Symbolic factorization for sparse gaussian elim-
ination with partial pivoting,” SIAM J. Sci. Statical Comput., vol. 8, no.
6, pp. 877–898, Nov. 1987.
Ahmed Mahdi holds a diploma in electrical and
computer engineering and a M.Sc. in integrated
software and hardware systems from the University
of Patras. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. Degree
on hardware architectures for error correction sys-
tems. His interests are in the field of high-throughput
low-complexity
VLSI
architectures
for
signal
processing and algorithm modelling/hardware im-
plementation co-design.
Vassilis Paliouras (S’90–M’92) is an associate
professor at the Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering Department, University of Patras, Greece.
His research interests are in the areas of VLSI archi-
tectures for signal processing and communications,
low-power digital design and computer arithmetic.
He has published more than 110 research articles
in international journals, conferences, and book
chapters and has edited three books. He is advisor to
five Ph.D. students, and has supervised 23 masters’
and 18 diploma theses. Dr. Paliouras has received
the IEEE CASS Guillemin-Cauer best-paper award for the year 2000. Dr.
Paliouras has served as the general co-chair of International Workshop on
Power and Timing Modeling, Optimization and Simulation (PATMOS 2004).
He has also served as technical program chair of PATMOS 2005, the IEEE
Workshop on Signal Processing Systems Implementation (SiPS) 2005, and
technical program co-chair of IEEE International Conference on Electronics
Circuits and Systems (ICECS) 2010 and a European liaison for IEEE ISCAS
2012, Korea. He has served in editorial boards of journals and technical
program committees of numerous conferences in the areas of signal processing,
circuits, systems, and communications.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:18:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
