IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

945

On Detection Method for Soft Iterative Decoding in the Presence of Impulsive Interference
Vincent Dimanche, Alban Goupil, Laurent Clavier, Member, IEEE, and Guillaume Gelle, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper deals with the performance improvement of soft iterative decoders in impulsive interference modeled by additive noise. In case of α-stable noise, the inputs of the belief propagation decoder are too complex to compute. We propose to use an approximation of the log likelihood ratio in an impulsive environment. Even with this simplification, we show that the performance stays close to the one obtained using the true probability density function. Moreover, the robustness of our solution against the parameter estimation is investigated.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, Turbo codes, α-stable, impulsive interference, impulsive noise, soft iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
O NE significant limitation of dense wireless networks is interference. Despite the limits due to the unbounded path loss model assumption, in ad hoc or sensor networks an α-stable distribution can give a relevant insight and be a powerful tool to analyze the effect of this aggregate interference [1], [2]. Other kind of noise can be used when studying soft iterative decoding codes such as Middleton class-A noise [3] but we based our study on the stable model.
We need an efficient channel coding scheme to minimize transmission errors and packet retransmission, which create an important energy dissipation. Soft iterative decoder, e.g. LDPC codes or turbo codes, is the best solution. However, the decoding process is particularly sensitive to the noise: if the noise is impulsive, performance is significantly degraded when receivers are designed under Gaussian noise assumption [4].
Several papers propose methods and metrics to improve performance if the noise is impulsive, e.g. Hubber metric [5], p-norm [6], robust metric [3] or generalized Gaussian [7] as for the design of optimal or suboptimal receivers, e.g. in [8] for RAKE combiner. Nevertheless the scope of the paper is to focus on a simple and easy way to implement the log likelihood ratio (LLR) calculation because of the limited storage and calculation capacity of embedded system. This is justified by the necessity to reduce the impact of the noise pulses and by the
Manuscript received February 13, 2014; accepted April 16, 2014. Date of publication May 1, 2014; date of current version June 6, 2014. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was J. Choi.
V. Dimanche, A. Goupil, and G. Gelle are with the CReSTIC, University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne, 51096 Reims, France.
L. Clavier is with the Institut d’Électronique, de Microélectronique et de Nanotechnologie (IEMN), UMR CNRS 8520, 60069-59652 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France. He is also with the Institut de Recherche sur les Composants logiciels et matériels pour l’Information et la Communication Avancée (IRCICA), UMR CNRS 3380, 59658 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France, and also with the Institut Mines-Télécom, Télécom Lille, 59653 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2014.2320921

difficulty to implement the natural demapper. Our contribution is to make the LLR calculation easier to implement than the natural LLR without significant performance loss.
Once the system model is presented in Section II, Section III deals with the simplification of the LLR calculation, and some simulations illustrate the performance obtained. Before the conclusion, Section IV investigates the robustness of our solution against channel parameters’ estimation error.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

The output Y of the channel is modeled by Y = X + N , where X = ±1 with equal probability and N is an independent and identically distributed noise following a symmetric α-stable distribution. Many papers have proposed justification for such a model [1] and we do not discuss it in this letter. We keep it simple because it is an accurate model for narrow band, slowly fading transmissions even though a method has been implemented to mitigate the fadings; e.g. equalization. As long as this method is linear, the stable distribution of the interference remains stable. The generalized central limit theorem allows to justify the impulsive noise α-stability in practice.
Stable random variables are, by definition, closed under summation [9]. Unfortunately, most often, no closed-form of their probability density function is available. This distribution depends on two parameters: the exponent, or index, α and the scale factor γ. In wireless context, α is directly associated with the path loss exponent of the radio channel [1]. The noise gets more impulsive as α is small. The special case of Gaussian and Cauchy distributions are given by α = 2 and α = 1 respectively. The scale parameter γ measures the spread of the noise.
In the case of impulsive environment, α < 2, the noise power is not well-defined and the signal to noise ratio is meaningless. Consequently, the following discussions will involve only γ as a measurement of the strength of the noise. In the special Gaussian case, the variance is twice the squared scale parameter σ2 = 2γ2.
To implement the soft iterative codes we first encode the channel outputs into log-likelihood ratios,

Pr(Y |X = +1)

LLR(Y ) = log Pr(Y |X = −1) .

(1)

The paper deals mainly with this transformation between channel output and decoder input. This transformation is called thereafter demapper. This channel output parameterization allows to derive efficient decoding algorithm such as the belief propagation algorithm used to decode LDPC.

1089-7798 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t0s:/2in3d:5e4x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

946

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

We consider that the approximated LLR has a linear part and a power law part—which will be justified below.
On Fig. 1, for α = 1.4, our two parts decomposition is also plotted and, visually, the resulting approximation is good, while the complexity is reduced to its minimum. These remarks are also true for other exponent parameter α between 1 and 2.

Fig. 1. LLR demapper for α = 1.4, γ = 0.483, and its approximation.

B. Linear Part of the Approximation
When the noise is Gaussian, the LLR demapper is linear and its slope depends on the noise power σ2. By analogy with this demapper, we propose to use the same slope expressed with the γ parameter. Thus the linear part of the decoder is:
√ 2
demapper(Y ) = Y when Y is small enough. (2) γ

The AWGN channel has the specific feature that the LLR expression has a closed and simple form: it is proportional to the input. Thus, the input of iterative soft decoder is given by the received word. Unfortunately, this linear demapper is not suited to the more general case of additive independent stable noise channels; when α < 2, rescaling leads to poor performance [4].
The LLR expression (1) involves the probability density function of the noise which is usually not accessible in closedform. The demapper using LLR is thus only available through numerical calculation. Fig. 1 shows that the LLR demapper is highly non-linear when the noise is not Gaussian, α = 1.4. Moreover, it depends on both channel parameters: the index α and the noise scale γ.
As expected when the noise is impulsive, high value of the output should not be trusted; the LLR decreases. The span where the LLR demapper can be approximated with a linear function near 0 grows with the decrease of the noise impulsiveness. The limit case is the Gaussian one where the LLR is linear.

C. Asymptotic Part of the Approximation

The probability density function fα of stable variables with unitary scale parameter may be well approximated by a simple asymptotic expansion given in [9, p. 16],

fα(x) =

n

bk |x|αk+1

+O

|x|−α(n+1)−1

.

(3)

k=1

Our LLR demapper expansion will only be based on the first term, fα(x) ∝ |x|−(α+1) for x large enough. We can then derive a very simple approximation for Y positive and large
enough,

Pr(Y |X = +1)

fα

Y −1 γ

LLR(Y ) = log Pr(Y |X = −1) = log fα

Y +1 γ

≈

log

(Y (Y

− 1)−(α+1) + 1)−(α+1)

for Y large enough

III. LLR APPROXIMATION
Implementing LLR demapper, using lookup tables or some approximations, e.g. p-norm, induces too much complexity. Moreover, robustness and efficiency of the channel parameters’ estimation has a significant impact on the performance of the demapper. The choice of another kind of demapper is then salutary. In this section, a simple approximated demapper is derived.

≈

− (α

+

1) log

Y

−

1

≈

2

α

+

1 .

(4)

Y +1

Y

D. Simulations
We can see on Fig. 1 that both “approximation” curves are close to the LLR demapper in their domain of interest. Accordingly, the complete proposed demapper is given for positive Y by

A. LLR Demapper Decomposition and Approximation As we can see on Fig. 1 the LLR demapper can be divided

√

2 α+1

demapper(Y ) = min

Y, 2

(5)

γ

Y

into two parts.
• When the channel output is close to 0, the LLR demapper is almost linear.
• When the channel output is large enough, the LLR demapper has a simple asymptotic expression which presents a power-law decrease.
By symmetry, the approximation of the LLR demapper may be done only for positive values. Zozor et al. [10] used a fraction of polynomials ax/(b + cx2) in the case of detection in low signal. We prefer to keep an even simpler approach.

the value for negative Y is given by oddness of the demapper. The greatest strength of this demapper is its simplicity; firstly
the computation is fast and simple, and secondly only two parameters need to be estimated: α and γ.
In order to test the suitability of our demapper, we compare it to other demappers in term of bit error rate (BER) by simulation. The BER obtained with a (3, 6)-regular LDPC code of length 20 000 are plotted on Figs. 2 and 3 for α = 1.4 and α = 1.8 which are representative of the behaviors under strong and weak impulsiveness of the noise.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:23:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIMANCHE et al.: SOFT ITERATIVE DECODING IN THE PRESENCE OF IMPULSIVE INTERFERENCE

947

Fig. 2. Comparison between several demappers for α = 1.4.

Fig. 4. Robustness of the BER and parameter estimation by McCulloch’s method for α = 1.4 and γ = 0.387.

Fig. 3. Comparison between several demappers for α = 1.8.

Fig. 5. Robustness of the BER and parameter estimation by Koutrouvelis’s method for α = 1.4 and γ = 0.387.

We compare our demapper to the LLR demapper, implemented by numerical integration, and the p-norm demapper. For the estimation of p, we use the estimation of the shape parameter of the generalized Gaussian distribution with a maximum likelihood method [11] which gives p = 0.6 and p = 1 when α = 1.4 and α = 1.8 respectively.
The simulations show that our solution performs well in both situation, that is for strongly impulsive noise α = 1.4 and weak one, α = 1.8. It is very close to the optimal LLR implementation and it is better than the p-norm solution which is moreover computationally demanding. We do not feel the need to compare with other solutions because we are very close to the optimal one and the only improvement could be to further reduce complexity and/or to increase robustness to estimation errors. Besides other more simple approaches like clipping present a more significant performance degradation [12].
IV. ROBUSTNESS

A. BER Robustness Against Parameter Estimation Errors
To estimate the robustness of our demapper we simulate a mismatch between the fixed channel parameters α, γ and the parameters used by the demapper αe, γe. The mismatch on γ is a relative error in the range γ(1 − 20%) < γe < γ(1 + 20%). The mismatch on α is an absolute one and it verifies 1.00 < αe < 1.95.
The contours on Figs. 4–7 represent log10(BER) for α = 1.4 and α = 1.8. It means that inside a region delimited by a given contour, the BER after decoding the LDPC is less than the value given by the contour. The value of the noise scale, γ, is chosen in order to target a BER value around 10−6. The contours of Figs. 4 and 5 are the same, so are the contours of Figs. 6 and 7.
Our demapper is visibly remarkably robust against channel parameters’ estimation error. Indeed, error on α do not excessively perturbs the performance. An absolute error around 0.2 is well supported as the BER stays around 10−6.
A relative error of 5% on the noise scale estimation, γ is also

Our solution depends on knowing the channel parameters α and γ. Especially, the noise scale γ may be difficult to estimate correctly and could be a fast changing parameter in a wireless communication networks as it involves the interfering neighbors [1].

well supported. As this parameter influences directly the linear part of the demapper, it seems reasonable that robustness is stronger for high impulsiveness, i.e. high value of α. Indeed, an error of 5% on γ degrades more the performance when α = 1.8 than when α = 1.4.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:23:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

948

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 18, NO. 6, JUNE 2014

true situation. The results plotted in Figs. 4 and 6 are computed thanks to the McCulloch’s method whereas the cross of 5 and 7 are obtained by Koutrouvelis’ method.
We notice that in strongly impulsive noise, α = 1.4, both estimators results are very similar and more importantly, the errors stay in the region of the demapper where performance is not degraded. The difference between the estimators is visible for weakly impulsive node, i.e. when α = 1.8. In this case, McCulloch’s method is less precise than the Koutrouvelis’s one. However, in both cases, the estimation errors are still in the region where our demapper is robust.

Fig. 6. Robustness of the BER and parameter estimation by McCulloch’s method for α = 1.8 and γ = 0.488.

V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a very simple demapper between the output of the channel and the iterative error correcting decoder such as LDPC decoders or turbo-codes. It is designed for a channel whose additive noise is impulsive. It is not computationally demanding and its parameters are directly related to the noise parameters.
Moreover, performance obtained with our solution is very close to that obtained using a numerical evaluation of the true log likelihood ratio and is better than previously proposed solutions such as p-norm.
The study of the system robustness done in the fourth part of the paper also shows that our demapper remains efficient even with a mismatch between the true noise parameter and their estimation done by two usual methods.

REFERENCES

Fig. 7. Robustness of the BER and parameter estimation by Koutrouvelis’s method for α = 1.8 and γ = 0.488.
It should be noted that the best values of α and γ according to the BER criterion are not given by their true values. For example, for α = 1.4, it seems that the demapper’s α should be set around 1.6 and gamma should be decreased by around 10%. A further study should determine more precisely the best constants in the demapper expression (5).
B. Realistic Channel Estimation Error
The previous paragraph shows that our demapper has some robustness against channel parameters estimation errors. In order to link these errors to realistic one, we simulate a system which uses 500 pilots in order to estimate the noise parameters α and γ.
Several methods exist to estimate the parameter of the stable distribution. We chose in this paper to use two different well known approaches:
1) McCulloch [13] provides a simple consistent estimator of the parameters based on quantiles.
2) Koutrouvelis [14] introduced a characteristic function based method using regression type estimation. It is easy to compute and it appears to be more accurate if no parameter is known a priori.
This system is run 1000 times and each parameters’ estimation is plotted in Figs. 4–7 with a small cross. In this way, we can see the extent of the errors which may be expected in a

[1] P. C. Pinto and M. Z. Win, “Communication in a Poisson field of interferers—Part I: Interference distribution and error probability,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 2176–2186, Jul. 2010.
[2] S. Weber and J. G. Andrews, Transmission Capacity of Wireless Networks. Delft, The Netherlands: Now Publishers Inc, Jan. 2012, ser. ser. Foundations and Trends(R) in Networking.
[3] D. Fertonani and G. Colavolpe, “A robust metric for soft-output detection in the presence of class-A noise,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 36–40, Jan. 2009.
[4] H. Ben Maad, A. Goupil, L. Clavier, and G. Gelle, “Asymptotic analysis of performance LDPC codes in impulsive non-Gaussian channel,” in Proc. IEEE SPAWC, Marrakech, Morocco, Jun. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[5] T. C. Chuah, “Robust iterative decoding of turbo codes in heavy-tailed noise,” Proc. Ins. Elect. Eng. —Commun., vol. 152, no. 1, pp. 29–38, Feb. 2005.
[6] W. Gu and L. Clavier, “Decoding metric study for turbo codes in very impulsive environment,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 256– 258, Feb. 2012.
[7] N. C. Beaulieu, H. Shao, and J. Fiorina, “P-order metric UWB receiver structures with superior performance,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1666–1676, Oct. 2008.
[8] L. Fan, X. Li, X. Lei, W. Li, and F. Gao, “On distribution of SS noise and its application in performance analysis for linear rake receivers,” IEEE Commun. Letter., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 186–189, Feb. 2012.
[9] C. L. Nikias and M. Shao, Signal Processing With Alpha-Stable Distributions and Applications. Hoboken, NJ, US: Wiley, 1995.
[10] S. Zozor, J. M. Brossier, and P. Amblard, “A parametric approach to suboptimal signal detection in α-stable noise,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 4497–4509, Dec. 2006.
[11] M. K. Varanasi and B. Aazhang, “Parametric generalized Gaussian density estimation,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 1404–1415, 1989.
[12] H. Ben Maad, A. Goupil, L. Clavier, and G. Gelle, “Clipping demapper for LDPC decoding in impulsive channel,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 968–971, May 2013.
[13] J. H. McCulloch, “Simple consistent estimators of stable distribution parameters,” Commun. Stat.-Simul. C., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1109–1036, 1986.
[14] I. A. Koutrouvelis, “An iterative procedure for the estimation of the parameters of stable laws,” Commun. Stat. Simul. Comput., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 17–38, 1981.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:23:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

