IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 49, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014
73
An LDPC Decoder With Time-Domain Analog and
Digital Mixed-Signal Processing
Daisuke Miyashita, Member, IEEE, Ryo Yamaki, Kazunori Hashiyoshi, Hiroyuki Kobayashi,
Shouhei Kousai, Member, IEEE, Yukihito Oowaki, Member, IEEE, and Yasuo Unekawa
Abstract—Time-domain analog and digital mixed-signal pro-
cessing (TD-AMS) is presented. Analog computation is more
energy- and area-efficient at the cost of its limited accuracy,
whereas digital computation is more versatile and derives greater
benefits from technology scaling. Besides, design automation
tools for digital circuits are much more sophisticated than those
for analog circuits. TD-AMS exploits both advantages, and is a
solution better suited to implementing a system on chip including
functions for which high computational accuracy is not required,
such as error correction, image processing, and machine learning.
As an example, a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code decoder
with the technique is implemented in 65 nm CMOS and achieves
the best reported efficiencies of 10.4 pJ/bit and 6.1 Gbps/mm².
Index Terms—Analog computation, low-density parity-check
(LDPC) code, LDPC decoder, multiple-valued logic (MVL),
time-to-digital converter (TDC), low power.
I. INTRODUCTION
A
NALOG computation, which is potentially more energy-
and area-efficient than digital counterpart at the cost
of limited accuracy, has been attracting attention again since
many applications are emerging that do not require high cal-
culation accuracy or complete answers. For example, energy-
and/or area-efficient analog decoders for error correcting codes
[1]–[4], analog FFT circuits [5], [6], and other applications
related to machine learning [7], [8] have been demonstrated
recently. However, they are specialized for particular functions,
whereas most other functions could be more efficiently exe-
cuted in digital implementation. In fact, binary logic functions
are obviously best suited to binary digital computation. In
order to implement a truly energy- and area-efficient system
with a wide variety of functions, which probably include
functions that do not allow any inaccuracy of analog compu-
tation, the function-specific analog core must be integrated
with general digital circuits as an alternative to using a digital
hardware accelerator (see also Fig. 1). From this standpoint,
the state-of-the-art techniques have critical drawbacks.
First, typically, a large-area and power-hungry analog-to-dig-
ital converter (ADC) and a digital-to-analog converter (DAC)
Manuscript received April 15, 2013; revised July 11, 2013; accepted July 30,
2013. Date of publication October 11, 2013; date of current version December
20, 2013. This paper was approved by Guest Editor Byeong-Gyu Nam.
D. Miyashita, H. Kobayashi, S. Kousai, Y. Oowaki, and Y. Unekawa are with
Toshiba Corporation, Kawasaki 212-8520, Japan.
R. Yamaki is with the Toshiba Corporation, Yokohama 247-8585, Japan.
K. Hashiyoshi is with Toshiba Microelectronics Corporation, Kawasaki 212-
8520, Japan.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2013.2284363
Fig. 1. Concept of the proposed time-domain analog and digital mixed signal
processing (TD-AMS) and comparison with the conventional technique.
are necessary for the interface between an analog computation
core and a digital system. This overhead may completely waste
the benefit of efficient analog computation. One approach to
tackle this problem is that of placing the analog computation
core in an analog domain [5], [6] so that conversion between
analog and digital is not required. However, this imposes se-
vere constraints on the applications and cannot improve the ef-
ficiency of a system that is currently implemented in a digital
circuit.
Second, the reduction in supply voltage accompanying tech-
nology scaling, which dramatically improves the energy and
area efficiencies of a digital circuit, makes the realization of
voltage-domain analog computation circuits [1]–[3], [5], [6] in-
creasingly problematic. In order to maintain a dynamic range
under such a low supply voltage, it is necessary to reduce the
mismatches and the thermal noise, and that results in large chip
area and larger power consumption. This tendency is funda-
mentally the same in current-domain and charge-domain analog
circuits. In [5], voltage-domain resolution is significantly im-
proved by employing a floating gate structure. However, it re-
quires special masks and materials that are not needed for digital
circuits. This is the critical drawback in terms of chip fabrica-
tion cost.
Third, design automation tools for analog circuitry are even
poorer than those for digital circuitry, and costly handcraft de-
sign plays a large part in analog design flow. In practice, this
may limit the applicable scale of a system.
In order to overcome these drawbacks, we have proposed
a time-domain analog and digital mixed-signal processing
technique (TD-AMS) [9]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the concept
of TD-AMS is to flexibly replace digital computation elements,
which can be as fundamental an element as an adder, with
analog computation elements only if it improves the efficiency.
0018-9200 © 2013 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
74
IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 49, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014
Fig. 2. Basics of TD-AMS.
Thus, analog computation portions are seamlessly embedded
in the resultant system. The concept makes it possible to reuse
the analog computation portions in several functions for further
improvement of efficiency.
To realize the concept, TD-AMS provides a digital-to-time
converter (DTC) and a time-to-digital converter (TDC) that
are much more energy- and area-efficient than a DAC and an
ADC. It allows exploitation of time-domain resolution that
is superior to voltage-domain resolution in deep-submicron
CMOS technology owing to the higher unity current gain
frequency
[10]. In addition, TD-AMS is fully compatible
with common electronic design automation (EDA) for a digital
system. This means all the systems with TD-AMS can be
implemented with a common digital IC design flow, and it
allows us to integrate a system that is as large as a fully digital
system. In order to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed
signal processing technique, an experimental prototype of
a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code decoder with the
proposed technique has been integrated in a 65 nm CMOS
technology, utilizing a common digital IC design flow [9].
In this paper, we present the details of the proposed time-do-
main analog and digital mixed-signal processing (TD-AMS)
technique and the LDPC decoder implemented using the
technique. Several available calculations, which open up the
possibility of a wide range of applications of the proposed tech-
nique, are explained. Also the design methodology is revealed.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the basics of TD-AMS. Section III describes an
overview of calculations in the time domain. Section IV details
the design of the fabricated prototype decoder whose experi-
mental results are presented in Section V. Section VI presents
conclusions.
II. BASICS OF TIME-DOMAIN ANALOG AND DIGITAL
MIXED SIGNAL PROCESSING (TD-AMS)
Fig. 2 shows the basics of the proposed time-domain analog
and digital mixed signal processing (TD-AMS). TD-AMS is a
hybrid of analog signal processing and binary digital signal pro-
cessing that is optimized in order to enjoy their respective ad-
vantages. The efficiency of analog computation in several arith-
metic functions derived from a single analog signal’s capacity
to convey multi-bit information is exploited, whereas the ad-
vantages of digital signal processing, such as performance im-
provement due to technology scaling and versatility of binary
logic, are fully retained.
In the analog domain, we propose to represent data by the
time when the voltage transition occurs. The representation is
more suitable than representations by the voltage and/or the
current domain [1]–[3], [5]–[7] for technology scaling where
supply voltage is decreasing whereas transistor speed is im-
proving. Because only one transition can represent multi-bit in-
formation, energy consumption is less than for pulse-density
modulation (PDM) [4], where at least
voltage transitions for
transmitting
-bit information are required. Although the wave-
form of the proposed representation resembles that of pulse-
width modulation (PWM) representation [8], the time difference
between a data line edge and a clock line edge is exploited in
order to realize various calculations, rather than pulse width. For
example, summation and minimum calculations are executable
using only zero and one digital standard gate in the time do-
main, respectively, as detailed in Section III. Besides, the rep-
resentation also allows the flexible timing design described in
Section IV.
Hereafter in this section, we describe the interface circuits
between the digital domain and the time domain, which are a
digital-to-time converter (DTC) and a time-to-digital converter
(TDC). Area and power overheads for data conversion are
reduced by using the DTC and TDC instead of a typically
large and power-hungry DAC and ADC for the voltage-domain
analog techniques. Indeed, the proposed 5b TDC consumes
only 3.0 fJ/conversion-step according to the simulation, which
is 1.5
better than the 4.4 fJ/conversion-step of the best ADCs
reported in ISSCC [11], and the TDC occupies only 107 gates
(154
m in 65 nm CMOS). Furthermore, the DTC and TDC
consist only of standard digital gates and can be described in a
common hardware description language (HDL).
A. Digital-to-Time Converter
The circuit diagram of a single-bit DTC and its operation
principle are shown in Fig. 3. Digital-to-time conversion is real-
ized by selecting a signal from delayed or non-delayed time-do-
main signals originated from
according to a digital input
signal
. The DTC is composed of unit delay cells with
delay (DELs), NORs, and inverters. When
is low, node B
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MIYASHITA et al.: AN LDPC DECODER WITH TIME-DOMAIN ANALOG AND DIGITAL MIXED-SIGNAL PROCESSING
75
Fig. 3. Digital-to-time converter: (a) Circuit diagram of a 1b digital-to-time converter (DTC) and its symbol representation; (b) waveform.
Fig. 4. 3-bit DTC: (a) Circuit diagram and (b) its simulated waveform.
stays low and a rising edge of
passes through two NORs. On
the other hand, when
is high, the rising edge passes through
DEL as well as two NORs. As a result, according to whether
is high or low, the timing of the rising edge of
varies
by
.
A multi-bit DTC is composed of cascaded single-bit DTCs
with binary weighted numbers of DELs. For example, the circuit
diagram of 3b DTC and its simulated waveform is shown in
Fig. 4. The time step or
is about 50 ps in this case.
B. Binary Search TDC
TDCs are extensively researched nowadays for use in all-dig-
ital PLLs in wireless transceivers [10], PET imaging [12], and
so on, because a TDC can gain the full benefits of deep-sub-
micron CMOS process [10]. Before the explanation of a pro-
posed TDC named binary-search TDC (BS-TDC) presented in
[9], we briefly describe a conventional TDC, which is composed
of delay chains and flip-flops (FFs). Fig. 5 shows a 3b con-
ventional TDC. The edge transition of the th node occurs at
Fig. 5. Conventional TDC and its operation principle.
, and then when the
signals are sampled by
FFs at
, the former
FFs, where
,
output ‘0’ and the latter
FFs output ‘1’. Because
can
have
different value from 0 to
depending on
, the
TDC distinguishes
different
levels with the step of
.
Therefore the TDC handles
bits of information.
In other words, the required number of FFs increases exponen-
tially with the bit number
, which leads to large energy and
area overhead as
increases.
In order to reduce the overhead, we propose BS-TDC based
on a binary-search algorithm. As shown in Fig. 6, the n-bit
BS-TDC is composed only of
FFs, whereas there are 2
1
FFs in a conventional TDC. Because the area and power for FFs
are dominant in TDCs, reducing FFs directly results in area and
power reduction. Although a binary-search approach is com-
monly used in voltage-domain ADCs, some tricks are required
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
76
IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 49, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014
Fig. 6. Circuit diagram of the proposed binary-search TDC.
Fig. 7. Operation example of the binary-search TDC.
in order to apply it to a TDC because time can neither be stored
nor subtracted in general [13].
At the first stage, the input time
is compared with
,
where
should be positioned at the center of the full range,
and the MSB data of
is produced. Although
could be directly obtained by comparing
with
, this cannot be implemented since time
cannot be subtracted [13]. Instead, by adding
to both sides, where
is added to compensate
for the delay of the FF, the equivalent comparison of
and
is implemented. An example when
is 5 is illustrated in
Fig. 7. In Fig. 8, simulated transition edge timings of the internal
nodes corresponding to the schematic of Fig. 6 are plotted. It
can be seen that a binary search sequence, which distinguishes
eight levels by a three-step comparison, is achieved by BS-TDC.
As shown in Fig. 9, the area and simulated power consumption
for the proposed 5b BS-TDC are reduced by 58% and 38%,
respectively, compared to a conventional TDC.
C. Accuracy of DTC and TDC
We investigated the accuracy of DTC and TDC with simu-
lations of the circuit shown in Fig. 10. A 3b digital input
is converted into a time-domain signal through a DTC and then
reconverted into digital output
through a TDC. In order to
ensure proper timing for the clock of TDC, a DTC identical to
the data line with fixed digital input of ‘011’, which corresponds
to the center of the full range of the TDC as explained above,
and inverters with the delay time around
for balancing
setup and hold margins are utilized.
Global delay variations due to the process, voltage, and tem-
perature changes are compensated by utilizing a pair of the DTC
Fig. 8. Simulated edge positions of the internal nodes of the 3b BS-TDC.
Fig. 9. Comparison of area and simulated energy consumption.
Fig. 10. Schematic for simulation of a DTC and a TDC.
and the TDC employed with the same structure of DEL. Fig. 11
shows the simulation results of the edge positions of ‘ck’ and
‘in’, and resultant
under fast corner condition (ff process,
1.32 V,
30 C) and slow corner condition (ss process, 1.08 V,
125 C). As shown in Fig. 11, although the value of
itself
varies greatly, the relations of edge position between ‘ck’ and
‘in’ are maintained and correct values of
are obtained.
On the other hand, local delay variations or mismatches,
which are mainly caused by random variations of transistors,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MIYASHITA et al.: AN LDPC DECODER WITH TIME-DOMAIN ANALOG AND DIGITAL MIXED-SIGNAL PROCESSING
77
Fig. 11. Simulated edge positions of the internal nodes of BS-TDC in (a) fast
corner condition and (b) slow corner condition, and resultant
in (c) fast
corner condition and (d) slow corner condition.
Fig. 12. Relation between the accuracy and the unit delay of the schematic
shown in Fig. 10. The vertical axis shows the frequency of error occurrences.
affect the effective resolutions of DTCs and TDCs. Fig. 12
shows the Monte Carlo simulation results taking account of
random variation of transistors. The vertical axis shows the
frequency of error occurrences and the horizontal axis shows
the
. Note that the results do not mean that the accuracy
is limited to 3 bits, but that the time resolution is limited.
Therefore when the
is kept unchanged, higher accuracy
than 3 bits is achieved at the expense of larger delay. More
importantly the result indicates the trade-off between energy
consumption, layout area and the effective resolution or the
accuracy because energy consumption and area increase as
increases. Therefore, as required accuracy is relaxed, the
TD-AMS provides higher energy and area efficiencies. The
characteristics are preferable for the applications where high
computational accuracy is not required, such as error correc-
tion, image processing, and machine learning.
Fig. 13. Circuit diagram of (a) multiplexer and (b) demultiplexer.
III. CALCULATIONS IN TIME DOMAIN
In TD-AMS, a variety of calculations are efficiently exe-
cutable. We describe the overview of those circuit diagrams
and operations in this section.
A. Data Transmission and Switches
A multi-bit data transmission circuit, which requires multiple
physical wires in a digital circuit, is realized by a single physical
wire. Not only the area for the wires, but also energy consump-
tion is reduced by employing the time-domain data transmission
because the number of voltage transition edges is reduced. Fur-
thermore, the energy consumption at a transmission line is pro-
portional to the product of the edge number and the capacitance
to be driven. Then, as the capacitance of wires becomes larger,
the time-domain data transmission becomes more advantageous
in terms of energy consumption. Therefore, the time-domain
data transmission is suited to a situation where a long trans-
mission line is required in a large-scale system or where wire
capacitances becomes dominant against gate capacitances in a
scaled CMOS technology [14]. Note that wire crosstalk should
be taken into account for a long transmission line since an edge
position fluctuation due to the crosstalk may induce error. In
practice, the effect of crosstalk becomes negligible compared to
delay variations due to mismatch of transistors mentioned in the
previous section.
Switching circuits, namely, a multiplexer and a demul-
tiplexer, that change the route of the transmission are also
implemented by simple pass gates as shown in Fig. 13(a) and
(b). Replicating data is simply realized by a fork structure used
in the demultiplexer.
B. Summation and Subtraction
A DTC is a kind of controllable delay circuit whose delay
time is controlled by the input digital code. By exploiting this
function, a DTC works as a time-domain adder. As shown in
Fig. 14, in order to ensure proper clock timing for the TDC,
the same number of reference DTCs as for the data path is in-
serted in the clock path. We can arbitrarily shift the origin, which
means the input timing corresponding to the digital output of
zero, by choosing the digital input value for the reference DTC.
This makes it possible to add an offset value so that the dig-
ital value is represented in offset binary format, and then, the
time-domain adder can handle a negative number. The adder
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
78
IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 49, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014
Fig. 14. Circuit diagram of summation calculation.
Fig. 15. Simulation results of summation calculation: (a) waveform of
,
(b) edge timings of
vs.
and
, (c)
vs.
and
.
has a useful characteristic in that when a summation result ex-
ceeds the dynamic range of the TDC, it becomes favorably sat-
urated. In a digital adder, when a summation result is overflows,
it goes to a wrong sign number. Proper processing for avoiding
overflow is a substantial overhead in digital signal processing.
A simulation result is shown in Fig. 15.
C. Minimum and Maximum Calculations
A minimum calculation, which most frequently appears in
MIN-SUM algorithm [2], [3], [15] for LDPC code decoding, is
executable by a single OR gate as shown in Fig. 16. The output
of OR becomes high when any one of the input signals becomes
high. Then, among the input signals with various rising edge
timings, the OR can find the fastest one, which corresponds to
the minimal value. A simulation result is shown in Fig. 17. In
the same manner, a maximum calculation is executable by an
AND gate. These calculations are obviously more efficient than
the digital counterparts.
D. Multiplication With a Constant Coefficient
Multiplication with a constant coefficient is also efficiently
executed in the time domain. When a DTC and a TDC have
different unit delays of
and
as in Fig. 18, respec-
tively, an input digital value is multiplied with a constant coef-
Fig. 16. Circuit diagram of minimum calculation.
Fig. 17. Simulation results of minimum calculation.
Fig. 18. Circuit diagram of multiplication with constant coefficient.
ficient of
by passing the DTC and TDC. To make
different unit delays, we can use transistors with different gate
width, different gate length, different gate numbers, and so on.
Simulation results when
in simpler
unsigned format are shown in Fig. 19.
Note that it is possible to combine the several calculations
mentioned above in the time domain, which is preferable for
minimizing overhead due to the converters between the time
domain and the digital domain.
IV. AN LDPC DECODER WITH TIME-DOMAIN ANALOG AND
DIGITAL MIXED SIGNAL PROCESSING
A. LDPC Decoder
One of the most promising applications of TD-AMS is an
LDPC decoder, because an LDPC decoder does not require per-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MIYASHITA et al.: AN LDPC DECODER WITH TIME-DOMAIN ANALOG AND DIGITAL MIXED-SIGNAL PROCESSING
79
Fig. 19. Simulation results of multiplication with constant coefficients.
Fig. 20. Tanner graph of the implemented (32, 8) LDPC decoder.
fect calculation accuracy and it can be simply implemented in
TD-AMS, as detailed below. LDPC codes are attractive be-
cause of their excellent error correction performance close to the
Shannon limit [16]. They have been adopted for a wide range of
applications, such as NAND flash memories [17] and wireless
communication standards [18], [19]. An LDPC decoder is ro-
bust against local calculation inaccuracy owing to its error cor-
recting nature and the iterative algorithm [3]. Therefore, we can
aggressively shorten the unit delay so that higher energy and
area efficiencies are achieved. This is one of the important rea-
sons why an LDPC decoder is well suited to the TD-AMS.
For the purpose of comparison with previously reported
voltage-domain analog LDPC decoders, we implemented an
LDPC code decoder for the same code as [1], [2]. The Tanner
graph of the implemented (32, 8) LDPC code is shown in
Fig. 20.
In a MIN-SUM decoding algorithm [2], [3], [15], check
nodes and variable nodes iteratively exchange messages with
one another following the rule described by the Tanner graph.
As shown in Fig. 21(a), each variable node
sends messages
to the all the connected check nodes
, as in
(1)
where
is a log-likelihood ratio (LLR), which is an input of
an LDPC decoder corresponding to
th bit,
is a mes-
sage from
to
, and
means a collection of the in-
dexes connected to
except for . In the case of Fig. 21(a),
for example, the message from
to
is calculated using the
messages received from
and
, as in
In a similar way, as shown in Fig. 21(b), each check node
sends messages to all the connected variable nodes
, as in
(2)
Fig. 21. (a) Variable node updating function and (b) check node updating
function.
The bit width of 6b is chosen for
, and
in-
cluding a sign bit. It is notable that even when the code length
is larger, such as several thousand bits, the bit width of 6b is
sufficient [18]. This relatively small dynamic range of signal is
suited to TD-AMS.
As indicated in the Tanner graph in Fig. 20, there are a large
number of interconnections between variable nodes and check
nodes. The large numbers of wires as well as of gates have a
crucial impact on the energy and area efficiencies [14], [18].
Similar to the pulse-width message encoding reported in [15],
which represents information by the number of clock cycles in
which a wire voltage is held high, TD-AMS can be applied to
reduce gate count and wiring in a MIN-SUM LDPC decoder.
The gate count is reduced because the minimum and summa-
tion, which are the main calculations in a MIN-SUM decoder
as explained above, are simply implemented in TD-AMS as ex-
plained in Section II. The wiring count is reduced because each
message is conveyed in a single wire.
Fig. 22 illustrates the overall architecture of the implemented
(32, 8) LDPC decoder leveraging TD-AMS. It is mainly com-
posed of variable node function units (VNUs) corresponding
to (1) and check node function units (CNUs) corresponding to
(2). The calculations in the VNUs and the CNUs are partitioned
into the time domain and the digital domain, considering the
efficiency. The minimum function in the CNU and the sum-
mation functions in the VNU are executed in the time domain,
whereas absolute value (ABS) and XOR functions in the CNU
are executed in the digital domain. The architecture also permits
the interconnections between VNUs and CNUs, which tend to
be longer than the other wires, to be partitioned into the time
domain, reducing power consumption and routing congestion.
Note that,
, and
can be stored once in the dig-
ital domain without overhead. Therefore, unlike other reported
analog LDPC decoders, TD-AMS is capable of employing par-
tially parallel architecture [18], [19], which is well suited to a
moderate throughput LDPC decoder.
B. Design of Unit Delay Cell
We employ a modified unit delay cell (DEL) depicted in
Fig. 23. In the DTC shown in Fig. 3(a), only the falling edge at
node B is required to be delayed. Then, as shown in Fig. 23(a),
only PMOS transistors in the first inverter and NMOS transis-
tors in the second inverter are cascaded so that only the falling
edge is delayed owing to the large on resistances. The wave-
forms are illustrated in Fig. 23(b). Note that, because energy
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
80
IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 49, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014
Fig. 22. Architecture of the implemented LDPC decoder.
consumption is proportional to capacitance, increasing resis-
tance rather than capacitance is better in order to increase the
time constant without wasting energy. As shown in Fig. 23(c),
compared with those of 4-stage inverters, delay time (larger is
better here), power consumption, and layout area of DEL are
improved by
, and
, respectively although the
effective precision of delay time is about the same.
C. Design Methodology
All the circuits in TD-AMS including DTCs and TDCs are
able to be designed using basic commercial digital IC design
tools. This allows implementation of a larger-scale system, than
is practical in handcrafted analog design flow, as well as seam-
less implementation with any conventional digital system. The
DTC and the BS-TDC modules, circuit diagrams of which are
depicted in Figs. 3 and 6, are described in gate-level Verilog
hardware description language (HDL) in the same way as gen-
eral digital circuits. These modules can be incorporated in the
Verilog simulations of the system including general digital mod-
ules. Also these modules can be synthesized for the following
layout design. During and after the logic synthesis, the con-
straint should be imposed that design automation tools do not
touch the delay cells, or otherwise the optimization functions of
the tools may remove the logically meaningless delay cells.
In the layout design step, a common placement and routing
(P{&}R) tool can be used. By P&R under the constraint of min-
imizing delay or minimizing parasitic capacitance, satisfactory
layout patterns for DTCs and TDCs can be obtained. Of course,
it is also possible to register optimized layout patterns for a DTC
and a TDC as standard cells in order to ensure that all the DTCs
and TDCs have the same layout pattern.
D. Timing Design
In the time-domain analog signal processing, a specialized
timing design is required. For aligning the time origins of
transmitting DTCs and receiving TDCs, it is necessary to insert
dummy delay cells. This timing alignment process can be
realized by utilizing a clock tree synthesis (CTS) function built
in P&R tools, which is generally utilized for minimizing skew
of clock signals. It can be checked if timing constraints are
satisfied or not by referring to a report from the static timing
analysis (STA) function, and engineering change order (ECO)
is available for tuning the timing.
Although employing a DTC for each of the time-domain sig-
nals on a one-to-one basis makes it easy to satisfy the required
timing constraint, it requires larger energy consumption and
larger layout area because of the large number of DTCs for clock
generators, which define the timing origin for DTCs and TDCs.
Therefore, it is preferable to employ one clock generator for the
DTCs or TDCs where the clock timing should be the same. In-
deed, in the LDPC decoder shown in Fig. 22, we employed only
three clock generators for the all DTCs and TDCs.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Fig. 24 shows the die photo of the prototype chip of the
LDPC decoder with the proposed time-domain analog and
digital mixed signal processing. The chip was implemented
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MIYASHITA et al.: AN LDPC DECODER WITH TIME-DOMAIN ANALOG AND DIGITAL MIXED-SIGNAL PROCESSING
81
Fig. 23. Modified delay cell: (a) Circuit diagram, (b) waveform, (b) simplified layout pattern, (c) simulated delay, delay variation, power, and area compared with
4-cascaded inverters.
Fig. 24. Die photograph.
in 65 nm CMOS utilizing a standard digital IC design flow.
Fig. 25 shows measurement results for BER under an AWGN
channel model. The measured results match the simulation
well and are unaffected by PVT conditions. Besides, the gray
dot line shows the simulation result if the calculation accuracy
was about 4 times worse than the designed accuracy, and it
indicates that the test chip achieved the designed accuracy.
Table I shows the performance summary and a comparison
with states of the art. Comparing with [1], an implementation of
the all-analog decoder for the same code as ours, the proposed
decoder improves energy and area efficiencies by
and
,
respectively, even when the area of [1] is normalized to 65 nm.
Although it is not a completely fair comparison since the code
length is different, the proposed design is also more efficient
Fig. 25. BER measurement results.
than the decoders reported in [18], [19] in terms of efficiency
normalized to throughput. Note that basically an LDPC decoder
leveraging TD-AMS scales for longer code lengths similarly
to a digital decoder. The LDPC decoder occupies 0.063 mm .
Fig. 26 shows the area reduction offered by the TD-AMS. The
stacked bar chart on the right shows the breakdown of the LDPC
decoder described in Fig. 22 based on the synthesized gate
area. The area of others includes the controller and the parity
check circuit. It indicates that the area for the calculations of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
82
IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 49, NO. 1, JANUARY 2014
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE SUMMARY AND COMPARISON WITH THE STATE-OF-THE-ART DECODERS
Fig. 26. Comparison of hardware area between LDPC decoders implemented
in digital circuit and in TD-AMS.
MIN, SUM, ABS, and XOR is 93% smaller than for the digital
implementation. Including the overhead of the converters, it is
still 38% smaller.
VI. CONCLUSION
We presented the time-domain analog and digital mixed
signal processing (TD-AMS). TD-AMS is a hybrid technique
of analog signal processing and digital signal processing that
enables flexibly embedding a highly efficient analog com-
putation core in a digital system. The distinctive feature is
that TD-AMS fully benefits from technology scaling and is
implemented with a common digital IC design flow, although
the analog technique is utilized. The experimental prototype
of an LDPC decoder employing TD-AMS was implemented
and it shows higher energy and area efficiencies than the
state-of-the-art decoders.
The proposed technique can enhance the energy and area ef-
ficiencies of computing especially in applications where high
calculation accuracy or complete answers are not required, such
as error correction, image processing, and machine learning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank R. Fujimoto, Y. Watanabe,
K. Seki, O. Torii, and N. Kokubun for their support.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Gu and S. Chakrabartty, “A 100 pJ/bit (32, 8) CMOS analog low-
density parity-check decoder based on margin propagation,” IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1433–1442, Jun. 2011.
[2] S. Hemati, A. Banihashemi, and C. Plett, “A 0.18- m CMOS analog
min-sum iterative decoder for a (32, 8) low-density parity-check
(LDPC) code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 11, pp.
2531–2540, Nov. 2006.
[3] A. R. Abolfazli, Y. R. Shayan, and G. E. R. Cowan, “TS-LDPC analog
decoding based on the min-sum algorithm,” in Proc. Biennial Symp.
Communications (QBSC), May 2012, pp. 162–167.
[4] B. Vigoda, “Low power logic for statistical inference,” in Proc. ACM/
IEEE Int. Symp. Low-Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED), 2010,
pp. 349–354.
[5] S. Suh, A. Basu, C. Schlottmann, P. E. Hasler, and J. R. Barry, “Low-
power discrete fourier transform for OFDM: A programmable analog
approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp.
290–298, Feb. 2011.
[6] B. Sadhu, M. Sturm, B. M. Sadler, and R. A. Harjani, “A 5 GS/s 12.2
pJ/conv. analog charge-domain FFT for a software defined radio re-
ceiver front-end in 65 nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE RFIC Symp., 2012,
pp. 39–42.
[7] M. Gu and S. Chakrabartty, “Synthesis of bias-scalable CMOS analog
computational circuits using margin propagation,” IEEE Trans. Cir-
cuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 243–254, Feb. 2012.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
MIYASHITA et al.: AN LDPC DECODER WITH TIME-DOMAIN ANALOG AND DIGITAL MIXED-SIGNAL PROCESSING
83
[8] M. Nagata, J. Funakoshi, and A. Iwata, “A PWM signal processing
core circuit based on a switched current integration technique,” IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 53–60, Jan. 1998.
[9] D. Miyashita, R. Yamaki, K. Hashiyoshi, H. Kobayashi, S. Kousai, Y.
Oowaki, and Y. Unekawa, “A 10.4 pJ/b (32, 8) LDPC decoder with
time-domain analog and digital mixed-signal processing,” in IEEE Int.
Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2013, pp. 420–421.
[10] R. B. Staszewski, J. L. Wallberg, S. Rezeq, C. M. Hung, O. E. Eliezer,
S. K. Vemulapalli, C. Fernando, K. Maggio, R. Staszewski, N. Barton,
M. C. Lee, P. Cruise, M. Entezari, K. Muhammad, and D. Leipold,
“All-digital PLL and transmitter for mobile phones,” IEEE J. Solid-
State Circuits, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2469–2482, Dec. 2005.
[11] M. V. Elzakker, E. V. Tuijl, P. Geraedts, D. Schinkel, E. Klumperink,
and B. Nauta, “A 1.9
W 4.4 fJ/conversion-step 10b 1 MS/s charge
redistribution ADC,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech.
Papers, 2008, pp. 244–245.
[12] A. S. Yousif and J. W. Haslett, “A fine resolution TDC architecture for
next generation PET imaging,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 54, no. 5,
pp. 1574–1582, Oct. 2007.
[13] J. Borremans, V. Giannini, and J. Craninckx, “A 86 MHz-to-12 GHz
digital-intensive phase-modulated fractional-N PLL using a 15 pJ/shot
5 ps TDC in 40 nm digital CMOS,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits
Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2010, pp. 480–481.
[14] H. Veendrick, Nanometer CMOS ICs, From Basics to ASICs.
New
York, NY, USA: Springer, 2008.
[15] K. Cushon, C. Leroux, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “A
min-sum iterative decoder based on pulsewidth message encoding,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 893–897,
Nov. 2010.
[16] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 1963.
[17] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10x-extended-
lifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with error-pre-
diction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in IEEE Int.
Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2012, pp. 424–426.
[18] S. W. Yen, S. Y. Shiang, C. L. Chen, H. C. Chia, S. J. Jou, and C.
Y. Lee, “A 5.79-Gb/s energy-efficient multirate LDPC codec chip for
IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no.
9, pp. 2246–2257, Sep. 2012.
[19] Y. S. Park, D. T. Blaauw, D. M. Sylvester, and Z. Zhang, “A 1.6-mm
38-mW 1.5-Gb/s LDPC decoder enabled by refresh-free embedded
DRAM,” in VLSI Circuits Symp. Dig., 2012, pp. 114–115.
Daisuke Miyashita (M’10) received the B.S. and
M.S. degrees in electronic engineering from the
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 2001 and
2003, respectively.
In 2003, he joined the Center for Semiconductor
Research and Development, Toshiba Corporation,
Kawasaki, Japan, where he has been engaged in
the design of RF and analog circuits for wireless
communications.
Ryo Yamaki was born in Tokushima, Japan, in 1983.
He received the B.S. and M.S. degree in electronic
engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan, in 2006 and 2008, respectively.
In 2008, he joined Toshiba Corporation, Kana-
gawa, Japan. Since then, he is engaged in the design
of FEC circuits for wireless communication and
memory system at the Center for Semiconductor
Research and Development, Toshiba Corporation,
Yokohama, Japan.
Kazunori Hashiyoshi was born in Hiroshima, Japan,
in 1966. He received the B.S. degree in electronic en-
gineering from Hiroshima Denki Institute of Tech-
nology, Hiroshima, Japan, in 1989.
In 2003 he joined Toshiba Microelectronics
Corporation,
Kawasaki,
Japan,
where
he
has
been engaged in work on IC products. He is cur-
rently working for ELP (Extremely Low Power)
technology.
Hiroyuki Kobayashi was born in Kyoto, Japan,
in 1973. He received the B.S., and M.S. degrees
in electronic engineering from Osaka Institute of
Technology, Japan, in 1998 and Osaka University,
Japan, in 2000, respectively.
Since 2000, he has been working at Toshiba Cor-
poration. Currently, he is a researcher at the Center
for Semiconductor Research and Development,
Toshiba, Kawasaki, Japan, engaged in wireless and
low-power electronic circuits design.
Shouhei Kousai (M’08) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electronic engineering from the University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1996 and 1998, respec-
tively, and the Ph.D. degree in physical electronics
from Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan, in 2011.
In 1998, he joined Toshiba Corporation, Kana-
gawa, Japan. Since then he has been engaged in
the design of analog and RF circuits for wireless
communications. He is now working for the Wire-
less and Analog Design Department of Center for
Semiconductor Research and Development. From
2007 to 2009, he was a visiting scholar at the California Institute of Technology,
where he has engaged in the research for linear power amplifiers.
Dr. Kousai served as a member of the technical program committee (TPC)
of the Asian Solid-State Circuit Conference (A-SSCC) from 2008 to 2010. Cur-
rently, he is a member of the TPC of the ISSCC International Solid-State Circuits
Conference (ISSCC) and International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM).
Yukihito Oowaki (M’99) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in applied physics from the University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1981 and 1983, respectively.
In 1983, he joined Toshiba Research and Devel-
opment Center, Kawasaki, Japan, where he was en-
gaged in the design of memories and system LSIs. He
was also engaged in multimedia LSI design and de-
sign methodologies in Toshiba corporation semicon-
ductor company. He is now a deputy general manager
of the Center for Semiconductor Research and Devel-
opment at Toshiba.
Mr. Oowaki was a member of the TPC of ISSCC from 1998 to 2005, and an
associate editor of IEEE JSSC from 2001 to 2004.
Yasuo Unekawa received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in electronic engineering from the Univer-
sity of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1986, 1988, and 1991,
respectively.
In 1991, he joined Toshiba Corporation, Kawasaki,
Japan, where he has been engaged in the design
of wired and wireless communication LSIs. He is
now a senior manager of the Wireless and Analog
Design Department in the Center for Semiconductor
Research and Development at Toshiba. He is also a
publication chair of COOL Chips conference series.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
