Concatenated Error Correction Code Implementation on FPGA

M. Y. Zinchenko
National Research University “MPEI”
Moscow, Russia zinchenkomy@gmail.com

A. M. Levadniy
National Research University “MPEI”
Moscow, Russia

Y. A. Grebenko
National Research University “MPEI”
Moscow, Russia

Abstract— the requirements of highly reliable data transmission over interference and noisy channels are imposed on modern radio communication systems. In this connection, forward error correction has become an indispensable step in the digital processing of information data during transmission. Today there are a large number of FEC codes, one of the most popular are low density parity check codes (LDPC). The paper presents the results of the development of the FPGA cascade codec with the internal LDPC code of the DVB-S2 standard and the external Reed-Solomon code. The use of the cascade encoding method allows to get rid of residual errors arising from the decoding of LDPC-code. The developed architectures, methods for increasing productivity and the used FPGA resources are presented.
Keywords— FEC; decoder; LDPC; DVB-S2; FPGA;
I. INTRODUCTION
Noise-resistant coding allows increasing the reliability of the transmitted information. The ability to correct errors at the receiving side and restore the original information is achieved by introducing redundancy into the original data. Among noise-resistant codes, binary low-density codes, also known as low-density parity check codes, have become widespread in recent years [1]. These codes are used in many modern data transmission standards: DVB-S2 / T2 / C2, IEEE 802.11n / ac (Wi-Fi), WiMAX, etc. The demand for the aforementioned codes is explained by the fact that they are capable of providing maximum transmission speeds with a limited frequency band. Moreover, they have a number of advantages compared to well-proven turbo codes. However, in addition to the advantages of binary low-density codes have the disadvantage of the phenomenon of residual error rate as a result of decoding. However, besides the advantages, binary low-density codes require significant subtractive resources for processing and in some cases have residual errors after decoding.
Since the work was based on the LDPC code of the DVBS2 standard with a large codeword length of 64,800 bits. The structure of the decoder from our past work [2] was taken as a basis. The block diagram of the architecture is shown in Figure 1. The proposed decoder of LDPC code has the following characteristics. Support 6-code rates of standard
DVB-S2. Performs an iterative “soft” decoding of a codeword with a maximum number of iterations equal to 50. Parity

check expressions are calculated using a modified minimumsum algorithm. The decoder uses a partially parallel architecture with a number of processing blocks is equal to 90.
Fig. 1. Block diagram of decoder architecture
Also for practical use and high performance, it is advisable to use the FPGA Xilinx Artix-7 xc7a200, as in the above work.
II. FUNDAMENTALS The use of LDPC codes allows to obtain a significant increase in the noise immunity of information compared to similar turbo codes. With the same proportion of check symbols in the code word, the decrease in the signal-to-noise ratio at the decoder input due to LDPC coding can be up to 3 dB for the selected error probability level of 10-6. It should also be noted

978-1-7281-3238-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

effectiveness of LDPC-codes to combat impulse noise and broadband noise, causing blurring signal [3].
LDPC-code is a special case of a block linear code, which is characterized by a low density of significant elements in the check matrix. That is, units, meaning the connection of the codeword bits with the corresponding checks. Due to this, the relative simplicity of building coding devices is achieved. The hardware implementation of the decoding procedure is a very time consuming and resource-intensive task. In this connection, for a long time LDPC codes were not in demand in the technical field. However, with the advent of efficient decoding algorithms and a more sophisticated element base in the 1990s, attention was paid to them again.
In addition to the complex decoding procedure, the phenomenon of residual level of errors as a result of their decoding is one of the most significant obstacles to the use of low-density codes in many communication and information storage systems.
As shown in Figure 2, the graph of the dependence of bit error on signal-to-noise ratio is usually divided into two areas. The first region, called the “waterfall” region, occurs when the channel quality is lower, close to the decoding threshold, and is characterized by a rapid drop in the error rate while improving the channel quality.

number of objects belonging to the sets of “traps” and “stops” should lead to an increase in the reliability of information when moving from one decoding iteration to another [8].
The authors of [5-6] found that not only the minimum code distance, but also the multiplicity, structure of near-codewords of low weight and multiple “traps” determine the performance of LDPC codes, in the region of low error rates.
At the moment there are several methods for reducing the level of residual errors as a result of decoding, described in many works. For example, in [7], a number of strategies are proposed for constructing an LDPC decoder to reduce this effect. In [9], several methods were proposed for reducing residual errors in the decoder. The paper [10] presents a method for slowing the convergence of a decoder using the averaged decoding. The DVB-S2 standard [11] defines the socalled concatenated encoding method, in which the external BCH code is combined with the LDPC code to ensure a low level of errors.
In our work we do an analysis of the operation of the LDPC decoder of the DVB-S2 standard for the selected coding degrees 1/4, 1/2, and 3/4 showed that in the residual error domain there are no more than 5 bit errors remain.
We selected the cascade coding method to deal with residual errors. The external code is the Reed-Solomon code and the internal LDPC code with a codeword length of 64,800 bits and a number of coding degrees. The structural scheme of the cascade codec is presented in Figure 3.

Fig. 2. Graph of bit error probability (BER) versus signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the LDPC code of the DVB-S2 standard, codeword length - 64800 bits, coding rate - ½
The second region, called the residual error region (error floor), appears at a higher channel quality and is characterized by a less sharp decrease in the error rate as the channel quality improves [4].
The phenomenon of residual errors resulting from decoding was first noted by MacKay and Postol, during the study of the Margulis code [5]. In the process of probabilistic decoding, information transmitted from one nodes of the Tanner graph to others inevitably falls into closed structures with the simplest configuration in the form of cycles. More complex formations - sets of “stops” and “traps”, in fact consist of a finite number of cycles of different lengths connected with each other [4-7]. For channels with erasures, the energy gain from coding is completely determined by the size of the smallest set of “stops” [4]. For other communication channels such dependence is not so obvious and it negatively affects the efficiency of iterative decoders. On the other hand, it is intuitively clear that reducing the

Fig. 3. Structural scheme of the cascade codec
III. RESULTS The first problem that was solved in this paper was the RTL implementation of coder and decoder. As well as the subsequent coordination of the codec of the external ReedSolomon code with the codec of the internal LDPC code. In order to save development time, it was decided to use the IP core of the Reed-Solomon coder provided by the Vivado software package of Xilinx. The Reed-Solomon (RS) code used (4095, 4083) consists of 12-bit characters and can correct up to 6 erroneous words. A code with this configuration was chosen, since the internal LDPC code has a large code word length of 64,800 bits. Therefore, for the coding degree of LDPC code R = 3/4, the external encoder should output a code word 48600 bits long. The selected RS code can give to the input of the internal coder a bit sequence of maximum length up to 49140 bits. Also, to support different degrees of coding R of the LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

coder, the core of the codec is synthesized in a mode with a configurable codeword length. As well, at the stage of operation of an external decoder, the integrity of the transmitted information is checked.
To combat the error bursts, after encoding by the internal coder, the codeword bits are shuffled. Following the demodulation stage, the original order of the bits is restored. When there are several consecutive errors (that is, a packet of errors) during transmission, in the process of restoring the original bit order, these errors will be distributed over the entire codeword more evenly.
To verify the performance of the proposed solutions, you need to collect a large amount of statistical data. Decoding one block when the number of iterations is 50 on a computer takes up to 4 seconds, and in the FPGA with our implementation of the decoder will take no more than 2 ms. To plot a bit error probability graph, it is necessary to perform up to 100,000 decoding operations for a given signal-to-noise ratio. Therefore, to obtain data for the shortest possible time, an experiment was conducted on FPGA, consisting of the following steps:
1. At the first stage, a packet encoded by a cascade codec was prepared. Information data was received on the FPGA board via high-speed USB3.0 interface. Then the data was encoded, and then the encoded packet came back to the computer.
2. At the second stage, errors distributed according to the Gauss law are introduced into the received encoded packet.
3. At the third stage, the packets were sent back to the board with the FPGA and the subsequent decoding of each packet was performed.
The connection between the PC and the breadboard was carried out using an application developed in the Microsoft Visual Studio in the C# programming language, which was also used to process experimental data.
Simulation of a cascade codec is necessary to verify the functionality of the developed architecture in hardware description language. The MATLAB application software package is ideal for testing the model because it has in its arsenal a large number of tools for modeling various devices and algorithms. In our case, there are several options to model the cascade coding system shown in Figure 3. One of which is the Communications Toolboox tool - a set of tools for designing and modeling the physical layer of communication systems. They include algorithms and applications for analysis, design, end-to-end modeling and testing of communication systems that meet various communication standards. Using this toolkit, the work of external and internal coders / decoders was modeled.
To assess the quality of decoding of the developed architecture, a comparison was made with a standard MATLAB LDPC decoder, implemented using the sumproduct algorithm. The comparison result for the code rate R = 1/2 is presented in Figure 4. Based on the comparison results, it can be concluded that the decoding quality of the developed architecture is worse than the standard MATLAB model by

only 0.4 dB. It can also be seen that the use of concatenated coding allows to get rid of the residual error decoding characteristic of LDPC-code.

Fig. 4. Comparison of decoding quality of a simulated decoder in MATLAB and the decoder implemented using the minimum-sum algorithm in the FPGA and a cascade codec implemented in the FPGA
The presented architecture of the cascade codec after the synthesis in the FPGA Aritx-7 xc7a200 is capable to operate at clock frequencies up to 210 MHz and occupies 63% of the logical cells. The FPGA resources used by the decoder are shown in Table I.

TABLE I. FPGA Logic Slice LUTs Slice Registers Block RAM
DSP

THE FPGA RESOURCES USED BY THE DECODER

LDPC codec

74928

56 %

53846

20 %

111

31 %

0

0%

RS codec

9366

7%

16153

6%

33

9%

0

0%

The performance of the synthesized cascade codec is presented in Table II.

TABLE II.

THE PERFORMANCE OF THE SYNTHESIZED CASCADE CODEC

LDPC code rate, R 1/4

Decoder throughput (Mbit/s) 8.028

1/2

16.128

3/4

24.228

IV. CONCLUSION In the course of the work, literary sources were analyzed in order to identify the most optimal, from the point of view of complexity of implementation and occupied hardware resources, method of dealing with the phenomenon of residual error rate as a result of decoding the LDPC code. According to the results of the analysis, a cascade coding method with an external Reed-Solomon code and an internal LDPC code of the DVB-S2 standard with a code word length of 64,800 bits was chosen. Designed and implemented a cascade codec

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

architecture in the FPGA basis using a low-density code encoder with the “irregular repetition with accumulation” coding algorithm and a decoder with a modified minimumsum algorithm. The proposed architecture is inferior 0.4 dB in decoding quality to a decoder modeled in MATLAB, that is used the optimal algorithm. However, it fully performs the task of eliminating the phenomenon of residual errors and uses an acceptable amount of FPGA resources. This makes it easy to scale the architecture and achieve specified data rates. In addition, as a result of this work, a high-performance experimental stand to measure bit error rate was created, allowing to collect a large amount of statistical data of the operation of the cascade codec.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager Low-density parity-check codes //IRE Transactions on information theory. 1962. Vol. 8. No. 1, pp. 21-28.
[2] M. Y. Zinchenko, A. M. Levadniy, Y. A. Grebenko. Development of the LDPC coder-decoder of the DVB-S2 standard on FPGA. 2018 Systems of Signal Synchronization, Generating and Processing in Telecommunications (SYNCHROINFO). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1-3.
[3] V. A. Vargauzin, I. А. Tsikin Methods of increasing the energy and spectral efficiency of digital radio communications. BHV-Petersburg, 2013.

[4] B. K. Butler, P. H. Siegel Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. 2014. Vol. 60. No.. 12, pp. 7416-7441.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay, M. S. Postol Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science. 2003. Vol. 74, pp. 97-104.
[6] T. Richardson Error floors of LDPC codes. Proceedings of the annual Allerton conference on communication control and computing. The University; 1998, 2003. Vol. 41. No. 3, pp. 1426-1435.
[7] W. Ryan, S. Lin. Channel codes: classical and modern. Cambridge university press, 2009.
[8] A. A. Ovinnikov. Investigation of the influence of the spectrum of connectedness of cycles in the Tanner graph on the energy gain of the coding of known LDPC codes. Digital Signal Processing. 2015. No. 4, pp. 24-29.
[9] Y. Han, W. E. Ryan Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes //IEEE Transactions on Communications. 2009. Vol. 57. No. 6, pp. 1663-1673.
[10] S. Landner, O. Milenkovic Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes //2005 International Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing. IEEE, 2005. Vol. 1, pp. 630-635.
[11] ETSI E. B. U. Digital video broadcasting (dvb); second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broadband satellite applications. Technical report, Tech. rep., ETSI, 200.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:18:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

