Fifty-first Annual Allerton Conference Allerton House, UIUC, Illinois, USA October 2 - 3, 2013
Anytime Characteristics of Spatially Coupled Code
Md. Noor-A-Rahim, Khoa D. Nguyen and Gottfried Lechner

Abstract— In this paper, we propose an efficient channel coding scheme for anytime communications. We design this anytime code based on spatially coupled LDPC codes and investigate the performance over binary erasure channels. Through density evolution analysis, we asymptotically show the desired anytime properties of the proposed code. We also numerically predict the finite-length performance of the anytime code. We develop an adaptive window decoding technique to ensure a low complexity anytime receiver. Through simulation, we compare the performance of our proposed code with existing anytime codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Reliable streaming of information over a noisy channel in real-time is known to be a relevant problem in communication engineering [1]. Such transmission is particularly desired for wireless automation, where real-time system state information from remote observers are required to determine appropriate control actions. Traditional block and convolutional codings are inappropriate, because block codes attain reliability only at infinite delays and convolutional codes with finite memory-length result in non-zero error probability. Both approaches result in instability in closed loop controls [2]. Several approaches like dynamic programming that jointly optimizes control and transmission functions are introduced for control applications [3][4]. However, dynamic programming suffers from high computational complexity and is intractable in practical applications. Delayuniversal/anytime transmission [5], on the other hand, allows for separating the transmission problem from controller designs and therefore is a promising approach.
Anytime transmission was first introduced by Anant Sahai [5] in 2001. Sahai demonstrated the communication requirements for tracking an unstable source such as causal encoding, decoding at any time instant and exponential decay of error probability with the decoding delay. Anytime transmission was shown to be necessary and sufficient for tracking and controlling an unstable plant over a noisy channel [2]. Although anytime transmission feasibility was first proved with sequential random codes in [5], the codes were not suitable for practical implementation. The existence of anytime linear codes was shown in [6], where anytime
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council Grant DE12010016n.
The Authors are with the Institute for Telecommunications Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia. Email: noomy004@mymail.unisa.edu.au, {khoa.nguyen, gottfried.lechner} @unisa.edu.au

behavior of time-invariant codes under maximum likelihood (ML) decoding is investigated. A causal anytime encoding scheme using unequal error protection (UEP) rateless codes was studied in [7]. Later, anytime reliability of low-density parity-check (LDPC) convolutional codes is analyzed in [8]. More recently, anytime reliability of LDPC convolutional codes over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels is proved in [9]. However, these codes have limited practicality due to high encoding/decoding complexity and poor reliability. Moreover, no analytical tool has been developed for the analysis of finite-length anytime codes. Thus, it is essential to design a low complexity anytime code, which may provide better performance than existing anytime codes and give a tractable finite-length analysis.
In this work, we study the design of a high performance anytime code, which offers a flexible code construction. Using asymptotic analysis, we show that the spatially coupled ensemble exhibits the desired anytime properties. We provide an estimation technique, which can closely estimate the finite-length performance of the proposed anytime code. We also observe the performance of the proposed code while varying different design parameters. Finally, we introduce a low complexity decoding algorithm for anytime receivers.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the system model of anytime transmission along with the necessary requirements. A brief introduction of spatially coupled codes will be given in Section III. In the next section, the anytime characteristic of modified spatially coupled codes is investigated through asymptotic density evolution analysis. In Section V, we describe the estimation technique for the proposed anytime code. An adaptive window decoding technique for anytime receiver is given in Section VI. Before concluding, we present the simulation results and compare the proposed code with existing anytime codes in Section VII.
II. ANYTIME TRANSMISSION
In this paper, we consider anytime transmission over memoryless noisy channels. In general, a memoryless channel can be defined by input-output transition probabilities p(y|x) for x ∈ X and y ∈ Y, where X and Y are the input and output alphabets, correspondingly. For instance, a binary erasure channel (BEC) with erasure probability ǫ implies X = {0, 1} and Y = {0, 1, ?}, while p(yt =?|xt = 0) = p(yt =?|xt =

978-1-4799-3410-2/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

335

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:23:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1) = ǫ and p(yt = 0|xt = 0) = p(yt = 1|xt = 1) = 1 − ǫ, where ? indicates an erasure.

Consider a streaming source, where at time t a message
st is produced. At time instant t, the channel encoder is defined by the function Et(st1), which produces a channel input xt according to the available source information st1 = [s1, s2, ...., st]. After transmitting the encoded message over a noisy channel, at time t, the channel decoder recovers the bits using the decoding function Dt(y1t ) = sˆt1(t), i.e., the decoder estimates sˆt1(t) based on current as well as all previously received symbols.

Input Messages st

Anytime Channel

Encoder

E

t

(

s

t 1

)

Estimates at time t

sÖ

t 1

t

Anytime Channel

Decoder

D

t

(

y

t 1

)

xt
Noisy Channel
p( yt | xt )
yt

Fig. 1. A block diagram illustrating anytime channel coding.

We now consider a decoder producing an estimate sˆi(t) of message si at time t ≥ i ; the corresponding decoding delay for message si is d = t − i. The probability of error for the message i will be Pe(i, d) = Pr sˆi(i + d) = si . For a given channel and rate Rc (bits per channel use), the encoderdecoder pair (Et, Dt) is called anytime code if there exists a β > 0 such that[10]:

Pe(i, d) ≤ βe−αd, ∀ d ≥ 0,

(1)

where α > 0 is known as anytime reliability or delayexponent or anytime exponent. The anytime reliability α specifies how fast the reliability of the system improves with delay. The inequality in (1) is the major property of an anytime decoder. Equation 1 implies that at any delay d ≥ 0, the decoder is capable to estimate the message si and the probability of error for that message will tend to zero as the delay d approaches infinity.

III. SPATIALLY COUPLED CODE
Spatial coupling is a recent coding paradigm, which was first analytically investigated in [11]. This code is constructed by coupling a chain of L standard (dv, dc)-regular LDPC codes or protographs, where dv and dc are the degrees of variable nodes and check nodes, respectively. We refer to L as the chain length. Figure 2 shows such a coupled code, where each of the dv connections of a variable node at position i is uniformly connected to their neighboring check nodes in the range i − (γ − 1)/2 to i + (γ − 1)/2 where γ is the coupling length. A terminated spatially coupled code can be achieved by adding extra check nodes on both sides of the chain. The design rate of the spatially coupled code

is given by

Rd (dv ,

dc,

γ,

L)

=

1

−

dv dc

1

+

O(

γ L

)

.

It has been investigated that, for L → ∞, coupled codes

Fig. 2. Coupled protograph created from a chain of regular (3, 6) protographs, where L = 15 and γ = 3.
exhibit a belief propagation (BP) decoding threshold that approaches the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) decoding threshold of the underlying protograph [11]. Moreover, spatially coupled codes can be modified to obtain a causal encoder. For these reasons, we are motivated to design anytime codes based on spatially coupled codes. In the next sections, we consider M to be the number of variable nodes at each position which represent a single message or block. We also consider t as the number of blocks received so far.
IV. SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC CODES AS ANYTIME CODES
To achieve the anytime coding properties mentioned in Section II, we bring the following modifications on the spatially coupled LDPC code:
1) To ensure causal streaming and anytime decoding capability, we choose the generalized code construction described in [11]. More precisely, each of the dv connections of a variable node at position i is independently chosen from the check nodes of range [i, ...., i + γ − 1].
2) We allow large chain length L and large coupling length γ, so that the reliability of each message can be improved with large delays. 1
3) Instead of a uniform distribution of each connection from variable node to check node, we chose a distribution such that, a variable node at position i has more connections with the check nodes close to position i. Equivalently, there will be fewer connections with check nodes that are positioned farther away from position i. In this way, we can get a quick improvement of error performance with small delay. This type of distribution can be achieved, for example, by using an exponential distribution. Considering the exponential distribution, the probability of a connection between
1Note that it is practically feasible to let γ = ∞ to satisfy the anytime requirements. Finite γ is used in various numerical results to illustrate the code performance.

336

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:23:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a variable node (VN) at position i and a check node (CN) at position j (j ≥ i) can be written by:

Pr(k) = e−kλ(1 − e−λ),

(2)

where λ is known as exponential rate parameter and k = j − i is the distance between the connected check node and variable node.

We now consider density evolution for the above modified coupled code. We assume an infinite number of variable nodes (M = ∞) at each position. We use the following notations:

• m(vl)(i, t) → erasure probability of a message outgoing from a VN at position i in the lth iteration when up to

t blocks received. • m(cl)(i, t) → erasure probability of a message outgoing
from a CN at position i in the lth iteration when up to
t blocks received.

Fig. 3. Asymptotic performance of proposed anytime code over binary erasure channel (ǫ = 0.42).

• Pe(i, d) → erasure probability of a VN at position i with delay d = t − i. three blocks versus decoding delay. It shows that, the erasure

Similar to [11], for any t ≥ i, we get the following density evolution update equations,

probability of each block decays exponentially with decoding delay. Furthermore, the error performance of a given block is the shifted version of another. This shows that the error

Check node update:

performance of a block is only dependent on the decoding delay and is not dependent on its position.

 γ−1

dc−1

m(cl)(i, t) = 1 − 1 − Pr(j)m(vl−1)(i − j, t)

j=0

V. FINITE-LENGTH ESTIMATION

(3)

Variable node update:

In this section, we study an algorithm to estimate the finitelength behavior of the proposed anytime SCLDPC code. For


t−i

γ−1

dv−1 this purpose, we utilize the estimation algorithm proposed

m(vl)(i, t) = ǫ  Pr(j)mc(l)(i + j, t) +

Pr (j )

j=0

j=t−i+1

in [12], which is developed to estimate the finite-length performance of LDPC codes. This estimation technique takes

(4) into account the randomness of the channel for finite block

Decision making:

length (N ), while assuming that the codes are cycle-free. For erasure channel, we represent the realized bit erasure proba-


t−i

γ−1

dv

Pe(i, d) = ǫ  Pr(j)mc(∞)(i + j, t) +

Pr (j )

j=0

j=t−i+1

(5)

bility as a random variable, which has a binomial distribution

with success probability ǫ. For large N , this distribution

can be approximated by a Gaussian distribution N (µ, σ2),

where

µ

=

ǫ

and

σ2

=

ǫ(1−ǫ) N

.

Conditioning

on

a

chan-

nel realization (erasure probability), the proposed algorithm

where,

first finds the conditional decoded erasure probability from density evolution. Then by marginalizing over the channel

 0  m(v0)(i, t) = ǫ 1

if i ≤ 0 if 0 < i ≤ t if i > t

realizations, erasure probability can be obtained. Similar to [12], we design an algorithm such that the bit erasure rate of finite-length anytime SCLDPC code is estimated as a function of the delay.

We present the results from the above modified density evolution analysis. We consider (dv, dc) = (3, 6) regular protographs to create a coupled code. We also consider γ = 100 and exponential distribution of coupling connection with λ = 0.1. Figure 3 shows that erasure probabilities of

• For t received blocks, the number of variable nodes
in the decoding window is Nt = tM . Thus, we have k = 0, 1, ...., Nt number of possible erasures from the channel. Let Pe|k(i, d) denote the erasure probability of block i at delay d, conditioning on k erasures realized at

337

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:23:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the channel. We determine Pe|k(i, d) via the following steps.

– For k erasures realized at the channel, the empirical

erasure

probability

is

mch|k

=

k Nt

.

– Update m(vl|)k(i, t) and mc(l|)k(i, t) using the variable

node and check node update equations, respectively

as mentioned in Section IV, where ǫ is replaced by mch|k. Here m(vl|)k(i, t) and mc(l|)k(i, t) denotes the corresponding erasure probability conditioning on

k erasures realized at the channel.

– Find the conditional erasure probability of block i

Pe|k(i, d) using Equation 5.

• Marginalize Pe|k(i, d) over k to get the erasure probability of block i (Pe(i, d)).

Pe(i, d) = Pr(k)Pe|k(i, d).
k

where Pr(k) is the the probability of having k erasures from channel, which can be obtained from the binomial distribution of realized channel erasure probability as mentioned above.

Now we present the results according to the aforementioned finite-length analysis. To estimate the anytime characteristics of the modified code, we consider (3, 6) protographs of size M = 32, where the edges of each protograph are distributed exponentially (λ = 0.1) over γ = 50 protographs. We compare the finite-length estimation with the simulation result shown in Figure 4. It is seen that there exists a slight gap between our prediction and the simulation results as the finite length analysis does not consider cycles in the code.

VI. ADAPTIVE WINDOW DECODING
In this section, we introduce a low complexity decoding algorithm for anytime receivers under BEC. An expanding window decoding technique is proposed in [8], where decoding involves the current as well as all past bits received so far. As a result, the computational complexity of the belief propagation decoder grows unboundedly as time progresses. The existing windowed decoding technique [13] will not satisfy the anytime requirements because after each decoding instant the decoding window slides to the next block, leaving behind uncorrected errors. Thus, the error performance of a particular block does not improve with time once a block has been decoded. In this paper, we design an adaptive window decoding algorithm over BEC, where the window size depends only on the number of erased bits.
After coupling the protographs, we get a lower diagonal check matrix H. We refer to c as a codeword generated by the encoder, which satisfies HcT = 0. In the conventional message passing decoder, when a check node receives only one erasure, it can calculate the value of the erased bit by choosing a value that satisfies the constraint that the modulo2 sum of all incoming messages is zero. For adaptive window decoding, we will remove the recovered coded bits from the corresponding check equations, and thus the modulo-2 sum of all remaining incoming messages to a check node can be either 0 or 1. We define p as the parity bit vector such that p = [p1, p2, ..., pn] ∈ {0, 1}n, where n is the number of remaining check equations. A parity bit pi corresponds to the ith row of H. The value of pi is equal to the modulo-2 sum of all variable node’s messages that are connected to the ith check node. The lower diagonal property of check matrix enables us to perform decoding with a portion of H, which is associated with the received bits only. We denote this portion of the check matrix as Hactive. In the following algorithm, we reduce the size of the Hactive and change the values of parity bits based on the recovered bits.

Fig. 4. Comparison between the simulation results and our estimation over BEC (ǫ = 0.4) with M = 32.

For the BEC, the above algorithm is straight forward as there is no chance of crossover of transmitting bits. This algorithm gives a significant lower decoding complexity compare to expanding window decoding technique, while the error performance remains the same. In case of expanding window decoding, the complexity of the decoder scales as O(M t). On the other hand, the complexity of our algorithm is O(Wav), where Wav is the average decoding window length that contains only erased bits. For block size M = 40, Figure 5 shows the comparison between expanding window decoding (EWD) and adaptive window decoding (AWD) technique. For AWD, we observe that the average decoding window length approaches a constant (Wav ≃ 150 for ǫ = 0.35) while the decoding window length grows linearly for EWD. As expected, Wav increases as the channel erasure probability increases.

338

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:23:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 Adaptive window decoding algorithm for t = 1, 2, ....., ∞ do 1. Take first tM columns and first RdtM rows from the parity check matrix H to form Hactive. 2. Modify Hactive based on recovered bits. for i = 1 to tM do if variable node-i is recovered then if variable node-i = 1 then Flip the values of parity bits associated with bit i. end if Remove the coded bit i and column i of Hactive. end if end for 3. Run the decoder with modified Hactive , erased bits and parity bits. 4. Find the recovered bits based on the information returned by the decoder. end for
!" !" !"

A. Comparison
We have compared the performance of our proposed anytime code with one of the existing anytime code [8] over a binary erasure channel. We constructed the proposed code of [8] by choosing sub-matrices B0 = [1 1] and Bi = [1 0], where i > 0. For our proposed code, we consider exponential rate parameter λ = 0.1 and coupling length γ = 50. For simulation, we consider ǫ = 0.4 and M = 24 i.e. each block contains 24 variable nodes. Figure 6 shows a comparison between our proposed code and a systematic LDPC convolutional code proposed in [8]. Although the latter code provides better performance at low delays, it exhibits a very high error floor where error probability does not decay with delay. It is worth to mention that the constructed code with above sub-matrices [8] gives good performance for low channel erasure probability (ǫ = 0.3) and/or larger block length M . Thus, it may be possible to modify the code for worse channels like ǫ = 0.4, to have better performance than that reported in Figure 6. However, to the best of our knowledge such modification will result in a complex code design. On the other hand, in Figure 6, our proposed code maintains an exponential decay of erasure probability at large delays. Besides, our code also gives a performance for lower channel erasure probability. Thus, the proposed anytime spatially coupled code provides more degrees of freedom than the code proposed in [8].

Fig. 5. Comparison between the expanding window decoding (EWD) and adaptive window decoding (AWD) over BEC.
VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS

!"# $

In this section, we present the error performance through simulation results and show the effects of different design parameters on the proposed anytime code. For the simulations, we consider (dv, dc) = (3, 6) regular protographs to couple and choose an exponential distribution of coupling connection. Note that, we have also simulated our proposed code using (dv, dc) = (4, 8) regular protographs and observed the same characteristics as mentioned in the following sections.

Fig. 6. Performance comparison between our proposed anytime code and systematic LDPC convolutional code [8].
B. Effect of Exponential Rate Parameter λ
We have investigated the effect of the exponential rate parameter λ on the performance of our proposed anytime

339

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:23:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

code. Figure 7 illustrates the behavior of the erasure probability of a block for different λ. For larger λ, connections or couplings are more concentrated on nearby blocks. As a result, with high λ, a certain block gets corrected quickly as soon as the nearest blocks are received. However, an error floor occurs due to the very few connections with the distant blocks. On the other hand, with low λ, though the decay of probability of error is slow at start, the error performance improves significantly at large delay. Thus, there exists a tradeoff between λ and decay of error probability.

We now vary the coupling length, while keep the other parameters fixed. A large γ will enable a large spread of the coupling connections between the protographs. When gamma is small, the resultant code becomes a convolutional code with small memory length and thus the error performance levels out with increasing delay. Figure 8 shows the simulation results for different coupling length. From the simulation results, it is clear that an infinite coupling length is necessary for our proposed code.

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have introduced a linear anytime channel code based on a spatially coupled LDPC code. Through the asymptotic density evolution analysis, we observe the anytime properties of the proposed code. For the first time we were able to estimate the finite-length performance of an anytime code. An anytime decoder with reduced complexity is proposed in this paper. We have shown that, our proposed code performs better than the existing linear anytime code. Moreover, one can flexibly optimize the anytime code by varying the design parameters. Our future work will deal with the analytical investigation of the proposed code, especially finding the delay exponent. Moreover, there are many open topics with respect to noisy channels like the AWGN channel.

Fig. 7. Effect of λ on error performance with M = 40 and ǫ = 0.42.

REFERENCES

C. Varying Coupling Length γ
Fig. 8. Error performance at different coupling length with M = 40, λ = 0.01 and ǫ = 0.44.

[1] G. Como, F. Fagnani, and S. Zampieri, “Anytime reliable transmission of real-valued information through digital noisy channels,” SIAM Journ. Control Optim., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 3903–3924, Apr. 2010.
[2] A. Sahai and S. Mitter, “The necessity and sufficiency of anytime capacity for stabilization of a linear system over a noisy communication link ; part I : Scalar systems,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3369 –3395, Aug. 2006.
[3] D. Teneketzis, “On the structure of optimal real-time encoders and decoders in noisy communication,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 4017 –4035, Sept. 2006.
[4] L. Bao, A. Shirazinia, and M. Skoglund, “Iterative encoder-controller design based on approximate dynamic programming,” in IEEE Int. Works. Signal Process. Advances in Wireless Commun. (SPAWC), June 2010, pp. 1 –5.
[5] A. Sahai, Anytime Information Theory. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 2001.
[6] R. Sukhavasi and B. Hassibi, “Linear error correcting codes with anytime reliability,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Aug. 2011, pp. 1748 –1752.
[7] A. Shirazinia, L. Bao, and M. Skoglund, “Anytime source transmission using UEP-LT channel coding,” European Wireless Conf. - Sustainable Wireless Technologies (European Wireless), pp. 1 –6, Apr. 2011.
[8] L. Dossel, L. Rasmussen, R. Thobaben, and M. Skoglund, “Anytime reliability of systematic LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Comm. (ICC), 2012, pp. 2171–2175.
[9] A. Tarable, A. Nordio, F. Dabbene, and R. Tempo, “Anytime reliable LDPC convolutional codes for networked control over wireless channel,” 2013.
[10] H. S¸ ims¸ek, Anytime Channel Coding with Feedback. University of California, Berkeley, 2004.

340

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:23:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[11] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803 –834, Feb. 2011.
[12] M. Noor-A-Rahim, K. D. Nguyen, and G. Lechner, “Finite length analysis of LDPC codes,” http://arxiv.org/abs/1309.7102, 2013.

[13] A. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303 –2320, Apr. 2012.

341
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:23:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

