LDPC Codes based on MPEG Algorithm for Block Fading Channels

Shan Ding
College of Information Science and Engineering Northeastern University Shenyang, China
Email: dingshan@ise.neu.edu.cn
Abstract— This paper presents a novel algorithm to design Root-LDPC codes based on improved PEG algorithm for block fading channels. The modified Progressive Edge-Growth (MPEG) algorithm is a PEG algorithm with Approximated Cycle Extrinsic Message Degree (ACE) metric, which is used to describe the connectivity of cycles. The approach can maximize the girth of the cycles, improve the connectivity of cycles. Simulation results demonstrate that the algorithm we proposed can achieve full diversity and significantly better code performance, suitable to different fading blocks. From medium to high SNR, the average required number of iterations can be decreased.
Keywords-cooperative Root Low-Density Parity-Check (Root-LDPC); block fading channels;PEG;ACE
I. INTRODUCTION
The block fading channel model was first proposed in [1]. Due to the fact that multi-path propagation and mobility exist in many wireless systems, information transmission over the wireless channels is confronted with a significant challenge. The block fading channels model slowly varying fading, where a codeword span a fixed number of F of fading degrees of freedom. In such non-ergodic scenarios, the channel capacity is zero since there is an irreducible probability, is called outage probability [2]. The block-fading channel is a simple and useful model that captures the essential characteristics of non-ergodic channels [3]. Codes designed for block fading channels are expected to achieve the maximum diversity order and that the channel provides good code gain. Recently, code design for block fading channels has been widely studied [3]-[6].
Boutros et al. proposed a family of full diversity low density parity check (LDPC) called Root-LDPC codes for non-ergodic block fading channels in [7]. The Root-LDPC codes can achieve full diversity and perform close to the outage limit when decoded using the iterative belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithm on block fading channels. Yueqian Li et al. proposed the structured Root-LDPC codes by average of tilling circulant matrices and designed Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes [8]. The generator matrices of QC-LDPC codes are in systematic (SC) form with the requirement that the parity check matrices are full rank. The memory cost for encoding of QC-LDPC codes is greatly reduced and the encoder can be implemented using simple shift registers. The QC-LDPC

Ya-nan Zhao
College of Information Science and Engineering Northeastern University Shenyang, China
Email: zhaoyanan2903@126.com
codes perform similarly to the Root-LDPC design by Boutros.
As well as we all known that the girth, the length of the shortest cycle in the graph, has a significant effect on code performance. The increasing of girth has improved the performance. Consequently, a number of code construction methods aim to produce codes of large girth. The Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm [9] is a construction method for LDPC codes which codes exhibit improved performance compared to random construction methods. The main purpose of PEG algorithm is to maximize the girth. Uchoa et al. proposed a PEG-based algorithm to design LDPC codes with Root-Check properties, thus providing Root-LDPC codes with large girths than those obtained by previously reported methods. The Root-LDPC codes generated by PEG algorithm can save up to 0.5dB in terms of signal to noise ratio (SNR) to achieve the same FER or BER compared to the previous algorithms.
Tian et al. proposed that not only the girth of cycles but the connectivity of the cycles plays an important role on the performance [11]. The metric of Approximate Cycle Extrinsic message degree (ACE) is used to describe the connectivity of cycles, which is identified as a simple and effective connection between the cycles and the stopping sets. The better the connectivity of cycles is, the better the code performs. Not all short cycles are equally harmful [11]. Some longer cycles with poor graph connectivity are more harmful than shorter cycles with good graph connectivity.
The contribution of this paper is to present a novel algorithm based on improved PEG technique to design LDPC codes with Root-Check properties. The proposed algorithm combines the PEG algorithm with Approximate Cycle Extrinsic message degree (ACE) metric. The approach can maximize the girth of the cycles, improve the connectivity of cycles. Simulation results demonstrate that the algorithm we proposed can achieve full diversity and significantly better code performance, suitable to different fading blocks. From medium to high SNR, the average required number of iterations can be decreased.
II. THE BLOCK FADING CHANNEL MODEL
We consider a communication channel with an independent fading coefficient on each block. F is the

978-1-4799-2827-9/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:02:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

number of blocks per codeword of length N. The lth received symbol is given by[8]:

yl =αf xl + zl

(1)

where

l={1,2,…,N},f={1,2,…,F},

f

=

⎡ ⎢⎢

F

l⎤ N ⎥⎥

with

⎢⎡φ ⎥⎤ denoting the ceiling of φ ,αf is the real Rayleigh fading

coefficient of the fth block with E[|αf|2]=1. In this paper, xl is the transmitted BPSK symbols, zl is additive white Gaussian noise with zero mean and varianceN0/2. We

assume that the receiver has perfect channel state

information, the signal to noise ratio (SNR) is expressed as Eb/N0, where Eb is the energy per information bit. A simple example of a codeword of length N in block-fading channel with F fading block is illustrated in Fig.1.

Two main parameters characterize the error rate performance on bloc-fading channels: the diversity order and the coding gain. The diversity order defines the slope of the error rate curve as a function of the signal to noise (SNR) ratio on a double logarithmic scale. The coding gain determines the level that the bit error rate curve approximates outage probability. Assuming a C (N,K)2 linear block code of length N can span over F fading blocks, R=K/N is the information transmission rate, where K is the dimension. The diversity order of linear block code d is defined as follows:

d = − lim logPew

(2)

γ →+∞ logγ

where Pew is the error probability of decoded output codeword. We can observe that the value of diversity order d
depends on the decoding algorithm. For linear block codes, block codes can obtain full diversity only when d=F. For a given non-zero codeword c∈C, we define the Hamming weight vector (w1(c),…,wF(c))，where wj(c) is the partial Hamming weight of coded bits undergoing fading αj. When
maximum likelihood decoding is employed at the receiver
[10], the diversity order is given by:

d

=

min
c ∈C

| {w j (c)

≠

0} |

(3)

Moreover, the minimum partial Hamming weight is defined as follows:

ω*

=

min
c∈C

min
j =1... F

(w

j

(c))

(4)

The block code can achieve full diversity using maximum likelihood decoding algorithm as long as ω*>0.

Fig. 1. The codeword of length N with block fadings F

Within these limitations, the upper-bounded of error probability is given as follows [12]:

∏ P(0 → c) ≤ 1 ∏ 2

F

1

j=1 1 + ω j (c)γ

≈ 2γ F

1

ω F
j =1

j

(c)

(5)

∏ where

ω F
j =1

j

(c)

is

the

coding

gain.

The Shannon capacity of the block fading channel is zero. The performance of a communication system in a non-ergodic block fading channel is characterized by its information outage limit, which is defined as follows[8][9]:

Pout = Pr (I (E b / N0 ,{a f }) < R)

(6)

where Pr(Φ) is the probability of eventΦ, I(Eb/N0,{αj})is the instantaneous mutual information between input and output of the channel. R=K/N is the information transmission rate, where K is the number of information bits per codeword of length N. We consider R=1/F, since then it is possible to
design a practical diversity achieving code. The outage limit
(2) is the lower bound on frame error rate (FER) for any
coding scheme over block-fading channels. With Gaussian inputs, the instantaneous mutual information IG is defined as follows:

∑ IG(Eb / N0,{αf }) =

1 F

F j=1

1 2

log2

(1+

2R

Eb N
0

αf

2
)

(7)

An outage occurs when the average accumulated mutual information among blocks is smaller than the attempted information transmission rate.

With BPSK input, the corresponding instantaneous mutual information is calculated by:

∑ I BPSK

=

1 F

F 1(g( f =1 2

2R

Eb N0

| hf

|2 ) + g(−

2R

Eb N0

| hf

|2 ))

(8)

where

∫ g (τ ) = ∞ −∞

− ( w −τ ) 2
1e 2 2π

2 log 2 1 + e − 2 wτ

dw

(9)

The value of above g(τ) can be computed using the Gauss-Hermite quadrature method.

III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM( IMPROVED PEG)
In this paper, we present a method to design Root-LDPC codes based on improved PEG algorithm for block fading channels. The resulting structured MPEG Root-LDPC codes can achieve full diversity and significantly better code performance. PEG algorithm is a construction method to maximum the girth of cycles. Although the algorithm guarantees the girth of cycle maximum, the connectivity of cycles is ignored. Tian et al. stated that not only the girth of cycles but the connectivity of the cycles plays an important role on the performance [11].
Tian et al. defined stopping sets, Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD) and Approximate Cycle EMD (ACE).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:02:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Definition 1: A variable-node set is called a stopping set if all its neighbors are connected to this set at least twice.
Definition 2(EMD): An extrinsic constraint node of a variable-node set is constraint node that is singly connected to this set. The EMD of a variable-node is the number of extrinsic constraint nodes of this set.

Consider the EMD of a generic cycle. If there are no
variable nodes in a cycle that share common constraint nodes outside of the cycle, then the EMD of this cycle is∑ i(di-2) ,where di is the degree of the ith variable in this cycle. To provide a calculable EMD metric, we neglect constraint
node sharing and define ACE.

Definition 3(ACE):The ACE of a length 2d cycle is ∑ i(di-2) ,where di is the degree of the ith variable in this cycle. We also say that the ACE of a degree-d variable node is d-2,
and the ACE of any constraint node is zero.

The ACE measures the connectivity between cycles in

Tanner graph and the rest of figure. The proposed algorithm

combines the PEG algorithm with Approximate Cycle

Extrinsic message degree (ACE) metric. The approach can

maximize the girth of the cycles, improve the connectivity of

cycles and reduce the error rate. This modified PEG

algorithm is called MPEG algorithm. The variable node of

interest is labeled vj and the candidate check nodes are

individually referred to as ci. The set of check nodes found in

sub-graph is denoted

Nl vi

while the set of check nodes of

interest, those not currently found in the sub-graph, are

denoted

Nl vi

.

The

structure

of

H

for

the

regular

Root-LDPC is given as follows:

H

=

⎡I

⎢ ⎣

H1i

H 2i I

0 H1p

H2 0

p

⎤ ⎥ ⎦

(10)

where I is an identity matrix of size N/4, H1i and H1p are random square matrix of size N/4 transmitted on α1. H2i and H2p are random square matrix of size N/4 transmitted on α2.
This random constructed matrix is called random Root-LDPC matrix. To guarantee the structure of H, we also define the indicator vectors Z1 and Z2 as follows:

Z1

=

⎡

⎢0 m

⎣

1× 2

Z 2

=

⎡

⎢1 m

⎣

1× 2

⎤

1 m⎥

1× 2

⎦

⎤

0 m⎥

1× 2

⎦

(11) (12)

which are modeled on the indicator of the original PEG

algorithm[10] for tracking

Nl vi

as the sub-tree expands.

For the MPEG algorithm, the ACE of the candidate

check nodes are calculated when

Nl vi

≠φ

or

N l+1 vi

=φ

.

Then the check node is chosen at random from the check

nodes with the maximum value of ACE.

Our proposed MPEG Root-LDPC algorithm is detailed in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2. MPEG Root-LDPC Algorithm
IV. SIMULATION
In this section, we present the performance of the proposed MPEG Root-LDPC codes when used in a Rayleigh block- fading channel with F = 2 independent fading blocks. All Root- LDPC codes with rate R = 1/2. The channel is Additive White Gauss Noise (AWGN) channel. BPSK modulation is used throughout evaluations. Standard BP algorithm is employed at the decoder with 20 iterations.
Fig. 3 shows the comparison of the FER performance between proposed MPEG Root-LDPC codes, PEG Root-LDPC codes and original PEG LDPC codes. The codeword length N is 1200. The outage limits with Gaussian input and BPSK input are also drawn. From the simulation results, we can see that MPEG Root-LDPC codes and PEG Root-LDPC codes have the same FER performance, which is close to the outage limit of the block-fading channels, and achieve the full diversity order of the channel.But with the increase of the SNR, the MPEG algorithm has significant performance advantages. With the same SNR, the frame error rate of MPEG algorithm is lower than PEG algorithm’s., the MPEG algorithm can save up to 0.3dB in terms of SNR to achieve the same FER. The original PEG LDPC algorithm has the worst performance. The curves presented for the proposed MPEG Root-LDPC codes show that a Root-LDPC code generated with the proposed MPEG algorithm produces a better performance in terms of FER.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:02:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FE R FER

10-1

PEG LDPC

PEG Root-LDPC

10-2

MPEG Root-LDPC outage Gaussian

outage BPSK

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 3. FER performance comparison for PEG root-LDPC codes, MPEG root-LDPC codes and PEG LDPC codes over a block-fading channel with F = 2.
Fig. 4 shows FER performance of MPEG Root-LDPC codes with different codeword lengths. Three codeword lengths N = 1000, 2000 and 4000 are used. We observe that MPEG Root-LDPC codes with different length have the similar error performance, which is close to the outage limit of the block-fading channels. The longer the codeword is, the better the performance will be.

V. CONCLUSION
A novel algorithm based on generalized ACE constrained PEG algorithm has been proposed to design Root- LDPC codes. Based on simulations, the proposed method was compared to PEG Root- LDPC and PEG-LDPC codes. The results demonstrate that the MPEG Root- LDPC codes generated by our proposed algorithm outperform in a wide range of SNR values and provide a gain of up to 0.3dB.

REFERENCES

[1] E. Biglieri, J. Proakis, and S. Shamai (Shitz). Fading channels: Information-theoretical and communications aspects [J], IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 1998, 44: 2619–2692.
[2] A. G. D. Uchoa, C. Healy, R. C. de Lamare, and R. D. Souza“, Design of LDPC Codes Based on Progressive Edge Growth Techniques for Block Fading Channels,”IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 15, NO. 11, pp. 1221-1223, Nov. 2011

[3] Wang Xijun,Chen Wei,Cao Zhigang, “A Cross-Layer Design for

Rateless Coding with Optimal Packet Size over Block Fading

Channels,”

WIRELESS

PERSONAL

COMMUNICATIONS,vol.70,no.1,pp.177-187,May 2013.

[4] Elizondo Victor M.,Derpich Milan S, “Maximum Expected Rates of

Block-Fading Channels with Entropy-Constrained Channel State

Feedback,”

IEEE

TRANSACTIONS

ON

COMMUNICATIONS,vol.61,no. 2,pp:576-589,FEB.2013.

[5] Yang Wei,Durisi Giuseppe,Riegler Erwin, “On the Capacity of

Large-MIMO Block-Fading Channels,”IEEE JOURNAL ON

SELECTED

AREAS

IN

COMMUNICATIONS,vol:31,no.2,pp:117-132FEB.2013.

[6] Zhou Qing F., Zhang Q. T,“On Blind Interference Alignment over Homogemeous Block Fading Channels,”IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS,vol:16,no.9,pp.1432-1435,SEP.2012.

[7] J. Boutros, A. Guillen i Fabregas, E. Biglieri, and G. Zemor, “Design and analysis of low-density parity-check codes for block-fading channels,”in Proc. IEEE ITA, Oct. 2007, pp. 54–62.

10-1

Frame error rate

n=1000

n=2000

n=4000

Outage Gaussian

Outage BPSK

10-2

10-3

10-4

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig.4. FER performance of MPEG Root-LDPC codes with different codeword lengths
[8] Y. Li and M. Salehi, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC code design for block-fading channels,” in Proc. IEEE CISS, Mar. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[9] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51,no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[10] A. G. D. Uchoa, C. Healy, R. C. de Lamare, and R. D. Souza“, Design of LDPC Codes Based on Progressive Edge Growth Techniques for Block Fading Channels,”IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 15, NO. 11, pp. 1221-1223, Nov. 2011
[11] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction [J], IEEE Trans. Commun., Aug. 2004, vol. 50, 8: 1242–1247.
[12] R. Knopp and P. Humblet, “On coding for block fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 189–205, Jan. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:02:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

