GLDPC-PC Codes: Channel Coding Towards 6G Communications
Li Shen, Yongpeng Wu, Yin Xu, Xiaohu You, Xiqi Gao, and Wenjun Zhang

arXiv:2404.14828v2 [cs.IT] 7 Apr 2025

Abstract—The sixth generation (6G) wireless communication system will improve the key technical indicators by one to two orders of magnitude, and come with some new features. As a crucial technique to enhance the reliability and efficiency of data transmission, the next-generation channel coding is thus confronted with new challenges in terms of complexity, latency, performance. This article supplies an overview of the potential channel codes for 6G communications. In addition, we explore to develop next-generation channel codes based on lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) and polar frameworks, introducing a concept named generalized LDPC with polar-like component (GLDPC-PC) codes. The codes have exhibited promising error correction performance and manageable complexity, which can be further optimized by specific code design. The opportunities and challenges of GLDPC-PC codes are also discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
In communication systems, the received signal may be corrupted by various factors, like noise, interference, and signal attenuation, leading to unexpected errors during data transmission. Channel coding technique combats these errors and enhances the reliability and efficiency of transmission by introducing additional redundancy. Owing to this, channel coding is essential in many modern communication systems, e.g. wireless communication, satellite communication, digital broadcasting, and fiber-optic communication systems.
Since Shannon’s channel coding theorem has demonstrated that, by employing appropriate channel coding techniques, the transmission rate can approach the channel capacity with arbitrarily low error probability, numerous researchers have been dedicated to designing effective channel coding schemes. In the 1950s, the introduction of convolutional codes marked a significant milestone in channel coding development. Specially, the invention of the Viterbi decoding algorithm greatly promoted the practical application of convolutional codes, and emphasized the importance of soft information inputs for the channel decoder. In the 1990s, the emergence of turbo codes revolutionized the field of channel coding. Turbo codes, introduced by Claude Berrou et al., demonstrated exceptional error correction performance close to the theoretical limits predicted by Shannon. The implementation of iterative turbo decoding also inspired the rediscovery of low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes [1] in the early 2000s, which were initially proposed by Gallager in the 1960s and were ignored for a long time because their decoding complexity was unacceptable at that time. Using the advanced belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm, LDPC codes have demonstrated excellent
Li Shen, Yongpeng Wu, Yin Xu, and Wenjun Zhang are with Shanghai Jiao Tong University; Xiaohu You and Xiqi Gao are with Southeast University.

performance that is extremely close to channel capacity on many channels. In the 2009, the polar codes [2], proposed by Arıkan, have emerged as a groundbreaking development in channel coding. Polar codes are based on the theory of channel polarization and are the first coding method with a deterministic construction that has been proved to achieve the capacity of symmetric binary-input discrete memoryless channels (B-DMCs).
For future sixth generation (6G) mobile communication systems, the key performance indicators, e.g. peak data rate, latency, and reliability, will be improved by one or two magnitudes compared to fifth generation (5G) systems [3]. Hence, we need to further develop the next-generation channel codes to address the stringent requirements of 6G. First, lower complexity, lower latency, and performance closer to the Shannon limit are unavoidable topics in channel coding design. Moreover, an increasing number of delay-sensitive services have posed serious challenges to the design of short codes, especially in terms of error correction performance and ultralow latency decoders. Considering the potential integration of sensing with communication in 6G, the next-generation channel codes are required to balance the performance of these two purposes. Furthermore, a unified coding architecture that can exhibit excellent performance in a wide range of code lengths and code rates is also welcomed. This will bring various benefits, such as simplified system design, enhanced compatibility, and improved area efficiency.
In this article, we first review some state-of-the-art channel codes, including LDPC codes [1], generalized LDPC (GLDPC) codes [4], non-binary LDPC (NB-LDPC) codes [5], spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes [6], polar codes [2], and polarization-adjusted convolutional (PAC) codes [7]. Then, we explore the possibility of developing next-generation channel codes on top of LDPC and polar frameworks, and introduce a concept for channel codes towards 6G, named GLDPC with polar-like component (GLDPC-PC) codes. By leveraging the advanced soft-output successive cancellation list (SCL) decoder [13] for GLDPC-PC decoding, they exhibit immense potential for ultra-reliable communications. The opportunities and challenges of GLDPC-PC codes are also discussed.
II. STATE-OF-THE-ART CHANNEL CODES
A. LDPC Codes
LDPC codes are a class of linear block codes with a sparse parity check matrix (PCM), which has a low density of 1’s in the matrix. In addition to the matrix representation, the Tanner

graph [4], a bipartite graph, is usually used to represent LDPC codes. For a systematic LDPC code, a codeword consists of the information bits and the remaining single parity checks. Each row of the PCM corresponds to a parity check, named check node (CN) in the Tanner graph, while each column of the PCM corresponds to an encoded bit in the codeword, named variable node (VN). When the element at the i-th row and the j-th column of the PCM is a 1, the i-th CN is connected to the j-th VN in the Tanner graph. A single parity check is then said to be satisfied if and only if the bits at VNs that are connected to this CN sum, modulo two, to zero.
The encoding process of LDPC codes involves multiplying the message sequence by the generation matrix (GM) to generate the codeword, which can be obtained from the PCM by ensuring that the parity checks hold for any valid codeword. At the receiver, the LDPC decoder detects and corrects errors in the received noisy codeword under the parity check constraints. A well-known decoding algorithm is the message passing algorithm (MPA), which refers to a class of iterative decoding algorithms, including the BP algorithm and its approximations. The algorithm iteratively exchanges soft information between VNs and CNs along the edges in the Tanner graph. Due to their remarkable performance, various wireless communication standards, such as WiMAX, ATSC 3.0, DVB S2/T2, Wi-Fi, and 5G, have adopted LDPC codes.
B. GLDPC Codes
As an extension of LDPC codes, GLDPC codes [4] were first introduced by Tanner in 1981. Compared to conventional LDPC codes, GLDPC codes have a more flexible structure. In GLDPC codes, the CNs in the Tanner graph are constrained to be a linear block code, rather than the single parity-check code. The sub-codes associated with the CNs are referred to as component codes. Various component codes have been considered in GLDPC code research, including Hamming codes, Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem codes, convolutional codes, etc. Polar codes have also been investigated as component codes for product codes [8]. Product codes constrain the rows and columns of information bits in matrix form to be two linear block codes, while the CN constraints of GLDPC codes are more liberal. Hence, product codes can be regarded as a special structure of GLDPC codes.
Since GLDPC codes share a similar code structure with LDPC codes, the MPA, commonly used for LDPC decoding, is also applicable to GLDPC decoding. During the iterative decoding process, the soft information passed from CNs to the VNs can be obtained by performing a soft-output decoder of the component codes. Owing to the stronger constraints at the CNs, GLDPC codes have demonstrated improved decoding performance, faster iterative convergence speed, and lower error floors for some specific code lengths at moderate-to-high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). Hence, it makes GLDPC codes a candidate for future wireless communication scenarios that require ultra-high reliability.
C. NB-LDPC codes
NB-LDPC codes are an extension of LDPC codes from the binary domain to higher-order Galois fields [5]. That is, both

the PCMs and codewords of NB-LDPC codes take values in the Galois field, and the parity checks are also defined over the Galois field. NB-LDPC codes can also perform BP decoding in the Galois field, i.e., the q-ary sum-product algorithm. However, the complexity of the algorithm increases with the square of the order of the Galois field. Through some simplified methods, such as fast fourier transform, extended min-sum, and min-max, the decoding complexity can be effectively reduced at the expense of some performance. Despite this, NB-LDPC codes have exhibited better burst error resistance and superior error-correcting performance at moderate-to-short code lengths, compared to their binary realization. Moreover, NB-LDPC codes are particularly well-suited for coded modulation systems, as the coded symbols may be directly mapped to modulated symbols without a bit-to-symbol modulator.
D. SC-LDPC Codes
The concept of SC-LDPC codes originated from convolutional LDPC codes proposed in the late 1990s, which inherit the characteristics of convolution and sparse PCMs. The convolutional structure associates the CNs of an LDPC codeword with the VNs of the preceding codewords, i.e., the spatial coupling of several LDPC codes. In [6], the threshold saturation phenomenon of regular SC-LDPC codes was discovered for binary erasure channels (BECs), which implies that this class of codes is capacity-achieving under BP decoding as the degrees of VNs and CNs become sufficiently large, while maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding is required for regular LDPC codes. Subsequently, this phenomenon was further generalized to binary-input memoryless symmetric channels. The promise of performance has motivated numerous research on SC-LDPC codes. It has been shown that the introduction of coupling structure can significantly enhance the performance of waterfall region, outperforming the LDPC codes with the same degree distribution.
E. Polar Codes
The key idea behind polar codes is the channel polarization. The polarization process begins with the 2×2 Arıkan’s polarization kernel (matrix). Arıkan showed that the kernel can transform two uses of a B-DMC into a good and a bad polarized channel without loss of the overall capacity. Moreover, by recursively applying Arıkan’s kernel, the channel polarization of polar codes with a power-of-two code length is achieved. As code length increases, the polarization phenomenon becomes more remarkable, leading to the convergence of the polarized channel capacity to 1 (almost noiseless) or 0 (almost purenoise). Moreover, the amount of noiseless polarized channels is proved to asymptotically converge to the overall capacity of the original B-DMCs, i.e. polar codes are capacity-achieving.
Given a message sequence, the general idea of polar encoding is to transmit the message over the most reliable polarized channels, while the remaining polarized channels are filled with frozen bits, which are fixed values known to both the transmitter and the receiver. At the receiver, a successive cancellation (SC) decoder [2] is performed to successively output the estimation of message. Moreover, the SCL decoder

proposed in [9] can output a list of candidate codewords and significantly improve decoding performance. As a cost, the complexity of SCL decoding is increased by a multiple of the list size compared to SC decoding. With cyclic redundancy check (CRC) aided selection of the candidate codewords [10], the performance of SCL decoding can be further improved.

F. PAC Codes
Although polar codes have shown to be capacity-achieving, insufficient polarization at short code lengths will cause a capacity loss. That is because the bad polarized channels are not bad enough, and we do not use them for message transmission. To address this issue, Arıkan proposed PAC codes in [7], which adjusts the polarization process by introducing convolutional encoding and sequential decoding.
In PAC codes, a rate-1 convolutional code is cascaded before a standard polar code at the encoding side. Then, the encoding of PAC codes is performed by rate-profiling, convolutional encoding, and polar encoding, where rate-profiling is the process of placing frozen bits like conventional polar codes. However, the optimal rate-profiling strategy is still unknown due to the concatenation of convolutional codes. During decoding, since the rate-1 convolutional code is equivalent to a tree code under the rate-profiling constraints, Arıkan uses the Fano sequential decoder to perform a tree-based heuristic search, where the path metrics required by the sequential decoder should be updated via repeatedly running an SC decoding.
The simulation results in [7] show that PAC codes outperform 5G polar codes, and the performance can reach the dispersion bound of the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Therefore, PAC codes have been one of the most competitive coding schemes at short code length.
III. CAN POLAR CODES ACT AS THE COMPONENT CODES OF GLDPC CODES?
As LDPC and polar codes are favored by various latest communication standards, we are interested in exploring nextgeneration channel coding techniques relying on their existing coding frameworks. Thus, an intuitive idea is whether polar codes can act as the component codes of GLDPC codes. Indeed, the crux of this idea revolves around whether polar codes can facilitate an effective MPA for decoding, which is tightly related to the error correction performance.
Generally, the soft information required by MPA’s iterations can be extracted from a soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoder of the component codes. Yet, it is challenging to design a bit-wise SISO polar decoder with accurate output and low complexity.
The optimal SISO decoder is known to be implemented by the Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) algorithm. However, its complexity grows exponentially with the number of frozen bits, which is unacceptable in practice. Pyndiah’s approximation [11] can estimate the a-posteriori probability (APP) loglikelihood ratios (LLRs) from a list of candidate codewords, which has been used for decoding polar product codes in [8]. However, Pyndiah’s approach assumes that the APPs of unvisited codewords are directly zero, and as a result, it may output

Fig. 1. An example of the SCL decoding tree of a polar code with code length of 4, frozen bit equal to 0, and list size of 2 [13].
infinite values of LLRs. Hence, a saturation value is required to avoid unbounded outputs and should be optimized for practical applications as the iterative performance is sensitive to this value. In [12], a universal soft-output guessing random additive noise decoding (SO-GRAND) without reliance on specific code structures for codes with short-to-moderate redundancy is presented, in which a method that estimates the APPs omitted by Pyndiah’s approach is proposed to provide more accurate soft output.
The above SISO decoders are universal and not only applicable to polar codes. Considering the special structure of polar codes, polar BP and soft cancellation (SCAN) decoders can provide soft output, while their accuracy is affected by short circles in the polar factor graph and thus inner iterations are required. Cascading an additional SCL decoder may improve their performance and avoid iterations. By extending the methodology in [12], a soft-output SCL (SO-SCL) decoder for polar-like codes with comparable complexity to SCL decoding was proposed [13]. The new approach begins with the SCL decoding tree, as shown in Fig. 1, where each leaf represents a possible codeword. After SCL decoding, the decoding tree consists of three parts [13]:
1) Visited leaves are the resulting valid codewords output by the SCL decoder.
2) Unvisited subtrees denote the subtrees pruned due to list size limitations and thus are not visited, although their leaves are valid codewords.
3) Invalid subtrees indicate the subtrees rooted at the nodes that are not satisfied the frozen bits constraints, whose leaves are invalid codewords.
The APP LLRs should actually be estimated from the APPs of all valid leaves, where the APPs of unvisited leaves are unknown from a conventional SCL decoding. To address this, SO-SCL approximates the APPs of unvisited leaves based on visited leaves and nodes, while Pyndiah’s approach simply ignores these APPs. Simulation results in [13] have demonstrated that the proposed approximation provides more

Fig. 2. The Tanner graph (left part) and parity check matrix (right part) representations of GLDPC-PC codes.

accurate soft information compared to Pyndiah’s algorithm and approaches the performance of the optimal BCJR algorithm.
The applications of SO-GRAND to GLDPC and product decoding presented in [12] have highlighted the crucial role of an accurate soft-output component decoder. Later, the emergence of SO-SCL [13] has provided an accurate SCLbased soft-output method. Inspired by these works, we believe that polar codes as component codes for GLDPC are practical, since the soft information of polar codes can be accurately and efficiently approximated through the widely used SCL decoder. Therefore, we adopt SO-SCL [13] for GLDPC-PC decoding in our simulations.
IV. CONCEPTS OF GLDPC-PC CODES
Since polar codes have the potential to be the component codes of GLDPC, we introduce the primary concepts of such codes in this section, which is referred to as GLDPC-PC codes hereafter.
A. Code Structure
Analogously to LDPC codes, GLDPC-PC codes can also be represented in the form of Tanner graphs and PCMs. In the Tanner graph, each VN still denotes the corresponding bit in the codeword, while each CN constrains the VNs connected to it to be a polar codeword. As such, the adjacency matrix (AM) of the Tanner graph no longer serves as the PCM of GLDPC-PC codes. Nevertheless, the PCM can be drawn from the AM by replacing the 1’s in the i-th row of AM with the columns of the PCM of the i-th component code. The PCM of polar component codes could be obtained through well-known polar construction methods like 5G construction. Moreover, we remark that, by applying different column permutations to the PCM of component codes, the same component code can impose different constraints on the same VNs.
An example of GLDPC-PC codes is illustrated in Fig. 2. In the Tanner graph (left part of Fig. 2), each CN is constrained by different polar codes, which are distinguished by different

colors. The AM of the Tanner graph is then written in the upper right corner of Fig. 2. To obtain the PCM of such a code, the k-th 1 in the i-th row of the AM is replaced by the k-th column of the permutated PCM of the i-th component code, while the remaining positions are filled with all-zero vectors to construct a submatrix. Here, the column permutations are assumed to perform no operation for simplicity. Thus, the resulting matrix is the PCM of the illustrated GLDPC-PC code, as shown in the bottom right corner of Fig. 2.
B. Encoding
A general GLDPC-PC encoding method is to multiply the message sequence by the GM. Specifically, the PCM of GLDPC-PC codes can be put into the form of the right submatrix being the identity matrix via Gaussian elimination. Then, the GM is directly written from the regained PCM. Note that due to the linear combination of the rows of the PCM, the resulting GM is most likely not sparse, which leads to high computational complexity (depending on the denseness of GM) of matrix multiplication when encoding. Nevertheless, with some special code structures, such as the quasi-cyclic form, one can follow the idea in [14] to perform encoding with lower complexity.
C. Decoding
The decoding of GLDPC-PC codes can be efficiently realized through the well-known MPA. A guided process of the MPA for GLDPC-PC decoding is described as follows.
1) Initialize the soft information at VNs with the channel LLRs calculated from the received noisy codeword, while all soft information that CNs pass to VNs and all soft information that VNs pass to CNs are initialized to zero.
2) VN update: At each VN, extract the soft information that will be passed to CNs connected to this VN from LLR at this VN and soft information passed to this VN

Fig. 3. BLER performance of GLDPC-PC codes over AWGN channel with Fig. 4. BLER performance of GLDPC-PC codes over AWGN channel with

N = 1024 and K = 640.

N = 2048 and K = 1280.

like conventional LDPC codes. Repeat this step until all VNs are updated. 3) CN update: At each CN, perform a SISO polar decoder with all soft information passed to this CN as inputs, and then output soft information that will be passed to VNs connected to this CN. Repeat this step until all CNs are updated. 4) Approximate the APP LLR at each VN given LLR at this VN and soft information passed to this VN, and then perform a hard decision on the sequence of APP LLRs to obtain the estimated codeword. 5) If the estimated codeword fulfills the parity check constraint, or the maximum number of iterations is reached, stop decoding and output the estimate. Otherwise, go back to step 2.
Note that the SISO polar decoder could be efficient schemes like Pyndiah’s approach [11], SO-GRAND [12], and SO-SCL [13] as mentioned in Sec. III.

Fig. 5. BLER performance of GLDPC-PC codes over AWGN channel with N = 4096 and K = 3200.

D. Performance Evaluation

Some examples of GLDPC-PC codes are offered to illustrate

their performance. We adopt the GLDPC structure used in [12]

to construct GLDPC-PC codes, which is acquired from product

codes following the idea in [15, Sec. V]. In this method, the

AM Γ is represented as

Γ=

I0 I0

I0 I1

I0 I2

··· ···

I0 I n−1

,

(1)

where Ii

is the i-th cyclic right shift of the

M 2

×

M 2

identity

matrix I0 and M is the number of CNs. The first and second

“block” row in Γ are associated to a (n, k) polar component

code and the code obtained by random column permutations

of its PCM, respectively. Thus, the resulting code length N of GLDPC-PC codes is n2 and parity check number is M (n −

k). Note that the information length K may be greater than n2 − M (n − k) if some parity checks are linearly dependent.

The (1024, 640), (2048, 1280), and (4096, 3200) GLDPC-PC

codes are constructed from (32, 26) polar code with M = 64, (32, 26) polar code with M = 128, and (64, 57) polar code with M = 128, respectively.
Figs. 3, 4, and 5 present the block error rate (BLER) performance as a function of energy per bit vs. power spectral density of noise (Eb/N0) for GLDPC-PC codes over AWGN channel with different code length and rate. We also provide the results of 5G LDPC codes, 5G polar codes, and LTE turbo codes for comparison. The random coding union (RCU) bound is simultaneously displayed. We use Pyndiah’s approach [11] and SO-SCL [13] for GLDPC-PC decoding, and the maximum number of iterations for GLDPC-PC decoding is 20. We adopt BP algorithm with a maximum of 50 iterations for 5G LDPC codes and CRC-aided SCL decoder with 16bit CRC and list size 16 for 5G polar codes. We observe that GLDPC-PC codes outperform other codes at moderate-to-high SNRs. Specifically, GLDPC-PC codes with SO-SCL achieve

Fig. 6. Average number of iterations for decoding GLDPC-PC codes and 5G LDPC codes, with N = 1024 and K = 640.

positive gain at a BLER of 10−4 ∼ 10−5 compared to 5G

LDPC codes. This gain is reduced by applying the inaccurate

approximation of Pyndiah’s approach. Whereas the BLER

performance of GLDPC-PC codes can be further improved by

increasing the list size. Moreover, GLDPC-PC codes show no apparent error floor at least when BLER drops to 10−7, while

the turning point of the waterfall region for LDPC codes is at a BLER of about 10−4.
Assuming that Iavg is the average number of iterations, M is the number of CNs, N is the code length, and d¯v(d¯c) denotes the average degree distribution of VNs(CNs), the BP decoder

of LDPC codes performs

Iavg(N d¯v + M d¯c)

(2)

basic operations for one received codeword. By replacing the

single parity check with polar codes, the GLDPC-PC decoder

executes about

M

Iavg(N d¯v + L ni(log ni + 1))

(3)

i=1
basic operations, where L is the list size and ni is the code length of the i-th component code. Since polar codes impose

stronger constraints on CNs, the average number of iterations

of GLDPC-PC codes is approximately one-third to half of

that of 5G LDPC codes, as verified in Fig. 6. Thus, in our

simulation settings, the decoding computational complexity of

GLDPC-PC codes with L = 4 is roughly two to three times

that of 5G LDPC codes and comparable to that of polar codes.

Please note that the presented GLDPC-PC codes are obtained

from off-the-shelf structures and not specifically designed for

polar component. A general code construction method remains

to be investigated. Moreover, the decoding complexity could

be further reduced by applying a low-complexity SCL decoder,

e.g. node-based SCL, with which it is expected to achieve a

complexity comparable to 5G LDPC codes.

V. OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
GLDPC-PC codes achieve a unity of LDPC codes and polar codes, and demonstrate promising performance on error correction and complexity. In this section, we highlight the superiorities and challenges of applying GLDPC-PC codes to 6G communication systems and beyond.

A. Superiorities for Practical Application
1) Ultra-Reliability: In contrast to 5G LDPC codes that have error floors at a BLER of 10−4 ∼ 10−5, GLDPC-PC codes have shown the potential to enable waterfall region down to 10−8 or below while achieving gains. This is in line with the demand for future 6G ultra-reliable communications.
2) Versatile Decoder: Since the SO-SCL decoding relies on the process of hard-output SCL decoding, we possess the flexibility to configure the SO-SCL decoder to enable decoding for either conventional polar codes or component codes of GLDPC-PC codes.
3) Parallel Decoding: To reduce the decoding latency, parallel decoding is widely used in hardware implementation of conventional LDPC codes. Similarly, GLDPC-PC codes can achieve parallel update of CNs by executing multiple polar SISO decoders simultaneously, which will greatly reduce the decoding latency.
4) Diverse application scenarios: Multiple-input multipleoutput (MIMO), fiber-optic, and other systems can also utilize GLDPC-PC codes to pursue more reliable communication. Particularly, with iterative detection and decoding, GLDPC-PC codes will further contribute to the error correction, multiuser access, and code-aided channel estimation performance in MIMO systems.
B. Challenges and Future Directions
1) Code Structure Design: The code structure design of GLDPC-PC codes involves which VNs are connected to one CN and which polar component code each CN is constrained by. The structure is related to the BLER performance (including waterfall region and error floors), the encoding complexity and the decoding complexity of GLDPC-PC codes. In general, there will be a trade-off between these technical indicators. Yet, how to design a good GLDPC-PC code is unknown and remains to be studied. Moreover, structured GLDPC-PC codes that support rate compatibility and hybrid automatic repeat request should also be considered.
2) Encoding Complexity: Although it was mentioned in the previous section that GLDPC-PC codes with quasi-cyclic structure can achieve linear-time encoding, we would like to develop more generalized low-complexity encoding schemes. One possible direction is to explore the utilization of polar transform for efficient encoding.
3) Decoding Complexity: The decoding complexity of GLDPC-PC codes is mainly affected by the density of CNs, the average degree distribution of CNs, and the complexity of SISO polar decoder. The first two factors are considered during the code structure design, and there is a trade-off that fewer CNs and lower average degree of help to reduce the decoding complexity, but will inevitably cause the loss of error correction performance. As for the complexity reduction of SISO polar decoding, it is an ongoing topic in polar codes research.
4) Decoding Latency: As an important technical indicator for hardware implementation, decoding latency is not necessarily proportional to decoding complexity, as it is also related to factors such as parallelism, cache size, and memory access

times. However, the decoding latency of GLDPC-PC codes has not been comprehensively evaluated, which is a direction for future work.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article focuses on channel coding towards 6G communications, including an overview of state-of-the-art channel codes. Generally, to avoid significant modifications to existing standards, improvements based on well-established coding frameworks like LDPC and polar codes are more readily acceptable. Thus, we specifically discuss imposing stronger CN constraints in LDPC codes by utilizing polar codes, namely GLDPC-PC codes, where the soft information passed by polar components to VNs is efficiently extracted from the SO-SCL decoder [13]. GLDPC-PC codes have demonstrated promising BLER performance, especially in terms of ultra-low error floor, which are compatible with the demand for higher data rate and ultra-reliable transmission of 6G communications. Finally, we raise some relevant open issues regarding the practical application of GLDPC-PC codes.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 7, no. 1, Jan. 1962, pp. 21–28.
[2] E. Arıkan, “Channel Polarization: A Method for Constructing CapacityAchieving Codes for Symmetric Binary-Input Memoryless Channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, Jul. 2009, pp. 3051–3073.
[3] M. Rowshan et al., “Channel Coding Toward 6G: Technical Overview and Outlook,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 5, Apr. 2024, pp. 2585–2685.
[4] R. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, Sep. 1981, pp. 533–547.
[5] M.C. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low-Density Parity Check Codes over GF(q),” in Proc. Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Jun. 1998, pp. 70–71.
[6] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold Saturation via Spatial Coupling: Why Convolutional LDPC Ensembles Perform So Well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, Jan. 2011, pp. 803–834.
[7] E. Arıkan, “From Sequential Decoding to Channel Polarization and Back Again,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09594v3, Sep. 2019.
[8] M. C. Cos¸kun, “Precoded Polar Product Codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2024, pp. 3368–3733.
[9] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, May 2015, pp. 2213–2226.
[10] K. Niu and K. Chen, “CRC-Aided Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 10, Oct. 2012, pp. 1668–71.
[11] R. Pyndiah, “Near-Optimum Decoding of Product Codes: Block Turbo Codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 8, Aug. 1998, pp. 1003–1010.
[12] P. Yuan et al., “Soft-output (SO) GRAND and Iterative Decoding to Outperform LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. (Early Access), Jan. 2025, pp. 1-14.
[13] P. Yuan, K. R. Duffy, and M. Me´dard, “Soft-Output Successive Cancellation List Decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 71, no. 2, Feb. 2025, pp. 1007-1017.
[14] Z. Li et al., “Efficient Encoding of Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density ParityCheck Codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, Jan. 2006, pp. 71–81.
[15] M. Lentmaier et al., “From Product Codes to Structured Generalized LDPC Codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. ICST Conf. Commun. Netw. China (CHINACOM), Aug. 2010, pp. 1–8.

Yongpeng Wu [SM] received the B.S. degree in telecommunication engineering from Wuhan University, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in Southeast University, China, in 2013. Dr. Wu is currently a Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His research interests include massive MIMO/MIMO systems, massive machine type communication, physical layer security, and signal processing for wireless communications.
Yin Xu [M] received the B.Sc. degree in information science and engineering from Southeast University, China, in 2009, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronics engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, in 2011 and 2015, respectively, where he currently works as an Assistant Professor. His main research interests include channel coding, advanced bit-interleaved coded modulation and other physical layer technologies in broadcasting and 5G.
Xiaohu You [F] received his Master and Ph.D. Degrees from Southeast University, China, in Electrical Engineering in 1985 and 1988, respectively. Since 1990, he has been working with National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory at Southeast University, where he is currently professor and director of the Lab. His current research interests include wireless networks, advanced signal processing and its applications.
Xiqi Gao [F] received his Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Southeast University, China, in 1997. He joined the Department of Radio Engineering, Southeast University, in 1992. Since 2001, he has been a professor of information systems and communications. His current research interests include broadband multi-carrier communications, massive MIMO wireless communications, satellite communications, optical wireless communications, information theory and signal processing for wireless communications.
Wenjun Zhang [F] received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, in 1984, 1987, and 1989, respectively. After three years’ working as an Engineer with Philips, Germany, he went back to his Alma Mater in 1993, and became a Full Professor of Electronic Engineering in 1995. His main research interests include video coding and wireless transmission, multimedia semantic analysis, and broadcast/broadband network convergence.

BIOGRAPHIES
Li Shen received B.S. and M.S. degrees from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, in 2021 and 2024, respectively. He is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree at the Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research interests are channel coding and coded modulation.

