Interlaced Column-Row Message-Passing Schedule
for Decoding LDPC Codes
Saleh Usman, Mohammad M. Mansour, Ali Chehab
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
American University of Beirut
Beirut 1107 2020, Lebanon
{sau00, mmansour, chehab}@aub.edu.lb
Abstract—This paper investigates efficient decoding algorithms
for LDPC codes. Alternating column-row message-passing (A-
CRMP) and Interlaced column-row message-passing (I-CRMP)
schedules for decoding of LDPC codes are proposed and in-
vestigated in this work. Existing serial scheduling schemes for
LDPC decoding are based either on column message-passing
(MP) or row MP, and roughly converge twice as fast as Gallager’s
flooding-based MP schedule at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
To further accelerate the convergence speed of serial decoders,
hybrid column-row MP schedules that perform multiple message
passes between check and variable nodes within or between iter-
ations are proposed. Our proposed I-CRMP schedule converges
in less than half the number of iterations compared to the best
existing serial decoding schedules. Compared to column MP, the
added complexity of this scheme is proportional only to check-
node-degree times more additions at variable nodes. This increase
in complexity is moderate compared to the convergence accelera-
tion factor that the scheme achieves. Superior performance of the
proposed I-CRMP scheme is confirmed by decoding randomly
generated as well as IEEE 802.11n/ac LDPC codes.
Index Terms—LDPC Codes, turbo-decoding of LDPC codes,
Gallager’s algorithm, IEEE 802.11n/ac
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes have become the coding scheme of choice for
high performance error correcting codes in many applications
owing to their near-optimal performance [1]. They have been
incorporated in numerous present and upcoming IEEE stan-
dards like 802.11n/ac/ax (WiFi), 802.11ad (WiGig) [2], [3],
among others. Compared to turbo codes [4], LDPC codes
provide an attractive additional feature of inherent parallel
structure at the decoder, and therefore are better suited for
present and future high throughput applications.
For LDPC decoding, mainly two types of schedules are
employed. One is Gallager’s standard message-passing (SMP)
technique, known as the flooding schedule [5], and which
consists of two distinct phases. In one phase, all variable
nodes are updated, and then in the second, all the check
nodes are updated. This technique was originally proposed by
Gallager [5], and later used by Mackay [6] in his rediscovery
of LDPC codes. The SMP algorithm has the advantage that
computations in each phase are inherently parallel, a feature
that can be fully exploited to design high-speed fully parallel
LDPC decoder architectures. However, in practical imple-
mentations, routing congestion between various processing
elements and large silicon footprint associated with such a
fully parallel hardware solution limit the LDPC block lengths
that can be supported.
In the second type, known as serial decoding, message
computations carried out in one phase (say variable nodes)
are immediately propagated to the other phase (check nodes in
this case). This immediate information exchange between the
two phases improves the convergence speed of serial decoders
by roughly a factor of two compared to SMP decoders at high
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Serial decoders are further divided
into two types, known as row message-passing (RMP) de-
coders [7] and column message-passing (CMP) decoders [8],
based on whether the row or column order of the parity-check
matrix is followed in the decoding process.
In the RMP schedule, decoding starts from the first check
node and computed messages are immediately passed back
to connected variable nodes. This process is repeated one
by one for all the check nodes. Immediate propagation of
messages computed at check nodes back to variable nodes
enables future check nodes to have access to the most updated
message nodes, thus accelerating the convergence rate. A
turbo-decoding scheduling scheme for LDPC decoder based
on RMP was first introduced in [7], [9], and further analyzed
in [10]. Other variations of this scheme later appeared in the
literature (e.g., [11]). In all of these works, it was demonstrated
analytically and through simulations, that RMP schedule take
on average half the number of iterations at high SNR to
converge compared to SMP.
In CMP scheduling, decoding starts in reverse order com-
pared to SMP, by computing messages first at variable nodes
and then messages are immediately exchanged with connected
check nodes. This scheme achieves almost the same bit error-
rate (BER) performance as RMP. CMP was proposed in [8]
and [12], and it was shown that this schedule also converges
in half the number of iterations compared to SMP.
These serial decoders provide faster convergence without
introducing any significant complexity overhead, i.e., the num-
ber of computations remains almost constant in one iteration
of serial decoders as in SMP. An added advantage of serial
decoders is that they can be implemented in a memory efficient
way, requiring significantly lower memory than SMP [7], [9].
To further improve the convergence rate from 2× over the
SMP, hybrid scheduling schemes that combine both the CMP
and RMP schemes are being proposed in this paper. Two
978-1-5090-1328-9/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:44:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
alternatives, named as Alternating Column-Row Message-
Passing (A-CRMP) and Interlaced Column-Row Message-
Passing (I-CRMP) schemes are considered. A-CRMP scheme
is based on decoding messages such that one iteration is done
by CMP and the next iteration is done by RMP. This pattern
of alternating CMP and RMP is repeated over all iterations.
I-CRMP scheme, which is more complex, starts from the
first variable node and propagates its values to connected
check nodes, as in CMP. After updating these check nodes,
I-CRMP moves one step forward than CMP and propagates
these updated check nodes values to their connected variable
nodes, as in RMP. This scheme converges in less than half the
number of iterations compared to CMP and RMP, and also
provides performance improvement in terms of BER.
Radosavljevic et al have also introduced a row-column MP
schedule in [13] by combining RMP and CMP in a way
that the variable and check nodes are updated single element
by single element through a random walk. This scheme is
fundamentally different from schemes proposed in this work
since variable and check nodes are updated in a deterministic
way rather than a random way in our proposed schemes. Also
the performance of Radosavljevic’s [13] scheme shows no
improvement to CMP or RMP.
A joint row-column decoding algorithm is presented in [14]
as well. However, in this decoding algorithm, the authors have
named the RMP process of updating the variable nodes by
check nodes as joint row-column decoding, but in essence,
it is the same schedule as RMP. These schemes actually do
not go beyond the basic theme of existing serial decoders,
i.e., the process of exchanging extrinsic information between
nodes in one step, and hence their performance is the same
as that of CMP or RMP. While the I-CRMP scheme proposed
in this work uses a two-step process of exchanging extrinsic
information between processing nodes, which actually leads
to a faster convergence speed and lower bit error-rate.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Back-
ground material related to SMP, RMP, and CMP is presented
in Section II. The proposed CRMP schemes are introduced
in Section III. Complexity analysis of the proposed I-CRMP
scheme is carried out in Section IV. Convergence analysis
of I-CRMP is presented in Section V. Simulation results are
depicted in Section VI. Finally, Section VII concludes the
paper.
II. BACKGROUND
LDPC codes are either defined by a sparse parity-check
matrix (SPCM), or represented by a sparse bipartite Tanner
graph consisting of variable nodes and check nodes. Variable
nodes in the Tanner graph represent columns of the SPCM, and
check nodes are associated with rows of the SPCM. Consider
an LDPC code having 𝑁𝑉variable nodes and 𝑁𝐶check nodes
in its associated Tanner graph G. Let 𝑑𝑣denote the degree of
variable node 𝑣, 𝑑𝑐the degree of check node 𝑐in the graph.
Let 𝑃𝑣𝑐represent the message computed at variable node 𝑣
corresponding to the check node 𝑐, and 𝐿𝑐𝑣be the message
computed at check node 𝑐associated with variable node 𝑣.
Message computations based on the standard message-passing
scheduling algorithm is described next.
A. Standard Message-Passing (SMP) Algorithm
The SMP scheduling based on a flooding scheme updates
the variable nodes and check nodes in two phases as follows
(e.g., see [7]). Two types of messages will be updated and
exchanged: 𝐿𝑐𝑣refers to the message sent from check node 𝑐
to variable node 𝑣, and 𝑃𝑣𝑐refers to the message sent from
variable node 𝑣to check node 𝑐:
∙Initialization: Initialize all variable node messages to the
received channel LLRs
𝑃(0)
𝑣𝑐= LLR[𝑣],
∀𝑣∈G.
(1)
∙Phase 1: Update all check node messages at iteration
𝑘≥1 according to
𝐿(𝑘)
𝑐𝑣= Ψ−1(
∑
𝑣′∈ℛ[𝑐]∖𝑣
Ψ
(𝑃(𝑘−1)
𝑣′𝑐

) )
,
∀𝑐∈G, (2)
where Ψ(𝑥) ≜0.5 log(tanh(𝑥/2)) = Ψ−1(𝑥). The set
ℛ[𝑐] denotes the set of 𝑑𝑐= ∣ℛ[𝑐]∣variable nodes
connected to check node 𝑐. Note that the notation ℛ[𝑐]∖𝑣
indicates that the summation does not include the previ-
ous message from variable node 𝑣that is set to receive
the new updated message 𝐿𝑐𝑣from check node 𝑐.
∙Phase 2: Update all variable nodes at iteration 𝑘≥1
using the equation
𝑃(𝑘)
𝑣𝑐= LLR[𝑣] +
(
∑
𝑐′∈𝒞[𝑣]∖𝑐
𝐿(𝑘)
𝑐′𝑣
)
,
∀𝑣∈G,
(3)
where 𝒞[𝑣] is the set of 𝑑𝑣
= ∣𝒞[𝑣]∣check nodes
connected to the variable node 𝑣, and LLR[𝑣] is the log-
likelihood ratio (LLR) of the received channel value of
variable node 𝑣. As in Phase 1, the summation does
not include the previous message from neighboring check
node 𝑐which the variable node is connected to.
For decision making in the final iteration, all neighboring
check node messages are included in the summation when
evaluating (3), i.e., none of the check nodes are excluded:
Λ[𝑣] ≜LLR[𝑣] +
( ∑
𝑐′∈𝒞[𝑣]
𝐿(𝐾)
𝑐′𝑣
)
,
∀𝑣∈G.
(4)
Here, the Λ’s denote updated channel LLR values at the end
of the final decoding iteration. Hard decisions on the bits are
then made based on the sign of the Λ LLR values.
B. Column Message-Passing (CMP) Algorithm
This scheduling starts from the first variable node and
computes its message using equation (3). Then, instead of
proceeding to the second variable node, all check nodes
connected to this variable node are updated first using equa-
tion (2) without waiting for the next iteration. This process
of evaluating each variable node and immediately updating
connected check nodes is repeated for all variable nodes in
one iteration. Decision making process in the final iteration is
based on evaluating (4) as in SMP. Figure 1(a) illustrates the
processing schedule of this scheme for the first variable node.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:44:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 1. CMP and RMP schedules: (a) CMP for first variable node (b) RMP
for first check node.
C. Row Message-Passing (RMP) Algorithm
In row message-passing, decoding proceeds row-wise in-
stead of column-wise, i.e., check-node messages are computed
using (2), and then all of its connected variable nodes are
updated immediately using equation (3). This process is re-
peated for all check nodes, in one iteration. Compared to CMP,
this scheme has the advantage that it only involves addition
computations at variable nodes that are much less expensive
than check-node computations (which involve the non-linear
function 𝜓). Moreover, this scheme can also be implemented
in a memory-efficient way [9]. The processing schedule of this
scheme for the first check node is illustrated in Fig. 1(b).
D. Row-Column Message-Passing (RCMP) Algorithm
There are some scheduling schemes in the literature that
are based on a hybrid combination of CMP and RMP, but
in essence, they are the same schemes as CMP or RMP,
and their performance is essentially the same. For instance
in [13], a row-column message-passing scheme is presented
which combines RMP with CMP. The process of updating the
variable-node and check-node messages in this scheme is done
single element by single element through a random walk in
the graph, but the convergence speed of the scheme is almost
the same as that of CMP or RMP. Similarly in [14], a joint
row-column decoding scheme is presented. The authors have
named the RMP process of updating variable nodes by check
nodes as joint row-column decoding, but actually this is the
same algorithm as in [7], which is RMP.
III. PROPOSED COLUMN-ROW MP SCHEMES
Two scheduling techniques for variable-node and check-
node message computations have been proposed and inves-
tigated in this work, with the aim of further accelerating the
convergence rate of LDPC decoding.
A. Alternating CRMP
The first proposed scheme, referred as Alternating-CRMP
(A-CRMP), is based on the idea of performing computations
in one iteration using CMP and in the second iteration using
RMP, and keep alternating between CMP and RMP throughout
the iterative process. The scheme could be started from either
CMP or RMP. It is found through preliminary simulations
(shown in Section VI) that the performance of such a scheme is
almost the same as that of CMP or RMP. The result, together
with other experimental simulations pertaining to the SMP
algorithm, highlight the following two observations:
∙A
scheduling
process
that
involves
computing
all
messages pertaining to one class of nodes at once using
only old messages from the other class of nodes, without
accounting
for
newly
generated
interim
messages
from the second class, essentially attains a similar
performance as that of the SMP schedule.
∙On the other hand, a scheduling process that serializes
the message computations of one class of nodes to ac-
count for newly updated messages from the other class of
nodes, but still updates the neighboring nodes in the other
class in parallel, essentially attains a similar performance
as that of the RMP or CMP schedules.
Hence, no major improvements can be achieved by investi-
gating other variants of the SMP or RMP (CMP) schedules.
B. Interlaced CRMP
Based on the above observations, scheduling schemes that
interlace between variable node and check node computations
within one iteration are proposed and investigated. This In-
terlaced-CRMP (I-CRMP) schedule extends the process of
exchanging extrinsic between nodes, to two steps within an
iteration, and will be referred to as an order-2 update scheme.
It is motivated by the following observation:
∙A scheduling process that serializes both the node mes-
sage computations of one class of nodes as well as the
message computations within each node benefits from us-
ing the most up to date messages to update future nodes,
and hence is expected to achieve better convergence rate.
To elaborate further, the I-CRMP schedule combines row
and column scheduling in a way such that the process of
exchanging information between nodes is done in two steps,
i.e., from variable nodes to check nodes and then back to
variable nodes, within one iteration. Referring to Fig. 2(a),
this starts by doing processing at one variable node, say the
first one 𝑣1, using (2). Then, only the first check node 𝑐1
from the set of neighbors of the first variable node 𝑣1 is
updated using (3). Processing so far up to this point is similar
to CMP. Next comes the part which makes the proposed
scheme different than CMP, and essentially amplifies the
convergence speed of CMP by that of RMP. Before moving
to do computations at the second neighboring check node
𝑐3 of 𝑣1, the newly computed message from the first check
node 𝑐1 is further propagated to its connected variable nodes,
excluding the one which originally propagated its value to this
check node. After this, the second check node from the set of
neighbouring check nodes of first variable node is updated,
as shown in Fig. 2(b) and its value is similarly propagated to
its connected variable nodes. The processing schedule of this
scheme for the first variable node is depicted in Fig. 2.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:44:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 2. I-CRMP schedule for 1st variable node: (a) 1st connected check node is
updated which further updates its connected variable nodes. (b) 2nd connected
check node is updated which further updates its connected variable nodes.
This process of performing computations on check nodes
and immediately propagating newly generated messages to
connected variable nodes is repeated for the complete neigh-
bouring set of check nodes of first variable node. Since these
check nodes are being updated serially, later check nodes now
have access to the variable nodes updated by earlier check
nodes. This second part of our schedule, which is similar to
RMP thus combines the convergence acceleration effect of
both the CMP and RMP. This completes the sub-cycle of
information exchange that started from the first variable node
and concluded also at some set of variable nodes, depending on
the structure of the SPCM. 𝑁𝑉such sub-cycles are repeated,
one for each variable node, in one iteration. So in summary:
∙One sub iteration of I-CRMP involves a variable node
update, followed by serial updates of all the connected
check nodes of the variable node and further propagation
of the check nodes values to their neighbouring sets
of variable nodes. Sub-iterations equal to number of
variable nodes, one for each variable node, make one
iteration of I-CRMP. This will add degree-of-check-
node times more additions in one iteration of I-CRMP,
compared to one iteration of CMP.
The analog of this schedule would be Interlaced-Row-
Column MP (I-RCMP). This will start from the first check
node, update its connected variable nodes which will further
propagate the new values back to their connected check nodes.
But the disadvantage of this schedule will be the extra non-
linear computations at check nodes which are much more
expensive than variable node computations. Hence we focus
in this work on the I-CRMP schedule, but nevertheless, the
techniques presented here apply to both schemes and the
performance of the two schedules will essentially be the same.
The pseudocode of the complete I-CRMP algorithm is
summarized in Algorithm 1. Experimental simulation results
presented in Section VI demonstrate the superior performance
of I-CRMP over existing schedules.
IV. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
For simplicity of exposition, complexity analysis of the
CMP schedule is presented first and then it is extended to the
Algorithm 1 Interlaced CRMP Schedule
1: for all 𝑐, 𝑣∈G do
⊳initialization loop
2:
𝐿(0)
𝑐𝑣←0
3: end for
4: for 𝑘= 1 to 𝐾do
⊳iteration loop
5:
for 𝑗= 1 to 𝑁𝑉do
⊳variable nodes loop
6:
𝑃(𝑘)
𝑣𝑗𝑐𝑖←Eq. (3) for all 𝑐𝑖∈𝒞[𝑣𝑗]
7:
for 𝑖= 1 to 𝑑𝑣𝑗such that 𝑐𝑖∈𝒞[𝑣𝑗] do
8:
𝐿(𝑘)
𝑐𝑖𝑣′ ←Eq. (2) for all 𝑣′ ∈ℛ[𝑐𝑖]∖𝑣𝑗
9:
for all 𝑣′ ∈ℛ[𝑐𝑖]∖𝑣𝑗do
10:
𝑃𝑣′𝑐′ ←Eq. (3) for all 𝑐′ ∈𝒞[𝑣′]
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
end for
14: end for
15: for all 𝑣∈G do
⊳Decision making
16:
Λ[𝑣] ←Eq. (4)
17: end for
proposed I-CRMP schedule. It is reiterated that I-CRMP is
selected for complexity analysis, instead of I-RCMP to avoid
the disadvantage of extra non-linear computations at check
nodes which are much more expensive than variable node
computations. The differences between CMP and I-CRMP are
elaborated by performing direct comparisons between the two,
throughout the analysis steps. Regular variable and check node
degrees are assumed here.
A. Computational Complexity of CMP
In column message-passing, decoding process starts from
the first variable node by computing values for all of its
connected check nodes. If 𝑑𝑉is the degree of the variable
node, then this variable node performs 𝑑𝑉computations. These
values are then propagated to the associated check nodes,
which are of course 𝑑𝑉in number.
Each of the associated check node then updates its values for
all of its connected variable nodes excluding the one it received
the message from. In doing so, each check node will do (𝑑𝐶−
1) computations and there are 𝑑𝑉check nodes connected to
one variable node. For one variable node, 𝑑𝑉variable node
computations and 𝑑𝑉×(𝑑𝐶−1) check node computations are
performed. This process is repeated for all the 𝑁𝑉variable
nodes. Let 𝑉CMP and 𝐶CMP denote the number of variable and
check nodes computations of the CMP schedule, respectively.
Then the total numbers of computations for one iteration is:
𝑉CMP + 𝐶CMP = 𝑁𝑉× 𝑑𝑉+ 𝑁𝑉× 𝑑𝑉× (𝑑𝐶−1).
(5)
Variable and check node computations are given separately
because former are simply additions and are much less expen-
sive than their check node counterparts.
B. Computational Complexity of I-CRMP
For the proposed I-CRMP scheme, the values computed
in CMP at check nodes are further propagated to all of
their connected variable nodes as explained in Section III.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:44:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Compared to CMP, this incurs additional computations at
variable nodes. Each variable node connected to a check node
will add one more addition in log domain and there will be
𝑑𝑉× (𝑑𝐶−1) variable nodes in total to be updated. This
process will be repeated for all of the 𝑁𝑉variable nodes.
Therefore, the additional computational cost of using this
scheme is 𝑁𝑉× 𝑑𝑉× (𝑑𝐶−1) more additions compared
to CMP decoding.
If 𝑉CRMP and 𝐶CRMP are the variable and check node
computations of the I-CRMP algorithm, respectively, then the
total number of computations for one I-CRMP iteration is:
𝑉CRMP +𝐶CRMP = 𝑁𝑉×𝑑𝑉×𝑑𝐶+𝑁𝑉×𝑑𝑉×(𝑑𝐶−1). (6)
As it can be seen, the number of check-node computations
for this scheme is the same as that for CMP decoding since
check node values are only propagated and no additional
computations are performed at check nodes. The increased cost
of this scheme is simply the extra additions at variable nodes,
which are much less expensive than check-node computations.
V. CONVERGENCE ANALYSIS
The convergence speed of an LDPC decoding schedule is
directly related to the number of times the channel LLRs
at variable nodes are updated by neighboring check nodes.
Hence, the convergence speed of the proposed I-CRMP
scheme is analyzed based on the number of times variable
nodes are updated in one I-CRMP iteration, by new messages
from check nodes, and compared directly with RMP decoding.
Since the convergence behavior of RMP and CMP is almost
the same, RMP is chosen here to compare directly against.
The RMP schedule starts its message computations at the
first check node and updates all its corresponding variable
nodes. This process is repeated by doing computations at
check nodes based on updated variable nodes and updating
back their connected variable nodes. As one check node is
connected to 𝑑𝐶variable nodes, and there are 𝑁𝐶check nodes
in total, so there will be 𝑁𝐶× 𝑑𝐶variable-node updates by
check nodes, in one iteration. If 𝑈RMP is the total number of
variable nodes updates by check nodes in one iteration of row
decoding then it will be given by:
𝑈RMP = 𝑁𝐶× 𝑑𝐶.
(7)
The I-CRMP schedule starts by computing messages at the
first variable node and updating immediately its connected
check nodes. These check nodes serially update their values
based on the received message from the variable node, and
propagate the new check messages to their connected variable
nodes one by one. As the schedule proceeds by taking one
variable node a time, and connected to each variable node are
𝑑𝑉check nodes and each check node updates back (𝑑𝐶−1)
variable nodes, so for one variable node, 𝑑𝑉× (𝑑𝐶−1)
updates of variable nodes are performed by check nodes.
Since there are 𝑁𝑉variable nodes in total, so there will be
𝑁𝑉×𝑑𝑉×(𝑑𝐶−1) variable node updates by check nodes, in
one iteration. If 𝑈I-CRMP denotes the total number of variable
nodes updates by check nodes in one I-CRMP iteration, then:
𝑈I-CRMP = 𝑁𝑉× 𝑑𝑉× (𝑑𝐶−1).
(8)
In [13], the logarithm of the ratio of 𝑁RMP to 𝑁SMP is taken
as convergence acceleration factor of RMP to SMP, where
𝑁SMP and 𝑁RMP are number of check node messages, updated
in the previous iteration and utilized in the computation of one
variable node during the current iteration of SMP and RMP,
respectively. Number of variable nodes updates performed by
all the check nodes of current iteration are compared here
instead of counting the number of utilized check nodes updated
previously. So the convergence acceleration factor 𝛼of I-
CRMP to RMP using our approach will be the log ratio of
𝑈I-CRMP and 𝑈RMP and using eqs. (7) and (8) is given by:
𝛼≜log
(𝑈I-CRMP
𝑈RMP
)
= log
(𝑁𝑉× 𝑑𝑉× (𝑑𝐶−1)
𝑁𝐶× 𝑑𝐶
)
.
(9)
For rate-half LDPC codes with 𝑑𝐶= 2 × 𝑑𝑉, this conver-
gence factor simplifies to:
𝛼= log(𝑑𝐶−1).
(10)
Since this ratio factor is greater than one, our proposed I-
CRMP scheme converges faster than RMP. Since, the conver-
gence speeds of RMP, CMP, and A-CRMP are almost the
same, our proposed I-CRMP scheme converges faster than
these existing LDPC serial decoding schedules.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
To study the potential advantages of the proposed I-CRMP
scheme in terms of convergence speed and BER performance,
five message passing schedules, viz. SMP, RMP, CMP, A-
CRMP , and I-CRMP were simulated. The bit-error rate (BER)
curves and number of iterations taken by each algorithm are
plotted for rate-1/2 randomly generated LDPC codes and for
802.11n/ac LDPC codes. The maximum number of iterations
was fixed and annotated against each plot in the figures.
As shown in the plots, fast convergence rate and lower
bit error rate of I-CRMP is verified consistently by these
simulation. Also, it is evident that the performance of A-
CRMP is almost the same as other serial decoding schedules.
To get further insight into the performance offered by
the proposed I-CRMP scheme, computations taken by CMP
and I-CRMP for IEEE 802.11n/ac, rate 1/2 LDPC codes are
tabulated in Tables I and II, corresponding to Figures 5 and 6.
It is confirmed from these calculations that at high SNR, I-
CRMP requires less than half the number of variable and check
nodes updates (V. Updates and C. Updates) compared to CMP,
with degree of check node times more additions. The extra
additions could be justified by lower BER, additionally offered
by I-CRMP, evident from BER columns of Tables I and II.
TABLE I
CMP COMPUTATIONS FOR RATE 1/2, 802.11N/AC LDPC CODES
Eb/No
Avg. Itrs.
V. Updates
C. Updates
BER
1.25
23.5
15228
64152
1.7 × 10−2
1.5
11.2
7257
26611
4.8 × 10−3
1.75
6.6
4277
15682
1.3 × 10−3
2.0
4.6
2981
10930
2.5 × 10−4
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:44:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 3. BER comparison of proposed schedule with other schedules for
(3,6)(500,1000) randomly generated LDPC codes with max iterations of 100.
Fig. 4. Iterations comparison corresponding to Fig. 3.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
Alternating and Interlaced column-row MP (A-CRMP and
I-CRMP) schedules for decoding of LDPC codes have been
proposed and investigated. It has been shown that by perform-
ing multi-hop message-computations between variable and
check nodes within the same iteration, the convergence speed
of the iterative decoding process can be accelerated compared
to existing serial decoding schedules. Alternatively viewed,
for a given fixed number of iterations (and hence processing
Fig. 5. BER comparison of proposed CRMP schemes with other MP schedules
for rate 1/2, 802.11n/ac LDPC Codes with max iterations of 100.
Fig. 6. Iterations comparison corresponding to Fig. 5.
TABLE II
I-CRMP COMPUTATIONS FOR RATE 1/2, 802.11N/AC LDPC CODES
Eb/No
Avg. Itrs.
V. Updates
C. Updates
Additions
BER
1.25
15.1
9784
35878
35878
1.3 × 10−2
1.5
5.3
3434
12593
12593
3.4 × 10−3
1.75
2.3
1490
5465
5465
7.8 × 10−4
2.0
1.3
842
3089
3089
1.3 × 10−4
throughput), the BER performance can be improved. It was
shown also that these improvements cannot be achieved if
these multi-hop message computations are done at the iteration
level, as is the case for RMP, SMP and the A-CRMP schemes.
These advantages have been demonstrated both analytically
and through simulations. Finally, through complexity analysis,
it has been shown that the added cost of this scheme is simply
more addition operations at variable nodes, which is minimal.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of
Low-Density Parity-Check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, Aug 1996.
[2] “IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks – part 11:
Wireless LAN (MAC) and physical layer (PHY),” no. 802.11, 2012.
[3] “IEEE draft standard for information technology-wireless lans-part 21:
mmWave PHY specification,” no. 802.11ad, May 2010.
[4] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit error
correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in IEEE Workshop on
Signal Processing Systems (SiPS02), pp. 1064–1070, Oct. 2002.
[5] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” 1963.
[6] D. MacKay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes based on Very Sparse
Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, 1999.
[7] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,”
IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, pp. 976–996, 2003.
[8] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in
Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, Nov. 2002.
[9] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Memory-efficient turbo decoder
architectures for LDPC coding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.
(ICC), pp. 159–164, 2002.
[10] M. Mansour, “A Turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for Sparse
Parity-Check Matrix codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, 2006.
[11] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “An efficient message-passing
schedule for LDPC decoding,” in 23rd IEEE Convention of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, pp. 223–226, Sep. 2004.
[12] H. Kfir and I. Kanter., “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief
propagation decoding,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Appli-
cations, vol. 330, no. 1, pp. 259–270, Dec. 2003.
[13] P. Radosavljevic, A. Baynast, and J. R. Cavallaro, “Optimized message
passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals,
Systems and Computers, pp. 591–595, 2005.
[14] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, “FPGA implementation of LDPC decoders
based on joint row-column decoding algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2007.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:44:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
