IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

6713

New Characterization and Efficient Exhaustive Search Algorithm for Leafless Elementary Trapping Sets of Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
Yoones Hashemi, Student Member, IEEE and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this paper, we propose a new characterization for leafless elementary trapping sets (LETSs) of variable-regular lowdensity parity-check codes. Recently, Karimi and Banihashemi proposed a characterization of LETSs, which was based on viewing an LETS as a layered superset (LSS) of a short cycle in the code’s Tanner graph. A notable advantage of LSS characterization is that it corresponds to a simple LSS-based search algorithm (expansion technique) that starts from short cycles of the graph and finds the LETSs with LSS structure efficiently. Compared with the LSS-based characterization of Karimi and Banihashemi, which is based on a single LSS expansion technique, the new characterization involves two additional expansion techniques. The introduction of the new techniques mitigates two problems that LSS-based characterization/search suffers from: 1) exhaustiveness: not every LETS structure is an LSS of a cycle and 2) search efficiency: LSS-based search algorithm often requires the enumeration of cycles with length much larger than the girth of the graph, where the multiplicity of such cycles increases rapidly with their length. We prove that using the three expansion techniques, any LETS structure can be obtained starting from a simple cycle, no matter how large the size of the structure a or the number of its unsatisfied check nodes b are, i.e., the characterization is exhaustive. We also demonstrate that for the proposed characterization/search to exhaustively cover all the LETS structures within the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, for any value of amax and bmax, the length of the short cycles required to be enumerated is less than that of the LSS-based characterization/search. We, in fact, show that such a length for the proposed search algorithm is minimal. We also prove that the three expansion techniques, proposed here, are the only expansions needed for characterization of LETS structures starting from simple cycles in the graph, if one requires each and every intermediate sub-structure to be a LETS as well. Extensive simulation results are provided to show that, compared with LSS-based search, significant improvement in search speed and memory requirements can be achieved.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, variable-regular LDPC codes, error floor, trapping sets (TS), elementary trapping sets (ETS), leafless elementary trapping sets (LETS), characterization of trapping sets, exhaustive search of trapping sets.
Manuscript received October 16, 2015; revised June 9, 2016; accepted September 12, 2016. Date of publication September 23, 2016; date of current version November 18, 2016. This paper was presented at the 2016 IEEE ICC and the 2016 IEEE ISIT.
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: yooneshashemitoroghi@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce. carleton.ca).
Communicated by R. Smarandache, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2016.2613113

I. INTRODUCTION
F INITE-LENGTH low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under iterative decoding algorithms suffer from the error floor phenomenon. In the error floor region, the slope of error rate curves decreases when the channel quality improves beyond a certain point. It is well-known that error-floor performance of LDPC codes is related to the presence of certain problematic graphical structures in the Tanner graph of the code, commonly referred to as trapping sets [29]. Graphically, a trapping set (TS) is often seen as the induced subgraph of some variable nodes in the code’s Tanner graph. In such a representation, the TS is commonly characterized by the number of its variable nodes a, and the number of its odddegree (unsatisfied) check nodes b, and is said to belong to the class of (a, b) trapping sets. Among TSs, the most harmful ones are known to be the elementary trapping sets (ETSs), whose induced subgraphs contain only degree-1 and degree-2 check nodes. In particular, the leafless ETSs (LETSs), in which each variable node is connected to at least two evendegree (satisfied) check nodes, are recognized as the main culprit [23], [27], [37].
The knowledge of trapping sets and their structure has been used in estimating the error floor of LDPC codes [6], [33], in modifying iterative decoders to have better error-floor performance [5], [11], [21], [38], and in constructing LDPC codes with low error floors [2], [3], [16], [20], [28]. There has also been a flurry of activity in characterization of trapping sets [8]–[10], [12], [17], [22], [28], [31], [34], and in developing search algorithms to find them [1], [19], [22], [31], [36], [37]. Most of the works on TSs in the literature are nonexhaustive [1], [18], are limited to structured codes [31], [38], are concerned with relatively small TSs [22], only deal with a certain variable node degree [28], [34], or are applicable to relatively short block lengths [21], [35].
In particular, in [1], using the modified impulse algorithm, the authors devised a technique to find a non-exhaustive list of trapping sets of a given short-length LDPC code. In [18], by examining the relationships between cycles and trapping sets, Karimi and Banihashemi proposed an efficient search algorithm to find the dominant LETSs of a given regular or irregular LDPC code. Although the algorithm proposed in [18] can find the LETSs with sufficiently large size, it provides no guarantee that the obtained list of LETSs is exhaustive.

0018-9448 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

In [29] and [35], the authors presented the trapping set ontology, a database of trapping sets related by their topological structures, and used it to enumerate the dominant trapping sets and to construct structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets. Specifically, by finding parent-child relationships between the trapping sets in regular LDPC codes with variable node degree 3, they proposed a search algorithm to enumerate these trapping sets. Due mainly to the tedious task of forming the trapping set ontology, the application of the technique of [29] and [35] was limited to variable degree 3, and only a small and non-exhaustive range of trapping sets. Using the branch-&-bound principle, Kyung and Wang [21] proposed an exhaustive search algorithm to enumerate the fully absorbing sets (FASs) of short regular and irregular LDPC codes. The proposed algorithm, however, becomes quickly infeasible to use as the block length, n, and the size of the FASs, a, are increased. In general, the reach of the algorithm is limited to n < 1000 and a < 7, or n < 1000 and a < 14, if the number of unsatisfied check nodes is limited to b < 3. Also, all the reported variable-regular LDPC codes in [21] are limited to those with variable node degree 3.
Recently, Karimi and Banihashemi [17] characterized the LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. They studied the graphical structure of the LETSs, and demonstrated that a vast majority of the non-isomorphic structures of LETSs are layered super sets (LSS) of short cycles, i.e., each structure S corresponds to a sequence of LETS structures that starts from a short cycle and grows one variable node at a time to reach S. This characterization corresponds to a simple search algorithm that starts from the instances of short cycles in the Tanner graph and can find the LETSs with the LSS property. A shortcoming of this characterization/search, however, is that some of the LETS structures do not lend themselves to the above characterization, i.e., they are not LSSs of any of their cycle subsets. Such structures are labeled as “NA” in [17].
In an earlier paper [12], we complemented the results of [17]. By careful examination of NA structures, we demonstrated that they are all LSSs of some basic graphical structures which are slightly more complex than cycles. These basic structures were called prime with respect to the LSS property, or “LSS-prime” in brief, implying that they are not layered super sets of smaller LETSs. Results of [17] (and its corrections in [13]) along with those of [12] provided a simple LSSbased search algorithm that can find all the instances of LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes, for any range of a and b values, in a guaranteed fashion, starting from the instances of LSS-prime structures.
The LSS-based search algorithm, however, suffers from a major drawback. Although, the search algorithm itself is simple, to find the dominant LETSs in a guaranteed fashion, one may need to enumerate cycles of length much larger than the girth in the Tanner graph of the code, as the input to the search algorithm. The multiplicity of such cycles increases rapidly with the cycle length and thus the enumeration, storage and processing of these cycles pose a practical hurdle in implementing the search algorithm. The same issue applies to non-cycle LSS-prime structures. This becomes particularly

problematic for larger variable and check degrees and cases where LETSs with larger a and b values are of interest. In fact, our experimental results show that by increasing the variable and average check degrees, the range of a and b values, the code rate and the block length, the LSS-based search algorithm becomes quickly infeasible to implement.
To the best of our knowledge, the LSS-based search algorithm is the most efficient exhaustive search algorithm for LETSs of a general variable-regular LDPC code. Yet, the complexity of the algorithm is still too high for many practical codes. Motivated by this, in this paper, we develop a new characterization of LETS structures of variable-regular LDPC codes. The new characterization is based on a hierarchical graph-based expansion approach which involves LSS expansion plus two additional expansion techniques. It characterizes each LETS structure with an embedded sequence of LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle and expands, at each step, to a larger LETS using one of the three expansions, until it reaches the LETS structure of interest. The characterization is minimal, in the sense that, none of the expansion steps can be divided into smaller expansions such that the resulting new sub-structures are still LETSs. The new characterization corresponds to an efficient exhaustive search algorithm for LETSs that requires only short-length simple cycles of the graph as the input. The maximum length of the input cycles is often smaller than that of the LSS-based search algorithm, and is, in fact, provably minimal. We develop a general approach to characterize all the non-isomorphic structures of LETSs within a certain range of a ≤ amax , b ≤ bmax, based on the three expansions, for LDPC codes with different variable degrees and girths. We then provide LETS characterization tables for LDPC codes with different variable degrees, girths, and with different rate and block length ranges. These tables are used to devise efficient search algorithms, based on the three expansion techniques, for exhaustively finding LETSs. The search algorithms are then applied to a large number of LDPC codes, both random and structured, and with a variety of degree distributions, girths, rates and block lengths, to demonstrate the strength and versatility of the proposed scheme. Compared to LSS-based search, improvements of up to three orders of magnitude are achieved in the runtime and memory requirements.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. In this section, we also describe a software that is used to find nonisomorphic structures of LETSs in a given class. We end Section II by discussing a general framework for an efficient exhaustive search for LETSs based on the graphical structure of the sets and their hierarchical relationship. This will serve as the backdrop for the proposed characterization/search scheme. In Section III, the LSS-based characterization/ search is revisited and its shortcomings are discussed. In Section IV, the new expansion techniques are introduced, the new characterization is developed, and characterization tables are provided. We also present the new search algorithm, and discuss its complexity in this section. Numerical results are presented in Section V, and Section VI is devoted to conclusions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs

6715

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Definitions and Notations
Consider an undirected graph G = (F, E), where the two sets F = { f1, . . . , fk} and E = {e1, . . . , em}, are the sets of nodes and edges of G, respectively. We say that an edge e is incident to a node f if e is connected to f . If there exists an edge ek which is incident to two distinct nodes fi and f j , we call these nodes adjacent. In this case, we represent ek by fi f j or f j fi . The neighborhood of a node f , denoted by N ( f ), is the set of nodes adjacent to f . The degree of a node f is denoted by deg(f), and is defined as the number of edges incident to f . The maximum degree and the minimum degree of a graph G, denoted by (G) and δ(G), respectively, are defined to be the maximum and minimum degree of its nodes, respectively.
Given an undirected graph G = (F, E), a walk between two nodes f1 and fk+1 is a sequence of nodes and edges f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk , ek , fk+1, where ei = fi fi+1, ∀i ∈ [1, k]. In this definition, the nodes f1, f2, . . . , fk+1 are not necessarily distinct. The same applies to the edges e1, e2, . . . , ek. A path is a walk with no repeated nodes or edges, except the first and the last nodes that can be the same. If the first and the last nodes are distinct, we call the path an open path. Otherwise, we call it a cycle. The length of a walk, a path, or a cycle is the number of its edges. A lollipop walk is a walk f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk , ek , fk+1, such that all the edges and all the nodes are distinct, except that fk+1 = fm , for some m ∈ (1, k). A chord of a cycle is an edge which is not part of the cycle but is incident to two distinct nodes in the cycle. A simple cycle or a chordless cycle is a cycle which does not have any chord. Throughout this paper, we use the notation sk for a simple cycle of length k. Notation ck is used for cycles of length k that do have at least one chord.
A graph is called connected when there is a path between every pair of nodes. A tree is a connected graph that contains no cycles. A rooted tree is a tree in which one specific node is assigned as the root. The depth of a node in a rooted tree is the length of the path from the node to the root. The depth of a tree is the maximum depth of any node in the tree. Depthone tree is a tree with depth one. A node f is called leaf if deg( f ) = 1. Although this terminology is commonly used for trees, in this paper, we use it for a general graph that may contain cycles. A leafless graph is a connected graph G with δ(G) ≥ 2.
The graphs G1 = (F1, E1) and G2 = (F2, E2) are isomorphic if there is a bijection p : F1 → F2 such that nodes f1, f2 ∈ F1 are joined by an edge if and only if p( f1) and p( f2) are joined by an edge. Otherwise, the graphs are non-isomorphic.
Any m × n parity check matrix H of an (n, k) LDPC code C can be represented by its bipartite Tanner graph G = (V ∪ C, E), where V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} is the set of variable nodes and C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm } is the set of check nodes. The degrees of nodes vi and ci are denoted by dvi and dci , respectively. A Tanner graph is called variable-regular with variable degree dv if dvi = dv, ∀ vi ∈ V . A (dv, dc)-regular Tanner graph is a variable-regular graph in which dci = dc,

∀ ci ∈ C. For a subset S of V , the subset (S) of C denotes the set of neighbors of S in G. The induced subgraph of S in G, denoted by G(S), is the graph with the set of nodes S ∪ (S) and the set of edges { fi f j ∈ E : fi ∈ S, f j ∈ (S)}. The set of check nodes with odd and even degrees in G(S) are denoted by o(S) and e(S), respectively. In this paper, the terms unsatisfied check nodes and satisfied check nodes are used to refer to the check nodes in o(S) and e(S), respectively. The size of an induced subgraph G(S) is defined to be the number of its variable nodes. We assume that an
induced subgraph is connected. Disconnected subgraphs can
be considered as the union of connected ones. The length
of the shortest cycle in a Tanner graph is called girth, and
is denoted by g. We study the variable-regular graphs with dv ≥ 3, that are free of 4-cycles (g > 4). All the induced subgraphs with the same size a, and the same number of
unsatisfied check nodes b, are considered to belong to the same (a, b) class.
Given a Tanner graph G, a set S ⊂ V is called an (a,b) trapping set (TS) if |S| = a and | o(S)| = b. Alternatively, S is said to belong to the class of (a,b) TSs. Parameter a is referred to as the size of the TS. In the rest of the paper,
depending on the context, the term “trapping set” may be used to refer to the set of variable nodes S, or to the induced subgraph G(S) of S in the Tanner graph G. Similarly, we may use S to mean G(S). An elementary trapping set (ETS) is a trapping set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2. A set S ⊂ V is called an (a,b) absorbing set (AS) if S is an (a, b) trapping set and all the variable nodes in S are connected to more nodes in e(S) than in
o(S). An elementary absorbing set (EAS) S is an absorbing set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2. A fully absorbing set (FAS) S ⊂ V is an absorbing set for which all the nodes in V \S have strictly more neighbors in C\ o(S) than in o(S). A set S ⊂ V is called an (a,b) fully elementary absorbing set (FEAS) if S is an (a, b) EAS and if all the nodes in V \S have strictly more neighbors in C\ o(S) than in o(S).
Elementary trapping sets are the subject of this paper.
To simplify the representation of ETSs, similar to
[13] and [18], we use an alternate graph representation
of ETSs, called normal graph. The normal graph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by removing all the check nodes of degree one and their incident edges, and by replacing all
the degree-2 check nodes and their two incident edges by
a single edge. It is easy to see that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the bipartite graph G(S) and the normal graph of S.
Lemma 1: Consider the normal graph of an (a, b) ETS structure of a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable
degree dv. The number of nodes and edges of this normal graph are a and (adv − b)/2, respectively. We thus have b = adv − 2e, where e is the number of edges of the normal graph.
We call a set S ⊂ V an (a,b) leafless ETS (LETS) if S is an (a, b) ETS and if the normal graph of S is leafless.
Example 1: Fig. 1(a) represents a LETS in the (4, 2) class and its leafless normal graph, while Fig. 1(b) represents

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

to [2, dv], the number of nodes to a, the number of edges to (adv − b)/2, and by choosing the simple connected graph in geng’s input options, this program generates all the non-
isomorphic graphical structures of connected LETSs in the (a, b) class for variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv. If we are interested in Tanner graphs with g ≥ 8, we also add the option of “triangle-free.”

Fig. 1. (a) A LETS in the (4, 2) class and its leafless normal graph, (b) An ETS in the (4, 4) class and its normal graph which has a leaf ( f1).
an ETS in the (4, 4) class and its normal graph with a leaf. Symbols and are used to represent satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes in the induced bipartite subgraphs,
respectively, and the symbol ◦ is used to represent variable
nodes in both the induced subgraphs and normal graphs. In general, EASs are a subset of LETSs. For the special
case of dv = 3, LETSs and EASs are equal sets. To the best of our knowledge, almost all the structures reported in the literature as error-prone structures of variable-regular LDPC codes are LETSs. LETSs have thus been the subject of many studies including [4], [12], [17], [18], and [28]. In the rest of this paper, also, we focus on LETSs.
In this paper, we characterize the non-isomorphic LETS structures, and also devise search algorithms to find all the instances of LETS structures of a given Tanner graph in a guaranteed fashion. In the part related to characterization, we use the normal graph representation of LETS structures. In the part on search algorithms, on the other hand, we perform the search on a Tanner graph, and are thus concerned with the bipartite graph representation of a LETS structure. Nevertheless, for consistency and to prevent confusion, we still use terminologies corresponding to normal graphs. For example, we use “all the instances of sk” to mean “all the instances of the structure whose normal graph is sk.”
B. Nauty Program
Nauty [26], is a package of programs for computing automorphism groups of graphs. There is a program called geng in this package that generates all the non-isomorphic graphical structures with a given number of nodes and edges very efficiently. This program has many input options to generate connected graphs, triangle-free graphs, or graphs with certain minimum and maximum node degrees. In this work, we use geng to generate all the non-isomorphic graphical structures of LETSs in different classes. To simplify this task, we use the normal graph representation of LETSs. Since we are interested in connected LETS structures in variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv that are 4-cycle free, we look for normal graphs with no parallel edges and with minimum and maximum node degrees equal to δ(G) ≥ 2 and
(G) ≤ dv, respectively. By setting the range of node degrees

C. Exhaustive Search Framework for LETSs Based on the Hierarchical Relationship of LETS Graphical Structures
Suppose that one is interested in finding all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures of a given Tanner graph within the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. A crude and highly complex approach would be to consider any combination of a variable nodes in the Tanner graph and examine it to see whether it is an (a, b) LETS with b ≤ bmax . This process will have to be repeated for all the values of a ≤ amax. A more efficient approach would be to first find all the nonisomorphic structures of LETSs within the interest range of a and b values, and then search for each structure, one at a time, within the Tanner graph. Although more efficient than the first approach, this method is also too complex to be useful in practical settings. To further simplify the exhaustive search, one can carefully examine the graphical structure of all the non-isomorphic LETSs of interest and look for hierarchical (parent-child) relationships that can be used to simplify the overall search. Suppose that L1 and L2 are two LETS structures of interest, and that L1 is a sub-structure (parent) of L2, i.e., L1 ⊂ L2. To find all the instances of L1 and L2, one can first perform an exhaustive search to find all the instances of L1. Then, instead of performing a new exhaustive search to find all the instances of L2, one can just check whether any instance of L1 can be expanded to an instance of L2 by grafting the expansion L2\L1 into L1.
Based on the above principle, a general framework for the exhaustive search of (a, b) LETSs with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax is as follows: Suppose that there are N nonisomorphic LETS structures L1, . . . , L N , within the range of interest. (These structures can be efficiently found using the normal graph representation and nauty.) Also, suppose that these structures are organized in a collection of rooted trees (forest) where each structure is represented by a node in a tree and the parent-child relationships between substructures are represented by edges, i.e., if Li ⊂ L j , and if we plan to use the exhaustive search of Li as a starting point for the exhaustive search of L j , as described above, then there is an edge between the corresponding nodes. In this case, the node for Li is called the parent (immediate ancestor) of the node for L j , and is closer to the root of the tree than the node for L j is. Given such a forest, one starts by finding all the instances of the root structures. The instances of all the other structures within each tree are then found by searching for the expansions of the instances of their parent structure. This will be done recursively, where each structure at depth i of a tree is searched for, as an expansion of its parent structure at depth i −1 of the tree. In this framework, given that the search of the root structures is exhaustive, it is clear that the search

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs

6717

for all the remaining structures will also be exhaustive. The search framework just presented can be further generalized by adding some auxiliary structures to the forest. These new structures, which may be LETS structures outside the range of interest or structures that are not even LETS, would be added to help in simplifying the overall search. For example, they may create links between two LETS structures of interest that have a hierarchical relationship, but through a complex expansion. The introduction of the auxiliary structure(s) can break the complex expansion into simpler ones.
The efficiency of an specific exhaustive search algorithm within the above framework depends highly on the design of the forest. In general, one would like to have a forest with smaller number of trees, where the roots are simple structures that can be efficiently enumerated, and in each tree, the expansion relationships between the structures are relatively simple.
In [18], Karimi and Banihashemi proposed a recursive search, similar to the framework described above, to find LETS instances within a Tanner graph. They used short cycles as the roots of the trees for variable-regular Tanner graphs, and short cycles plus variable nodes with low degree, and cycles with low approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) as the roots of the trees for the case of irregular Tanner graphs. They also described the expansions relating two LETS structures in terms of the size difference between the two structures, and used those expansions to organize the recursive search. The search algorithm of [18], although efficient, did not provide any guarantee that the search results were exhaustive. In [17], Karimi and Banihashemi focused on variable-regular Tanner graphs and a simple hierarchical relationship between LETS structures, dubbed LSS (layered super set) property, and devised a recursive search algorithm based on trees, each rooted at short cycles of a certain length and being connected internally based on the LSS relationship between their nodes. The forest used in the search algorithm of [17] has the advantage that the expansions are very simple, but suffers from the introduction of some auxiliary structures that may be very complex and abundant. It also lacks the guarantee for exhaustiveness. This latter shortcoming was recently resolved in [12], where new trees were added to the forest of [17]. The new trees were rooted at some auxiliary LETS structures but were still formed following the LSS-based expansion as the relationship between their nodes.
In this work, following the above general framework for exhaustive search, we design a forest whose trees are each rooted at a simple short cycle of a different length. This makes the number of rooted trees small. It also makes the enumeration of the instances of the root structure for each tree simple. The expansions within each tree are limited to three types, one being the LSS-based expansion of [17]. The expansions in each tree are selected to be minimal in the sense that they cannot be broken into smaller (simpler) expansions such that the intermediate structures still remain LETS. This satisfies the constraint of having simple expansions in the search process. Finally, auxiliary LETS structures are added systematically as intermediate or root nodes of the trees, as required, with the goal of minimizing the overall search complexity.

TABLE I PROS AND CONS OF THE SEARCH ALGORITHMS
IN THIS WORK, [12], [17], [18]
Table I summarizes the pros and cons of the search algorithms in this work, [12], [17], [18].
In the following section, we discuss the LSS-based characterization/search algorithm of [13] and [18]. This will motivate, and set the stage for, the introduction of the two additional expansion techniques.
III. LSS-BASED (DOT-BASED) CHARACTERIZATION/ SEARCH APPROACH AND ITS SHORTCOMINGS
In this section, by providing a new perspective, we revisit the LSS-based characterization/search approach, proposed in [17]. The new perspective is based on the normal graph representation of LETS structures, and a graph expansion technique applied to normal graphs, which we refer to as “depth-one tree,” or “dot,” in brief. Characterization and search algorithms based on dot expansion are then explained followed by a discussion on shortcomings of the dot-based approach. All the discussions are in the context of variableregular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, even if this is not explicitly mentioned sometimes.
A. LSS-Based Approach and Dot-Based Characterization/Search
To characterize LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes, in [17], Karimi and Banihashemi first generated all the graphical structures of LETSs in each (a, b) class. They then examined each structure S to find out whether S is a layered super set (LSS) of any of its cycles, i.e., whether S corresponds to a sequence of LETS structures that starts from a cycle and grows one variable node at a time to reach S. It was shown in [17] that a vast majority of non-isomorphic LETS structures are LSS of cycles. The relatively small number of structures that do not lend themselves to LSS characterization (starting from cycles) are labeled as “NA” in [17]. Subsequently, it was shown in [12] that NA structures, themselves, are also LSSs of some basic graphical structures which are only slightly more complex than cycles.
A careful examination of the LSS property in the space of normal graphs reveals that this property corresponds to a simple graph-based expansion technique, referred to, here, as depth-one tree (dot) expansion. The notation dotm is used for a dot expansion with m edges, as shown in Fig. 2. In this figure,
symbol ◦ is used to represent the m common nodes between the parent structure S and the dotm structure. Symbol •, on
the other hand, is used to represent the root node of dotm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

Fig. 2. Expanding a LETS structure S by applying depth-one tree expansion with m edges (dotm ).
Fig. 3. LETS structures with (S) ≤ dv = 4: (a) The LETS structure S is in the (4, 8) class, (b)-(c) LETS structures in the (5, 8) class generated from S by dot2 expansion, (d) LETS structure in the (5, 6) class generated from S by dot3 expansion, and (e) LETS structure in the (5, 4) class generated from S by dot4 expansion.
structure. For the dotm expansion to result in a valid normal graph for a LETS structure of a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv, the m edges of the tree will have to be connected to nodes of S with degree less than dv. In addition, the degree m of the root node must be at least 2 and at most dv.
Proposition 1: Suppose that S is an (a, b) LETS structure of variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, where b ≥ 2. Expansion of S using dotm, 2 ≤ m ≤ mi n{dv, b}, will result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + 1, b + dv − 2m) class.
Proof: In addition to being limited by the upper bound of dv, the maximum value of m is also upper bounded by b. Therefore, m ≤ mi n{dv, b}. In the dotm expansion, only one node is added to S, and thus the size of the new structure is a = a + 1. Based on Lemma 1, the number of edges in S is |ES | = (adv − b)/2. By the nature of dotm expansion, the number of edges in the expanded structure S is |ES | = |ES | + m. Therefore, based on Lemma 1, the number of unsatisfied check nodes b in the new structure is b = (a + 1)dv − 2|ES | = adv − 2|ES | + dv − 2m = b + dv − 2m.
Example 2: Consider the LETS structure S of Fig. 3(a) in a variable-regular Tanner graph with dv = 4 and g = 6. This structure is in the (4, 8) class. The application of dot2 expansion to S generates two non-isomorphic structures shown in Figs. 3(b) and (c) in the (5, 8) class. For each of the two expansions dot3 and dot4 applied to S, only one new structure is generated. This structure belongs to the (5, 6) and the (5, 4) class, respectively, and is shown in Figs. 3(d) and (e), respectively.
Proposition 2: Among the LETS structures with the same size a, the simple cycle of size a in the (a, a(dv − 2)) class has the largest b.

Proof: Since b = adv − 2|E|, the LETS structure with the largest b is the one with the minimum number of edges |E|. Also, in leafless structures, each node has at least two incident edges. Therefore, the simple cycle of size a, in which each node has exactly two incident edges, has the minimum number of edges, a, among all the LETS structures with the same size. The simple cycle of size a is, in fact, the only LETS structure in the (a, adv − 2a = a(dv − 2)) class.
Remark 1: In a Tanner graph with girth g, the smallest LETS structure is the simple cycle of size g/2, denoted by sg/2. The sg/2 structure is the only LETS structure of size g/2.
Given all the non-isomorphic LETS structures of size k, the dot expansion technique is able to generate most of the non-isomorphic LETS structures of size k + 1. The LETS structures which cannot be obtained by the dot expansion from any of their subsets are called dot-prime structures. For brevity, we refer to these structures as being prime, in the rest of the paper. Prime structures can be categorized into: (i) cycle prime structures, and (ii) non-cycle prime structures. In the first category, we have all the simple cycles, and cycles with chord that are out of the reach of the dot expansion. In the second category, we have structures that are slightly more complex than cycles. Non-cycle prime structures are discussed in details in [12].
Dot expansion is a simple recursive technique to generate larger LETS structures from smaller ones. Based on Remark 1, one needs to start from the simple cycle of length g/2 and apply the dot expansion recursively, to obtain non-isomorphic LETS structures in different (a, b) classes with a > g/2. This technique, however, has the limitation of leaving out all the prime structures. Therefore, for a full characterization of LETS structures based on dot expansion, these prime structures will have to be identified and added as new initial building blocks for the dot expansion.
Remark 2: Expanding LETS structures with depth-one tree is the same as the LSS-based algorithm proposed in [17]. For the characterization of LETS structures, however, rather than examining each structure in a class to find out its LSS properties, as performed in [17], in this work, the nonisomorphic LETS structures are generated by expanding the prime structures using the dot expansion technique.
Case Study: Characterization of non-isomorphic LETS structures of (a, b) classes for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 6 and a ≤ 9, b ≤ 9:
This characterization is summarized in Table II, where the prime structures are boldfaced. The notations sk, ck, and nk are used to denote the simple cycle, a prime cycle with chord, and a non-cycle prime structure of size k, respectively. As an example of how the entries in Table II should be interpreted, we consider the (7, 5) class. The entries for this class are: s6(3), c7(1), and n7(2). This means that there are a total of 6 non-isomorphic LETS structures in this class, three of these structures are generated, using dot expansions, starting from s6, one of them is a prime cycle with chord of size 7, and two of them are non-cycle prime structures of size 7. Having the symbol “-” for an (a, b) class means that it is impossible to have any LETS structure in that class. In Table II, the smallest possible LETS structure is the cycle of size 3, s3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs
TABLE II DOT-BASED CHARACTERIZATION OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR
VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3, g = 6 AND a ≤ 9, b ≤ 9

6719

Fig. 4. LETS structures in (a) (4, 2) and (b) (4, 0) classes in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6.

It is worth noting that unlike [17], the simple cycles and prime cycles with chord are distinguished in this paper.
Dot-based characterization of LETS structures corresponds
to a search algorithm to find all the instances of LETS structures in the Tanner graph of LDPC codes for given values
of dv, g, amax and bmax . First, based on the characterization table, the set of prime structures in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax are identified. For example, for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 6 and bmax = amax = 9, all the prime structures of Table II are needed. As another example, if, for a variable-regular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6, one is interested in bmax = 3 and amax = 8, only 8 prime structures in the (3, 3), (4, 4), (5, 5), (6, 4), (6, 6) and (7, 5) classes are needed. Suppose that T prime structures are needed for a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax . The instances of each prime structure are then enumerated in the
Tanner graph of the code, and are used as the input to the dot-based search algorithm to find all the instances of LETS structures in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. This dot-based search algorithm is essentially the same as the LSS-based search algorithm of [13] and [18].

Fig. 5. Prime LETS structures in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6 (a) a simple cycle in the (6, 6) class and a cycle with chord in the (6, 4) class (b) non-cycle prime structures in the (7, 5) class.
The two non-isomorphic LETS structures of size 4 generated by the application of dot expansions to s3 are shown in Fig. 4 ( f4 is the new node added to s3). These structures, which belong to (4, 2) and (4, 0) classes, respectively, are the only non-isomorphic LETS structures of size 4 that are generated by the dot expansion. There, however, remains another LETS structure of size 4 in the (4, 4) class that is not generated by the dot expansion. This (4, 4) LETS structure, which is in fact s4, is thus chosen as a prime structure.
Fig. 5(a) shows two prime structures in the (6, 6) and (6, 4) classes, respectively, and Fig. 5(b) depicts two prime structures in the (7, 5) class.

B. Shortcomings of Dot-Based Search Algorithm
To motivate the new characterization/search technique, we start by explaining the main practical issues in implementing a dot-based search algorithm. In summary, in a given Tanner graph, to exhaustively search for (a, b) LETS instances within the range of interest a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, one needs to initially enumerate instances of prime structures that are needed as parents of the LETS structures under consideration. (These prime structures are the roots of the trees in the forest described in Subsection II-C.) Some of these prime structures have relatively large a and b values. For practical codes, the multiplicity of instances of such prime structures can be easily in the range of tens of millions. This imposes a huge computational burden and memory requirement on the dotbased search algorithm. The dot-based search algorithm in this case is particularly inefficient, when such prime structures,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016
TABLE III DOT-BASED CHARACTERIZATION OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES
FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3, g = 6, 10 ≤ a ≤ 12 AND b ≤ 5

themselves, are not of direct interest (as they have relatively large a and b values), and when the multiplicity of the instances of the LETS structures, that are children of such prime structures and of interest, is relatively low, or in some cases even zero.
We consider the case of variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6. For such graphs, the dot-based characterization for the range of a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 9, was presented in Table II. In Table III, we have extended the results of Table II to cover LETS structures with a = 10, 11, 12, and b ≤ 5. All the (non-cycle and cycle) prime structures of size less than 10 (those identified in Table II by sk , ck, nk, with k ≤ 9) are used to generate the LETS structures in Table III. For the LETS structures which are not generated using the dot expansion technique starting from any of these prime structures, the notation “NA” is used in Table III. Starting from the prime structures of size 10 and 11, one can also generate (characterize) NA LETS structures of Table III.
Example 3: The (11, 1) class is a potentially dominant LETS class of variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6. Table III shows that among 114 non-isomorphic LETS structures in this class, 50, 26, 10, 7, 4, 6, 9 and 2 structures are generated starting from prime structures s6, s7, c7, n7, s8, c8, n8 and n9, respectively. This means prime structures with size up to 9 need to be enumerated in the Tanner graph to find the instances of all the LETS structures of this class (if any exists). Fig. 6 represents S = ({ f1, f2, . . . , f11}, E), a LETS structure in the (11, 1) class which is generated starting from the simple cycle prime structure, s8, in the (8, 8) class (S = ({ f1, f2, . . . , f8}, E )). To find all the instances of S in the Tanner graph using a dot-based search algorithm, all the instances of s8 in the graph need to be enumerated.
Example 4: Consider a (3, 6)-regular LDPC code with g = 6, and n = 20000 [24].1 Suppose that one is interested in LETSs of this code in the range of a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5. The multiplicities of all the instances of prime structures of size 8 and 9 in the Tanner graph of this code in the (8, 4), (8, 6), (8, 8), (9, 5), (9, 7) and (9, 9) classes are listed
1This code is labeled as C4 in Section V.

Fig. 6. A LETS structure in the (11, 1) class of a variable-regular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6.
TABLE IV MULTIPLICITIES OF PRIME STRUCTURES OF SIZE 8 AND 9
IN THE CODE OF EXAMPLE 4
in Table IV. In the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, the (8, 4), (9, 3), (9, 5), (10, 0), (10, 2), (10, 4), (11, 1), (11, 3), (11, 5), (12, 0), (12, 2), (12, 4) classes are the classes that can have LETS structures starting from these prime structures. To exhaustively search the Tanner graph for LETSs with a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, the dot-based search algorithm will have to enumerate all the instances of the prime structures listed in Table IV (a total of more than 60 million). In all the above classes, however, this code has only 15, 1 and 8 instances of LETS structures in (9, 5), (10, 4) and (11, 5) classes, respectively, that are generated by the dot-based expansion, starting from the instances of these (more than 60 million) prime structures.
IV. Dpl-BASED CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH APPROACH To overcome the shortcomings of the dot-based search
algorithm, explained in Subsection III-B, in this section, we first propose two new graph expansion techniques,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs

6721

Fig. 7. Expansion of the LETS structure S with (a) an open path of length m + 1, pamo (b) a closed path of length m + 1, pamc .
path and lollipop expansions, that are applied to smaller LETS structures to generate larger ones. Similar to dot expansion, the new expansions are also applied in the space of normal graphs. In Subsection IV-B, we then use path and lollipop expansions along with the dot expansion, to formulate a new characterization of LETS structures. In the context of characterizing a LETS structure as a sequence of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle and expands, step by step, to reach the structure of interest, we introduce the concept of minimal characterizations, as those in which none of the expansions in the sequence can be divided into smaller ones. The proposed characterization in Subsection IV-B is minimal, and describes each and every LETS structure as an expansion of a simple cycle, using a combination of dot, path and lollipop expansion techniques, thus the name dpl-based characterization, or dpl characterization, in brief. In Subsection IV-B, we also prove that any minimal characterization is based only on the expansions dot, path and lollipop, and that the proposed characterization has some optimal properties as related to the corresponding search algorithm. The characterization results for some values of dv, g, amax, and bmax are presented as characterization tables in Subsection IV-C. For a given range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , the maximum length of simple cycles participating in the dpl characterization is often less than that for the dot characterization. Finally, in Subsection IV-D, we develop the search algorithm corresponding to the dpl characterization, and in Subsection IV-E, we discuss the complexity of the search.
A. Path and Lollipop Expansion Techniques
Consider an (a, b) LETS structure S of a dv-regular Tanner graph with g ≥ 6. The path expansion of S is a new LETS structure S of size a + m, that is constructed by appending a path of length m + 1 to S. The first and the last nodes of the path are common with S, and can be identical, in that case, the path is closed. Figures 7(a) and (b), show the path expansion of S using open and closed paths of length m +1, respectively.
In these figures, the symbol ◦ is used to represent the common node(s) between S and the path, and the symbol • is used to
represent the other m nodes of the path. It is clear that for an open-path expansion, the degrees of the two nodes that are common with S must be strictly less that dv (in G(S)), and for the closed-path expansion, the degree of the one common node must be strictly less than dv − 1 in G(S). We use the notations pamo and pamc for open and closed paths of length m + 1, respectively. The notation pam is used to include both open and closed paths.

Routine 1 (PathExpansion) Expansion of a LETS Structure S to all Possible LETS Structures Lp of Size |S| + m, Using pam. Lp = PathExpansion(S, m) 1: Initialization: Identify the subset of nodes in S with degree
strictly less that dv, and store them in F . Identify the subset of nodes in S with degree strictly less than dv −1, and store them in F . Lp ← ∅. 2: Construct N2(G) to include all the possible subsets of F of size 2. 3: for each set in N2(G) do 4: Generate a new LETS structure S by applying pamo
expansion to S such that the 2 nodes in F are the first and the last nodes of the new path of length m + 1. 5: Lp ← Lp ∪ S . 6: end for 7: for each node in F do 8: Generate a new LETS structure S by applying pamc expansion to S such that the node in F is the common node between S and the new path of length m + 1. 9: Lp ← Lp ∪ S . 10: end for 11: Output: Lp.
Fig. 8. Expansion of the LETS structure S with a lollipop walk of length m + 1 = d + c, lomc .
Proposition 3: Suppose that S is a LETS structure in the (a, b) class (b ≥ 2) for variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv. Applying the path expansion pam, with m ≥ 2, to S will result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + m, b − 2 + m(dv − 2)) class.
Proof: The constraint b ≥ 2 is to accommodate the 2 edges of the path that are connected to S. We also note that pa1o is the same as dot2, and that the expansion pa1c will result in a cycle of length 4. We thus focus on m ≥ 2 in the statement of the proposition.
The expanded structure S has size a = a + m. Based on Lemma 1, the number of edges in S is |ES | = (adv − b)/2. By the nature of expansion, the number of edges in S is |ES | = |ES |+m+1. By combining these and using Lemma 1, we have b = a dv−2|ES | = (a +m)dv−(adv−b)−2m −2 = b − 2 + m(dv − 2).
The pseudo-code of the path expansion algorithm is given in Routine 1.
In Fig. 8, the expansion of a LETS structure S using a lollipop walk of length m + 1 is shown. The notation lomc is used for a lollipop walk of length m + 1 (m is number of the nodes added to S), which consists of a cycle of length c (c ≥ 3) and a path of length d (d ≥ 1). Clearly, the common node between S and the lollipop expansion must have a degree strictly less than dv in G(S).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

Routine 2 (LollipopExpansion) Expansion of a LETS Structure S to All Possible LETS Structures Llc of Size |S| + m, Using lomc . Llc = LollipopExpansion(S, m, c) 1: Initialization: Identify the subset of nodes in S with degree
strictly less than dv and store them in F . Llc ← ∅. 2: for each node f in F do 3: Generate a new LETS structure, S , by expanding S
using lomc expansion such that f is the common node between the lollipop and S. 4: Llc ← Llc ∪ S . 5: end for 6: Output: Llc.
Proposition 4: Suppose that S is a LETS structure in the (a, b) class (b ≥ 1) for variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv. Applying the lollipop expansion lomc , with m ≥ 3 and 3 ≤ c ≤ m, to S will result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + m, b − 2 + m(dv − 2)) class.
Proof: Similar to that of Proposition 3. The pseudo-code for the lollipop expansion is given in Routine 2. In the following, we demonstrate, through a sequence of intermediate results, that any LETS structure of variableregular Tanner graphs can be generated from simple cycles using a combination of the three expansion techniques: dot, path and lollipop. Lemma 2: Except the simple cycles, any LETS structure S = (F , E ) contains at least one LETS sub-structure S = (F, E) with |F| < |F |.
Proof: Since the structure S is leafless, it must contain a cycle, and as a result, a simple cycle. The proof then follows from the fact that simple cycles are LETSs.
Lemma 3: Suppose that a LETS structure S = (F , E ) has a LETS sub-structure S = (F, E), where |F| = |F | − 1. Structure S can then be generated from S by using the dot expansion.
Proof: Node f in F \F must be connected to at least two nodes in S. Based on the definition of dot expansion, structure S can then be generated from S by using dotm expansion (m ≥ 2), where the root of the expansion tree is f .
Lemma 4: Consider a LETS structure S = (F , E ) that is prime with respect to dot expansion, and is not a simple cycle. Then, for the largest LETS sub-structure S = (F, E) of S , we have (i) |F| < |F | − 1, (ii) subgraph induced by F \F is connected, (iii) no node in F \ F can have more than one edge connected to the nodes in S.
Proof: Proof of (i) follows from Lemmas 2 and 3, and the definition of a prime structure. For (ii), assume that the subgraph is disconnected. Then removing the nodes in one of the disconnected parts from F results in a new LETS substructure of S , which is larger than S. This contradicts the assumption that S is the largest LETS sub-structure of S . For (iii), again by contradiction, if such a node exists, by removing

all the other nodes in F \ F, we obtain a LETS sub-structure of S larger than S.
Proposition 5: Suppose that S = (F , E ) is a prime structure of dot expansion, but is not a simple cycle. Let S = (F, E) be the largest LETS sub-structure of S . Structure S can then be generated by expanding S using a path or a lollipop walk.
Proof: Based on Lemma 4, in the following, we consider two cases of |F| = |F | − 2 and |F| < |F | − 2.
Case (1)–|F| = |F | − 2: Based on Part (ii) of Lemma 4, the two nodes in F \ F must be adjacent. Moreover, based on Part (iii) of the same lemma, each node in F \ F must have one connection to the nodes in S. The only possible configurations satisfying both conditions are the expansions of S by the closed and open paths of length 3.
Case (2)–|F| < |F | − 2: We first prove that in this case, the number of the edges connecting the nodes in F \ F to the nodes in S must be strictly less than 3. Suppose that the number of such edges is at least 3. This means that, based
on Part (iii) of Lemma 4, there are at least three nodes in F \ F each connected with one edge to a node in S. Select three such nodes, and call them v1, v2 and v3. Based on Part (ii) of Lemma 4, there is a path between any pair of these nodes in the subgraph induced by F \ F. Find the shortest paths between any pair of these nodes in the subgraph. Without
loss of generality, assume that among the three shortest paths, the one between v1 and v2 has the smallest length. Clearly v3 cannot be on this path. Add the nodes v1, v2 and all the nodes on the shortest path between v1 and v2 to S. This results in a LETS sub-structure of S that is larger than S and strictly smaller than S , which is a contradiction. Therefore, the number of the edges connecting the nodes in F \ F to the nodes in S must be either two or one.
For the case where there are two edges connecting F \ F to S, based on Part (iii) of Lemma 4, these edges must be incident to two distinct nodes in F \ F. Call these nodes v1 and v2. There must be no cycles in the subgraph induced by F \ F. Otherwise, one can find the shortest path between v1 and v2 in the subgraph and by removing all the nodes in F \ F except v1, v2 and all the nodes on the shortest path between them, obtain a LETS sub-structure of S that is larger than S but strictly smaller than S . Therefore, for this case, the only possible configurations are the expansions of S by closed and open paths of length more than 3.
For the case where there is only one edge connecting F \ F to S, for S to be a LETS structure, there must exist at least one cycle in the subgraph induced by F \ F. With a discussion similar to the case of two connecting edges, one can prove that
there must be exactly one cycle in the subgraph. For this case, the only possible configurations are the expansions of S by lollipop walks lomc with m ≥ 3 (length more than four) and c ≥ 3 (cycles longer than three).
Based on Proposition 5, except the simple cycles, each
prime structure of dot-based expansion can be generated by
applying path or lollipop expansions to its largest LETS sub-
structure. This sub-structure is either a simple cycle or not.
If not, then Lemmas 2 and 3, and Proposition 5 show that we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs

6723

can obtain the sub-structure by applying a combination of the three expansion techniques to a simple cycle.
Theorem 1: All LETS structures of variable-regular Tanner graphs for any variable degree dv, and in any (a, b) class (that are not simple cycles), can be generated by applying a combination of depth-one tree (dot), path and lollipop expansions to simple cycles.
Proof: The only LETS structures that are out of the reach of dot expansions are prime structures discussed in Section III-A. These prime structures are either simple cycles or not. Based on Proposition 5, and the above discussions, the prime structures that are not simple cycles can be generated using the three expansion techniques starting from simple cycles.
Compared to the dot-based characterization, Theorem 1 provides a new characterization of LETS structures. Instead of using one expansion technique (dot) and some prime structures (simple cycles plus some other prime structures) to characterize the LETS structures, the new characterization uses more expansion techniques (dot, path and lollipop) but has fewer prime structures (only simple cycles). In the general framework of Subsection II-C, this corresponds to a forest with smaller number of trees but more variety of expansion types for internal links within each tree. This new characterization, however, does not provide us with a road-map to a more efficient search algorithm. The reason is that, if we continue to rely on the dot-based search algorithm as before, we still need to enumerate all the instances of the required prime structures as the input to the dot-based search algorithm. Having a characterization of the prime structures as expansions of simple cycles, although helpful in such an enumeration, has no effect on the required prime structures with relatively large a and b values, and the (huge) number of the instances of such structures that need to be enumerated.
To use the new expansions in the characterization such that they translate to a more efficient search algorithm, we need to use them for generating not only the prime structures but also the other LETS structures of interest. This corresponds to a full reorganization of the internal structure of each tree within the forest. If the hierarchical structure of the trees is properly designed, many of the prime structures may not be needed in the new trees. This can, consequently, reduce the search complexity significantly. The following example explains this idea and motivates the dpl characterization of next subsection.
Example 5: Consider the (11, 1) LETS structure S of Fig. 6. The prime sub-structure of S with respect to dot expansion is s8. There are, however, different ways to generate S starting from s3, using a combination of dot, path and lollipop expansion techniques. One approach is explained in Fig. 9. In this figure, Fi is the set of nodes in Si , the LETS substructure of S in the i -th step of expansion. A search algorithm based on the sequence of expansions presented in Fig. 9, will start by enumerating all the instances of s3 in the Tanner graph, instead of finding the instances of s8, to find all the instances of S.
As an example, consider the code discussed in Example 4. This code has 161 and 6,219,941 instances of s3 and s8, respectively. In dot-based search algorithm, all the instances

Fig. 9. Steps of generating the (11, 1) LETS structure of Fig. 6 starting from s3.
of s8 (more than 6 million) need to be enumerated and then dot expansions need to be applied to each instance of s8 three times successively to obtain the instances of S. For this code, however, no instance of S exists in the Tanner graph. On the other hand, following the road-map of Fig. 9, by applying the dot expansion to the 161 instances of s3, as the first step, one obtains no instance of the structure in the (4, 2) class, and thus stops the search process for S (very quickly).
In general, if all the LETS structures of interest, that have s8 as their prime sub-structure in the dot characterization, are generated using prime structures with smaller size, the instances of s8 are no longer needed to be enumerated in the search algorithm.
B. Dpl-Based Characterization
Our goal in this subsection is to characterize all the nonisomorphic LETS structures of a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv and girth g, within all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax . The characterization is based on describing each LETS structure S as a hierarchy of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle, and expands to S in multiple steps, each step involving one of the three expansion techniques, i.e., dot, path or lollipop. The basic idea behind the new characterization, i.e., dpl-based characterization, is to generate as many LETS structures as possible within the interest range of a and b values by using smaller LETS structures that have a and b values also within the range. When translated to a search algorithm, this has the benefit that we will only search for instances of the structures that are themselves of direct interest to us (have a and b values within the target range). This is unlike the case for the dot-based search algorithm, where we would search for structures that are not of direct interest (have a or b values outside the target range), but happen to be parents of structures of interest in the dot characterization. To achieve the goal of staying within the target range of a and b values, and have an exhaustive characterization for all the LETS structures, we need to use path and lollipop expansions in addition to the dot expansion. For the reasons just explained, one of the important properties of the dpl characterization is to generate a LETS structure in each level of expansion. With this constraint, i.e., all the sub-structures in the embedded sequence are LETSs, it is easy to see that the proposed characterization is minimal, in the sense that, none of the expansion steps can be divided into smaller expansions. We also prove that the three expansion techniques of dot, path and lolli pop, are the only expansions that are needed in minimal characterizations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6724

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

Fig. 10. A LETS structure in the (7, 3) class of a variable-regular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6.

Within the framework of Subsection II-C, in the design of the search forest, we aim at covering all the LETS structures of interest without introducing any auxiliary structures within the forest, if possible. This is along with the constraints that each tree in the forest is rooted at a short simple cycle and the connections within each tree correspond to only dot, path and lollipop expansions.
Given a target range of interest a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, we start from all the simple cycles within this range. Based on Proposition 2, for a given a, a simple cycle of size a has the largest b value of a(dv − 2) among all the (a, b) LETS structures. We thus initiate the characterization by including simple cycles sg/2, . . . , s bmax /(dv−2) . We then recursively apply dot expansions to these simple cycles to generate more LETS structures within the range of interest. (We choose the dot expansion in this step of the algorithm, since it can generate the majority of the LETS structures starting from the simple cycles.) If at the end of this process, there are still some LETS structures within the range of interest that are not generated, we try to generate them using the already generated smaller LETS structures by applying the path or lollipop expansions. Propositions 3 and 4, are our guide in this process. After the generation of any new LETS structure in this process, we also recursively apply dot expansions to it to (possibly) generate more new LETS structures in the range of interest. If there are still some structures that are not generated, we will increase the range of b values to bmax + 1 to include some new LETS structures (auxiliary structures) that can generate the missing LETS structures through expansions. This process of including LETS structures with larger b values will continue until all the LETS structures of all the (a, b) classes within the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , are generated.
When the process of generating LETS structures of interest, as described above, is completed, for each LETS structure S in the range, we have the parent simple cycle s j , for some j ≥ g/2, and the sequence of expansions that are applied to s j to generate S. We however, recognize that this minimal characterization of S may not be unique, in the sense that, there may be other combinations of parent and expansion sequences that result in the generation of S. This is explained in the following example.
Example 6: Fig. 10 shows a (7, 3) LETS structure S = ({ f1, f2, . . . , f7}, E) of a variable-regular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6. Two minimal characterizations of S starting from the simple cycle s4 in the (4, 4) class (S = ({ f1, f2, . . . , f4}, E )) are presented in Fig. 11.
To present the d pl characterization in a compact form, instead of providing the above sequence of parent/expansions for each LETS structure, for each (a, b) class of interest, we only provide (in a characterization table) the dpl-prime

Fig. 11. Two minimal characterizations of the (7, 3) LETS structure of Fig. 10, starting from s4.
structures (simple cycles) that are required to obtain the LETS structures in that class, plus the expansions that need to be applied to the structures within that class to obtain larger LETS structures within the range of interest. This presentation of characterization is particularly helpful for the dpl-based search algorithm.
The pseudo-code of the dpl characterization algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. In this algorithm, the table EX is used to store the sets of required expansion techniques in different classes. The notation EX (a,b) is used to denote the expansion sets for the (a, b) class. For example, EX (a,b) = {dot, pa2, lo33} means that dot, pa2 and lo33 expansions will need to be applied to all the non-isomorphic LETS structures in the (a, b) class.
The algorithm presented in Routine 3 is responsible for dot expansion. In this routine, set Lak is the set of non-isomorphic LETS structures of size a generated by the recursive application of the dot expansion starting from the structures in Pk. All the non-isomorphic LETS structures of size a + 1 that are generated by expanding the non-isomorphic LETS structures in Lka using dotm expansions with different values of m are stored in Ltem. A subset of Ltem that is not generated by smaller prime structures will then be identified as the set Lak+1. The algorithm of Routine 4 is responsible for generating LETS structures that are out of the reach of dot expansions, by using path and lollipop expansions.
The following lemma proves that minimal characterizations are based only on the three expansions dot, path and lolli pop.
Lemma 5: Consider a characterization of a LETS structure S, based on a hierarchy of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle and generates S through a series of graph expansions. Assume that the characterization is minimal, in the sense that, none of the expansions can be broken into a sequence of smaller expansions such that the resulting sub-structures are still LETSs. Then, any graph expansion in the series, corresponding to a minimal characterization, is either a dot, a path or a lolli pop expansion.
Proof: Consider structures S = (F , E ) and S = (F , E ) as two successive embedded LETS structures in a minimal characterization of S (S is generated by applying a graph expansion to S ). If |F | = |F |−1, then it is easy to see that S is obtained from S by a dot expansion. For the case

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs

6725

Algorithm 1 (Dpl-Based Characterization Algorithm) Finds

All the Non-Isomorphic LETS Structures in (a, b) Classes

With a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , for Variable-Regular Tanner Graphs With Variable Degree dv and Girth g. The Output Parameter K Is the Size of the Largest Simple Cycle Required

in the Characterization. The LETS Structures Generated From

the Simple Cycle sk Are Stored in Lk, for k = g/2, . . . , K , and the Set of Expansions for Different Classes Are Stored in EX

1: Inputs: amax , bmax , dv and g.
2: Initializations: L ← ∅, a = g/2, bmax = bmax , EX (a,b) ←dot, ∀a ∈ {g/2, . . . , amax − 1}, ∀b ∈
{2, . . . , bmax }. 3: K = bmax /(dv − 2) .
4: for k = g/2, . . . , K do

5: Lk = DotExpansion(sk, L, amax ). 6: L = L ∪ Lk . 7: end for 8: while a ≤ amax do 9: if all the LETS structures in classes of size a are not

found (check by comparing the structures of size a in

L with those generated by geng) do

10:

for any incomplete (a, b) class, where 1 ≤ b ≤ bmax

do

11:

for k = g/2, . . . , K do

12:

(Ltem, EX tem)=PaLoExpan(a, b, Lk, L).

13:

Ltem= DotExpansion(Ltem, L, amax ).

14:

L = L ∪ Ltem, Lk = Lk ∪ Ltem .

15:

EX = EX ∪ EX tem.

16:

end for

17:

end for

18: end if

19: a = a + 1.

20: end while

21: while all the LETS structures in all the classes of interest

are not found (check by comparing all the structures in L

with those generated by geng) do

22: bmax = bmax + 1, a = g/2.

23: while a < amax do

24:

E X (a,bmax) ← dot.

25:

if (a, bmax) is the class of a simple cycle then

26:

K = K + 1.

27:

LK = DotExpansion(sK , L, amax ).

28:

L = L ∪ LK .

29:

if LK = ∅ then

30:

E X (a,bmax) = E X (a,bmax ) \ dot .

31:

end if

32:

else

33:

for k = g/2, . . . , K do

34:

(Ltem, EX tem)=PaLoExpan(a, bmax, Lk , L).

35:

Ltem= DotExpansion(Ltem, L, amax ).

36:

L = L ∪ Ltem, Lk = Lk ∪ Ltem .

37:

EX = EX ∪ EX tem.

38:

end for

39:

end if

40:

a = a + 1.

41: end while

42: end while

43: Outputs: K , {Lg/2, . . . , LK }, EX .

Routine 3 (DotExpansion) Recursive Expansion of a Set of

Structures Pk of Size k, up to Size amax, Using dot Expansion, Excluding the Already Found Structures L, and Storing the

Rest in Lk . Lk = DotExpansion (Pk , L, amax )

1: Initialization: Lkk ← Pk.

2: for a = k, . . . , amax − 1 do

3: Ltem ← ∅.

4: for each LETS structure S in Lka do

5:

Find the subset F of nodes in S with degree strictly

less than dv.

6:

for m = 2, . . . , dv do

7:

Construct Nm(S) to include all the possible sub-

sets of F with size m.

8:

for each set of m nodes in Nm (S) do

9:

Generate a new structure, S using dotm expan-

sion by connecting a new node to the set of m

nodes.

10:

Ltem = Ltem ∪ S .

11:

end for

12:

end for

13: end for

14: Lka+1 = Ltem \ L.

15: end foarmax

16: Lk =

Lak .

a=k

17: Output: Lk .

of |F | = |F | − 2, using discussions similar to those in the proof of Case (1) of Proposition 5, one can prove that the only possible expansions to generate S from S are the closed and open paths of length 3. Finally, for the case of |F | < |F |−2, following similar steps as those in the proof of Case (2) of
Proposition 5, we can show that the only possible expansions to generate S from S are closed and open paths of length more than 3, or lollipop walks lomc with m ≥ 3 (length more than four) and c ≥ 3 (cycles longer than three).
Algorithm 1 obtains minimal characterizations for LETS
structures. The following theorem shows that the algorithm
performs this task efficiently and effectively, by making sure
that all the intermediate LETS structures generated in each
characterization are within the target range of a and b values,
if possible. Theorem 2: For given values of dv, g, amax and bmax ,
Algorithm 1 provides an optimal minimal characterization of all non-isomorphic (a, b) LETS structures of variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv and girth g, with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, in the sense that, to generate all such structures starting from simple cycles and using dot, path, and lollipop
expansions, the maximum length K of the required simple
cycles, and the maximum range bmax of the b values of the LETS structures that are generated in the characterization
process, are minimized by Algorithm 1.
Proof: Assume that Algorithm 1 fails to characterize all the non-isomorphic (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , in Lines 4–20 of the algorithm. Consider one such structure S. The failure of Algorithm 1 to characterize S implies, based on Lemma 5 and Propositions 1, 3 and 4,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

Routine 4 (PaLoExpansion) Finding New LETS Structures

in the (a, b) Class Which Are Out of the Reach of dot

Expansion by Applying path and lollipop Expansions to LETS

Structures Already Found in Lk , Excluding the Already Found Structures L, and Storing All the New Structures in Ltem . The

Expansions Corresponding to the New Structures Are Stored in EX tem. (Ltem, EX tem) = PaLoExpansion (a, b, Lk , L)

1: Initialization: EX tem ← ∅, Ltem ← ∅. 2: a = a − 2.

3: while a ≥ g/2 do

4: m = a − a . 5: Ltpem ← ∅, Lc,tem ← ∅, 3 ≤ c ≤ m. 6: for any LETS structure S in the (a , b = b + 2 −

m(dv − 2)) class of Lk do

7:

Lp = PathExpansion(S, m).

8:

Ltpem = Ltpem ∪ Lp .

9:

for any possible c do

10:

Llc = LollipopExpansion(S, m, c).

11:

Lc,tem = Lc,tem ∪ Llc.

12:

end for

13: end for

14: 15:

if

{Ltpem Lt em

\ =

L} Lt

=
em

∅ ∪

{aLndtpem{L\tpeLm}.\

Lt

em

}

=

∅

then

16:

E

X

t em (a ,b

)

←

E

X

t em (a ,b

)

∪

pam .

17: end if

18: for any possible c do

19:

if {Lc,tem \ L} = ∅ and {Lc,tem \ Ltem} = ∅ then

20:

Ltem = Ltem ∪ {Lc,tem \ L}.

21:

E

X

t em (a ,b

)

←

E

X

t em (a ,b

)

∪

lomc .

22:

end if

23: end for

24: a = a − 1.

25: end while 26: Outputs: Ltem, EX tem.

that there is no minimal characterization of S that starts from a simple cycle in the range of interest with all the sub-structures also in the range. To obtain a minimal characterization for S, one has thus no choice other than increasing the range of b values beyond bmax. In Lines 21-42, Algorithm 1 performs this task step by step, increasing the range of b values only by one, at each step, ensuring that the range increase is the minimum required to obtain a minimal characterization for all the LETS structures in the range.
C. Dpl-Based Characterization Tables
Given the values of dv and g, and a target range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, Algorithm 1 can be used to characterize all the LETS structures of variable-regular Tanner graphs in (a, b) classes of interest. For a given graph (code), the target values amax and bmax, however, need to be selected such that the classes that have the main contribution in the error floor of the code, the so-called dominant classes, are included in the range. The proper selection of the range would depend on the code’s rate and block length. Some information about the characterization tables for different values of dv, g, amax

and bmax is provided in Table V. The actual characterization tables are only provided for 3 cases, corresponding to columns four, seven and ten of Table V, in Tables VI-VIII, respectively. Characterization tables corresponding to the cases presented in the other columns of Table V can be found in [14].
Row five of Table V contains the maximum b value of the LETS structures that need to be generated for the exhaustive coverage of the classes of interest. This corresponds to bmax in Algorithm 1. This row should be compared to the last row of the table that shows the similar parameter when dot characterization is used. The comparison of the two rows demonstrates the advantage of the dpl-based approach compared to the dotbased approach in covering the same range of LETS classes but by generating LETS structures with smaller b values.
Example 7: In dot-based (LSS-based) approach, to find all the LETS structures of variable regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6, in the interest range of a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 3, all the LETS structures within the range a ≤ 8, b ≤ 8, need to be generated. However, in the proposed approach, only the LETS structures with b ≤ 5 need to be generated to guarantee the generation of all the LETS structures in the interest range. This corresponds to Characterization Table VI.
Rows six and seven of Table V contain the simple cycles and the expansion techniques that are used in each characterization table, respectively.
Example 8: Consider the case discussed in Example 7. Table V shows that for this case, to characterize all the LETS structures in the range of interest, simple cycles of length 3, 4 and 5, and expansions dot, pa2, pa3, lo33, lo43 and lo44 are needed.
We note that while the study of the relative harmfulness of different LETS structures is beyond the scope of this work, our experimental results, as well as those reported in the literature, show that the dominant LETS structures/classes depend not only on dv and g, but also on the rate R and block length n of the code. As a result, the values of interest for amax and bmax would also depend on all these parameters (dv, g, R and n). In the eighth row of Table V, we have indicated the ranges of rates and block lengths for which a characterization table can be useful, i.e., for a code within the specified range of rate and block length, the table is likely to cover the dominant classes of LETSs. Since the characterization tables are used as guidelines for dpl-based search algorithm to find instances of LETS structures in a given code (graph), one is interested in selecting the smallest values for amax and bmax to minimize the search complexity while ensuring that the dominant LETS structures are covered (found) in the search process. While this has been the main motivation for providing characterization tables, we make no claim that these tables are necessarily optimal in the sense just explained, nor we assert that such universally optimal tables even exist for codes with the same dv, g, rate and block length. These tables should thus be only treated as suggestions rather than definite guidelines.
Example 9: Consider the Characterization Table VI. The information in Table V indicates that Table VI is likely to contain the dominant LETS classes of medium-rate codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs
TABLE V INFORMATION ABOUT SOME EXAMPLES OF CHARACTERIZATION TABLES FOR DIFFERENT VALUES OF dv , g, amax AND bmax

6727

TABLE VI
CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-GRAPHS AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 10 AND b ≤ bmax = 3

TABLE VII
CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 8 FOR a ≤ amax = 12 AND b ≤ bmax = 4

(0.3 < R < 0.7) with short to medium block length (n < 8000), with dv = 3, and g = 6.
In each characterization table, columns and rows correspond to different values of a and b, respectively. For each (a, b) class of LETSs, the top entries in the table (separated by a dashed line from the bottom entries) show the prime simple cycles that are parents of the LETS structures within that class, and the multiplicity of non-isomorphic structures in the class with those parents (multiplicity is given within brackets). The bottom entries show the expansion techniques applied to all the LETS structures within the class. For example, si (x), s j (y), as upper entries in a class means that there are x + y nonisomorphic LETS structures in that class, x number of such

structures are generated from si and y of them are generated from s j . Having dot, pam, lomc , as lower entries in a class means that all the possible dotm expansions, both closed and open path expansions ( pamo , pamc ), and lomc are used to expand all the LETS structures of that class. Having the symbol “-”,
as the only entry for a class means that it is impossible to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

TABLE VIII CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION
TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 4 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 10 AND b ≤ bmax = 10
have LETS structures in that class. Having the symbol “-” as the only bottom entry means that no expansion technique is applied to the structures in that class. In each characterization table, the simple prime cycles that are needed to generate all the structures within the table are boldfaced.
Example 10: Consider the LETS class (8, 4) of Table VII. There are 10 non-isomorphic LETS structures in this class. Nine and one of these structures are generated starting from s4 and s5, respectively. To obtain all the LETS structures in the table, one needs to apply dot and pa2 expansions to each one of the 10 structures in this class. This results in the generation of LETS structures in (9, 1), (9, 3) and (10, 4) classes (based on Propositions 1 and 3).
As discussed in Subsection IV-B, to cover a given range of a and b values exhaustively, it is sometimes required to generate LETS structures with b values larger than bmax and up to some bmax > bmax. In the characterization tables, the LETS classes with b > bmax are separated from the rest by a double-line. For classes with b > bmax, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LETS structures are not reported in the tables.

Remark 3: Note that in Lines 21-42 of Algorithm 1, if an expansion technique does not generate a new LETS structure within the range of interest, it will not be added to EX . For example, consider the characterization of the non-isomorphic LETS structures of (a, b) classes for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6, in the range a ≤ amax = 10 and b ≤ bmax = 3 (Table VI). In Line 34 of Algorithm 1, pa4 is applied to the simple cycle s3 in the (3, 3) class and generates one new LETS structure in the (7, 5) class. However, the new LETS structure in the (7, 5) class does not generate any new non-isomorphic LETS structure in the interest range of a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 3. Therefore, pa4 expansion can be removed from the list of expansion techniques applied to s3 in the (3, 3) class.
Remark 4: In Lines 21-42 of Algorithm 1, if there are still some LETS structures within the range of interest that are not generated, the range of b values will be increased to include some new LETS structures that can generate the missing LETS structures through expansions. We note that, in this process, some LETS structures, which are already generated in Lines 8-20 of Algorithm 1, may be regenerated. In such cases, some path or lollipop expansions, which were added in Lines 8-20 of Algorithm 1, could be removed. For example, consider the characterization of the non-isomorphic LETS structures of (a, b) classes for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6, in the range a ≤ amax = 10 and b ≤ bmax = 3 (Table VI). In Lines 8-20 of Algorithm 1, pa2 is applied to the simple cycle s3 in the (3, 3) class and generates one new LETS structure in the (5, 3) class. However, since there are still some structures missing by the time that the algorithm reaches Line 21, the range of b values will be increased to bmax = 4. In Lines 21-42 of Algorithm 1, by applying the dot expansion to the simple cycle s4, both of the non-isomorphic LETS structures in the (5, 3) class will be generated. Therefore, pa2 expansion can be removed from the list of expansion techniques applied to s3 in the (3, 3) class.
Remark 5: When Algorithm 1 will have to go beyond LETS structures with b ≤ bmax, and to use simple cycles of size larger than bmax/(dv − 2) , it may happen that the new cycle does not result in any new LETS structure in the range of interest. In such cases, the new cycle is not included as a prime structure in the table. An example of this can be seen in Table VIII, where s6 does not generate any new nonisomorphic LETS structure in the interest range of a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 10, and is thus not added as a prime structure in the table.
D. Dpl-Based Search Algorithm
The characterization of LETS structures described in Subsections IV-B and IV-C corresponds to an efficient search algorithm to find the instances of all (a, b) LETS structures of a variable-regular Tanner graph for a given range of a and b values in a guaranteed fashion. The efficiency of the search is implied by Theorem 2. The pseudo-code of the proposed search algorithm is given in Algorithm 2. The search algorithm starts by the enumeration of simple cycles of length up to K . These are the cycles that are identified in the characterization table as the required prime structures. For the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs

6729

Algorithm 2 (Dpl-Based Search Algorithm) Finds All the

Instances of (a, b) LETS Structures of a Variable-Regular

Tanner Graph G With Girth g, for a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The Inputs Are the Maximum Size K of The Simple Cycles, and the Table EX of Expansion Techniques Required

in dpl Characterization. The Outputs Are the Sets Ik, k = g/2, . . . , K , Which Contain All the Instances of LETS Struc-

tures of Size Up to amax that Are Expansions of Simple Cycles of Length k in G

1: Inputs: K , EX , g, amax , bmax . 2: Initializations: I ← ∅.

3: for k = g/2, . . . , K do

4: for a = k, . . . , amax do

5:

Ika ← ∅.

6: end for

7: end for

8: for k = g/2, . . . , K do

9: Ikk = CycSrch(sk), a = k.

10: while a < amax do

11:

Itae+m1= DotSrch(Ika, I).

12:

for any pam in the characterization table do

13:

Itae+mm=PathSrch(Ika, I, EX , m).

14:

end for

15:

for any lomc in the characterization table do

16: 17:

IItae=+mLmo=lliSIrtace+mhm(I∪ka

, Icc, I.

I

,

E

X

,

m).

18:

end for

19:

for t = a + 1, . . . , amax do

20:

Ikt = Ikt ∪ Ittem .

21:

I = I ∪ Ittem.

22:

end for

23:

a = a + 1.

24: 25:

eInk d=wahmailxeIka

a=k

26: end for

27: Outputs: {Ig/2, . . . , IK }.

sake of completeness, the pseudo-code for cycle enumeration is provided in Routine 5.
After the enumeration of all instances of a simple cycle, these instances are expanded in the while loop (Lines 10-24) to find instances of other LETS structures up to size amax, Ik. Notation Ika is used for the set of instances of size a found by starting from the instances of the simple cycle of length k, and I is the set of instances of all LETSs which are found so far in the algorithm. Finding the instances of LETS structures using dot, path and lollipop expansion techniques are explained in Routines 6, 7 and 8, respectively.
E. Complexity of the dpl-Based Search Algorithm
The complexity of the search algorithm depends, in general, on the multiplicity of different instances of LETS structures and the expansion techniques used in different classes. The total complexity of the proposed algorithm can be divided into two parts: 1) complexity of finding the instances of prime

Routine 5 (CycSrch) Finds All the Instances Ikk of Simple Cycles of Length k in a Given Tanner Graph. Ikk= CycSrch(sk)

1: Initializations: Ikk ← ∅.

2: for each variable node vl in the Tanner graph do

3: for each check node ci in the neighborhood of vl do

4:

Find all the paths PAi,l of length k − 1 in the Tanner

graph, starting from ci that do not contain vl .

5: end for

6: for any pair of check nodes ci and c j in the neighbor-

hood of vl , where i = j do

7:

for any path pa ∈ PAi,l , and any path pa ∈ PA j,l

do

8:

if the two paths end with the same node and that

node is their only common node do

9:

Let v and v denote the last variable nodes of

pa and pa , respectively.

10:

if variable nodes in pa \ v and pa \ v do not

have any common check node do

11:

S = vl ∪{set of variable nodes in pa ∪ pa }.

12:

Ikk = Ikk ∪ {S}.

13:

end if

14:

end if

15:

end for

16: end for

17: end for 18: Output: Ikk .

Routine 6 (DotSrch) Expansion of a Set of Instances Ika of LETS Structures of Size a Using dot Expansions to Find a

Set of Instances of LETS Structures of Size a + 1, Excluding

the Already Found Structures I, and Storing the Rest in I .

I = DotSrch (Ika, I)

1: Initializations: Item ← ∅. 2: for each instance of LETS structure S in Ika do 3: Consider V to be the set of variable nodes in V \S, which

have at least two connections with the check nodes in

o(S) and have no connection with the check nodes in e (S ). 4: for each variable node v ∈ V do

5:

Item = Item ∪ {S ∪ v}.

6: end for

7: end for

8: I ← Item \ I. 9: Output: I .

simple cycle structures, and 2) complexity of expanding the instances of prime structures to find all the instances of every (a, b) LETS structure within the interest range of a and b values. In this subsection, we assume that the LDPC codes are regular.
1) Complexity of Finding the Instances of Prime Structures: The proposed dpl-based search algorithm uses Routine 5 to find the instances of simple cycles. Based on this approach, the order of complexity for finding the instances of a simple cycle of size k is O(n(dvdc)k). This complexity increases linearly,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

Routine 7 (PathSrch) Expanding the LETS Instances of Size a in Ika Using pam to Find Instances of LETS Structures of Size a + m, Excluding the Already Found

Instances I, and Storing the Rest in I . Only Instances

in Ika Whose Structures in Accordance to the Expansion Table EX Need to Be Expanded by pam Are Expanded. I = PathSrch(Ika, I, EX , m)

1: Initializations: Item ← ∅.

2: for each LETS instance S in Ika that based on EX requires

pam do

3: for each unsatisfied check node ck ∈ o(S) do

4:

Find all the paths PAk of length m in the Tanner

graph, starting from ck. 5: end for

6: for any pair of unsatisfied check nodes ck and c j in

o(S), where k = j do

7:

for any path pa ∈ PAk and any path pa ∈ PA j do

8:

if pa and pa end with the same node and this

node is their only common node, and if variable

and check nodes of pa and pa are not in G(S)

do

9:

Item ← Item ∪ {S ∪ {set of variable nodes in

pa ∪ pa }}.

10:

end if

11:

end for

12: end for

13: end for

14: I ← Item \ I. 15: Output: I .

Routine 8 (LolliSrch) Expanding the LETS Instances of Size a in Ika Using lomc to Find Instances of LETS Structures of Size a + m, Excluding the Already Found Instances I, and Storing the Rest in I . Only Instances in Ika Whose Structures in Accordance to the Expansion Table EX Need

to be Expanded by lomc Are Expanded. The Set of Instances of Simple Cycles of Length c, Icc, Is Also an Input. I = LolliSrch (Ika, Icc, I, EX , m)

1: Initializations: Item ← ∅, d = m + 1 − c. 2: for each LETS instance S in Ika that based on EX requires
lomc do
3: Find all the paths PA of length 2(d − 1) in the Tanner

graph, starting from check nodes c in o(S) that have no common nodes with G(S) other than c .

4: for each structure S ∈ Icc, for which G(S ) has no

common node with G(S), let o(S ) denote the set

of unsatisfied check nodes of G(S ) and do

5:

for each path, pa ∈ PA do

6:

if pa ends with a check node c in o(S ) and

if c is the only common node between pa and

o(S ) do

7:

Item ← Item ∪ {S ∪ {set of variable nodes in

pa ∪ G(S }}.

8:

end if

9:

end for

10: end for

11: end for

12: I ← Item \ I. 13: Output: I .

polynomially and exponentially with the block length, n, the check and variable degrees, dc, dv, and the size of the cycle, respectively. The complexity of finding the instances of a simple cycle thus becomes quickly impractical as the cycle length increases.
Let Nk denote the multiplicity of the instances of the simple cycle sk of length k in the Tanner graph. Clearly, the complexity of finding the instances of a LETS structure that is an immediate child of sk is proportional to Nk . Moreover, all the instances of the prime cycles need to be stored for further processing throughout the search algorithm. The memory required to store all the instances of sk is also proportional to Nk . To the best of our knowledge, there is no theoretical result on how Nk scales with n, k, or the degree distribution of the Tanner graph. Empirical results in [19], however, suggest that Nk is rather independent of n and increases rather rapidly as the variable and check degrees, or k are increased. We note that, in comparison with the dot-based (LSS-based) search algorithm, the proposed dpl-based search algorithm requires smaller size prime cycles to be enumerated. This translates to less computational complexity and memory requirements as will be discussed in details in Section V.
2) Complexity of Expansions: Based on the characterization tables, a few expansion techniques (those in EX (a,b)) are used to expand the instances of LETS structures within each (a, b) class. The complexity of this part of the algorithm depends

on the expansion techniques, and the multiplicity of LETSs in each (a, b) class, Na,b. To the best of our knowledge, there is no theoretical result on how Na,b changes with a and b, or with different code parameters.
In the following, we discuss the complexity of the three
expansion techniques. The expansion of an instance of a LETS structure in an (a, b) class using dot expansion is explained
in Routine 6. For each instance, bdc variable nodes should be checked to find the set V in Routine 6. The complexity for the expansion of all the instances of LETSs in an (a, b) class using dot is thus O(Na,bb2dc2). The expansion of an instance of a LETS structure in an (a, b) class using the path expansion
technique is explained in Routine 7. Based on the approach of
Routine 7, it is easy to see that the complexity of expanding all the instance of LETS structures in an (a, b) class using pam is O(Na,bb2(dvdc)m ). Similarly, the complexity of expanding all the instance of LETS structures in an (a, b) class using lomc , based on Routine 8, is O(Na,b Ncbc(dvdc)d ), where Nc is the multiplicity of simple cycles of size c in the Tanner graph, and d = m + 1 − c.
Finally, we note that the memory required to store all the LETS instances of an (a, b) class is O(a Na,b). The main advantage of using the dpl-based search algorithm, compared
to dot-based search, is to avoid dealing with classes with large
a and b values. Searching for LETS instances in these classes
and expanding them imposes huge computational complexity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs

6731

TABLE IX LIST OF LDPC CODES USED IN THIS PAPER

TABLE X MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODE C1
WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 3

and memory requirements on the search algorithm. Instead, in the dpl-based search algorithm, expansions are used in classes with relatively small Na,b values. Our experimental results in Section V show that the dpl-based search algorithm is significantly faster and requires much less memory compared to the dot (LSS)-based search algorithm, for different codes with a wide range of variable degrees, rates, block lengths and girths.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We have applied the dot-based and dpl-based search algorithms to a large number of variable-regular random and structured LDPC codes with a wide range of variable degrees, rates and block lengths. Here, we only report the results for eleven codes. These codes are listed in Table IX. More results are available in [14]. For all the runtimes reported in this paper, a desktop computer with 2.4-GHz CPU and 8-GB memory is used. Except codes C5 and C8, which are structured codes, the other LDPC codes are all randomly constructed. For structured codes, their structure is not used to simplify the search, and all the runtimes are based on exhaustive search of the code’s Tanner graph without taking into account the automorphisms that exist for structured codes.
Tables X-XVII list the multiplicity of instances of LETSs in different classes for these codes, found by the dpl-based search algorithm, starting from the instances of simple cycles. Each row of a table corresponds to a LETS class, and for each class, the total number of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs are listed. We note that for the codes with dv = 3, the multiplicities of LETSs and EASs are the same. We have also listed the break down of the LETS multiplicity of each class based on the prime structure involved in the LETS structure. For example, in Table X, for Code C1, and for the (7, 1) class, we notice that there are a total of 37 instances of LETS in this class, from which 34 are children of s3, and the remaining 3 are children of s4. The symbol “-” as an entry of an (a, b) class for a specific sk means that, based on the characterization table, sk is not a prime sub-structure of any LETS structure in the (a, b) class. In the last two rows of each table, the runtime of the dpl-based and the dot-based search algorithms is reported for comparison. The symbol “-” for the runtime of the dot-based search algorithm means that the search takes more than one day, or needs more than 8-GB memory to be completed. For fair comparison, both algorithms are run to find all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures within the range of interest for a and b values, exhaustively.
Table X lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 3, for code C1 with dv = 3 and g = 6. Code C1

is a high-rate code (R = 0.87) with large block length (n = 16383). Since the variable degree is 3, all the instances of LETSs found by the search algorithm are EASs. Therefore, FEASs were found by examining the LETSs, and testing them for the definition of a fully elementary absorbing set. It takes the proposed search algorithm only about 27 minutes to find LETSs reported in Table X for C1. To obtain these results, the dpl-based search algorithm only needs to enumerate the instances of s3 and s4 in the Tanner graph of the code. The dotbased search algorithm, on the other hand, needs to enumerate the instances of s3, s4, s5, s6, c6, n6, s7, c7, and n7, to find all the instances of LETSs in the range a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 3, in a guaranteed fashion. It took the dot-based search algorithm 43 minutes to only find the 16, 710, 009 instances of s5 for C1.
The examination of Table X shows that for two classes with the same size, the class with a larger b value has more instances of LETSs. For example, the instances of LETS structures in the (7, 1) and (7, 3) classes are 37 and 250,466, respectively. Following a similar trend, this code probably has millions of instances of LETSs in the (7, 5) class, and it would take the search algorithm a long time to find them. These trapping sets, however, would not be dominant in the presence of those in the (7, 1) and (7, 3) classes. This highlights the importance of having a flexible and efficient search algorithm that can be easily tailored to different values of amax and bmax .
Multiplicities of instances of LETSs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, for Codes C2 and C3 are listed in Table XI. Both codes are (3, 6)-regular with g = 6, and with short block lengths: 816 and 1008, respectively. It takes the proposed search algorithm 16 and 14 minutes to find all the instances of LETSs in the range of a ≤ 12, b ≤ 5, for Codes C2 and C3, respectively. This is versus about 20 seconds that takes the algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs of these codes in the range of a ≤ 10, b ≤ 3. In Table XI, we have also reported the multiplicity of instances of FASs obtained by the exhaustive search algorithm of [21]. There are only four cases in Table XI, where the multiplicity of FEAS classes obtained here differ from the multiplicity of FAS classes reported in [21]. These cases are boldfaced in the table. We believe that the source of these differences are either typographical error, or some FASs that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6732

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016
TABLE XI MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C2 AND C3 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 12 AND b ≤ 5

TABLE XII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODE C4
WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 12 AND b ≤ 5
are not elementary. In addition, it took the exhaustive search of [21] more than 5 hours to generate the fully absorbing sets of each of the two codes on a desktop computer with an Intel Core2 2.4 GHz CPU with 2GB memory [21]. It is worth mentioning that [39] only reports the multiplicity of FEAS structures in the (3, 3), (4, 2) and (5, 3) classes of C2 and C3. The results of [39] match the results reported in Table XI.
Table XII lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, for Code C4. This code is (3, 6)-regular, with g = 6, and with large block length: 20, 000. For this code, all the instances

of LETSs in the range of interest are enumerated in about 9 minutes. In comparison, for the dot-based algorithm to search the instances of LETS structures of C4 with a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, in an exhaustive fashion, the algorithm requires the enumeration of s10 and s11 structures. This imposes huge computational complexity and memory requirements on the dot-based search algorithm (more than a day of runtime and 8-GB memory). On the other hand, the dpl-search only needs to enumerate simple cycles up to s6. Moreover, in the dpl-based search, for finding the instances of potentially dominant LETSs, most of the expansion techniques with relatively high complexity (large m) are needed to be applied to the instances of LETS in classes with small b, where such classes happen to be usually empty. In particular, in C4, there is no LETS in the (4, 2), (5, 1), (6, 2), (7, 1) and (8, 2) classes.
Multiplicities of instances of LETSs and FEAS in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 4, for Codes C5, C6 and C7 are listed in Table XIII. These codes have dv = 3 and g = 8. The search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in the range of interest is based on the information provided in Table VII.
Code C5 is the Tanner (155, 64) code [32] with dc = 5. The error-prone structures of this code have been widely investigated [7], [17], [18], [21], [38]. It is well-known that the LETS structures in the (8, 2) and (10, 2) classes are the dominant LETS structures of this code. It takes the dpl-based search algorithm 442 seconds to find all the instances of LETS structures reported in Table XIII for this code. However, it took the dot-based algorithm 45 minutes to find almost all the instances of LETS structures of C5 within this range

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs
TABLE XIII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C5 , C6 AND C7 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 12 AND b ≤ 4

6733

TABLE XIV MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF C8
WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 14 AND b ≤ 6

TABLE XV
MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS, EAS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODE C9 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 6

(prime structures of size 10 are not considered), and more than
a day to find the exhaustive list of instances of LETS structures in this table. If we limit the range of search to a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 4, it takes the proposed algorithm only 28 seconds to find all the instances of LETS structures of C5 within this range. However, it took the dot-based algorithm 392 seconds to find all the instances of LETS structures of C5 within the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 4.
Codes C6 and C7 are (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes constructed by the PEG algorithm [15]. The dpl-based search algorithm finds all the instances of LETSs for codes C6 and C7 within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 4, in 561 and 157 seconds, respectively. Again, the exhaustive search of LETSs for both codes within the range a ≤ 12, b ≤ 4, is out of the reach of the dot-based

search algorithm. If we limit the range of search to a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 4, it takes the proposed algorithm only 38 and 17 seconds to find all the instances of LETSs of C6 and C7 within this range, respectively. It, however, takes the dot-based algorithm 1563 and 1466 seconds to find all the instances of LETSs of C6 and C7, respectively, within the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 4.
In Table XIII, we have also reported the multiplicity of instances of FASs obtained by the exhaustive search algorithm of [21]. It can be seen that the results of [21] match those obtained here. One should, however, note that while the range of classes reported in Table XIII is much larger than the range of classes reported in [21], it took the exhaustive search of [21] more than 5 hours, compared to only a few minutes for the proposed algorithm, to generate the fully absorbing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6734

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

TABLE XVI MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS, EAS AND FEAS STRUCTURES
OF CODE C10 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 10 AND b ≤ 10
TABLE XVII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS, EAS AND FEAS STRUCTURES
OF CODE C11 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 9 AND b ≤ 11
sets of each of these codes on a desktop computer with an Intel Core2 2.4 GHz CPU with 2GB memory [21].
Code C8 is the Margulis (2640, 1320) code [25], with g = 8. It is well-known that the most dominant LETS structures of this code are in (12,4) and (14,4) LETS classes. The proposed search algorithm finds all the instances of LETSs in Table XIV for this code in about 42 minutes. It is worth mentioning that [21] only reports the multiplicity of FAS structures in the (4, 4), (5, 5) classes of C8. The results of [21] match the results reported in the first two rows of Table XIV.
Table XV lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 6, for Code C9. This is a high-rate code with dv = 4, g = 6 and block length n = 16, 383. All the instances of LETS structures in the range of interest for C9 are enumerated in

about 133 minutes. If we limit the range of search to a ≤ 6 and b ≤ 4, it takes the proposed algorithm only 3 minutes to find all the instances of LETSs of C9 within this range. For the dotbased search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in the range of a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 6, in a guaranteed fashion, it requires to enumerate s6 structures. This enumeration alone imposes huge computational complexity and memory requirements to the dot-based search algorithm (more than a day of runtime and 8-GB of memory).
Table XVI lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 10, for C10. This is a (4, 8)-regular LDPC code, with g = 6, and with block length n = 8000. The search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in the range of interest is based on the information provided in Table VIII. It can be observed that C10 has no instance of EAS in this range. The dominant LETSs of C10, which are included in those reported in Table XVI, are used in [33] to accurately estimate the error floor under quantized iterative decoders. The accurate estimation reveals that error-prone structures of this code are not absorbing sets. If we limit the range of interest to a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 8, it takes the proposed search algorithm only 4 minutes to find all the LETSs of C10 within this range. It is worth mentioning that to find all the instances of LETSs of C10 within the range a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 8, by the dot-based search algorithm, all the instances of s6, s7 and s8, need to be enumerated. It takes more than 10 hours to only enumerate instances of s7 in the Tanner graph of this code, and enumerating instances of s8 is not even feasible on the desktop computer.
Table XVII lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 11, for C11. This is a (5, 10)-regular LDPC code with g = 6, and block length n = 816. All the instances of LETSs of this code in the range a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 11, are enumerated in about 6 minutes. It can be seen that for this code, as a result of relatively large dv, no LETS with b < a exists in the range of interest. Moreover, there is no FEAS for this code in the range b < a. It is reported in [33] that using dominant LETSs of C11, included in Table XVII, one can obtain a more accurate estimation of the error floor in comparison to using only EASs.
To the best of our knowledge, there are only two exhaustive search algorithms in the literature for finding the error-prone structures of variable-regular LDPC codes which cover a relatively wide range of trapping set classes, rates, block lengths and variable degrees: the algorithm of [21], and that of [13] and [18]. The work in [21] is limited to only fully absorbing sets (FASs). Also, the regular LDPC codes which were studied in [21] are all codes with dv = 3, short block lengths and rates equal to or less than 0.5. The variable-regular LDPC codes studied in [21] are Codes C2, C3, C5, C6, C7 and C8 in this paper. While, it takes the dpl-based search algorithm less than 42 minutes to find all the dominant LETSs and FEASs of each of these codes, the runtime to find FASs of these codes in [21] (in smaller ranges of a and b values than those considered in this work) ranges from 5 to 48 hours using a desktop computer with an Intel core2 2.4-GHz CPU with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: NEW CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LETSs

6735

2-GB memory. Compared to the LSS- or dot-based algorithm of [13] and [18], as we discussed in the tables, the runtime and memory requirements of dpl-based search are up to three orders of magnitude smaller.
To the best of our knowledge, the most versatile algorithm for finding LETSs of LDPC codes is that of [18]. This algorithm, however, is not exhaustive in the sense that it does not provide any guarantee that all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures with a and b values within a given range of interest are found. For example, Codes C5, C6, and C8 have also been studied in [18], and their LETSs (EASs) are presented in [19, Tables I–III] , respectively. The comparison of the multiplicity of LETSs in different classes reported in this paper, and that reported in [18], for each of these codes, reveals that for each code, there are some classes for which the multiplicity reported in [18] is smaller than that of this work. This means that for such classes, the algorithm of [18] has not been able to find all the LETSs in that class. These classes for Codes C5, C6, and C8 are {(9, 3), (11, 3)}, {(8, 4), (10, 4), (11, 3), (12, 2), (12, 4)}, and {(8, 6), (10, 6)}, respectively.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel hierarchical graphbased expansion approach to characterize leafless elementary trapping sets (LETS) of variable-regular low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes. The proposed characterization is based on three basic expansion techniques, dubbed, dot, path and lolli pop, used in the space of normal graphs. Each LETS structure S is characterized as a sequence of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle, and grows in each step by using one of the three expansions, until it reaches S. It was demonstrated that the new characterization, called d pl, is minimal, in that, none of the expansions in the sequence can be divided into smaller expansions and still maintain the property that all the embedded sub-structures are LETSs. Moreover, it was proved that any minimal characterization based on embedded LETS structures must only use one of the three expansions, dot, path and lollipop, at each step. The minimality of the characterization, allowed us to devise search algorithms that are provably efficient in finding all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , for any choice of amax and bmax , in a guaranteed fashion. The efficiency of the search is a consequence of the fact that to enumerate the instances of larger LETS structures, the proposed algorithm searches for instances of smaller LETS structures that are of interest themselves, i.e., their a and b values are in the range of interest. This is unlike the so-called LSS-based search algorithm of [17], where a large number of instances of LETS structures with large b values need to be enumerated, not because they are of direct interest, but because they happen to be parents of other LETS structures of interest. As shown through extensive numerical results, this reduces the search complexity of the dpl-based approach compared to LSS-based approach significantly.
To the best of our knowledge, the proposed dpl-based algorithm is the most efficient exhaustive search algorithm

available for finding LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. It is also the most general, in that, it is applicable to codes with any variable degree, girth, rate and block length.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments that improved the presentation of the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abu-Surra, D. DeClercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), San Diego, CA, USA, Jan./Feb. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[2] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[3] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Design of finite-length irregular protograph codes with low error floors over the binary-input AWGN channel using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 902–907, Apr. 2012.
[4] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.
[5] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error floor avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Los Angeles, CA, USA, Sep. 2005, pp. 2386–2390.
[6] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi. (May 2006). “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes.” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0605051
[7] D. Declercq, B. Vasic, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders—Part II: Towards guaranteed error correction of LDPC codes via iterative decoder diversity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4046–4057, Oct. 2013.
[8] Q. Diao, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Trapping set structure of finite geometry LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Davis, CA, USA, Jul. 2012, pp. 3088–3092.
[9] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Glasgow, Scotland, Jun. 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[10] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[11] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “LDPC decoder strategies for achieving low error floors,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Jan./Feb. 2008, pp. 277–286.
[12] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization and efficient exhaustive search of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 323–326, Mar. 2015.
[13] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Corrections to ‘On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,”’ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 3, p. 1508, Mar. 2015.
[14] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi. (Oct. 2015). “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes.” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/pdf/1510.04954
[15] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[16] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[17] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[18] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[19] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Message-passing algorithms for counting short cycles in a graph,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 485–495, Feb. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6736

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2016

[20] S. Khazraie, R. Asvadi, and A. H. Banihashemi, “A PEG construction of finite-length LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1288–1291, Aug. 2012.
[21] G. B. Kyung and C. C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[22] S. Laendner, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “Characterization of small trapping sets in LDPC codes from Steiner triple systems,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 93–97.
[23] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009.
[24] D. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes, accessed on Sep. 28, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[25] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, Mar. 1982.
[26] B. D. McKay and A. Piperno, “Practical graph isomorphism, II,” J. Symbolic Comput., vol. 60, pp. 94–112, Jan. 2013.
[27] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[28] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasic, “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012.
[29] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[30] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4167–4178, Sep. 2009.
[31] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jul. 2010.
[32] R. M. Tanner, T. D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.
[33] S. Tolouei and A. H. Banihashemi, “Fast and accurate error floor estimation of quantized iterative decoders for variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1283–1286, Aug. 2014.
[34] B. Vasic´, S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2009, pp. 1–7.
[35] C. C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[36] C.-C. Wang, “On the exhaustion and elimination of trapping sets: Algorithms & the suppressing effect,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2271–2275.

[37] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[38] S. Zhang and C. Schlegel, “Controlling the error floor in LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 3566–3575, Sep. 2013.
[39] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient algorithms to find all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
Yoones Hashemi (S’14) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran, in 2010, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2013. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada. His research interests include graph theory, coding theory and wireless communications.
Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes. From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. During 1994-1997, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, for his Ph.D. degree. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he worked as a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University in 1998, where at present, he is a Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communication algorithms, and compressed sensing and sampling.
Dr. Banihashemi served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009. He was the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University from 2005 to 2013. He has been involved in many international conferences as chair, member of technical program committee, and member of organizing committee. These include co-chair for the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom07, TPC co-chair of the Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, member of the organizing committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and co-chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. He has been a two-time recipient of NSERC Discovery Accelerator Supplement (DAS) in 2008 and 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

