676

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 5, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2016

Real Time LP Decoding of LDPC Codes for High Correction Performance Applications
Imen Debbabi, Bertrand Le Gal, Nadia Khouja, Fethi Tlili, and Christophe Jego

Abstract—The alternate direction method of multipliers is a recent linear programming error correcting approach which improves the decoding performance of LDPC codes compared with the best BP decoding techniques. In this letter, an efficient implementation of the ADMM LP decoding algorithm on a multicore architecture is presented. Its throughput performance level is about one order of magnitude higher than related works on the same multicore target. The proposed decoder’s throughput reaches up to 100 Mb/s which makes it viable for real time applications with tough error correction requirements.
Index Terms—LDPC code, LP, ADMM, layered scheduling, software optimization, multicore, SIMD, SIMT, throughput.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [2] are considered among the best error correcting channel codes known today. They are used for forward error correction in many digital communication standards like DVB-S2, DVB-S2X, WiMAX, WiFi and WRAN.
The decoding of LDPC codes has been consistently performed using belief-propagation (BP) based algorithms such as the normalized min-sum (NMS) and the offset min-sum (OMS) algorithms since they exhibit low computational complexities. For high performance demanding applications, the usage of the sum product algorithm (SPA) is still possible, yet it limits the throughput as well as the energy efficiency levels. When the SPA cannot provide the desired decoding performance, it is better to redesign the LDPC code and make change to the standard recommendation.
Linear programming (LP) technique was proposed by Feldman [3] as an alternative to BP decoding. It improves the frame error rate (FER) performance in both waterfall and error floor regions compared with the SPA decoding and its simplified formulations (OMS, NMS, etc.) as highlighted in Figure 1. The error correction performance of the LP decoding outperforms the SPA decoding algorithm [4], [5] and its simplified heuristics (MS, OMS, NMS, etc.) even at a high number of decoding iterations. Notwithstanding satisfactory error correction performance, an algorithmic improvement is still valuable before making any practical software or hardware implementation. In fact, the first LP decoding formulations show a decent

Manuscript received August 24, 2016; accepted October 1, 2016. Date of

publication October 5, 2016; date of current version December 15, 2016. The

associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for

publication was K. Adachi.

The authors are with GRESCOM Laboratory, High School of

Communications, Carthage University, 1070 Amilcar, Tunisia, and also with

IMS Laboratory, 33400 Talence, France (e-mail: imen.debbabi@supcom.tn;

nadia.khouja@supcom.rnu.tn;

bertrand.legal@ims-bordeaux.fr ;

fethi.tlili@supcom.rnu.tn; christophe.jego@ims-bordeaux.fr).

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LWC.2016.2615304

Fig. 1. FER comparisons of ADMM-l2 penalized decoders with SPA decoders on AWGN channel and BPSK mapping at 200 decoding iterations.
level of memory and computational complexities. With the recent optimizations of the LP decoding thanks to the works on the Alternate Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) technique [4], [7], [8], the LP decoding formulation was brought back to the sphere of iterative processing [5], [8], [9]. It is now more viable for practical implementations.
A first software implementation of the ADMM-l2 algorithm targeting Software Defined Radio or Cloud-RAN systems has been done on multicore architecture [1]. The implementation in [1] used the flooding-based formulation of the ADMM-l2 decoding algorithm [5], [9] and the Euclidean projection operation described in [10]. It shows up to 0.5 dB better error correction performance improvement compared with the traditional software decoder based on OMS or NMS decoding algorithms [6], [11]. However, the complexity of the ADMM algorithm limits its decoding throughputs. Hence, the interest of the LP decoding approach for systems requiring a throughput higher than some Mbps is undermined. Two recent research works [12], [13] proposed improvements for the ADMM decoding algorithm, reducing its computation complexity and easing its implementation. In [12], the Euclidean projection operation complexity was reduced while in [13] the computation complexity of the decoding process was scaled down. These two works offer advantageous parallelization levels for multicore decoder implementations.
In this letter, an improved implementation of the ADMM-l2 algorithm is described. The efficient computational mapping provides a throughput efficiency significantly enhanced: performances are 7 to 10 times higher compared with previous works [1] on identical experimentations. It proves that the LP decoding is practical for real time applications where error correction performance matters.

2162-2345 c 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEBBABI et al.: REAL TIME LP DECODING OF LDPC CODES FOR HIGH CORRECTION PERFORMANCE APPLICATIONS

677

The remainder of this letter is organized as follows: Section II summarizes the ADMM-l2 algorithm principles for LDPC decoding when a layered scheduling is applied. Section III presents the parallelisation approaches employed to reach software improvements for multicore targets. Section IV provides the results in terms of throughput and latency.

II. ADMM-l2 DECODING ALGORITHM
An LDPC code C of block length N is described by a par-
ity check matrix H. It is composed of M check equations with
(M ≤ N). The code rate of C is defined by r = (N−M)/N. The
matrix H can also be represented by its Tanner graph where the variable nodes (VN) are indexed by = {1, . . . , N} and
the check nodes (CN) are indexed by J = {1, . . . , M}. Each
one in H at the position (i, j) corresponds to an edge in the
Tanner graph connecting VNi to CNj. Let dvi and dcj be the VNi and CNj respective degrees which can be regular or irregular depending on H. To facilitate the algorithmic formulation of the decoding process, let Nv(i) be the index of the set of neighbors of variable node vi and Nc( j) be the index of the set of neighbors of check node cj.
The check polytope Pdcj is the convex hull of all binary vectors of length dcj with an even number of ones. Suppose
that a codeword x ∈ C is transmitted over a noisy chan-
nel and that the received vector of an LDPC codeword
is r. Barman et al. [10] demonstrated that the ML decoding
problem in [3] can be reformulated as follows:

minimize γ T x

subject to Tjx = zj; zj ∈ Pdcj ∀j ∈ J ,

(1)

where γ is the vector of log-likelihood channel information

whose

ith

entry

is

defined

as:

γi

=

log

Pr(ri|xi Pr(ri|xi

=0) =1)

.

The

descrip-

tion of the LP problem with scaled dual variable and its

resolution steps are detailed in [10]. An over-relaxation param-

eter ρ is added to the ADMM algorithm in order to improve its

convergence [4]. Besides, it is observed that the ADMM-based

LP decoder has worse error performance than the BP decoder

at low signal to noise ratio (SNR) values [9]. To address

this problem, Liu et al. [8] proposed a penalized ADMM-l2
decoder which adds a penalty term to the objective function of the LP formulation so that it becomes γ T x − α x − 0.5 22. The coefficient α is a penalty parameter that can be optimized

in advance.

The first ADMM-l2 algorithmic formulation presented in [7] and [8] is based on a flooding scheduling for the com-

putation and the Euclidean projection algorithm from [10] for

the CN computations. To reduce the computational complex-

ity of the decoding algorithm, a layered scheduling has been

proposed in [1]. It reduces the computation complexity of the

decoding process by approximately two while reducing mem-

ory complexity by 30% without impacting the error correction

performance. The ADMM-l2 based on the layered formulation is summarized in Algorithm 1. It is similar to the usual

BP-based algorithm in CN and VN computation scheduling.

The algorithm is described in details in [1].

The ADMM-l2 formulation is a message passing one, yet differences remain when compared with SPA like decoding

algorithms. First, the computation complexity involved in CN

kernel is higher than MS and SPA decoding algorithms [14].

Algorithm 1 Horizontal Layered based ADMM l2 Algorithm.

1: Kernel 1: Initialization

2: ∀j ∈ J , i ∈ Nc(j) : zj(→0) i = 0.5, λj(→0) i = 0, L(j→0) i = 0.5

3: ∀i ∈ , j ∈ Nv(i) : ti =

(L(j→0) i) −

γi μ

−

α μ

j∈Nv (i)

4: for all k = 1 → (iter_max) when stop criterion = false do

5: Kernel 2: For each check node in the code

6: for all j ∈ J do

7:

∀i ∈ Nc(j):L(i→k) j =

[0,1] (

1 dvi −2

α μ

ti)

8: 9:

for

all i zj(→k) i

∈ =

NcP(jd)cjd[oρLi(→k) j

+

(1

−

ρ)z(j→k−i1)

+

λ(j→k−i1)]

10:

λj(→k) i = (λ(j→k−i1) + ρLi(→k) j + (1 − ρ)zj(→k−i1) − z(j→k) i

11:

L(j→k) i = z(j→k) i − λj(→k) i

12:

end for

13:

∀i ∈ Nc(j):ti = ti − Lj(→k−i1) + L(j→k) i

14: end for

15: end for

16: Kernel 3: Hard decisions from soft-values

17: ∀i ∈ : cˆi =

Li→j > 0.5

j∈Nv (i)

It is mainly due to the Euclidean projection task which needs a large set of arithmetical and sorting computations [1]. Besides, the amount of messages exchanged between CN and VN is also different: (a) each VN broadcasts a single message to its connected CN and (b) each CN sends two messages to each neighbor VN. Consequently, the memory footprint is slightly higher and the memory access patterns are different. These differences in the decoding process construct the reasons why the design of ADMM dedicated decoders is necessary.
III. MULTICORE DECODER IMPLEMENTATION
The x86 target was selected for efficient software implementations of other decoding algorithms as reported for different code families in [6], [15], and [16].1 Indeed, its SIMD feature allows the processing of identical computations on different data sets. It affords an efficient computation of a large data set with the same processing pattern and no conditional statements. On the other hand, the MIMD feature enables different computations or programs to be executed on different data sets making parallel execution of independent processes possible. However, to use them effectively is an ongoing challenge that depends on the chosen algorithm and its parallelism levels.
A. Fine-Grained Parallelism Optimizations
A recent work in [1] has proposed an ADMM-l2 decoder implementation based on a parallel version of the original algorithmic formulation of the decoding process [4], [7]. It is premised on the flooding scheduling of the ADMM-l2 algorithm and the Euclidean projection algorithm proposed in [10]. The formulations of these two algorithms limit drastically the SIMD parallelization approaches due to the data and control dependencies located mainly in the Euclidean projection algorithm. Indeed, the projection approach involves two sorting functions which give it a computational complexity
1We evaluated an implementation of the flooding and the layered based formulations of the ADMM algorithm onto a NVIDIA GPU 660 target. The throughput performance results were disappointing. This is due to the Euclidean projection which requires (i) sequential data processing that discards thread parallelization usage and (ii) very large set of register usage per thread. Consequently, the GPU implementation study was ignored and low throughput performance results unpublished.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

678

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 5, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2016

of O(dc log dc) [12]. For instance, the special data sorting
required by the Euclidean projection was sequentially performed. Besides, the flooding scheduling of the CN and VN kernels limited SIMD parallelization to the node degrees. In most cases, CN and VN degrees are lower than the available SIMD width. Hence, the decoder’s execution time is reduced, but the overall parallel units are not fully used.
Later, two contributions were proposed to reduce the ADMM-l2 computation complexity and make it more suitable for both hardware and software implementations. In [13], a layered scheduling of the VN/CN computations which halves the decoding complexity was proposed. At once, it reduces the amount of computations and the memory footprint of the decoding process. In [12] a simplified version of the Euclidean projection algorithm was provided. It meets the need for more regular computation sequences without control dependencies required for an efficient SIMD parallelization.
In the layered version of the ADMM-l2 decoding algorithm the computation complexity is fully located in the CN kernel (Algorithm 1, lines 6 : 15) since the VN kernel is removed. The straightforward approach to take advantage of SIMD feature is to process all the CN data at once. However, for the CN processing and the Euclidean projection task, the efficiency of the parallelization is limited by the node degree that is often different from SIMD width. A second solution, proposed in [6], consists in processing different codewords in parallel. It improves the computation regularity, and thus the throughput, at the cost of an increased processing latency.
To provide a trade-off solution that fulfils the requirements of throughput performance and low latency, a third approach is considered. It consists in handling the computation parallelism accross the CN elements during a single codeword processing. The SIMD feature is used to process the data of different CN elements in parallel making SIMD completely busy during the overall processing. For an x86 target where SIMD unit can process up to 8 floating point operations per cycle in AVX2 configuration, the CN elements are grouped by 8. Nonetheless, two constraints have to be respected. First, the CN degree of all the check nodes in a decoding step have to be equal. Second, the variable nodes involved in the computations must be different so that the check nodes processed together do not share any neighbors. These two constraints may involve a reordering of the rows of the parity check matrix which does not impact the error decoding performances.
According to the SIMD instruction set available on the x86 target, the computations involved in CN processing can be efficiently parallelized except the VN memory access (Algorithm 1, line 7). Indeed, VN elements used in the CN computations are not memory aligned due to the H matrix structure. Read memory accesses can be implemented thanks to the “gather” instructions which are quite slow. Yet, the write memory accesses need a sequential emulation where no “scatter” instruction is available in the AVX2 instruction set.
In addition, the Euclidean projection algorithm proposed in [12] benefits from a fully parallel SIMD implementation thanks to the processing of Q projections at the same time. The sort operation required during the processing is implemented thanks to a network swap approach. It was demonstrated to be more efficient than rank order sort in the current context, contrary to the implementation performed in [1].

Finally, various low level optimizations were applied to the initial algorithm description: constants were precomputed, division operations were replaced by multiplications when possible. Finally, loops were unrolled to remove the conditional structures and improve the processor’s register usage rate.
B. Coarse-Grained Parallelism Optimizations
Modern multicore architectures include multiple physical and logical processing cores. The most efficient approach to reap opportunities from the available P processor cores is to execute a decoder on each processor core as demonstrated in [6]. Indeed, it seems impossible to efficiently take advantage of multiple cores inside a single decoder due to two main reasons. First, the processing of different check nodes by different cores involves independent variable node data. Second, the execution time improvement has to be higher than the time necessary for the synchronization task.
On the other hand, we opted for the usage of multiple decoders running in parallel, each on a separate core, through the OpenMP API. OpenMP directives are included in the decoder descriptions for a multicore execution. During the compilation, the thread management function call is inserted to create and synchronize the P decoding processes. Thereby, scalable decoders can be created and adapted to the execution target. In theory, an acceleration factor equal to P is possible, yet the practical gains are often lower. Indeed, some architectural elements such as memory bandwidth and L3 memory caches are shared across the different processor cores which leads to execution time penalties. To reduce the memory bandwidth occupancy and limit L3 memory cache misses, 16-bit floating point format available for data storage on novel x86 architecture was investigated. It halves the memory footprint of the decoder. Hence the memory bandwidth requirement is halved without worsening the error correction performance.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The decoder performance is evaluated for two multicore architectures. The first target is an Intel i7-4960HQ CPU in order to compare with results given in [1]. The second target is an Intel Xeon E5-2670 CPU composed of 24 physical cores and 24 logical cores running at 2.3 GHz. The “chrono” timers, part of the C++11 API, are used to measure the decoding throughput and latency. The LDPC codes chosen for the following experimentations are three quasi-cyclic and irregular codes from the WiMAX standard 576 × 288 (C1), 1152 × 288 (C2), 2304 × 1152 (C3) and two regular but unstructured academic codes 2640 × 1320 (C4) and 4000 × 2000 (C5).
Table I shows the decoding throughput and latency reached by the proposed ADMM-l2 decoder for the considered LDPC codes. The current decoder converges twice faster than the one in [1]. Consequently, error correction performance reached at 100 horizontal layered iterations are similar to the one obtained for 200 flooding iterations. Latency and throughput are measured at FER = 10−3. When compared with the decoder in [1], the results highlight 7 to 10 times throughput improvement on the same Intel Core-i7 target which demonstrates the efficiency of the new implementation. Meanwhile, the proposed decoder is about 18 times slower than the best LDPC decoder proposed in literature in terms of throughput [6] but it provides error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DEBBABI et al.: REAL TIME LP DECODING OF LDPC CODES FOR HIGH CORRECTION PERFORMANCE APPLICATIONS

679

TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH RELATED WORKS [1] AND [6]

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, an improved LP decoder based on horizontal layered scheduling formulation of the ADMM-l2 algorithm is presented. It provides up to 0.5 dB better error correction than the SPA decoding for different LDPC codes. The software implementations of the decoder were optimized by taking advantage of SIMD and SIMT processing features of multicore targets. It runs 7 to 10 times faster than related works. Performance evaluation on a 24-core Xeon processor target for a 576 × 288 LDPC code shows that the optimized decoder can reach throughputs up to 500 Mbps. This achievement strengthen the conclusion that the linear programming can compete with traditional decoding solution for software based digital communications system where error correction performance matters.

Fig. 2. Decoding throughput achieved on 24-core processor target when 200 iterations are executed with a stopping criterion.
rate performance unreachable by BP related work decoders [6] as shown in Figure 1.
To demonstrate the efficiency of the decoder for applications requiring high error correction performance and high throughputs, an evaluation of the decoder implementation was performed on a mid-range Xeon target. It operates on a slower frequency than the first considered target but contains 6 times more processor cores. The decoding throughputs reached depending on the SNR values are provided in Figure 2. All the cores are switched on to handle the allocation of 48 decoders. It can be shown that for the considered codes with different lengths, code rates, regularities and degree distributions, the throughput increases linearly with the SNR value. This is achieved since the average number of iterations required to decode frames decreases substantially when the SNR increases. For the considered codes with rate 0.5, the throughput reaches 200 Mbps at SNR = 2 dB and is around 400 Mbps at SNR = 3 dB.
For applications with more stringent requirements which need high throughputs and low latencies at low SNR values in addition to high error correction performance at higher SNR values, different solutions may be adopted. First, the maximum number of decoding iterations may be reduced according to the channel estimation. Second, a fast fixed-point LDPC decoder based on OMS or NMS decoding algorithms [6], [11] may be added prior to an ADMM-l2 decoder. Henceforth, the ADMM-l2 decoder can be switched on only when the first one fails. These two solutions would provide the means for reaching a higher throughput at lower SNR values at the cost of a penalty in terms of FER performance.

REFERENCES
[1] I. Debbabi, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, B. Le Gal, and C. Jego, “Multicore implementation of LDPC decoders based on ADMM algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Shanghai, China, Mar. 2016, pp. 971–975.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachussets Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2003.
[4] X. Zhang, “LDPC Codes—Structural analysis and decoding techniques,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Commun. Theory Syst., Univ. California, San Diego, CA, USA, 2012.
[5] X. Jiao, H. Wei, J. Mu, and C. Chen, “Improved ADMM penalized decoder for irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 913–916, Jun. 2015.
[6] B. Le Gal and C. Jego, “High-throughput multi-core LDPC decoders based on x86 processor,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1373–1386, May 2016.
[7] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” in Proc. 49th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2011, pp. 253–260.
[8] X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Suppressing pseudocodewords by penalizing the objective of LP decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Lausanne, Switzerland, Sep. 2012, pp. 367–371.
[9] H. Wei, X. Jiao, and J. Mu, “Reduced-complexity linear programming decoding based on ADMM for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 909–912, Jun. 2015.
[10] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7870–7886, Dec. 2013.
[11] G. Wang, M. Wu, B. Yin, and J. R. Cavallaro, “High throughput low latency LDPC decoding on GPU for SDR systems,” in Proc. Glob. Conf. Signal Inf. Process. (GlobalSIP), Austin, TX, USA, 2013, pp. 1258–1261.
[12] M. Wasson and S. C. Draper, “Hardware based projection onto the parity polytope and probability simplex,” in Proc. 49th Asilomar Conf. Signals Syst. Comput., Pacific Grove, CA, USA, Nov. 2015, pp. 1015–1020.
[13] I. Debbabi, B. Le Gal, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, and C. Jego, “Fast converging ADMM-penalized algorithm for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 648–651, Apr. 2016.
[14] I. Debbabi, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, B. Le Gal, and C. Jego, “Evaluation of the hardware complexity of the ADMM approach for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Doha, Qatar, Apr. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[15] P. Giard, G. Sarkis, C. Leroux, C. Thibeault, and W. J. Gross, “Low-latency software polar decoders,” J. Signal Process. Syst., pp. 1–15, Jul. 2016.
[16] A. Cassagne et al., “Beyond Gbps turbo decoder on multi-core CPUs,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Brest, France, Sep. 2016, pp. 136–140.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:43:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

