CRC-Aided Belief Propagation List Decoding of Polar Codes

Marvin Geiselhart, Ahmed Elkelesh, Moustafa Ebada, Sebastian Cammerer and Stephan ten Brink Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffenwaldring 47, University of Stuttgart, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany {geiselhart,elkelesh,ebada,cammerer,tenbrink}@inue.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract—Although iterative decoding of polar codes has recently made huge progress based on the idea of permuted factor graphs, it still suffers from a non-negligible performance degradation when compared to state-of-the-art CRC-aided successive cancellation list (CA-SCL) decoding. In this work, we show that iterative decoding of polar codes based on the belief propagation list (BPL) algorithm can approach the error-rate performance of CA-SCL decoding and, thus, can be efficiently used for decoding the standardized 5G polar codes. Rather than only utilizing the cyclic redundancy check (CRC) as a stopping condition (i.e., for error-detection), we also aim to benefit from the error-correction capabilities of the outer CRC code. For this, we develop two distinct soft-decision CRC decoding algorithms: a Bahl-CockeJelinek-Raviv (BCJR)-based approach and a sum product algorithm (SPA)-based approach. Further, an optimized selection of permuted factor graphs is analyzed and shown to reduce the decoding complexity significantly. Finally, we benchmark the proposed CRC-aided belief propagation list (CA-BPL) decoding to state-of-the-art 5G polar codes under CA-SCL decoding and, thereby, showcase an error-rate performance not just close to the CA-SCL but also close to the maximum likelihood (ML) bound as estimated by ordered statistic decoding (OSD).
I. INTRODUCTION
Polar codes [1] are the first type of channel codes which are theoretically proven to achieve channel capacity. However, this is only true when the code length tends to infinity under a low complexity successive cancellation (SC) decoder. Due to the recent advances in polar code design and polar decoding, short length cyclic redundancy check (CRC)-aided polar codes are selected as the channel code for the uplink and downlink control channel of the upcoming 5G standard [2]. The concatenation of an outer CRC code is important to enchance the short-length error-correcting capabilities of the polar code. Thus, efficiently decoding short CRC-aided polar codes in terms of error-rate performance and decoding complexity/latency is an active topic of research, in particular for ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC).
The state-of-the-art successive cancellation list (SCL) decoder of polar codes [3] benefits significantly from the possibility of a seamless integration of the CRC into the decoding process. For this, the CRC is used to pick the correct candidate from the list of possible codewords. However, the SCL algorithm suffers from unfavorable decoding latency due to its sequential decoding nature and is also not well suited for iterative detection and decoding due to the hardoutput nature of the decoder (and its latency). Another polar decoding approach is to use an iterative belief propagation
This work has been supported by DFG, Germany, under grant BR 3205/5-1.

(BP) decoder [4] which is inherently parallel and, thus, allows high throughput implementations [5] [6]. Also, it is a softin/soft-out (SISO) decoder and, thus, is very suitable for iterative detection and decoding. However, its main drawback is a degraded error-rate performance when compared to the CRC-aided successive cancellation list (CA-SCL) decoder.
Several algorithms have been proposed over the past few years to enhance the error-rate performance of iterative polar decoding algorithms. Among these was an outer graph-based code (e.g., low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [7] or polar code [8]) which was (partially) augmented to the inner polar code factor graph to enhance the reliability of the semipolarized bit-channels. In [9], [10], virtual noise of low power is added to the decoder input (i.e., channel output) to avoid falling into trapping/stopping sets which also enhances the error-rate of the BP decoder. Furthermore, polar codes can be decoded over different permuted factor graphs which can greatly enhance the error-rate performance. This was studied for different channels (e.g., Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) [11] and additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) [12]) and different decoders (e.g., BP [13] and SCL [14]). It is worth mentioning that similar ideas were also investigated for Reed– Muller (RM) codes [14], [15].
Iterative decoding of CRC-aided polar codes was studied in few recent works (e.g., with only CRC detection in [12] and with the aid of the CRC error-correcting capabilities in [16]). However, to the best of our knowledge, there exists no iterative decoding algorithm of polar codes which achieves (or approaches) the performance of the CRC-aided polar codes under SCL decoding (with a sufficiently large list size).
Belief propagation list (BPL) decoding of polar codes [13] is an iterative BP-based decoding in which a list of different BP decoders run in parallel, each with a different polar code factor graph (FG). It was shown that it achieves the same error-rate performance as SCL decoding of plain polar codes (i.e., no outer CRC code). In this work, we focus on solving some open problems in the BPL decoder such as: 1.) CRC incompatibility and 2.) reducing complexity by optimizing the factor graph selection. We combine the idea of iterative decoding of polar codes over permuted factor graphs with SISO decoding of the CRC, utilizing the error-correction capabilities of the CRC (rather than only detection of errors). Our results, surprisingly, show that it is possible to approach the CRC-aided SCL errorrate performance with a BP-based decoding framework. As such, the proposed algorithm suggests a competitive decoding to CA-SCL for CRC-aided polar codes.

978-1-7281-6432-8/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

395

ISIT 2020

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. POLAR CODES AND ITERATIVE DECODING

Polar codes are based on the channel polarization concept,

where N synthesized channels show a polarization behavior

(good and bad channels). Practically, polar codes can be seen

as a wide range of codes, each characterized by a set of good

bit-channels or its complementary set of bad channels (denoted

as the information set A and the frozen set Ac, respectively). The polarization matrix of polar codes of block size N = 2n

is given by GN = F⊗n, where F =

10 11

and F⊗n denotes

the n-th Kronecker power of F. The k ×N polar code generator

matrix G is a sub-matrix of GN with row indices corresponding to A.1 Throughout this work, we use the notation P(N, k) to

denote a polar code of length N and code dimension k.

A. Belief Propagation Decoding
Unlike the SC-based polar decoders, an iterative BP decoding scheme [4] is based on the idea of message passing over the encoding FG, shown in Fig. 3 (rightmost box). Finally, a hard decision is applied on the resultant log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values on the left or the right of the FG in order to recover the information bits (in the vector uˆ ) or the transmitted codeword xˆ, respectively.
The conventional BP decoder, BP (Nit,max), terminates when a maximum number of iterations Nit,max is reached. Early stopping conditions can speed up the decoding process [17]:
• G-based: decoding terminates when xˆ = uˆ · GN. • CRC-based: decoding terminates when the checks of the
concatenated CRC code are satisfied. It is important to keep in mind that in this case, the CRC code only acts as a stopping condition (i.e., error-detection).

B. Belief Propagation List (BPL) Decoding
It has been observed that the stages of the encoding graph of a polar code of length 2n can be permuted leading to n! different graphs with the same encoding behavior [11]. This enables the possibility of BP decoding on different realizations of the FG. Seeing that different permutations contain different loops, one FG permutation may be better than another permutation for a specific input (i.e., transmitted codeword plus noise realization). BPL exploits this idea by using a set S of L parallel independent BP decoders each with a different permutation. Iterative decoding is conducted on the L decoders in parallel with Nit,max iterations per decoder and only those codewords satisfying the G-matrix-based stopping condition are included in the set of valid polar codewords. Finally, that valid codeword from the L parallel BP decoders which is closest, in terms of Euclidean distance, to the channel output y is picked to be the BPL decoder output. Throughout this work, we use the notation BPL (L, Nit,max) to denote this decoder. For more details, we refer the interested reader to [13].
Interestingly, it was shown in [18] that a stage-wise permutation on the FG corresponds to certain bit-wise permutations

1Based on this insight, RM codes can be easily related to polar codes [11].

10−1

BLER

10−2

10−3

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Eb/N0 [dB]

P(128, 64) P(512, 256) P(1024, 512)

Decoder (L, Nit,max)

BP (200)

BPL scheduling (32, 200)

BPL FG permutation (32, 200)

Fig. 1: BLER comparison between BPL with permuted scheduling and
permuted factor graphs (FGs); 5G polar codes of rate 0.5 (i.e., P(N, N/2)codes); no CRC is used.
of the vectors u and x. This enables permuted-decoding on the same FG while only doing these bit-mappings. It also enabled the same permuted-decoder concept with other decoders without having to change the decoder structure itself which is highly useful for hardware implementations (see [14]).
The selection of permutation sets S was originally done in a random manner [12]. Later, it was shown that a smart permutations selection would introduce additional performance gains [18]–[21]. However, finding an optimal FG selection strategy remains an open problem.

C. Factor Graph Permutations vs. Decoding Schedule Permutations
Two implementation strategies have been found to realize the BPL decoding of polar codes:
1) Graph permutations, as originally introduced in [13] where the FG stages are permuted according to a specific permutation. Afterwards, conventional BP decoding is conducted on the permuted factor graph, following the conventional decoding schedule (i.e., permuted stages from 1 to n, or n to 1, are updated sequentially).
2) Decoding schedule permutations, where conventional BP decoding is conducted on the conventional factor graph, while permuting the decoding schedule (i.e., permuting the order in which stages are being activated/updated).
Fig. 1 shows for different code lengths that both strategies have a similar error rate performance. We empirically observed that the factor graph permutation-based BPL yields a better performance in the short block length regime, while its scheduling-based counterpart performs better for longer code lengths.

396
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

xi

D

D

State s

Lin,0 Lin,1 Lin,2 Lin,3 Lin,4 00
10
01
11

Fig. 2: Linear feedback shift register (LFSR) and length nCRC = 5 trellis of
the CRC code with g(x) = x2 + x + 1.

III. CRC-AIDED BPL DECODING

None of the previously described BPL decoding schemes utilizes the presence of an outer CRC code during decoding. In this paper, we propose a CRC-aided belief propagation list (CA-BPL) decoding scheme that extends the standard BPL decoding. Its underlying idea is to utilize estimated softinformation from the CRC code to further enhance the BPL decoder (i.e., we treat the CRC as an outer code component). Accordingly, we present two SISO decoding algorithms for the CRC code that enhance the error-correcting capability of the BPL decoder.
CRC codewords are defined as polynomials of degree less than nCRC that are divisible by the generator polynomial g(x) of degree r. To check divisibility, a linear feedback shift register (LFSR) of length r with input xi and feedback according to g(x) can be used. The CRC code can be visualized in a trellis diagram with the state s of the shift register on the vertical axis and the discrete time index i on the horizontal axis. Fig. 2 shows the LFSR and the trellis of a CRC-2 code with polynomial g(x) = x2 + x + 1 as an example. The register is initialized to the all-zero state. Every time index, a state transition (s , s) from state s to s occurs, depending on the input bit value xi. A bit sequence fulfills the CRC, i.e., it is a codeword, if and only if the shift register returns to the all-zero state when the last bit enters the circuit. For all transitions, λtrans(s , s) ∈ {0, 1} denotes the bit value of the transition. Likewise, U0 and U1, depicted as solid black and dashed red lines in the trellis diagram, denote the set of edges (s , s) corresponding to the 0 and 1 transitions, respectively.
We use the Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [22] to enable maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding of the CRC code. Thus, we briefly present the log-domain BCJR algorithm [23].

α˜ i+1(s) = max∗ α˜ i(s ) − Lin,i · λtrans(s , s)

(1)

s

∀s and i = 0, ..., nCRC − 1 starting with α˜ 0(0) = 0.

β˜i(s ) = max∗
s

β˜i+1(s) − Lin,i · λtrans(s , s)

(2)

∀s and i = nCRC − 1, ..., 0 starting with β˜nCRC (0) = 0.

Lout,i = max∗ α˜ i(s ) + β˜i+1(s) − max∗ α˜ i(s ) + β˜i+1(s) .

U0

U1

(3)

The inputs to the BCJR algorithm are the LLRs Lin,i of each
bit of the noisy CRC codeword. The BCJR algorithm estimates a posteriori log-probabilities α˜ and β˜ recursively, based on

the current state along with state transition probabilities in a

forward pass (1) and a backward pass (2) on the trellis. The

L-messages propagation Lf

L-messages propagation Lf

Lch

Lch

Lin

Lout

CRC

Polar FG

Trellis R-messages propagation

CRC FG Polar FG R-messages propagation

Fig. 3: Polar + CRC decoders based on the polar factor graph (FG) augmented
with BCJR trellis (left) and SPA factor graph (right) for the CRC. The code
used is a P(8, 5) polar code concatenated with a CRC code with polynomial g(x) = x2 + x + 1.

estimates are combined in a final step (3) to obtain the extrinsic
L-value Lout,i for each bit. To compute the sum of probabilities in the log-domain, we use the max∗ operator, which can be

expressed as max∗(x j) = log ∑ exj .

j

j

From the equations it is obvious that the complexity of

the BCJR algorithm scales proportional to the number of

states in the underlying state machine. Therefore, the overall complexity is O(nCRC · 2r), making this algorithm infeasible
for long CRC lengths r.

To counteract complexity, we propose a second SISO de-

coder. It is based on the sum product algorithm (SPA) used to

decode LDPC codes. SPA operates on the parity-check matrix

HCRC of the CRC code. For details on the SPA, we refer the interested reader to [23]. HCRC is directly obtained from the systematic generator matrix, which is generated by the CRC

codewords corresponding to the unit vectors. As the SPA is

known to have poor performance on high density parity-check

matrices, the density of HCRC is reduced using row operations. As a heuristic, a greedy algorithm that iteratively combines

two rows and replaces the one with higher Hamming weight, proved to be sufficient for this task.2

For the example CRC code with polynomial g(x) = x2 + x + 1, the resulting parity-check matrix is

HCRC =

10110 01101

.

Fig. 3 shows how both the BCJR and SPA decoders of the CRC code are augmented to the left side of the polar decoder. The CRC decoder only interacts with the non-frozen bit-positions A of the polar code. After each right-to-left message propagation on the polar FG, the CRC decoder is fed with the left-most L-messages of the information bit channels Lin = L0,A. Then, the CRC decoder is updated and its output is fed back into the left-most R-message R0,A = Lout, followed by a left-to-right message update on the polar FG.
In CA-BPL, a total of L permuted factor graphs is used, each with its own instance of the CRC decoder. Throughout this work, we only consider factor graph permutation-based BPL rather than scheduling-based BPL (cf. Fig. 1).

2We empirically observed that the exact form of HCRC has only minor impact on the error-rate performance.

397
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10−2

BLER

10−3

List Gain

10−4 10−5

L = 1, default permutation D Factor Graph (FG) Selection
L = 7, random permutations L = 7, cyclic shifts L = 7, genetic alg. optimized

FG Selection Gain

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/N0 [dB]
Fig. 4: BLER comparison between CRC-aided BPL with different permutation
selection methods; BCJR-based CRC decoders were used and Nit,max = 200. The considered CRC-aided polar code has a code length N = 128, code dimension k = 64 and CRC-6 is used, thus, the overall code rate is 0.5.

IV. RESULTS
We evaluate the performance of the CA-BPL algorithm on a concatenated polar-CRC code with codelength N = 128 and code dimension k = 64. As CRC polynomial, CRC-6 from the 5G standard [2] g(x) = x6 + x5 + 1 is used. Consequently, the polar code has 70 non-frozen bits, to account for the rate loss of the outer CRC code. For the sake of reproducibility, we use the bit-reliability order specified in the 5G standard [2] as the design criterion of the inner polar code (i.e., A).

A. Permutation Selection
One possible approach to reduce the complexity of the proposed decoding scheme would be to smartly select the FG permutations reducing the number of required FGs.
Remember that, in BPL, as long as the received vector is maximum likelihood (ML)-decodable, only one of the L permuted BP decoders has to converge to the correct codeword to successfully decode. In other words, the block error probability of the ML-decodable received sequences P EBPL EML of the BPL decoder is the probability of all the constituent BP decoders being in error. This can be expressed as

P EBPL(S) EML = P

Ei EML

(4)

i∈S

where EML denotes an ML decoder success event, EBPL denotes the event of the BPL decoder block error, and Ei denotes

the event of the BP decoder using FG permutation i not

converging to the correct codeword within Nit,max iterations. Therefore, to use the full potential of BPL, it is necessary

to find a set S of L factor graph permutations that yields the

best joint block error rate (BLER) performance. The intuition

behind this idea is to have more diverse permutations that lead

to more differentiated results (i.e., diversity in the final list of

candidates) than multiple good permutations that lead to the

same results (i.e., having the same candidate multiple times

in the list). Thus, we would like to minimize P EBPL(S) EML over all possible sets S with the constraint |S| = L

minimize
S
subject to

P Ei EML
i∈S
|S| = L.

For a length N = 128 polar code, there exist 7! = 5040

different permutations of the FG. Thus, the search space of

the optimization problem contains

5040 L

possible permuta-

tion sets. As we can only estimate the probabilities using

Monte Carlo simulation and error events are comparably

rare, naive optimization is computationally infeasible. For the

5G construction of the polar code, however, we empirically

observe that, regarding standalone BP decoders, the default

permutation D achieves the lowest BLER. By assuming D is in

the optimum set S we can factor equation (4) into a conditional

BP BLER and a term corresponding to the list gain:





P

Ei EML D=∈S P ED EML · P 

Ei ED, EML .

i∈S

i∈S\{D}

List Gain
This factorization simplifies the optimization dramatically, as P Ei ED, EML P Ei EML , due to the correlation of the permuted FG decoders. Consequently, a comparably small dataset of 2 · 104 samples could be used to find the remaining (sub-) optimal L − 1 other permutations. The collected dataset contains y-vectors at Eb/N0 = 4 dB for which the BP decoder, using the default permutation D, fails to decode. We then
evaluate the convergence of all other 5039 permutations. Finally, we optimize the remaining permutations S = S \ D by minimizing the estimate of P ( i∈S Ei | ED), i.e., maximizing the list gain. The optimization is carried out by a genetic algorithm (GenAlg) [24]. Possible candidate solutions S are thought of as individuals in a population P. Each individual is assigned a fitness value f , corresponding to the value of the
conditional success rate on the dataset, i.e., the list gain of this
candidate

f (S ) = 1 − P Ei ED .
i∈S
The GenAlg is only applied on 15000 samples of the dataset, while the unused 5000 samples serve as a validation set to test the generalization of the solution. In multiple generations, pairs of individuals (parents) are chosen from the population to crossover and creating two new individuals (children). The probability of being selected as a crossover candidate is proportional to its fitness. The crossover is performed as follows: the permutations contained by both parents are directly inherited by the children. The permutations only contained by a single parent are shuffled randomly and inherited by either the first or the second child. Furthermore, mutation is implemented by randomly removing a permutation from an individual and adding a random (not yet contained) permutation instead. The next generation is formed by the fittest individuals (elite), randomly surviving but mutated individuals, children of crossover and new completely randomized candidates. The proportions of how many individuals from

398
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10−1 BPL

10−2

(L =

BP

32)

BLER

pping
R ding 2)

10−3 10−4 10−5

Iterative Decoding CRC-based stopping CRC-aided SPA CRC-aided BCJR
Non-Iterative Decoding CA-SCL (L = 32) ML estimate via OSD-4

BPL (L = 32)

a OSD-4 10−61.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5

Eb/N0 [dB]

Fig. 5: BLER comparison between different CRC-aided BPL decoders and

3

3.5 4 4.5 5 CRC-aided SCL decoder; the considered CRC-aided polar code has a code
length N = 128, code dimension k = 64 and CRC-6 is used, thus, the overall

code rate is 0.5. The iterative decoders use a maximum number of iterations

E /N [dB] of Nit,max = 200.

b

0 each category contribute in the next generations are found

empirically and are summarized in Table I.

Table I: Generation composition in the used genetic algorithm

Category Elite
Mutated Crossover
New

Fraction of next Generation 5% 30 % 50 % 15 %

The genetic algorithm uses a total of Nind = 100 individuals per generation for a maximum of 1000 generations (i.e., epochs). However, it was observed to be very robust against the choice of these parameters. The candidate with the highest fitness is then selected as the optimum permutation list

Sˆ = D ∪ argmax f (S ).
S ∈P
In Fig. 4 we compare different permutation selection methods for CA-BPL with list size L = 7 based on BLER performance. The genetic optimized list outperforms both random permutations and the 7 cyclic shifts of the default permutation.

B. Error-Rate Performance
We compare a classical BPL decoder that uses the CRC solely as a stopping condition to our proposed CA-BPL decoding scheme, with both BCJR and SPA CRC decoders. Additionally, we use CA-SCL decoding with list size L = 32 and order-4 ordered statistic decoding (OSD) [25] as a lower bound on the BLER performance. The CRC parity-check ensemble used has (edge-perspective) variable node and check node degree distribution polynomials

λ (Z) = 0.06 + 0.16Z1 + 0.3Z2 + 0.3Z3 + 0.15Z4 + 0.03Z5 and ρ(Z) = 0.66Z32 + 0.34Z33, respectively.
The BPL and CA-BPL decoders use L = 32 parallel BP decoders with Nit,max = 200 iterations each. However, it has to be noted that due to the early stopping criterion, the constituent decoders of CA-BPL only require an average of 5.93 and 3.03 iterations each at Eb/N0 = 4 dB and 5 dB, respectively. The FG permutations were selected using the genetic optimization technique described above. Fig. 5 shows the BLER performance of the decoders over the AWGN channel using binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation. The proposed CA-BPL scheme outperforms a classical BPL (with CRC used as a stopping criterion) by 0.5 dB at a BLER of 10−3. Note that, this gain is solely due to benefiting from the CRC error-correction capabilities rather than only detecting errors. It is worth mentioning that CA-BPL approaches the performance of CA-SCL closer than 0.15 dB at a BLER of 10−4. The same BLER performance as CA-SCL is reached at Eb/N0 = 5 dB. It is quite remarkable that the much simpler SPA-aided BPL decoder is only marginally worse than the (optimal) BCJR-aided BPL.
V. CONCLUSION
We have introduced a CRC-aided extension of the iterative BPL decoding algorithm where the CRC is used for errorcorrection rather than the plain error-detection. For this, we have developed two soft-in/soft-out decoding techniques for CRC codes based on the trellis-based BCJR algorithm and the iterative SPA decoder, respectively. To account for the additional decoding overhead, we have further optimized the selection of factor graph permutations and have shown that the required list size can be reduced. As a result, the proposed CA-BPL algorithm can compete with CA-SCL decoding in the typical SNR region of interest while promising lower decoding latency and offering the potential for parallel implementations. For a large enough list size, the proposed algorithm even approaches the estimated ML performance of the concatenated polar+CRC coding scheme. To the best of our knowledge, these are the best iterative polar+CRC decoding results that have been reported in the literature. Although we have given some intuition why the selection of factor graph permutation works, we leave it open for future work to derive a theoretical analysis of why a certain set of permutations yields a better overall performance than other selections.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Arıkan, “Channel Polarization: A Method for Constructing CapacityAchieving Codes for Symmetric Binary-Input Memoryless Channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[2] “Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network,” 3GPP, 2018, TS 38.212 V.15.1.1. [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/ archive/38 series/38.212/
[3] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[4] E. Arıkan, “Polar Codes: A Pipelined Implementation,” Proc. 4th ISBC, pp. 11–14, 2010.
[5] S. Sun and Z. Zhang, “Architecture and Optimization of HighThroughput Belief Propagation Decoding of Polar Codes,” in IEEE Inter. Symp. on Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2016, pp. 165–168.

399
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[6] S. Cammerer, B. Leible, M. Stahl, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “Combining Belief Propagation and Successive Cancellation List Decoding of Polar Codes on a GPU Platform,” in IEEE Inter. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Sig. Process. (ICASSP), Mar. 2017, pp. 3664–3668.
[7] J. Guo, M. Qin, A. G. i Fa`bregas, and P. H. Siegel, “Enhanced Belief Propagation Decoding of Polar Codes through Concatenation,” in IEEE Inter. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2014, pp. 2987–2991.
[8] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Flexible Length Polar Codes through Graph Based Augmentation,” in IEEE Inter. ITG Conf. on Syst., Commun. and Coding (SCC), Feb. 2017.
[9] A. Elkelesh, S. Cammerer, M. Ebada, and S. ten Brink, “Mitigating Clipping Effects on Error Floors under Belief Propagation Decoding of Polar Codes,” in Inter. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst., Aug. 2017.
[10] A. C¸ ag˘rı Arlı and O. Gazi, “Noise-Aided Belief Propagation List Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1285–1288, Aug. 2019.
[11] N. Hussami, S. B. Korada, and R. Urbanke, “Performance of Polar Codes for Channel and Source Coding,” in IEEE Inter. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2009, pp. 1488–1492.
[12] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Belief Propagation Decoding of Polar Codes on Permuted Factor Graphs,” in IEEE Wireless Commun. and Networking Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2018.
[13] ——, “Belief Propagation List Decoding of Polar Codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 1536–1539, Aug. 2018.
[14] S. A. Hashemi, N. Doan, M. Mondelli, and W. J. Gross, “Decoding Reed-Muller and Polar Codes by Successive Factor Graph Permutations,” in IEEE 10th Inter. Symp. on Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Dec. 2018.
[15] K. Ivanov and R. Urbanke, “Permutation-based Decoding of ReedMuller Codes in Binary Erasure Channel,” in IEEE Inter. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2019.
[16] N. Doan, S. A. Hashemi, E. N. Mambou, T. Tonnellier, and W. J. Gross, “Neural Belief Propagation Decoding of CRC-Polar Concatenated Codes,” in IEEE Inter. Conf. on Commun. (ICC), May 2019.
[17] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhi, “Early Stopping Criteria for Energy-Efficient Low-Latency Belief-Propagation Polar Code Decoders,” IEEE Trans. Sig. Process., vol. 62, no. 24, pp. 6496–6506, Dec. 2014.
[18] N. Doan, S. A. Hashemi, M. Mondelli, and W. J. Gross, “On the Decoding of Polar Codes on Permuted Factor Graphs,” in IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2018.
[19] Z. Q. Chen, L. Li, Z. Ma, and P. Z. Fan, “List Selection and Decision Fusion Scheme for Belief Propagation List Decoding of Polar Codes,” in IEEE 30th Annual Inter. Symp. on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC), Sep. 2019.
[20] V. Ranasinghe, N. Rajatheva, and M. Latva-aho, “Partially Permuted Multi-Trellis Belief Propagation for Polar Codes,” ArXiv e-prints, Nov. 2019.
[21] B. Tosun, “Belief Propagation Decoding Using Factor Graph Permutations,” Master thesis, Middle East Technical University, 2019.
[22] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal Decoding of Linear Codes for Minimizing Symbol Error Rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[23] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, “Channel Codes: Classical and Modern,” Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[24] J. H. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems: An Introductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control and Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1992.
[25] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-Decision Decoding of Linear Block Codes Based on Ordered Statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1379–1396, Sep. 1995.
400
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:41:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

