316

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 24, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2020

A Generalized Parity-Check Transformation for Iterative Soft-Decision Decoding of Binary Cyclic Codes
O. P. Babalola , Graduate Member, IEEE, O. O. Ogundile , Member, IEEE, and D. J. J. Versfeld, Member, IEEE

Abstract— The conventional parity-check matrix transformation algorithm (PTA) requires matrix inversion to transform matrices of maximum distance separable (MDS) codes. However, such matrix transformation is not always guaranteed for the class of non-MDS codes. Hence, the PTA fails for binary cyclic (BC) codes. To overcome this limitation, we developed a generalized parity-check matrix transformation (GPT) algorithm for binary cyclic codes. The GPT avoids the matrix inversion step of the PTA. It permutes the columns of the parity-check matrix based on the reliability information from the channel. Results show a significant bit error rate (BER) performance gain as compared to the existing PTA. It also presents a reasonable BER performance as compared to the other soft-decision (SD) decoding algorithms. In addition, the decoder functions within a practical decoding time complexity, particularly at the message passing stage.
Index Terms— Adaptive belief propagation, binary cyclic codes, generalized parity-check matrix transformation, maximum-distance separable.
I. INTRODUCTION
B INARY cyclic (BC) codes represent a class of extremely important linear block codes for error control in communication systems. Their algebraic structure makes encoding and decoding more efficient. Classic hard-decision (HD) decoders are used on binary output channels to correct errors up to half the minimum distance of the code. Since the use of HD decoding causes loss of information at the receiver, there is a need for efficient decoders such as soft-decision decoders, which employ channel state measurements.
Soft-decision (SD) decoding can provide significant performance gain as compared to hard-decision decoding. The SD decoder utilizes channel state information to provide a measure of the corresponding reliability of each of the received binary bits [1]–[3]. This enables the decoder to correct errors beyond half the minimum distance of a code. A major soft-decision decoder is the belief propagation (BP) algorithm [4]. This decoder is practically used for long length codes such as the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and Turbo codes.
Manuscript received October 30, 2019; revised November 14, 2019; accepted November 25, 2019. Date of publication December 2, 2019; date of current version February 11, 2020. This work is based on research supported in part by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of South Africa under Grant 116036, and the MIH Media Lab, Stellenbosch University, South Africa. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was C. Feng. (Corresponding author: O. P. Babalola.)
O. P. Babalola and D. J. J. Versfeld are with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa (e-mail: 18003982@sun.ac.za; djjversfeld@sun.ac.za).
O. O. Ogundile is with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa, and also with the Department of Physics and Telecommunications, Tai Solarin University of Education, Ijebu Ode 120-001, Nigeria (e-mail: ogundileoo@ gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2956935

To attain good performance, belief propagation requires that the parity-check matrix is sparse, does not contain short cycles in the related Tanner graph, and has regular or optimized irregular row and column distributions [5]. These properties are almost never satisfied by the parity-check matrices of the class of cyclic codes. Therefore, alternative solutions such as the extended parity-check matrix (EPCM) [6], the spread parity-check matrix (SPCM) [5], the adaptive belief propagation (ABP) [7], random redundant decoding (RRD) [8], improved random redundant decoding (mRRD) [9], permuted belief propagation (PBP) [10], and the parity-check transformation algorithms (PTA) [11] have been proposed in the literature.
Both the ABP algorithm [7] and the PTA [11] presented a modification of the belief propagation decoding algorithm. These algorithms transform the parity-check matrices of a code, based on the bit reliabilities at each decoding iteration. The ABP with its variations significantly improves performance of Reed-Solomon (RS) codes over hard decision decoding and the traditional BP algorithm. However, its complexity is high, and can be inappropriate for real-time implementation. On the other hand, the PTA is a symbol level decoder for MDS codes with reduced complexity. It can be implemented in real-time applications. Unfortunately, for the class of nonMDS codes, such as the BCH codes, the PTA fails whenever a linearly dependent column of the parity-check matrix cannot be reduced to an identity form.
The algorithms in [5] and [6] do not function on a transformed parity-check matrix but on larger matrices that are suitable for the BP decoding. These techniques involve the addition of supplementary bits, which do not correspond to the transmitted bits. Thus, reducing the decoding performances. The random redundant iterative decoding based on the automorphism group of a code is introduced in [8]. This algorithm can be seen as an extension of the ABP for cyclic codes to arbitrary block codes with a known permutation group. In [9], the RRD algorithm is modified by eliminating the use of a damping factor. Instead, it utilizes multiple parallel BP decoders with the same parity-check matrix, but with random permutations selected from the permutation group of the code. This technique reduces the computational complexity of the RRD. Nevertheless, the complexity remains high as compared to the ABP. Recently, the permuted belief propagation algorithm [10] presented a method of incorporating the set of permutations from the automorphism group of a code into the message passing process of the belief propagation algorithm. This improves the decoding performance of the BP and reduces the average number of decoding iterations as

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:43:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BABALOLA et al.: GENERALIZED PARITY-CHECK TRANSFORMATION FOR ITERATIVE SOFT-DECISION

317

compared to the RRD and mRRD algorithms. However, it is generally difficult to find the complete automorphism group of a linear code. It was shown that limiting the permutation set to the cyclic permutations significantly reduces the performance of the PBP algorithm.
In this letter, a generalized parity-check transformation (GPT) algorithm for iterative SD decoding of the class of BC codes is developed. The proposed GPT algorithm does not utilize the complete set of permutations of the automorphism group as discussed in the mRRD and PBP, but is motivated by the symbol level PTA in [11]. The algorithm utilizes a new approach of matrix transformation to overcome the limitation of the PTA. Here, the transformed matrix is obtained by permuting the columns of the initial parity-check matrix based on the reliability information received from the channel. The bit error rate (BER) performance of the algorithm is detailed by way of computer simulations over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

II. PARITY-CHECK TRANSFORMATION ALGORITHM FOR BINARY CYCLIC CODE

We consider a binary cyclic code C(n, k), of length n

and dimension k. Each codeword c¯ of a BC code can be related to a polynomial c(x) over GF2[x]mod(xn + 1). Also,

by reason of the cyclic property of the code, all cyclic shifts

of c(x) are valid codewords. The generator polynomial g(x)

of C exists as a unique monic polynomial, with minimal

degree n − k, within the set of the code polynomials in C.

Therefore, every codeword can be represented uniquely as

c(x) = m(x)g(x)mod(xn + 1), where m(x) ∈ GF2[x] has degree < k. Since g(x) is a factor of xn + 1, a polynomial

h(x) exists with degree k, such that g(x)h(x) = xn + 1.

Hence, the standard form of the parity-check matrix of a

binary cyclic code is given in terms of the binary coefficients

of h(x) as [12]:

⎡

⎤

hk · · · h1 h0 0 · · · 0

H = ⎣⎢⎢⎢.0. .

hk ...

··· ...

h1 ...

h0 ...

0 ...

· .

· .

.·⎦⎥⎥⎥

(1)

0 · · · 0 hk · · · h1 h0.

This form of matrix contains many length 4-cycles, and it is therefore not suitable for BP decoding [5].
Traditionally, H is transformed at each iteration of the ABP and PTA by applying the Gaussian-Jordan (GJ) elimination according to the bit-reliability to reduce the number of length 4-cycles. Since H is full rank, there are at least (n − k) independent columns in H to be reduced to weight one column. These reduced (sparse) columns form an identity submatrix B, such that each of the columns correspond to an unreliable bit. However, for the class of BC codes, it is not always guaranteed that all the columns associated to the unreliable bits will be reduced during matrix adaptation [7]. In this case, the performance of the iterative SD decoder decreases. The PTA in particular, utilizes the submatrix B and fails if the matrix becomes non-invertible. Therefore, the proposed GPT excludes the transformation technique of the PTA. The algorithm transforms H in (1) by means of

column permutations based on the bit reliabilities. It also introduces a computational efficient method of generating the update messages in the ABP algorithm.
III. GPT ALGORITHM FOR BINARY CYCLIC CODES The proposed GPT consists of the matrix transformation and message passing stages.

A. Matrix Transformation
Let c¯ = [c1, c2, · · · , cn] be the codeword of a binary cyclic code C. Assume the bits of the codeword are modulated using binary phase shift keying (BPSK), with 0 mapped to +1 and 1 mapped to −1. The modulated vector is transmitted over an AWGN channel to obtain vector r¯:

r¯ = (−2c¯ + 1) + φ,

(2)

where φ is the vector of statistically independent Gaussian random variables with zero mean and variance N0/2.
Thus, the initial reliability of each bit ri ∈ r¯, i = 1, 2, . . . , n is expressed as a distance matrix Π, based on the Euclidean distance d between r¯ and the signal constellation points s , = [0, 1].

Π=

d(s0, r1) d(s1, r1)

d(s0, r2) d(s1, r2)

... ...

d(s0, rn) d(s1, rn),

(3)

where

d(s , ri) = (s − ri)2.

(4)

Let p and q represent the elements in rows indexed by s and columns indexed by ri respectively. To ensure that the elements in the columns of Π sum up to one, it is normalized along the columns to obtain a reliability matrix, β:

β=

N0,1 N1,1

N0,2 N1,2

... ...

N0,n N1,n,

(5)

where

N (p, q) =

e−Π(p,q)

n q=1

e−Π(p,q)

=ˆ P (ri =

|ci).

(6)

Each column of β contains a pair of normalized a priori probability (APP) values P (ci = 0|ri) and P (ci = 1|ri). Note that for the ABP decoding, the APP values of ri are obtained in terms of the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) as observed from

the channel:

L(ci)

=

log

P P

(ci (ci

= =

0|ri 1|ri

) )

.

(7)

The vector of the LLRs is given as

L¯ = [L(c1), L(c2), . . . , L(cn)],

(8)

such that the magnitude of L¯ is sorted in ascending order.

Thus, the parity-check matrix is reduced to a transformed form

based on (8).

However, the GPT directly operates on the normalized

reliability matrix in (5) to transform H. The highest APP value

in the columns of β are selected and sorted in ascending order of reliability to yield β¯:

β¯ = [β1, β2, . . . , βn],

(9)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:43:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

318

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 24, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2020

with β1 > β2 > · · · > βn and βi ∈ β, i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Thus, the index of sorting are recorded in order of reliability as:

I = i1, i2, . . . , in−k, in−k+1, . . . , in,

(10)

ρ

σ

where segments ρ and σ correspond to the least reliable values and the most reliable values of β¯ respectively. To reduce the density and remove part of the short cycles in (1), we introduce the process of permuting columns of H based on I as:

Hι = I[H] = hι1 hι2 · · · hnι ,

(11)

where hiι reliability

represents the value βi of β¯

ith column vector is associated with

of Hι. the ith

Since each column hιi

of Hι, we refer to βi as the corresponding reliability value

of hιi. Now, we perform elementary row operations on Hι to

obtain a systematic matrix Hs:

Hs = I(n−k)P ,

(12)

where I(n−k) is the (n − k) × (n − k) identity matrix and P is the (n − k) × k parity-check matrix. The columns of Hs
are then rearranged according to I, resulting to a transformed parity-check matrix Hˆ :

Hˆ = I[Hs] = hˆ1 hˆ2 · · · hˆn .

(13)

Note, the orders of the initial reliabilities computed from the channel’s output, say Iβ¯0 and IL¯0 , of the GPT and ABP algorithms respectively are equivalent. But, the orders
change as the reliabilities are updated in the message passing
stage. Hence, resulting in different transformed parity-check matrices, Hˆ at each iteration for the GPT and ABP algorithms.

B. Message Passing

Similar to the ABP, the proposed GPT is a message passing algorithm that updates bit reliability at every decoding iteration. The ABP generates extrinsic information by way of sum-product algorithm (SPA) for each bit as:

n−k

Lext(ci) =

2 tanh−1

j=1 hji =1

a
tanh
p=1 p=i,hjp =1

L(cp) 2

, (14)

where hji are the entries of matrix Hˆ . Thereby, updating the bit reliabilities at the lth iteration as:

L¯(l+1) = L¯(l) + αL(elx)t.

(15)

However, the GPT directly updates the bit reliabilities in β
(without performing the additional SPA computation) based on the information provided by the parity-check equations of Hˆ . Unlike the ABP that update the ratio values, the GPT refines a specific scaled value in the columns of β based on a carefully selected damping factor δ at every iteration. The refined
reliability values correspond to the participating bits in the ith row of Hˆ at the lth iteration, thus resulting in a new order I . β¯(l+1) Moreover, as the iteration progresses, Iβ¯ continues to differ from IL¯ due to the difference in the update methods. Consequently, it results in different transformed parity-check
matrices which determines the decoding performances of both

the GPT and ABP algorithms. This process is summarized in
three steps. Step 1: Suppose awμ are the bit reliability entries of β.
Let b represent the index of the highest entry awμ at the μth column of β. For a BPSK scheme, b can either be 0 or 1. Hence, an estimate vector ¯b of the received codeword c¯ is
obtained as:

¯b = b=aw1, b=aw2, . . . , b=awn.

(16)

Thus, we calculate each parity-check equation as:

pj = ¯bHˆ T , j = 1, 2, . . . , n − k.

(17)

Step 2: Since each entry awμ corresponds to a participating bit hˆi in the jth row of Hˆ , we update the bit reliability based on results from Equation (17). If pj yields zero, the highest bit reliability awμ in each column of β is updated by adding δ. Otherwise, β is updated by subtracting δ from awμ.
Step 3: The GPT algorithm is iterative and a stopping
rule is given such that if all pj checks, that is, [p1 = 0, p2 = 0, . . . , p(n−k) = 0], then the decoding process terminates and produces ˆb as its correct codeword. Otherwise, the updated bit reliability matrix β(l) returns as input to the decoder until a
maximum number of iteration (N ) is attained. The operations
of the GPT is summarised in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 GPT Algorithm for Iterative Decoding
Input: r¯, H, n, k, N, δ. Output: Decoded vector ˆb.
Matrix transformation compute: β, β¯, I ; compute: Hι, Hs based on (11) and (12); derive: Hˆ = I[Hs]; Message passing
repeat compute: ¯b and pj; pj = false || N = false; repeat perform: step 2; until pj = true || N = true;
until pj = true || N = true; ˆb = ¯b

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
We present simulation results for the BCH codes using BPSK modulation with different rates R, length n and dimension k, over an AWGN channel. The bit error rate (BER) performance of the proposed GPT is compared to other iterative soft-decision decoding algorithms for the class of BC codes. The following representations are used in the legends. GPT(N1) symbolizes the proposed generalized parity-check transformation algorithm, where N1 is the maximum number of iterations. ABP(N1, N2) represents the adaptive belief propagation in [7], where N2 is the number of grouping of unreliable bits. PTA(N1) refers to the traditional parity-check matrix transformation for MDS codes in [11]. mRRD(N1, N3) refers to the modified random redundant decoding in [9], where N3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:43:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BABALOLA et al.: GENERALIZED PARITY-CHECK TRANSFORMATION FOR ITERATIVE SOFT-DECISION

319

Fig. 1. Average number of iterations for different δ values.

Fig. 3. BER performance comparison: BCH code (31, 16), R = 0.5161.

Fig. 2. Performance comparison of the GPT for different δ values.

Fig. 4. BER performance comparison: BCH code (63, 36), R = 0.5714.

is the maximum number of iterations per outer iteration with each iteration utilizing a different permutation. PBP represents the permuted belief propagation algorithms in [10].
The number of iterations and BER performance of the GPT algorithm is determined by δ. Therefore, we simulate the BCH(31, 16) code to select an appropriate δ-value for the algorithm. Fig.1 shows that the number of iterations in the algorithm increases as the δ-values become smaller. As shown, δ = 0.5 requires the minimum number of iteration in comparison to the other δ-values, but it offers the worst BER performance in Fig.2. However, δ = 0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, and 0.001 yield the same BER performance. Nevertheless, considering Fig.2, δ = 0.1 requires the minimum number of iterations in comparison to δ = 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, and 0.001. Thus, we carefully select δ = 0.1 as the damping factor for the proposed algorithm since it is computationally efficient.
We present the results for medium rate, R = 0.5161, BCH (31, 16) code in Fig.3. For this code, the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding curve is presented as a comparison benchmark for the proposed GPT and other iterative SD decoders. The GPT(10) approaches the ML curve within 0.5dB at a BER of 10−3. Also, it reasonably compares to the performances of the mRRD(15, 50) with fifteen parallel decoders and the PBP(5) algorithms. The mRRD utilizes 50 iterations to attain a 0.1dB performance gain over the GPT with

10 iterations and the PBP with 5 iterations. As compared to the algebraic HDD, PTA(10), ABP(20, 1), and the regrouping ABP(20, 3), the GPT(10) exhibits a performance gain of 2.7dB, 1.7dB, 0.4dB, and 0.1dB at a BER of 10−4 respectively. The PTA exhibits the worst SD decoding performance
due to the formation of a non-invertible matrix at the transfor-
mation stage. Thus, it converges to a wrong codeword. Note that the ABP(20, 3) offers a performance gain of about 0.4dB in comparison to the ABP(20, 1). This performance gain comes with increased decoding computational complexity because of
the increase in the number of regrouping. In Fig.4, we consider a medium rate R = 0.5714, BCH
(63, 36) code. At a BER of 10−4, the GPT(10) algorithm matches the performances of the mRRD(15, 50) and the
PBP(5) algorithms. Note that the ML is not included since it becomes impracticable as the code length increases. Again,
the GPT exhibits about 0.4dB, 0.8dB and 1.8dB performance gain in comparison to the ABP(20, 3), ABP(20, 1) and the PTA respectively.
Fig.5 shows the simulation results for a high rate R = 0.9059, BCH (255, 231) code. In comparison to the mRRD(15, 50) and the PBP(5), the proposed GPT algorithm
utilizes the maximum of 10 iterations to yield a performance gain of 0.6dB, at a BER of 10−4. Likewise, the algorithm
exhibits a performance gain of about 0.5dB, 1.1dB, 1.4dB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:43:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

320

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 24, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2020

complexity as compared to the GPT and PTA. This is largely attributed to the computation of extrinsic information during the check-node update, which is not required by the PTA and GPT algorithms. Thus, aside from obtaining a better BER performance, the GPT also exhibits a reduced computational time complexity in comparison to the other considered.

Fig. 5. BER performance comparison: BCH code (255, 231), R = 0.9058.
TABLE I WORST-CASE TIME COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS

VI. CONCLUSION
In this letter we developed a generalized parity-check transformation algorithm for iterative soft-decision (SD) decoding of binary cyclic codes. As compared to the mRRD and PBP, the proposed GPT does not utilize a wider set of permutations of the complete automorphism group. However, it transforms the initial parity-check matrix of a code by permuting the columns according to the bit reliabilities. A significant remark is that the algorithm has a low time complexity, which is applicable for real-time communication systems. Simulation results compared the BER performance of the GPT algorithm with other SD decoding algorithms for medium to high rate binary BCH codes in AWGN channels. The results show that the proposed GPT algorithm significantly outperforms the conventional PTA and it offers a reasonably BER performance gain over the remaining SD decoders.

and 2.3dB in comparison to the ABP(80, 50), ABP(20, 3), ABP(20, 1), and the conventional PTA respectively. This portrays the GPT as a performance efficient decoding algorithm. Therefore, it can be used in real-time coding system as it exhibits reasonable decoding time complexity as shown in section V.
V. WORST-CASE COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
In comparison of the proposed GPT to the permuted belief propagation (PBP) algorithm and the modified random redundant decoding (mRRD), the GPT only permutes the columns of the parity-check matrices based on the bit reliabilities at each iteration. The complexity of the PBP algorithm increases by computing n required summations in the accumalate step in order to replace the damping factor of the GPT and generating a permutation step, which are added to the belief propagation algorithm. On the other hand, the mRDD’s complexity is assessed based on the number of parallel decoders and the number of BP iterations required for the decoder to converge to a codeword. The mRRD requires 15 parallel decoders and 50 iterations on average to achieve the same decoding performance as the GPT algorithm.
Furthermore, the worst-case time complexity analysis is presented in Table I using the big O notation for the GPT, PTA and ABP algorithms. As shown, ABP has more computational

REFERENCES
[1] D. Chase, “Class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, no. 1, pp. 170–182, Jan. 1972.
[2] L. Chen, “Iterative soft-decision decoding of hermitian codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 33–42, Jan. 2013.
[3] O. Babalola and J. Versfeld, “Iterative soft-decision decoding of binary cyclic codes based on extended parity-check transformation algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Can. Conf. Elect. Comput. Eng. (CCECE), May 2018, pp. 1–5.
[4] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[5] M. Baldi, G. Cancellieri, and F. Chiaraluce, “Iterative soft-decision decoding of binary cyclic codes,” J. Commun. Softw. Syst., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 142–149, Jun. 2008.
[6] R. H. Morelos-Zaragoza, “Architectural issues of soft-decision iterative decoders for binary cyclic codes,” Adv. Telecommun. Lab., SONY Comput. Sci. Lab., Tokyo, Japan, Sony ATL Internal Rep., Aug. 2000.
[7] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of Reed–Solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3746–3756, Aug. 2006.
[8] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “Transactions letters—Random redundant iterative soft-in soft-out decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 513–517, Apr. 2008.
[9] I. Dimnik and Y. Be’ery, “Improved random redundant iterative HDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1982–1985, Jul. 2009.
[10] M. Ismail, S. Denic, and J. Coon, “Efficient decoding of short length linear cyclic codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 505–508, Apr. 2015.
[11] O. O. Ogundile, Y. O. Genga, and D. J. J. Versfeld, “Symbol level iterative soft decision decoder for Reed–Solomon codes based on paritycheck equations,” Electron. Lett., vol. 51, no. 17, pp. 1332–1333, Aug. 2015.
[12] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes, vol. 16, 3rd ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland, 1981.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:43:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

