Notice of Violation of IEEE Publication Principles “Channel Decoding Based on Complex-valued Convolutional Neural Networks” by Lun Li, Guanghui Yu, Jin Xu, and Liguang Li in the Proceedings of the 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT), March 2020 After careful and considered review of the content and authorship of this paper by a duly constituted expert committee, this paper has been found to be in violation of IEEE’s Publication Principles. This article contains significant portions of text from the article cited below that were paraphrased without attribution. “Exploiting Noise Correlation for Channel Decoding with Convolutional Neural Networks” by Fei Liang, Cong Shen, and Feng Wu in the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), May 2018
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Channel Decoding Based on Complex-valued Convolutional Neural Networks

Lun Li, Guanghui Yu, Jin Xu, and Liguang Li ZTE Corporation, Shen Zhen, China
Email:{li.lun1, yu.guanghui, xu.jin7, li.liguang9}@zte.com.cn

Abstract—Inspired by the recent outcomes in deep learning, we propose a novel decoding architecture which concatenates a complex-valued convolutional neural network (CCNN) with a belief propagation (BP) decoder for combating correlated noise in the channel. The CCNN can exploit the complex noise correlation and yield a more accurate estimation of the channel noise. Depressing the influence of channel noise via the proposed architecture, the BP decoder can obtain better decoding performances. Furthermore, extensive experiments are carried out to analyze and verify performances of the proposed framework.
I. INTRODUCTION
Channel encoding and decoding are playing an increasingly important role in modern communication systems. Many researches have shown that low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are able to provide a performance close to Shannon capacity for AWGN channels with a proper encoding structure and the well-developed belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [2]. However, in practical communication systems, channels are so complicated that there may exist correlations in fading [3] and noise. For example, many kinds of filtering schemes need suppressing the effect of inter-symbol interference, which is caused by correlated noise [4]. A well-designed coding scheme may not yield a good performance if the receiver is not able to address noise correlation [5]. In addition, few proposed works can effectively address the problem of decoding linear codes under correlated channel noise. Therefore, a novel method which can exploit the features of noise correlation, e.g. deep learning, should be taken into consideration.
Deep learning technologies have been widely applied in various fields, such as computer vision [6], natural language processing [7] and many other domains. Taking computer vision as an example, it is an almost impossible task to write a robust algorithm for detection of handwritten digits or objects in images, however, it is trivial to implement a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) to accomplish this task beyond human levels of accuracy [8]. These results have also made great achievement because deep learning can tackle the tasks that are difficult to characterize with rigid mathematical models. Inspired by these advances, researchers have tried solving communication problems by using deep learning technologies [9]-[17]. Although significant progress in communication systems has been achieved, there are many limitations needed to breakthrough. For example, a novel architecture is proposed to address the correlated channel noise in [14], but it is simply suitable for BPSK modulation because only the real part of symbols needs to handle with the real-valued convolutional neural network. When higher-order modulations are adopted in the practical communication system, this architecture can not work anymore. At this point, using a real-valued network seems inappropriate. Hence, the complex domain of deep learning [18]-[21] has appeared in the last few years and learning algorithms were derived and used. [21] designs a

complex-valued convolutional neural network and shows that complex-valued networks can provide certain accuracy gains in image classification compared to the real-valued ones. Inspired by its advantages, we propose an effective receiver architecture based on the complex-valued CNN, i.e. BP-CCNN , to combat correlated channel noise and improve the decoding performance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II demonstrates the system model in detail, including the proposed BP-CCNN architecture, the application of complex-valued CNN and its training mode. Experimental results are shown and discussed in Section III. Finally, Section IV is dedicated to presenting the conclusions of the study and future tasks.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

A. Communication System Framework
The proposed architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. At the
transmitter, a block of bits x of length K is randomly
generated, and then it is fed into a linear channel encoder to
obtain a binary codeword u of length N . In this paper, we focus on the LDPC coding scheme. The codeword u is then mapped into a symbol vector s through QPSK modulation.
The QPSK symbols will be transmitted through a channel with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and interference.
At the receiver, the received vector y can be expressed
as

y  s n  s  I nw

(1)

where n denotes the channel noise consisting of interference I and white noise nw . The signal to noise ratio (SNR) is
defined as

SNR  10 log(P  2 )

(2)

  where P is the average transmit power, P  Ε s2 where
  E  denotes the calculation of expectation. In addition,  2

in Eqn. 2 is defined as the power of the complex white noise samples.

Fig. 1. The proposed BP-CCNN decoding architecture which concatenates a BP decoder with a complex-valued convolutional neural network.

978-1-7281-6A0u4th7o-r4iz/e2d0li/c$e3ns1e.d00use©li2m0it2ed0toIE: YEoEnsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Similarly, the power of interference is defined by Eqn. 3:

  PI  E I2  I  IH

(3)

where I represents the complex interference vector, and
  PI is the average interference power, PI  Ε I2 . IH
denotes the conjugate transpose of I .
Next, a BP decoder is used to decode the transmitted
information bit vector from y . In fact, there is a QPSK soft
demodulator before the BP decoding, to calculate the loglikelihood ratios (LLRs) of the received symbols. In our system framework of Fig. 1, we omit this module and merge it into the BP decoder for simplicity.
Then, sˆ is denoted as the estimated transmit symbols, and nˆ is obtained by subtracting it from the received symbols y .

nˆ  y  sˆ

(4)

where nˆ can be regarded as an estimation of the channel
noise. However, nˆ is not exactly the same as the channel
noise due to the decoding errors. It can be re-written as

nˆ  n  δ

(5)

where δ is the error of the channel noise estimation.

The dashed box shown in Fig. 1 is the key module of

the system framework, i.e. BP-CCNN decoding architecture.

Enlightened by image denoising [22], we combine a

convolutional network with the BP decoder to learn the

correlation estimation.

oWf cehdaennnoetlenon~isaesatnhde

obtain a CCNN

more accurate noise output and subtract

it from the received symbols y , and then we have

yˆ  y  n~  s  n  n~  s  r

(6)

where r  n  n~ is defined as the residual noise. The new received symbol vector yˆ is then fed back to the BP decoder

and BP decoding would be performed again. The BP decoder may achieve the best performance by setting reasonable iterations. At last, we obtain the final decoding
bits vector xˆ and analyze the decoding properties.

For the sake of better decoding performances, the residual noise should be depressed as much as possible, i.e. the convolutional network should be trained to learn the channel noise more precisely. Because of the complex form of channel noise symbols whose real and imaginary parts both carry information, a complex-valued CNN is demanded for exploiting the correlation of the complex noise. In Section II-B, we will demonstrate complex-valued CNN in detail.

B. Complex Convolutional Neural Network
Inspired by advances in image processing, most communication problems are addressed by real-valued CNNs. The complex symbols are divided into the real and imaginary parts for further calculation by the CNN [16]. However, the inner correlation between the two parts is discarded. The previous work [21] has shown that complexvalued CNNs outperform traditional real-valued ones in image classification, but there are few papers applying

complex-valued networks for communication problems. Therefore, we design two structures for complex noise estimation as shown in Fig. 2. The conventional real-valued CNN is used in Fig.2(a) while the proposed complex-valued network is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). The main difference is that the input and parameters of our proposed network are complex-valued.

As we can see, at the first layer in Fig. 2, f1 feature maps

are generated by different convolutional kernels from the

input vector nˆ , which can be expressed as

  c1, j  F h1, j *nˆ  b1, j

(7)

where c1, j is the jth feature map at the first layer,
h1, j denotes the jth convolutional kernel, which is a vector
  of length l j , b1, j is the corresponding bias, and F 
denotes the activation function in order to introduce nonlinearity.

At the ith layer ( i  1 ), the convolution operation can be

considered as a 3-D convolution as illustrated in Fig. 2,

which is operated over all feature maps of the previous layer.

The output is written as

  ci, j  F hi, j * ci1  bi, j

(8)

where ci, j denotes the jth feature map at the ith layer.

hi, j represents the jth convolutional kernel of size

li 1 fi1 where fi1 is the number of feature maps of the
previous layer. Operated in this way until the last layer, the final noise estimation is calculated as

n~  F hL *cL1  bL 

(9)

where L is denoted as the total number of network layers.

(a) The real-valued CNN structure for noise estimation
(b) The adopted complex-valued CNN structure for noise estimation Fig. 2. Two kinds of CNN structures applied for noise estimation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In general, a complex-valued CNN mainly consists of several parts as following: the total number of layers, convolutional kernel sizes, and feature map numbers in each layer, which need to be decided before network training. For simplicity of expression, the structure of network is denoted as

L;l1, l2 ,, lL ; f1, f2 ,, fL

(10)

C. Training
1) Loss function: Loss function is to measure the difference between the actual network output and the expected output. Since the complex-valued CNN is adopted to estimate the channel noise in our proposed structure, we define the loss function as

Loss  1  r 2 N  1  r  rH N

(11)

2

2

where N is the length of a coding block and r H represents the conjugate transpose of residual noise vector r . We add a constant coefficient 1 2 in order to eliminate the residual
noise vector’s exponent when taking the derivative of loss function during the process of back propagation. It is a widely adopted quadratic loss function in deep learning.

2) Activation function: For the conventional real-valued CNN, activation functions are various. The common used activation function is Rectified Linear Unit function (ReLU,
max(x,0) ) , which is also used in the real-valued structure
shown in Fig. 2(a). However, the selection criteria in the complex-valued CNN are more rigorous. The activation function needs to be derivable in complex domains and satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann relations. Consequently, there are two kinds of activation functions in complex-valued networks. One is the fully complex mode (treating the complex number as a whole) and the other is split complex mode (treating the real and imaginary parts separately) [21]. After testing these two types in our proposed network, we find the split complex function can present a better learning ability and we adopt it in our complex-valued convolutional network, which is
      F z  F z R z I  tanh z R  tanh z I (12)

where z  z R z I is a complex number, z R and z I denote
its real part and imaginary part respectively.

III. SIMULATIONS RESULTS
A. Overview
In our experiments, LDPC code of rate 1 2 is used and
the code block length is 2048. We set 2000 data blocks for network training and 1000 blocks for testing. The complex-
valued CNN structure is designed as 3;5,1,9;16,8,1 . We
initialize the network with Xavier initialization [23] and use the Adam optimization method for searching the optimal network parameters [24]. In addition, the conventional minibatch gradient descent method is adopted to guarantee the network convergence. Each mini-batch contains 50 blocks of training data and all mini-batches of data are applied to train network parameters in one epoch. Finally, we finish training the network in 30 epochs. In order to avoid overfitting, the training data need disordering in each epoch as new data

TABLE I. BASIC CCNN SETTING FOR EXPERIMENTS

Parameter

Value

CCNN structure Weight number Mini-batch size Training block number Testing block number

{3;5,1,9;16,8,1} 280 50 2000 1000

batches to update current network parameters. During the training process, we have to check the loss value over the training set every several epochs. If the loss does not drop for consecutive epochs (five epochs set in our experiment), we consider the network is convergent to input data. The basic network setting is summarized in Table I.

In addition to the simulation results, we assume that the model of channel interference is with known correlation functions and thus we can generate adequate samples to train our network. In our experiments, we apply a finite impulse response (FIR) low-pass filter to produce the correlations in the noise samples. The channel interference is generated by

nk

 In  i  nni n  nk

(13)

i0

where In is the nth element of the interference vector, n is
an AWGN noise vector generated randomly, nk and  represent the total filter tap number and the coefficient
vector respectively. In order to get stable correlations of the interference vector, we set n  nk .

The channel interference with different correlations will exert different degrees of influence on the BP decoding. If the channel condition is very bad, many errors exist and they are harmful to the standard BP decoder. In order to highlight the advantages of our proposed architecture, we set different channel interference conditions to simulate in Table II. In all tests, the power of channel interference is controlled by approximately 1.2 times as much as the signal power and testing SNRs are the same as the training SNRs ranging from 0dB to 10dB.

TABLE II. INTERFERENCE MODEL SETTING FOR EXPERIMENTS

Parameter
Training filter bandwidth(Hz) Testing filter bandwidth(Hz)
Tap number

Model 1 80 80 40

Interference model Model 2 100
10 40

Model 3 10 80 40

B. Performance Evaluation
1) BP-CCNN decoding performances: We first compare the performances of the proposed method and the standard BP decoder. For the BP decoder, 25 iterations are executed in all tests (denoted as “BP(25)” in the figure). In our proposed receiver structure, we use its simplest form for testing, i.e. there is one iteration between BP decoder and the neural network. Furthermore, the proposed structure is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) BLER in the first channel model

(b) BLER in the second channel model

(c) BLER in the third channel model

Fig. 3. Performance comparisons of the standard BP decoder, BP-CNN and proposed BP-CCNN under three mentioned channel noise models.

divided into two types which are “BP-CNN-BP” and “BPCCNN-BP”. The former applies the conventional realvalued CNN while the latter adopts the complex-valued one. Considering the fairness of comparison, we keep the number of BP iterations the same in both systems. Therefore, we execute 25 BP iterations in decoding process (denoted as “BP(25)-CCNN-BP(25)”). This is because BP(25) is enough to achieve a saturating performance, and no more better decoding performance gain would be brought by more BP iterations. The block error rate (BLER) will be adopted as the evaluation criterion of the system performance.
The simulation results are presented in Fig. 3. We can see that the standard BP decoder performs poorly under correlated noise channels, this is because the standard BP decoder can hardly correctly decode due to the high interference power and complicated form. However, both BP-CNN and BP-CCNN architectures achieve significant performance gains in these cases. This lies in that the trained convolutional neural network is able to exploit the inner correlation of interference accurately and remove channel interference. However, the performance still falls behind the decoding limit which is depicted by the black curve in the figure. In the first and the last case, BP-CCNN can improve the decoding performance by approximately 1dB at BLER=0, which is far better than BP-CNN. In the second case, the performance gain becomes smaller. When testing interference has more high-frequency components, we can see that complex-valued networks provide more performance gains than the real-valued ones. Nevertheless, the gap is narrowed in the case of simple noise models. We thus conclude that the BP-CCNN decoder can be robust to different types of interference in a wide range of correlation levels.
2) BP-CCNN learning performances: To analyze channel noise intuitively, we take the last model as an example and present the learning results at SNR=10dB in Fig. 4. The red scatter of points represents the real shape of training interference with Gaussian white noise, while the blue ones depict the learning shape of the channel noise through the complex-valued CNN. We can see that the

(a) The channel noise learning result in training process
(b) The channel noise learning result in testing process Fig. 4. The network simulation results in training and testing process
complex network is capable of exploiting the inner correlation and basically reproducing the fluctuations of interference. However, some marginal noise points cannot be learned because the white noise scarcely contains information. During testing process, the learning result is also well fit for the label model.
3) Two-level BP-CCNN architecture for decoding performances: When we continue broadening the filter bandwidth to 100Hz, decoding performances will deteriorate even applying our proposed decoding structure. Therefore, we come up with extending the mentioned BPCCNN to a two-level architecture, as shown in Fig. 5. Notation-wise, we denote the two-level framework

Fig. 5. The two-level BP-CCNN architecture for decoding
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig.6. BLER comparisons of two-level BP-CCNN, BP-CCNN and the standard BP decoder.
“2{BP(25)-CCNN}-BP(25)”, which is composed of two different well-trained complex-valued CNNs. It is illustrated in Fig. 6 that 2{BP-CCNN}-BP yields large performance improvement than BP-CCNN-BP. When SNR is 8dB, the two-level architecture can correctly decode all code blocks, but BP-CCNN just reduces BLER to about 0.1 in the best situation. It is because the two-level architecture can further reduce errors of noise estimation, and thus improve decoding performances. Therefore, the two-level structure perfectly handles the problem that a BP decoder cannot completely decode correctly. Although the two-level framework increases the network complexity and training cost at the offline stage, we obtain considerable decoding performance gains in return during the online phase.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this paper, we design a novel BP-CCNN decoding architecture to depress correlated channel noise. The proposed framework concatenates a complex-valued CNN with a BP decoder. To implement the architecture, we provide three channel noise models to train the network and compare performances between the real-valued CNN and the complex one. Simulation results have shown the effectiveness of the proposed BP-CCNN decoding structure. In order to address more complicated channel noise, we also design a two-level architecture and show its advantages. In our future work, we will optimize our proposed architecture for good decoding performances at lower training cost. Furthermore, we will also consider the design of channel noise models closer to the real environment and validate our proposed architecture compared to the conventional decoder.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes", IRE Transactions on information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[2] T. J. Richardson, R. L. Urbanke, "The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding", IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb 2001.
[3] D.-S. Shiu, G. J. Foschini, M. J. Gans, J. M. Kahn, "Fading correlation and its effect on the capacity of multielement antenna systems", IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 502-513, Mar. 2000.
[4] S. S. Tehrani, B. F. Cockburn, S. Bates, "On the effects of colored noise on the performance of LDPC codes", Proc. IEEE Workshop

Signal Process. Syst. Des. Implementation, pp. 226-231, 2006.
[5] J. D. Wang, H. Y. Chung, "Trellis coded communication systemscolored noise and the swapping technique", IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 1549-1556, Sep. 1990.
[6] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, "Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks", Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., pp. 1097-1105, 2012.
[7] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, Q. V. Le, "Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks", Proc. NIPS, pp. 3104-3112, 2014.
[8] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, "Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification", Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp. 1026-1034, 2015.
[9] E. Nachmani, Y. Be'ery and D. Burshtein, "Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning," 2016 54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), Monticello, IL, 2016, pp. 341-346.
[10] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, "An Introduction to Deep Learning for the Physical Layer," in IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563-575, Dec. 2017.
[11] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, S. ten Brink, "On deep learningbased channel decoding", Proc. CISS, pp. 1-6, 2017.
[12] T. Wang, C. Wen, H. Wang, F. Gao, T. Jiang and S. Jin, "Deep learning for wireless physical layer: Opportunities and challenges," in China Communications, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 92-111, Nov. 2017.
[13] S. Cammerer, T. Gruber, J. Hoydis, S. ten Brink, Scaling deep learning-based decoding of polar codes via partitioning, 2017, [online] Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.06901.
[14] F. Liang, C. Shen and F. Wu, "Exploiting Noise Correlation for Channel Decoding with Convolutional Neural Networks," 2018 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Kansas City, MO, 2018, pp. 1-6.
[15] H. Ye, G. Y. Li and B. Juang, "Power of Deep Learning for Channel Estimation and Signal Detection in OFDM Systems," in IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 114-117, Feb. 2018.
[16] S. Riyaz, K. Sankhe, S. Ioannidis and K. Chowdhury, "Deep Learning Convolutional Neural Networks for Radio Identification," in IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 146-152, Sept. 2018.
[17] A. S. Mohammad, N. Reddy, F. James and C. Beard, "Demodulation of faded wireless signals using deep convolutional neural networks," 2018 IEEE 8th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), Las Vegas, NV, 2018, pp. 969-975.
[18] E. Angiuli, F. Del Frate, B. Polsinelli, D. Solimini, "Towards complex-valued neural algorithms for forest parameters estimation from PolInSAR data", IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS, vol. II, pp. 641-644, July 2008.
[19] S. Samadi, M. Cetin, M. Masnadi-Shirazi, "Sparse signal representation for complex-valued imaging", Digital Signal Processing Workshop and Signal Processing Education Workshop (DSP/SPE), pp. 365-370, 2009.
[20] R. Hansch, O. Hellwich, "Classification of polarimetric SAR data by complex valued neural networks", ISPRS Workshop, 2009.
[21] C. Popa, "Complex-valued convolutional neural networks for realvalued image classification," 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Anchorage, AK, 2017, pp. 816-822.
[22] V. Jain, S. Seung, "Natural image denoising with convolutional networks", Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., pp. 769-776, 2009.
[23] X. Glorot, Y. Bengio, "Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks", AISTATS, vol. 9, pp. 249-256, 2010.
[24] D. Kingma, J. Ba, "Adam: A method for stochastic optimization", Proc. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:42:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

