IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

7

A Partially Coupled LDPC Coded Scheme for the Gaussian Wiretap Channel
Junyi Du

Abstract— In this letter, we propose an effective partially coupled low-density parity-check coded scheme to reduce the security gap for the Gaussian wiretap channel. In our scheme, codewords are partially coupled by exclusive OR adding the message bits from a codeword to the parity check bits from its consecutive codeword. An iterative decoding algorithm is also proposed to utilize the correlations between codewords. Based on this design, error propagation effect between codewords is achieved to worsen the performance at the eavesdropper, which receives messages via a poor conditioned channel. Numerical results demonstrate that the proposed scheme outperforms the punctured scheme in terms of the equivocation rate and the security gap.
Index Terms— Gaussian wiretap channel, low-density paritycheck, coupled codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE wiretap channel, introduced by Wyner [1], consists of a transmitter Alice, a legitimate receiver Bob and an eavesdropper Eve. Bob and Eve receive messages from Alice via the main channel and the eavesdropper’s channel, respectively. Wyner proves that it is possible to achieve informationtheoretically secure communication by means of coding if the main channel is better than the eavesdropper’s channel.
From the aspect of information theory, the perfect secrecy is achieved when the transmission rate of Bob is equal to the secrecy capacity and the mutual information between messages and Eve’s observations goes to zero as the blocklength goes to infinity. Equivocation rate, defined as the conditional entropy of the secret messages, is Eve’s equivocation about the transmitted messages and can be also used as a measure of secrecy. These metrics are widely used for evaluation of the secrecy performance [2]. However, an alternative metric, called security gap, is adopted in some applications such as explicit and implementable scheme design for physical layer security. It quantifies the minimum required difference between the channel qualities of the main channel and the eavesdropper’s channel to ensure that the bit error rate (BER) at Bob is lower than a threshold and that at Eve’s receiver is larger than another threshold. According to this definition, it is important to keep the security gap of a scheme as small as possible, so that a desired secrecy level can be easily achieved.
Despite the fact that imposing a high BER at the eavesdropper cannot guarantee a strict secrecy security, security gap serves as a practical metric and is commonly adopted
Manuscript received July 9, 2019; revised August 23, 2019 and September 26, 2019; accepted October 25, 2019. Date of publication October 29, 2019; date of current version January 8, 2020. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Baldi.
The author is with the Southwest China Institute of Electronic Technology, Chengdu 610036, China (e-mail: jydu1989@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2950307

for the design of practical coding and modulation schemes. In [3], the authors propose an effective practical low-density parity-check (LDPC) coded scheme by puncturing the message bits of the codeword to hide the information from Eve. The proposed scheme can achieve high reliability between friendly parties while keeping the security gap small. Referring to this work, the following literature [4]–[8] proposes different coded schemes to further minimize the security gap. In [4], [5], the authors propose a non-systematic coding scheme by multiplying the message bits vector by a nonsingular scrambling matrix, so that even one residual channel error can produce maximum uncertainty by perfect scrambling. In [6], the authors consider the lattice code and propose a lattice coset coding strategy for the Gaussian wiretap channel. In [7], the authors introduce polar code for the wiretap channel and propose a polar-LDPC concatenated coding scheme. In [8], the authors introduce convolutional codes and Turbo codes for the wiretap channel and propose a randomized coding scheme. However, these schemes achieve a smaller security gap by concatenation or utilizing complex encoding scheme, thus have higher computational complexities.
In this letter, we introduce a partially coupled LDPC coded scheme to improve the security performance with a negligible complexity increase. At the transmitter, we couple the codewords by exclusive OR (XOR) adding the message bits of a codeword to the parity check bits of its consecutive codewords in a bit by bit manner. At the receiver, we propose an iterative decoding algorithm and conduct the decoding process in a codeword by codeword manner. The decoding result of a codeword are fed back to the demodulator as the a priori information for the demodulation of its consecutive codeword. Compared to the punctured scheme, our proposed scheme can further reduce the security gap without increasing the complexity and the SNR loss significantly.
II. SCHEME DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, we first present some notations and then describe our proposed partially coupled LDPC coded scheme. At last, we make a comparison between the coupled scheme and the punctured scheme by analysis and equivocation evaluation.

A. Preliminaries and Notations

We denote the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the main
channel as SNRB with the corresponding BER PeB and denote the SNR in the eavesdropper’s channel as SNRE with the corresponding BER PeE. The wiretap channel is considered to be effective if the following conditions hold

a) PeB ≤ PeB,max b) PeE ≥ PeE,min

(reliability) (security),

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the coupled LDPC coded schemes for gaussian wiretap channel.
where PeB,max denotes the maximum BER to ensure reliability and PeE,min denotes the minimum BER to ensure security. Their corresponding SNRs are SNRB,min and SNRE,max, respectively. We denote SNRgap = SNRB,min −SNRE,max as the security gap.

B. Partially Coupled LDPC Coded Scheme
In the punctured scheme, the message bits of a codeword are
punctured and its parity bits are transmitted without any com-
putation. Different from that, in the coupled scheme, the parity
check bits of a codeword are XOR computed with the message
bits of its previous codeword. Therefore, the codewords are
partially coupled and the residual bit errors of a codeword
would affect the decoding result of its following codewords.
For Bob, the BER performance is almost the same as that of
the punctured scheme. For Eve with a degraded version of
channel, the errors would propagate between codewords and
the decoding performance would be worse.
1) Encoding: The diagram of the scheme is presented in Fig. 1. Denote the number of coupled codewords as ρ, where ρ > 1. For the first codeword, Alice employs a systematic LDPC code and encodes a message vector b1 with k bits to an LDPC codeword c1 = {c1p, c1m} with n bits. Alice then directly punctures the message bits cm 1 and transmits the r parity check bits c1p to Bob. For the i-th codeword, where i > 1 and i ≤ ρ, Alice encodes the message bit vector bi to an n-bit LDPC codeword ci = {cip, cim}. The parity check bits cip are further partitioned into two parts {cip,c, cip,u}. Before transmitted to Bob, a part of the parity check bits cip,c are XOR computed with the message bits cim−1 of the (i − 1)-th codeword, i.e., cpi ,c = cip,c ⊕ cm i−1. For each codeword, the number of the transmitted bits is r and the number of the coupled bits is k. Denote α as the fraction of the coupled bits in the transmitted bits and α = k/r.
To clearly present the encoding process, Fig. 2 shows the coupling structure of the ρ codewords and marks the bits
belonged to the same codeword with the same color. Only the parity check bits c1p of the first codeword are directly modulated to BPSK signals x1 and the parity check bits of other codewords are XOR computed with the message bits from its previous codeword. For the i-th codeword, i ≤ ρ, its new computed parity check bits c˜ip are modulated to BPSK signals xi. To be note that, since only the parity check bits are transmitted, the transmission rate increases from rd = k/n to rs = k/r, the same as the punctured scheme.
2) Decoding: Bob (and Eve) receives the channel observations yi ( and zi) via the main (and eavesdropper’s) AWGN channel. The demodulation and decoding algorithm is assumed
to be the same for Bob and Eve. The whole process is taken

Fig. 2. The coupled LDPC codewords.

codeword by codeword to estimate the message bits. For the i-th codeword, i ≤ ρ, the demodulator calculates the LLRs L(cip) of its r parity check bits and then transmits them to the decoder. Afterwards, the decoder employs decoding algorithm to obtain the LLRs of its k message bits and estimates the transmitted message bits ˆbBi (and ˆbiE). It then feeds back the LLRs LA(cim) of the message bits back to the demodulator as the a priori LLRs for the following codeword.
The detailed demodulation process is described as follows. For the first codeword, the LLR of its t-th (t ≤ r) parity check bit is calculated according to (1) with y1(t),

L(p1)(t)

=

2y1(t) σn2

,

(1)

where the noise variance σn2 = N0/2, and N0 denotes the single-sided noise spectrum density.

For the i-th codeword, i > 1 and i ≤ ρ, the demodulation process is different. For the parity check bit in cpi ,u, its LLR is calculated according to (1). For the t-th parity check bit in cpi ,c, t ≤ k, the LLR is calculated according to (3) with the a priori LLR LA(cim−1(t)) and channel observation yi(t). Its
probability of zero is equal to

p(cpi ,c(t) = 0) = p(yi(t)|c˜ip(t) = 0, cim−1(t) = 0) + p(yi(t)|c˜pi (t) = 1, cim−1(t) = 1), (2)
where cpi (t) is the XOR computed bit and cim−1(t) is the corresponding message bit. Its LLR value is equal to

L(pi,)c(t)

=

log

p(cpi ,c(t) p(cpi ,c(t)

= =

0) 1)

=

log

e2yi(t)/σn2 eLA e2yi(t)/σn2 +

(cm i−1 (t))
eLA (cim−1

+1
(t))

,

(3)

The detailed decoding process is described as follows. After receiving the r parity check LLRs of the i-th codeword, the decoder sets the LLRs of the message bits to 0. The LDPC decoder employs belief propagation (BP) algorithm to estimate the message bits with the channel information of the parity check bits and obtains the decoding results bˆBi of the i-th codeword. Though the Tanner graph of a finite length LDPC code usually has cycles and the BP algorithm does not yield exact bitwise maximum a posteriori probabilities of the coded

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU: PARTIALLY COUPLED LDPC CODED SCHEME

9

bits, it has been shown to exhibit excellent performance [9]. Then the decoder feeds the calculated LLRs of the message bits back to the demodulator as the a priori information for the (i + 1)-th codeword. Note that, the coupled scheme introduces a pipeline decoding structure and is different from the existing concatenation scheme [4], [7].

C. Comparison to the Punctured Scheme
In this section, we aim to evaluate the SNR loss and the SNR gap. From the aspect of Bob, the BER performances of the two schemes in the main channel are almost the same. Since it is required that the BER in the main channel PeB ≤ PeB,max (e.g. PeB,max = 10−5), the demodulator can remove the interference of the previous codeword with its perfect a priori information from the decoder. Therefore, SNRB,min of the coupled scheme is almost the same as that of the punctured scheme, as well as the SNR loss.
From the aspect of Eve, the BER performance of the coupled scheme in the eavesdropper’s channel is worse than that of the punctured scheme. Since it is required that PeE ≥ PeE,min (e.g. PeE,min = 0.49), the demodulator cannot remove the interference of the previous codeword and the coupled parity check bits are equivalently punctured. Compared to the punctured scheme, SNRE,max of the coupled scheme is larger and the security gap is thus smaller.
We introduce correlations between codewords via coupling in our proposed coupled scheme. Therefore, we utilize the error propagation effect so that the decoding errors would propagate between codewords. Since Eve has a much worse channel condition than Bob in the wiretap channel, this encoding scheme enables to worsen Eve’s BER performance without changing Bob’s BER performance much.

D. Eve’s Total Equivocation

In this subsection, we aim to evaluate Eve’s total equivocation about the transmitted codeword. Since the codewords are partially coupled and they have correlations, Eve’s total equivocation about the i-th transmitted codeword is

E = H(ci|zi, LA(cm i−1))

= H(ci|LA(ci−1)) − I(ci; zi|LA(cim−1))

= H(ci) − I(ci; zi|LA(cim−1)).

(4)

Therefore, Eve’s equivocation rate is equal to

Re

=

1 r H(ci) −

1 r

I

(ci

;

zi|LA(cm i−1

))

=

Rs

−

1 r

I

(ci

;

zi|LA

(cim−1

)).

(5)

In punctured scheme, the codewords have no correlations and

Eve’s equivocation rate is equal to

ReP

=

Rs

−

1 r I(ci; zi)

≤

Rs

−

1 r

I

(ci

;

zi|LA(cim−1

)).

(6)

Eve’s equivocation rate in the punctured scheme is higher than

the proposed coupled scheme.

To clearly calculate the equivocation rate, we use the mutual information security (MIS) notion [10], [11] and denote IA

Fig. 3. BPSK modulated schemes with α = 1/3 and various IA values: (a) input-constrained capacity; (b) equivalent rate.
Fig. 4. SNR loss and SNR gap performances with various ρ.
as the a priori information of the feedback channel from the decoder to the demodulator. For the employed BPSK modulation, its input-constrained capacities with various a priori information for AWGN channels are calculated in Fig. 3. Since Eve receives low SNR signals and the decoding results are commonly poor, the quality of the feedback channel is poor in the coupled scheme and IA is equal to 0. In the punctured scheme, codewords do not have correlations and the demodulation of the parity check bits do not rely on the decoding results of previous codewords. Equivalently, Eve has perfect a priori information IA = 1 from the decoder.
Fix the capacity of at 0.2, the required SNRs for the coupled scheme and the punctured scheme are −5.7 dB and −7.9 dB, respectively. The coupled scheme has about 2.2 dB gain over the punctured scheme at this level of security.
III. NUMERICAL RESULTS In this section, we aim to verify the performance of the coupled scheme by finite-length simulations with a comparison to the punctured scheme [3] and the scrambled scheme [4]. We consider the irregular LDPC code with a code rate 0.25. Its distributions are presented in equation (11) to (12) of [3] and its puncturing distributions are described in Table II of [3]. The code length is set to 3940. The transmission rates of the punctured scheme and the coupled scheme are 0.33, and that of the scrambled scheme is 0.25. We set the reliability threshold as PeB,max = 10−5 and the security threshold as PeE,min = 0.49. For a coupled scheme with a larger ρ, SNRE,max would increase significantly since the decoding errors of a codeword at the side of Eve can affect more codewords. In contrary, SNRB,min would not increase much since few errors are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10
TABLE I SNR LOSS (dB) AND SECURITY GAP (dB) OF THE SCHEMES

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 24, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

Fig. 5. Bob’s BER performances with rate-0.25 LDPC codes.
produced and propagated at the side of Bob. The SNR loss would be slightly larger and the SNR gap would be smaller with the increase of ρ, as presented in Fig. 4. In this simulation, ρ are chosen as 10 and 20, and the column weight w are set to 5 and k/2. Table I presents the simulation results.
A. SNR Loss
We compare the SNR losses of the schemes at the BER of 10−5. Fig. 5 presents the BER performances of the schemes with the rate-0.25 LDPC code. The coupled scheme with ρ = 20 has about 0.5 dB and 0.08 dB larger than the perfect scrambled scheme and the punctured scheme, respectively. Since the legitimate user Bob has a good channel condition to receive messages, only few decoding errors would appear and propagate between codewords. Therefore, the coupled scheme does not increase the SNR loss significantly.
B. Security Gap
We compare the security gaps of the schemes. Fig. 6 present Eve’s BER performances with the rate-0.25 LDPC code. To the best of our knowledge, the scrambled scheme is the best existing scheme in the literature if the security gap is concerned. The security gap of the perfect scrambled scheme is about 1.95 dB and that of the scrambled scheme with a column weight of 5 is about 3.72 dB. The security gap of the coupled scheme with ρ = 20 is about 4.8 dB and that of the punctured scheme is about 9.13 dB. The coupled scheme has about 4.3 dB gain over the punctured scheme.
Note that, the scrambled scheme needs to multiply the message bits vector by a nonsingular scrambling matrix, leading to a computational complexity of O(wk + k2), where w denotes the column weight of the matrix. The coupled scheme only needs bitwise XOR computation and the required complexity is O(k), which is linear with the growth of the code length. Moreover, the coupled scheme is a new approach to employ the error propagation effect for further reducing the

Fig. 6. Eve’s BER performances with rate-0.25 LDPC codes.
security gap of the punctured scheme. This similar idea of coupling codewords may also be able to improve the security gap performance for the scrambled scheme. We will consider it in the future work.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we proposed a coupled LDPC coded scheme for the Gaussian wiretap channel by considering this property that the channel condition of the legal user was better than that of the eavesdropper. At the transmitter, we introduced correlations between codewords by XOR adding the message bits of a codeword to some parity check bits of its consecutive codeword. At the receiver, we proposed an iterative decoding algorithm to utilize the correlations between codewords. Compared to the punctured scheme, the coupled scheme had a lower security gap and a higher level of equivocation with a slight complexity and SNR loss increase, verified by analysis and numerical results.
REFERENCES
[1] A. D. Wyner, “The wire-tap channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 387–1355, Oct. 1975.
[2] E. Güvenkaya, J. M. Hamamreh, and H. Arslan, “On physical-layer concepts and metrics in secure signal transmission,” Phys. Commun., vol. 25, pp. 14–25, Dec. 2017.
[3] D. Klinc, J. Ha, S. W. McLaughlin, J. Barros, and B.-J. Kwak, “LDPC codes for the Gaussian wiretap channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 532–540, Sep. 2011.
[4] M. Baldi, M. Bianchi, and F. Chiaraluce, “Coding with scrambling, concatenation, and HARQ for the AWGN wire-tap channel: A security gap analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 883–894, Jun. 2012.
[5] M. Baldi, M. Bianchi, and F. Chiaraluce, “Non-systematic codes for physical layer security,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Dublin, Ireland, Aug./Sep. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[6] F. Oggier, P. Solé, and J.-C. Belfiore, “Lattice codes for the wiretap Gaussian channel: Construction and analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 5690–5708, Oct. 2016.
[7] Y. Zhang, A. Liu, C. Gong, G. Yang, and S. Yang, “Polar-LDPC concatenated coding for the AWGN wiretap channel,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1683–1686, Oct. 2014.
[8] A. Nooraiepour and T. M. Duman, “Randomized convolutional codes for the wiretap channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 3442–3452, Aug. 2017.
[9] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[10] M. Baldi, L. Senigagliesi, and F. Chiaraluce, “On the security of transmissions over fading wiretap channels in realistic conditions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Commun. Conf., May 2017, pp. 1–6.
[11] S. R. Aghdam, A. Nooraiepour, and T. M. Duman, “An overview of physical layer security with finite-alphabet signaling,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1829–1850, 2nd Quart., 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:36:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

