390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

Analysis and Optimization of Tail-Biting Spatially Coupled Protograph LDPC Codes for BICM-ID Systems
Zhaojie Yang , Yi Fang , Guohua Zhang , Francis C. M. Lau , Shahid Mumtaz , and Daniel B. da Costa

Abstract—As a typical example of bandwidth-efficient techniques, bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding (BICM-ID) provides desirable spectral efficiencies in various wireless communication scenarios. In this paper, we carry out a comprehensive investigation on tail-biting (TB) spatially coupled protograph (SC-P) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in BICM-ID systems. Specifically, we first develop a two-step design method to formulate a novel type of constellation mappers, referred to as labeling-bit-partial-match (LBPM) constellation mappers, for SC-P-based BICM-ID systems. The LBPM constellation mappers can be seamlessly combined with high-order modulations, such as M -ary phase-shift keying (PSK) and M -ary quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM). Furthermore, we conceive a new bit-level interleaving scheme, referred to as variable node matched mapping (VNMM) scheme, which can substantially exploit the structure feature of SC-P codes and the unequal protection-degree property of labeling bits to trigger the wave-like convergence for TB-SC-P codes. In addition, we propose a hierarchical extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) algorithm to predict the convergence performance (i.e., decoding thresholds) of the proposed SC-P-based BICM-ID systems. Theoretical analyses and simulation results illustrate that the LBPM-mapped SC-P-based BICM-ID systems are remarkably
Manuscript received March 2, 2019; revised July 8, 2019 and September 10, 2019; accepted October 3, 2019. Date of publication October 25, 2019; date of current version January 15, 2020. This work was supported in part by the NSF of China under Grants 61771149 and 61471294, in part by the RGC of the Hong Kong SAR, China under Project PolyU 152170/18E, in part by the Open Research Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks under Grant ISN19-04, in part by the NSF of Guangdong Province under Grant 2016A030310337, in part by the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou under Grant 201904010124, in part by the NSF of Guangdong Province under Grant 2019A1515011465, in part by the Guangdong Province Universities and Colleges Pearl River Scholar Funded Scheme under Grant 2017-ZJ022, in part by the Research Project of the Education Department of Guangdong Province under Grants 2017KTSCX060 and 2017KZDXM028, in part by the Graduate Education & Innovation Project of Guangdong Province under Grant 2020SQXX12, and in part by the Guangdong Innovative Research Team Program under Grant 2014ZT05G157. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof. H.-F. Lu. (Corresponding author: Yi Fang.)
Z. Yang and Y. Fang are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China, and also with the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710126, China (e-mail: zjyang0131@163.com; fangyi@gdut.edu.cn).
G. Zhang is with the School of Communications and Information Engineering, Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi’an 710121, China (e-mail: zhangghcast@163.com).
F. C. M. Lau is with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong (e-mail: francis-cm.lau@polyu.edu.hk).
S. Mumtaz is with the Instituto de Telecomunicações 1049-001 Lisbo, Portugal (e-mail: smumtaz@av.it.pt).
D. B. da Costa is with the Department of Computer Engineering, Federal University of Ceará, Sobral 62010-560, Brazil (e-mail: danielbcosta@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2019.2949600

superior to the state-of-the-art mapped counterparts. Moreover, the proposed SC-P-based BICM-ID systems can achieve even better error performance with the aid of the VNMM scheme. As a consequence, the proposed LBPM constellation mappers and VNMM scheme make the SC-P-based BICM-ID systems a favorable choice for the future-generation wireless communication systems.
Index Terms—Tail-biting spatially coupled protograph codes, bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding, constellation mapper, extrinsic information transfer, interleaving.
I. INTRODUCTION
A S A type of bandwidth-efficient coded modulation techniques, bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) has attracted a significant amount of attention in the past two decades. BICM is constructed by a serial concatenated framework, which is composed of a channel encoder, a bit interleaver, and a constellation mapper [1]. This serial concatenated framework not only can boost the flexibility of system design, but also can improve the system performance and throughput in various channel environments. However, the BICM is regarded as a sub-optimal transmission scheme because of the independent demapping procedure. Recently, some signal shaping techniques have been widely investigated to improve the BICM capacity [2]. As one of the most popular shaping techniques, the probabilistic shaping technique allows the constellation labels to have non-equiprobable probabilities and thus realizes desirable shaping improvement [3]. Furthermore, an iterative processing for soft information between the demapper and the channel decoder has been employed at the receiver to improve the system performance. This operation results in an enhanced version of BICM systems, referred to as BICM with iterative decoding (BICM-ID) systems [4]. Such systems not only can inherit the high spectral-efficiency advantage, but also can exhibit better error performance.
Thanks to the aforementioned advantages, a large set of research activities have been sparked off to analyze and optimize the BICM-ID systems in order to enhance the reliability and rate of data transmission. For instance, many researches have focused on the design of constellation mapper, which is one critical parameter that determines the system performance. It is noteworthy that a constellation mapper that exhibits excellent performance in BICM systems is not always suitable for BICMID systems due to the incorporation of the iterative decoding technique. As a typical example, Gray constellation mapper is considered as an optimal constellation mapper in BICM systems,

0018-9545 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF TAIL-BITING SPATIALLY COUPLED PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES FOR BICM-ID SYSTEMS

391

but this mapper can only achieve trivial performance gain when ID is introduced [5]–[7]. For this reason, some constellation mappers have been designed particularly for BICM-ID systems. In [8], an innovative method, which can be used to generate good phase-shift keying (PSK) and quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) constellation mappers for BICM-ID systems, has been introduced. Moreover, a constellation-design criterion has been proposed to enhance the performance of BICM-ID systems over two-way relay fading channels [9], [10]. In [11], the authors have proposed a systematic method to construct multi-dimensional (MD) mappings based on the 16- and 64-QAM constellations.
Besides depending on the constellation mappers, the performance of BICM-ID systems depends on the error-correction codes (ECCs). Thus, much research effort has been endeavored to promote the analysis and optimization of ECCs for BICM-ID systems. Among all ECCs, protograph low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are the most popular due to their excellent error performance and relatively low complexity [12]. During the past decade, much attention has been paid to developing theoretical-analysis tools for protograph codes so as to determine the best candidates for a specific channel environment. As an example, the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) algorithm has been conceived to estimate the asymptotic-performance metrics of protograph codes (i.e., the decoding thresholds) [13]. In recent years, the combination of protograph codes and BICM technique has been carefully investigated in bandwidthlimited communication environments. To be specific, an interleaving scheme, called variable degree matched mapping (VDMM) scheme, has been proposed and optimized in order to improve the performance of protograph-based BICM systems [14]–[17]. In parallel with the above advancement, the optimization of protograph-based BICM-ID systems has also been studied over Poisson pulse-position modulation (PPM) channels [18], [19].
In addition to the protograph codes, a type of LDPC convolutional-like codes, referred to as spatially coupled (SC) LDPC codes, has gained increasing interest in the coding communit [20], [21]. Compared with block codes, the SC codes are capable of achieving better performance because of the convolutional gain [22]–[25]. Thus, there is a surge of research interest in developing some practical design methods for SC codes to facilitate their application in wireless communication scenarios. For instance, the time-invariant SC codes with small constraint length [26]–[28] and the finite-length SC codes [29], [30], which benefit from desirable error performance and decoding complexity, have been deeply investigated in recent years. In parallel with the above advancements, some energy allocation and high-order modulation techniques have been considered for SC codes. In particular, an energy shaping scheme, which allows the system to allocate different transmission energies for different coded bits, has been proposed to improve the decoding thresholds of tail-biting SC (TB-SC) codes over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels [31]. Moreover, some improved bit-mapping schemes have been proposed for TB-SC codes in BICM frameworks so as to accelerate the convergence of the decoding process [32], [33]. Besides, the idea of EXIT has been exploited to optimize the asymptotic performance of SC codes in different transmission scenarios [34]–[36].

Inspired by the appealing advantages of protograph codes and SC codes, spatially coupled protograph (SC-P) codes have also been formulated. The SC-P codes can not only inherit all superiorities of protograph codes, but also possess the convolutional property to achieve additional performance gain [37], [38]. Accordingly, such codes have become a more preferable choice in practical applications. During the past five years, abundant works have been reported to promote the theoretical and practical advancement of SC-P codes in different transmission environments, such as binary erasure channels (BECs) and AWGN channels [39], [40]. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, the performance analysis and optimization of SC-P codes for BICM systems, especially BICM-ID systems, are relatively unexplored.
With the above motivation, this paper conducts an insightful and comprehensive study on tail-biting SC-P (TB-SC-P) codes for BICM-ID systems. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows. First, according to the average mutual information (AMI) analysis, a two-step design method is proposed to construct a novel type of constellation mappers, referred to as labeling-bit-partial-match (LBPM) constellation mappers, for the SC-P-based BICM-ID systems. An appealing benefit of the proposed constellation mappers is that they can not only achieve higher capacity than other existing constellation mappers in BICM scenarios, but also accomplish larger iterative improvement in BICM-ID scenarios. Moreover, we conceive a novel interleaving scheme, i.e., variable node matched mapping (VNMM) scheme, tailored for the TB-SC-P codes so as to offer more performance gain in the BICM-ID scenarios. Especially, the proposed VNMM scheme can give rise to the decoding-wave phenomenon in the joint demapping-and-decoding process and thus significantly accelerate the convergence of the a posteriori MI of TB-SC-P codes. Additionally, a hierarchical EXIT algorithm, which can be used to evaluate the asymptotic convergence performance of TB-SC-P codes with different constellation mappers, is proposed for BICM-ID systems. To summarize, the proposed LBPM-VNMM-aided SC-P-based BICM-ID system is superior to the state-of-the-art BICM-ID systems and stands out as a promising transmission technique for future wireless communication systems.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the SC-P-based BICM-ID system model and its AMI analysis. In Section III, we put forward a two-step design method to construct the LBPM constellation mappers and we illustrate its merit from the information-theoretical perspective. In Section IV, we further conceive a VNMM scheme for the SC-P-based BICM-ID systems. In Section V, we propose a hierarchical EXIT algorithm to derive the decoding thresholds of TB-SC-P codes in the BICM-ID systems. Section VI gives various simulation results along with several discussions and insights, and Section VII concludes the overall work.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND AMI CALCULATION
In this section, we begin with a brief introduction of the SC-P-based BICM-ID systems over an AWGN channel. Then, we review the information-theoretical analysis of constellationconstrained AMI for such systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

A. BICM-ID Systems

The protograph/SC-P-based BICM-ID system considered in this paper is illustrated as follows. The information bits are first encoded by a protograph/SC-P encoder to yield a coded bit sequence. Then, every m bits output from the interleaver are mapped to a modulated symbol based on a specific M -ary constellation mapper, such as M -PSK and M -QAM constellation mappers. After the above process, a coded bit sequence of length n is converted to an M -ary modulated symbol sequence of length n/m, where m = log2 M (m = 3, 4, . . .).1 The j-th modulated signal xj will be transmitted through a complex AWGN channel and its corresponding received signal yj is given by

yj = xj + nj ,

(1)

where j = 1, 2, . . . , n/m; xj belongs to a constellation set χ; |χ| = M = 2m denotes the size of constellation set; nj represents the complex Gaussian noise with zero mean and variance σ2 = N0/2 in each dimension. In this paper, it is assumed that the transmitted energy per symbol is normalized to one, i.e., Es = E[|xj|2] = 1, where E[·] denotes the expectation function.
At the receiver, the received signal will be processed by a serial concatenated decoding framework, which consists of a single-input single-output (SISO) demapper and a SISO decoder. Specifically, based on the received signal yj and the apriori log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) of the demapper, the extrinsic LLRs output from the demapper can be computed and sent to the deinterleaver. After a specific deinterleaving operation, these extrinsic LLRs will be used as a-priori LLRs of the decoder. Subsequently, the extrinsic LLRs output from the decoder can be calculated and sent to the interleaver. After being permuted by the interleaver, these extrinsic LLRs will be fed back to the demapper and used as the updated a-priori LLRs of the demapper for the next iteration. Based on such a framework, the extrinsic LLRs can be updated iteratively to accelerate the convergence of a-posteriori LLRs and to enhance the performance of BICMID systems. In this work, the max-sum approximation of the log-domain maximum a-posteriori probability (Max-Log-Map) algorithm [41] and belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [38] are utilized to implement the demapper and decoder, respectively.2

can be evaluated as

CCM = m − Ex,y log2

z∈χ p(y|z) p(y|x)

,

(2)

where p(y|z) denotes the probability density function (PDF) of the received signal y conditioned on the complex symbol z chosen from a constellation set χ, and p(y|x) denotes the PDF of the received signal y conditioned on the modulated signal x. The CCM defined in (2) is called the coded modulation (CM) capacity. According to [44], [45], CM can maximize the achievable rate and thus is regarded as an optimal transmission scheme.
On the other hand, for a BICM system, the constellationconstrained AMI can be measured by

m
CBICM = m − Eb,y log2
i=1

z∈χ p(y|z) z∈χ(ib) p(y|z)

,

(3)

where χ(ib) denotes the subset of constellation set χ with the i-th bit being b (b ∈ {0, 1}). The CBICM defined in (3) is called the BICM capacity.
As is well known, BICM is regarded as a sub-optimal transmission scheme and is not able to achieve the maximum achievable rate due to the independent demapping procedure [46]. To address this issue, an iterative processing for soft information exchange between the demapper and decoder can be employed at the receiver of a BICM to formulate a BICM-ID. In a BICM-ID system, the a-priori information of m labeling bits within a modulated symbol is fed back from the decoder to the demapper. This operation can be exploited substantially to improve the overall performance (i.e., boost the achievable rate) of the BICM system. After a sufficient number of iterations between the demapper and decoder, BICM-ID can perfectly compensate the rate loss of BICM and hence maximize the achievable rate [4], [46], [47]. For the above reason, BICM-ID can be considered as an optimal transmission scheme whose constellation-constrained AMI is equal to the CM capacity [44], [48]. In this sense, CCM can be treated as the BICM-ID capacity, which is denoted as CBICM−ID.

B. Constellation-Constrained AMI Calculation
It is well known that the AMI between the channel input and the channel output determines the maximum information rate for error-free transmission [42], [43]. In this sense, the AMI can be treated as a criterion for estimating the channel transmission performance. Supposing that the transmitted signal is taken from a given constellation set with equal probability, the constellation-constrained AMI of CM over an AWGN channel
1In this paper, we focus on the modulations with m > 2 because the proposed LBPM constellation mapper reduces to an anti-Gray constellation mapper when m = 2. Interested readers are referred to Section III for detailed principles of the proposed LBPM constellation mappers.
2Although the standard BP algorithm is utilized to decode the SC-P codes in this paper, the windowed BP algorithm [31] is also applicable to decoding the proposed BICM-ID systems.

III. DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF LBPM CONSTELLATION MAPPERS FOR SC-P-BASED BICM-ID SYSTEMS
A. Proposed Design Method
It is well known that the constellation mapper is one of the most critical parameters for bandwidth-efficient transmission techniques [6]. In different communication environments, the constellation mapper should be carefully designed and optimized so as to improve the system performance. In fact, any constellation mapper has its specific application scenarios. For instance, the Gray constellation mapper can achieve optimal performance in the BICM systems [6], [7]. But it is not suitable for BICM-ID systems owing to the trivial iterative gain [5]–[7]. To address this problem, a variety of constellation mappers, which can obtain larger iterative gain than the Gray constellation mapper in the BICM-ID systems, have been proposed [6], [9], [49],

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF TAIL-BITING SPATIALLY COUPLED PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES FOR BICM-ID SYSTEMS

393

Fig. 1. Constellation mappers for the SP, MSEW, and anti-Gray: (a) 8-PSK and (b) 16-QAM modulations.

[50]. Fig. 1 shows three classical constellation mappers, i.e., setpartition (SP), maximum squared Euclidean weight (MSEW), and anti-Gray mappers for the 8-PSK and 16-QAM modulations, which are suitable for BICM-ID scenarios. In this figure, xl is the l-th label in the constellation (i.e., l = 1, 2, . . . , 2m) and xlbi denotes the i-th labeling bit within xl (i.e., i = 1, 2, . . . , m).
From the perspective of equivalent parallel channels, an M ary modulation scheme can be viewed as a set of m parallel independent and memoryless binary input sub-channels (i.e., m = log2 M ) [1]. Such m sub-channels have different reliabilities (i.e., different AMIs corresponding to the m sub-channels) and each sub-channel corresponds to a labeling bit. In this paper, we define the protection degree of a labeling bit as the reliability of its corresponding sub-channel. Considering a 2m-ary modulation scheme, there are 2m labels in the corresponding constellation mapper and each label is composed of m labeling bits. From the distribution of labels in the constellation, it is apparent that the protection degrees for the m labeling bits are not exactly identical. Besides, it has been demonstrated in [51] that the Hamming distance of adjacent labels has a significant influence on the system performance. Based on the above discussion, a two-step design method, which can be used to construct the LBPM constellation mappers for high-order modulations, is proposed as follows.
1) Maximizing the number of highly protected labeling bits: For a 2m-PSK or QAM constellation mapper, there exist 2m labels and each label contains m labeling bits. The protection degrees corresponding to the m labeling bits can be evaluated by analyzing all the labeling-bit distribution in the constellation mapper. The higher the protection degree of a labeling bit is, the greater the AMI between the labeling bit and the received signal can be acquired. In

this work, we refer to these labeling bits with maximum protection degree as highly protected labeling bits and the rest labeling bits as generally protected labeling bits. With an aim to maximize the AMI, the number of highly protected labeling bits should be maximized. Specifically, suppose that the labeling bit sequence corresponding to the label xl is represented by {xlb1 , xlb2 , . . . , xbl m } and the number of highly protected labeling bits is assumed to be m . The parameter m , which satisfies 0 < m < m, can be calculated based on the labeling bit distribution in a constellation mapper. Afterwards, we can place the highly protected labeling bits of the label xl at the first m positions (i.e., {xbl 1 , xlb2 , . . . , xbl m }) within the labeling bit sequence. The above labeling-bit partial matched operation can ensure that the number of highly protected labeling bits can be maximized and thus can make the BICM-ID systems having excellent performance even without ID. 2) Maximizing the Hamming distance between the adjacent labels: To boost the iterative gain in the context of ID, we propose a maximizing-Hamming-distance criterion to deal with the remaining m − m generally protected labeling bits in the label xl. To begin with, the first generally protected labeling bit is placed at the m + 1 position in xl. This bit should be reasonably set to maximize the Hamming distance between the adjacent labels in the current constellation. Likewise, the remaining generally protected labeling bits, which are respectively placed at the m + 2, m + 3, . . . , m positions in the labeling bit sequence, will be processed individually according to the proposed maximizing-Hamming-distance criterion. As a consequence, an LBPM constellation mapper can be successfully constructed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

Fig. 2. Constellation mappers of the proposed LBPM: (a) 8-PSK and (b) 16-QAM modulations.

Following the proposed design method, one can construct the corresponding LBPM constellation mappers for different modulations. As an example, we show the LBPM constellation mappers for 8-PSK and 16-QAM modulations in Fig. 2. In this figure, we can see that the labeling bits xbl 1 and xbl 2 belong to the highly protected labeling bits for both the 8-PSK and 16-QAM constellation mappers. However, the remaining labeling bits (i.e., xlb3 for 8-PSK while xbl 3 and xbl 4 for 16-QAM), which belong to the generally protected labeling bits, are carefully set to maximize the Hamming distance between adjacent labels. In order to verify the superiority of our proposed LBPM constellation mappers in the BICM framework, we will analyze the BICM capacities by exploiting such mappers for 8-PSK and 16-QAM in the next subsection. As benchmarks, three state-of-the-art constellation mappers, i.e., SP, MSEW, and anti-Gray, are also considered. The benefit of our proposed LBPM constellation mappers in the BICM-ID framework will be further illustrated in the forthcoming sections. In particular, Section III-B (i.e., Fig. 3) and Section V-B (i.e., Table I) verify the effectiveness of Step 1) and Step 2) of the proposed LBPM constellation mappers, respectively.

Fig. 3. The CM and BICM capacities for the proposed LBPM and three existing constellation mappers (i.e., SP, MSEW, and anti-Gray) over an AWGN channel: (a) 8-PSK and (b) 16-QAM modulations.
IV. INTERLEAVER DESIGN FOR SC-P-BASED BICM-ID SYSTEMS

B. Capacity Analysis

A. Terminated SC-P Codes

The BICM capacities of different constellation mappers can be calculated by exploiting the constellation-constrained AMI analytical method in Section II. In the case of an AWGN channel, the CM and BICM capacities for 8-PSK and 16-QAM modulations with the proposed LBPM and three existing constellation mappers are depicted in Fig. 3. As observed from Fig. 3(a), the CM capacity is better than the BICM capacity (CCM ≥ CBICM), indicating that the BICM is a sub-optimal transmission scheme. More importantly, the proposed LBPM constellation mapper leads to a larger capacity with respect to the other three constellation mappers when the code rate R ≤ 0.5 (i.e., R = CBICM/m). One can also observe that the gap between the CM capacity and BICM capacity becomes the smallest when using the LBPM constellation mapper. Therefore, it can be concluded that the BICM system with the proposed constellation mapper can achieve better performance compared with counterparts using SP, MSEW, and anti-Gray constellation mappers. Similar conclusions can also be drawn from the case of 16-QAM modulation (see Fig. 3(b)).

A protograph, which has been proposed in [12], [52], can be represented by a small Tanner graph [52] G = (V, C, E) consisting of three different sets, i.e., a variable-node (VN) set V, a check-node (CN) set C, and an edge set E. The cardinalities of V, C, and E equal np, mp, and E, respectively. For a protograph, each edge ei,j ∈ E connects a VN vj ∈ V with a CN ci ∈ C, and parallel edges are allowed since they can be thoroughly
eliminated during an expansion procedure. Furthermore, a protograph with a code rate R = (np − mp)/np can be defined by a base matrix B = (bi,j) of size mp × np, where bi,j denotes the number of edges connecting ci with vj. An expanded protograph (resp. parity-check matrix) corresponding to a protograph
code can be generated by performing the “copy-and-permute”
operation on a given protograph (resp. base matrix) [52]. In
actual implementation, the “copy-and-permute” operation (i.e.,
also known as “lifting” operation) can be realized by exploit-
ing a modified progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [53].
After that, a protograph code of a given length can be easily
constructed based on its parity-check matrix.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF TAIL-BITING SPATIALLY COUPLED PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES FOR BICM-ID SYSTEMS

395

Remark: In this paper, both the protograph codes and TB-

SC-P codes are generated by performing the modified PEG

algorithm on their corresponding protographs.

By replicating a protograph L times and associating each

protograph with a time index t (t = 0, 1, . . . , L − 1), one can

construct an SC-P code by spatially coupling the sequence of L

disjoint protograph codes into a single coupled chain, where L

is the coupling length. More specifically, the edges emanating

from the VNs of protograph at times t (t = 0, 1, . . . , L − 1) are

connected to the CNs of protograph at times t, t + 1, . . . , t + w

based on a given edge-spreading rule, where w denotes the

coupling width (0 < w < L). From the perspective of matrix

structure, given a specific edge-spreading rule and a coupling

width w, the base matrix B corresponding to a protograph of

size mp × np can be decomposed into w + 1 submatrices (i.e.,

B0, B1, . . . , Bw). Moreover, the relationship between the base

matrix and submatrices is governed by

w k=0

Bk

=

B

and

all

matrices must be of the same size. Based on the above discussion,

the base matrix corresponding to a terminated SC-P (TE-SC-P)

code can be expressed as

⎡

L

BLTE = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢BBB...w01

B0
B1 ... Bw

... ...
...

B0
B1 B0 ... B1 . . . Bw ... . . .
Bw ...

B0
B1 ...

Bw

⎤ ⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥ , (4)

where the size of BTLE is equal to mp(L + w) × npL. For a finite coupling length L, the code rate RLTE correspond-
ing to a TE-SC-P code can be measured by

RLTE

=

1−

(L + w)mp Lnp

=

1−

L+w L

(1 − R). (5)

It is apparent that the code rate RLTE is less than R, i.e., RLTE < R. To overcome the rate-loss weakness, another termination method has been developed to formulate a new type of
SC-P codes, called TB-SC-P codes.

B. Tail-Biting SC-P Codes
A TB-SC-P code can be generated from a TE-SC-P code by combining the CNs at times t = L, L + 1, . . . , L + w − 1 with the corresponding CNs of the same type at times t =

0, 1, . . . , w − 1, respectively. Consequently, the base matrix cor-

responding to a TB-SC-P code can be given by

⎡

⎤

BTLB = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢B...BB0ww−1

...
... ...

B0 ...
Bw−1

Bw
B0 ...

··· ...
...

...BB1w⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥ ,

(6)

Bw Bw−1 · · · B0

where the size of BLTB equals mpL × npL. By comparing (6) and (4), one can easily find that the base matrix BLTB can be obtained from the base matrix BTLE via adding its last mpw rows to the first mpw rows. As a result, the TB-SC-P codes have the same code rate and degree distribution as their corresponding
protograph codes.

C. Interleaver Design
1) Related Work: It is well known that the TE-SC-P codes can attain a larger threshold improvement as the coupling length L tends to infinity. Based on the information-theoretical analysis, this threshold improvement is caused by the decoding-wave phenomenon in the decoding process, which can be explained as follows [25], [38], [39]. Considering a TE-SC-P code, the MIs corresponding to the VNs at both ends of the protograph can converge with relatively higher priorities compared with the remaining VNs. This will further help to accelerate the convergence speed of MIs corresponding to the remaining VNs during the iteration procedure. The decoding-wave phenomenon greatly reduces the SNR required for the convergence of MIs of all VNs and thus improves the decoding threshold of the TE-SC-P code. Nonetheless, a large coupling length will greatly increase the complexity of TE-SC-P codes, and hence makes it rather difficult to meet the low-latency requirement for practical communication systems. When the coupling length L is small or moderate, there exists a rate-loss problem in such codes and the transmission-rate requirement can not be met.
Compared with the TE-SC-P codes, the TB-SC-P codes do not have the threshold improvement, but they have the same code rates as the original protograph codes. In order to improve the decoding thresholds of such codes, a hybrid mapping scheme, which simultaneously adopts two constellation mappers for each codeword, has been proposed in [36]. However, the hybrid mapping scheme may suffer from higher implementation complexity. Moreover, the work has only considered the 16QAM modulation in the mapping design. In [33], a shortening technique has been applied for TB-SC codes. The principle is that one can shorten the codeword by setting some coded bits to zero and thus inject some priori knowledge. But such a technique is at the cost of sacrificing the code rate. Based on the unequal protection-degree property of the labeling bits in SC-P-based BICM-ID systems (see Section III), we propose a new interleaving scheme to protect some coded bits in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

Fig. 4. Principle of the proposed VNMM scheme for a 2m-ary modulation in an SC-P-based BICM-ID system.

bit-to-symbol-mapping process. The new interleaving scheme not only can maintain the same implementation complexity and code rate as those of original systems, but also can trigger the decoding-wave phenomenon for TB-SC-P codes so as to improve their decoding thresholds in the BICM-ID systems. In the following, we will briefly describe the principle of the new interleaving scheme, referred to as VNMM scheme, for TB-SC-P-based BICM-ID systems.
2) Proposed VNMM Scheme: For an M -ary BICM-ID system, there exist M different labels. Each label consists of m labeling bits. Based on the distribution of M labels in the constellation mapper, one can evaluate the protection degrees for the m labeling bits (i.e., the protection degrees for different labeling bits are considered as the reliabilities for different sub-channels). Afterwards, the two labeling bits with relatively higher protection degrees than the remaining m − 2 labeling bits can be found (i.e., m ≥ 3) and referred to as the highly protected labeling bits. However, the remaining m − 2 labeling bits are viewed as the generally protected labeling bits. In the bit-to-symbol mapping process, one can extract m coded bits from the m different blocks separately to generate an M -ary modulated symbol. Specifically, the coded bits, which are extracted from the first block (i.e., the first n/m coded bits) and the last block (i.e., the last n/m coded bits), must be assigned to the two highly protected labeling bit positions. On the other hand, the remaining m − 2 coded bits can be extracted from the remaining m − 2 blocks and assigned to the generally protected labeling bit positions in a sequential order. After the above operation, one can assume that the coded bits within these m different blocks are assigned into m parallel sub-channels with different reliabilities. For this reason, the convergence performances of AMIs for the coded bits within different blocks are not exactly the same. In particular, the AMIs corresponding to the coded bits at both ends of the codeword converge faster than that of coded bits in the middle. Hence, the wave-like convergence for TB-SC-P codes can be triggered in the iterative decoding scenario. The newly proposed interleaving scheme that considers the unequal-protection-degree property is referred to as the VNMM scheme.
In general, the principle of the proposed VNMM scheme for a 2m-ary modulation is illustrated in Fig. 4. As can be observed,

the VNMM scheme can substantially exploit the structural feature of SC-P codes and the unequal protection-degree property of labeling bits so as to achieve additional performance gain in the BICM-ID systems.
Remark: The wave-like convergence principle of our proposed VNMM scheme is quite different from that of the existing techniques [31]–[33]. In our proposed VNMM scheme, the unequal protection-degree property of the labeling bits in a given constellation mapper can be exploited to protect some specific coded bits at both ends of the spatially coupled chain with relatively higher priorities in the bit-to-symbol mapping process. During the iterations between the demapper and decoder (i.e., outer iterations), the MIs corresponding to coded bits at both ends of the codeword can converge with relatively higher priorities and further accelerate the convergence of MIs corresponding to the remaining coded bits, which effectively triggers the decoding-wave phenomenon.
Assuming that the modulation order adopted in the BICM-ID systems is M , every m bits are grouped together and then mapped onto an M -ary modulated symbol (i.e., m = log2 M ). In this sense, the entire codeword can be divided into m blocks in a sequential order and each block consists of n/m bits. Based on the LBPM constellation mappers, we now give two different examples in order to clearly explain how to implement the proposed VNMM scheme.
Example 1: Considering an 8-PSK modulation and a TB-SCP code, every m = 3 coded bits are modulated into a symbol. Then, the entire codeword can be divided into m = 3 blocks in a sequential order, each of which contains n/3 coded bits. In the proposed 8-PSK LBPM constellation mapper, the number of highly protected labeling bits equals 2 (i.e., the xbl 1 and xlb2 in Fig. 2(a) are the highly protected labeling bits). Assuming that the AMI between the labeling bits xlbi and the received signal yj is denoted by I(xbi ; y), the three labeling bits in each label must satisfy the following property
I(xb1 ; y) = I(xb2 ; y) > I(xb3 ; y).
In the process of bit-to-symbol mapping, a symbol is generated by interleaving three coded bits, which can be extracted from the predefined three different blocks separately. Specifically, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF TAIL-BITING SPATIALLY COUPLED PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES FOR BICM-ID SYSTEMS

397

Fig. 5. Block diagram of the hierarchical EXIT algorithm for a VNMM-aided SC-P-based BICM-ID system.

VNs at both ends of the entire codeword should be protected with relatively higher priorities in order to accelerate their MI convergence in the decoding process. To achieve this goal, the coded bits in the first block and the last block should be assigned to the labeling bit positions xbl 1 and xlb2 , respectively. On the contrary, the coded bits in the second block should be assigned to the remaining labeling bit position xbl 3 . Exploiting the above VNMM scheme, the decoding-wave phenomenon of the TBSC-P code can be successfully triggered.
Example 2: Likewise, for a 16-QAM modulation, every m = 4 coded bits are modulated into a symbol. In this case, one can divide the whole codeword into m = 4 blocks, where n/4 coded bits are involved in each block. Referring to the proposed 16-QAM LBPM constellation mapper, it is apparent that the number of highly protected labeling bits also equals 2. Moreover, the relationship among AMIs of the four labeling bits can be expressed by
I(xb1 ; y) = I(xb2 ; y) > I(xb4 ; y) > I(xb3 ; y).
Accordingly, one can utilize a similar method as in Example 1 to protect the VNs at both ends of the entire SC-P codeword.
Remark: There exist some other interleaving schemes, e.g., the water-filling interleaving [14], reverse water-filling interleaving [14], and the variable degree matched mapping (VDMM) scheme [15], [17] for LDPC and protograph codes in the existing literature. However, they are tailored for conventional irregular protograph codes, but are not for regular protograph codes. More importantly, these interleaving schemes are not effective for the TB-SC-P codes.

V. HIERARCHICAL EXIT ALGORITHM AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR SC-P-BASED BICM-ID SYSTEMS

A. Hierarchical EXIT Algorithm

In order to accurately evaluate the decoding threshold of SC-P

codes in the VNMM-aided BICM-ID systems, a hierarchical

EXIT algorithm is proposed in this section. Specifically, the

hierarchical EXIT algorithm can be used to trace the iterative

convergence behavior of the MI between the demapper (inner

demapper) and the SC-P decoder (outer decoder). The structure

of the hierarchical EXIT algorithm is shown in Fig. 5. Aiming

to facilitate the description of the hierarchical EXIT algorithm

process, we define the following concepts.

Let

l

∼

N

( σc2h
2

,

σc2h)

be

the

LLR

of

the

received

signal

cor-

responding to the coded bit over an AWGN channel, where

N (α, β) denotes a Gaussian distribution with mean α and

variance β. The MI between the coded bit and its corresponding

LLR l can be expressed as

J (σch) = 1 −

+∞ exp

− (μ−σc2h/2)2
2σc2h

−∞

2πσc2h

× log2[1 + exp(−μ)] dμ.

(7)

The derivation of J(·) and its inverse function J−1(·) can be obtained in [54]. The closed-form approximation of J−1(·) is
also provided in [54]. Moreover, several different kinds of MIs
for the SC-P-based BICM-ID system can be defined as follows:
i) IAd and IEd denote the a-priori MI and the extrinsic MI of the demapper, respectively;
ii) IAv(i, j) denotes the a-priori MI transmitted from ci to vj ;
iii) IAc(i, j) denotes the a-priori MI transmitted from vj to ci;
iv) IEv(i, j) denotes the extrinsic MI transmitted from vj to ci;
v) IEc(i, j) denotes the extrinsic MI transmitted from ci to vj ;
vi) IAPP(j) denotes the a-posteriori MI of vj. Additionally, we assume that the maximum number of outer
iterations between the demapper and the SC-P decoder is set
to be T1; while the maximum number of inner iterations for the SC-P decoder in each outer iteration is set to be T2. In particular, we have IAv(i, j) = IEc(i, j) and IAc(i, j) = IEv(i, j) in each inner iteration. Based on the aforementioned definitions, the
hierarchical EXIT algorithm can be described as follows.
1) Initialization: At the beginning of the algorithm, there exist an initial Eb/N0 and m initial a-priori MIs IAkd (k = 1, 2, . . . , m), which serve as the input parameters
for the demapper.
2) Computing the extrinsic MI of demapper: Based on
the VNMM-based Monte-Carlo simulation, the extrinsic
LLRs corresponding to the coded bits output from the
demapper can be obtained. Furthermore, the extrinsic MIs IEkd (k = 1, 2, . . . , m), which are regarded as the initial decoding information for the VNs in the SC-P
decoder, can be computed by

IEkd = 1 − E log2(1 + e−ujlj ) ,

(8)

where uj ∈ {+1, −1} denotes the binary-phase shift-

keying (BPSK) modulated symbol corresponding to the

j-th coded bit; lj denotes the extrinsic LLR of the j-th

coded

bit

in

the

demapper;

and

j

=

(k−1)n m

+

1,

(k−1)n m

+

2, . . . ,

(k−1)n m

+

n m

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

3) Passing the extrinsic MI from demapper to decoder:

Set the initial channel MI of the VN decoder as Icjh = IEkd,

where

k

= 1, 2, . . . , m

and

j

=

(k−1)np m

+ 1,

(k−1)np m

+

2, . . . ,

(k−1)np m

+

np m

.

As

a

special

case,

Icjh

equals

zero

if

the j-th VN vj is punctured in corresponding protograph.

4) Updating the extrinsic MI from VN to CN: Exploiting the initial channel MI Icjh and the a-priori MI IAv(i, j) of a VN, one can calculate its corresponding extrinsic

MI IEv(i, j) for i = 1, 2, . . . , mp and j = 1, 2, . . . , np (if

bi,j = 0), as ⎛⎛

IEv(i, j) = J ⎝⎝ bs,j[J −1(IAv(s, j))]2
s=i
⎞1/2⎞ + (bi,j − 1)[J −1(IAv(i, j))]2 + [J −1(Icjh)]2⎠ ⎟⎠ .

(9)
5) Updating the extrinsic MI from CN to VN: Similarly, exploiting the a-priori MI IAc(i, j) of a CN, one can also calculate its corresponding extrinsic MI IEc(i, j), for i = 1, 2, . . . , mp and j = 1, 2, . . . , np (if bi,j = 0), as ⎛⎛
IEc(i, j) = 1 − J ⎜⎝ ⎝ bi,s[J −1(1 − IAc(i, s))]2
s=j
⎞1/2⎞ + (bi,j − 1)[J −1(1 − IAc(i, j))]2⎠ ⎟⎠ .

(10)

6) Computing the a-priori MI of demapper: Based on the a-priori MI IAv(i, j), one can further calculate the average extrinsic MI flowing from the SC-P decoder to the demapper for k = 1, 2, . . . , m, as

IAk d

=

1 (np/m)

knp /m j =(k−1)np /m+1

⎛

mp

J⎝

bi,j [J −1(IAv(i, j))]2

i=1

⎞
1/2
⎠,

(11)

which is viewed as updated a-priori MIs IAkd. 7) Computing the a-posteriori MI of VNs: For j =
1, 2, . . . , np, the a-posteriori MI IAPP(j) of each VN can be measured by exploiting IAv(i, j) and Icjh, as

IAPP(j) ⎛
=J⎝

⎞

mp

1/2

bi,j [J −1(IAv(i, j))]2 + [J −1(Icjh)]2 ⎠.

i=1

(12)

8) Finalization: The evaluation process is terminated when the a-posteriori MI IAPP(j) = 1 for all j = 1, 2, . . . , np,

or when the maximum number of outer iterations is

reached. Otherwise, we repeat Steps 2)–7).

Based on the hierarchical EXIT algorithm, one can get the

decoding threshold, i.e., the smallest Eb/N0 that ensures the a-posteriori MIs of all VNs in an SC-P code converging

to the value of unity. As a further advancement, Fig. 6 illustrates

the MI update schedule of a protograph-based code in the

hierarchical EXIT algorithm.

Nr oTtehaelsoptrhoapto:sed hierarchical EXIT algorithm is a

performance-analysis tool for the VNMM-aided

SC-P-based BICM-ID systems and the execution process is

realized by a serial concatenated scheme, which consists of

both Monte-Carlo simulation and information-theoretical

derivation. In order to ensure the accuracy of this algorithm,

the number of modulated symbols must be sufficiently

r

large. While

the

proposed

hierarchical

EXIT

algorithm

is

de-

signed particularly for the VNMM-aided BICM-ID sys-

tems, it is also suitable for the BICM systems when the

r

number of outer iteration T1 is set to be 0. In the standard EXIT algorithm, an infinite-length all-zero

codeword is assumed to be transmitted when calculating

the extrinsic MIs due to the characteristics of symmetric

channel and asymptotic analysis [12], [13]. However, the

codeword length is finite in practical wireless communi-

cation scenarios. In order to obtain a decoding threshold

well consistent with the waterfall-region performance of

the simulated BER result, a finite-length binary codeword

including both 0 and 1 bits is assumed in the proposed

r

hierarchical EXIT algorithm, as in [55]–[57]. In the standard EXIT analysis for the conventional BICM-

ID systems, only one extrinsic MI IEd and one a-priori MI IAd can be obtained in each outer iteration. Nonetheless, in the proposed hierarchical EXIT analysis, m dif-

ferent extrinsic MIs IEd and m different a-priori MIs IAd are calculated due to the introduction of the proposed VNMM interleaving scheme. Consequently, the formulas

used to calculate the extrinsic MI IEd and the a-priori MI IAd in the proposed hierarchical EXIT algorithm are different from those in the existing counterparts.

B. Asymptotic-Performance Analysis
As a specific example, Fig. 7 shows the protographs of a (3, 6) protograph code and its corresponding TB-SC-P code with L = 12, where the VNs and CNs are represented by black circles and circles with a plus sign, respectively. Referring to Fig. 7(b), the number of VNs in the protograph of (3, 6) TB-SC-P code is 24. Through a “copy-and-permute” operation with n/24 copies of this protograph, one can obtain a (3, 6) TB-SC-P code with a codeword length of n.
Based on the 8-PSK and 16-QAM modulations, the decodingwave phenomenon and decoding threshold of the (3, 6) TB-SC-P code are analyzed by exploiting the hierarchical EXIT algorithm in Section IV. In order to validate the superiority of the proposed LBPM constellation mappers and VNMM scheme in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF TAIL-BITING SPATIALLY COUPLED PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES FOR BICM-ID SYSTEMS

399

Fig. 6. Illustration of the MI update schedule of a protograph-based code in the hierarchical EXIT algorithm.

Fig. 7. Structures of (a) (3, 6) protograph code and (b) (3, 6) TB-SC-P code with coupling length L = 12.

BICM-ID condition, the SP, MSEW, and anti-Gray constellation mappers are used as benchmarks. As a further advance, we also compare the decoding thresholds of the proposed VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code and the well-performing protograph code (i.e., repeat-jagged-accumulate (RJA) protograph code) [37].
1) Decoding Wave: Fig. 8 depicts the decoding-wave phenomenon of the (3, 6) TB-SC-P code with coupling length L = 12 based on the proposed LBPM-mapped 8-PSK and 16QAM modulations and the VNMM in a BICM-ID system. In this figure, we plot the evolution of the a-posteriori MIs corresponding to the VNs in coupling position (L = 1, 2, . . . , 12) as the number of outer iterations T1 (T1 = 1, 2, . . . , 8) increases. As seen, the a-posteriori MIs for the VNs at both ends of the protograph can quickly converge to the value of one with an increase of the number of outer iterations. Moreover, a wave-like convergence from both ends to the middle area is yielded as the

Fig. 8. Decoding waves of the (3, 6) TB-SC-P code with the proposed LBPM
constellation mappers and VNMM scheme in a BICM-ID system over an AWGN channel. The coupling length is 12 and the outer iterations are T1 = 1, 2, . . . , 8 (from bottom to top): (a) 8-PSK and (b) 16-QAM modulations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

TABLE I DECODING THRESHOLDS OF THE (3, 6) PROTOGRAPH CODE IN BICM-ID SYSTEMS WITH DIFFERENT CONSTELLATION MAPPERS OVER AN AWGN CHANNEL. 8-PSK AND 16-QAM MODULATIONS ARE CONSIDERED. THE MAXIMUM NUMBERS OF OUTER ITERATIONS T1 AND INNER ITERATIONS T2
ARE 8 AND 25, RESPECTIVELY

mappers and VNMM scheme. In particular, the code rate and codeword length are assumed to be 1/2 and 4800. The coupling length for the TB-SC-P codes is set to be 12. Furthermore, the number of outer iterations between the demapper and the protograph/SC-P decoder is set to be T1 = 1, 2, 4, 8, while the maximum number of inner iterations is set to be T2 = 25.

A. Performance for 8-PSK Modulated BICM-ID Systems

a-posteriori MIs continuously increases. From the viewpoint of iterative decoding, the VNs at both ends of the protograph can pass more reliable messages to their neighboring VNs.
2) Decoding Threshold: Based on different constellation mappers, we estimate the decoding thresholds of the original (3, 6) protograph code in BICM-ID systems by exploiting the hierarchical EXIT algorithm, and present the results in Table I, where 8-PSK and 16-QAM modulations are considered. As observed, the (3, 6) protograph code with the proposed LBPM constellation mappers can exhibit the smallest decoding thresholds compared with the other three existing constellation mappers. Considering the proposed LBPM constellation mappers, the MIs of (3, 6) protograph code can converge to the value of unity at Eb/N0 = 2.480 dB and Eb/N0 = 3.626 dB for 8-PSK and 16-QAM modulations, respectively, while the (3, 6) protograph code with other constellation mappers requires much larger signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). This implies that the (3, 6) protograph code can achieve the best error performance when the proposed LBPM constellation mappers are applied in the BICM-ID systems.
In order to get further insight, we compare in Table II the decoding thresholds of (i) the RJA protograph code [37], (ii) the (3, 6) TB-SC-P code [38], and (iii) the VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code in BICM-ID systems with the proposed LBPM constellation mappers. Note that the (3, 6) TB-SC-P code in Table II has the same decoding thresholds (i.e., 2.480 dB and 3.626 dB) as the (3, 6) protograph code in Table I. More importantly, the decoding threshold of the (3, 6) TB-SC-P code can be further improved by utilizing the VNMM scheme. Moreover, the VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code can achieve an additional threshold gain with respect to the RJA protograph code, which outperforms the (3, 6) TB-SC-P code and (3, 6) protograph code. Hence, the SC-P-based BICM-ID system with the proposed LBPM constellation mappers and VNMM scheme is able to achieve excellent error performances.
Remark: To illustrate the potential benefits of the LBPM constellation mapper and VNMM scheme in a simple and clear way, we mainly focus on the regular (3, 6) SC-P code and PSK/QAM in this paper. However, the proposed design and analysis methodologies are applicable to other complex-valued modulations and other SC-P codes.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
Based on the BICM-ID systems, we present various simulation results of the (3, 6) protograph code, RJA protograph code, and (3, 6) TB-SC-P code over AWGN channels so as to demonstrate the merit of the proposed LBPM constellation

For the 8-PSK modulation, the bit-error-rate (BER) curves of the (3, 6) protograph code in the BICM-ID systems with different constellation mappers are depicted in Fig. 9. As observed from Fig. 9(a)–(c), the (3, 6) protograph code with the proposed LBPM constellation mapper can exhibit the best error performance compared with the conventional constellation mappers (i.e., the SP, MSEW, and anti-Gray constellation mappers) in the BICM-ID systems. For the case of T1 = 8, the (3, 6) protograph code with the proposed LBPM constellation mapper only requires an SNR of about 3.7 dB to accomplish a BER of 10−5, while the codes with SP, anti-Gray, and MSEW constellation mappers require SNRs of about 4.4 dB, 5.6 dB, 5.7 dB, respectively. In other words, the proposed LBPM constellation mapper possesses remarkable gains of about 0.7 dB, 1.9 dB and 2.0 dB over the SP, anti-Gray, and MSEW constellation mappers, respectively, at a BER of 10−5. The above simulated results are reasonably consistent with our theoretical analyses in Section V-B. In addition, as can be seen, the proposed LBPM constellation mapper can attain a gain of about 0.2 dB when the number of outer iterations increases from 4 to 8. In this sense, an additional gain can be expected for the proposed LBPM constellation mapper when the number of outer iterations becomes even larger.
To validate the superiority of the VNMM scheme in SC-Pbased BICM-ID systems, Fig. 9(d) presents the BER curves of the (3, 6) protograph code [38], (3, 6) TB-SC-P code [38], RJA protograph code [37], and the VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code in a BICM-ID system with the proposed LBPM-mapped 8-PSK modulation. As can be observed, the error performance of the VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code is much better than its corresponding (3, 6) TB-SC-P code, which has the same performance as the originial (3, 6) protograph code. Specifically, the VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code can achieve a gain of more than 0.2 dB over the (3, 6) TB-SC-P code in the whole BER range under study, which demonstrates the merit of our interleaver design. Furthermore, the VNMM-aided (3, 6) TBSC-P code outperforms the well-performing RJA protograph code, especially in the low SNR region. The performance gap between these two types of codes becomes smaller in the high SNR region due to the fact that the unequal protection-degree property cannot be substantially exploited when the modulation order is too small (M ≤ 8). In fact, the performance benefit of the proposed VNMM scheme will be more noticeable for higher-order modulations (see Fig. 10(d)).
B. Performance for 16-QAM Modulated BICM-ID Systems
Similarly, Fig. 10(a)–(c) show the BER curves of the (3, 6) protograph code in the BICM-ID systems with different constellation mappers, when a 16-QAM modulation is considered. As

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF TAIL-BITING SPATIALLY COUPLED PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES FOR BICM-ID SYSTEMS

401

TABLE II DECODING THRESHOLDS OF THE RJA PROTOGRAPH CODE, (3, 6) TB-SC-P CODE AND VNMM-AIDED (3, 6) TB-SC-P CODE IN A BICM-ID SYSTEM OVER AN
AWGN CHANNEL. THE LBPM-MAPPED 8-PSK AND 16-QAM MODULATIONS ARE CONSIDERED. THE MAXIMUM NUMBERS OF OUTER ITERATIONS T1 AND INNER ITERATIONS T2 ARE 8 AND 25, RESPECTIVELY, AND THE COUPLING LENGTH FOR SC-P CODES IS 12

Fig. 9. BER curves of the (3, 6) protograph code in the BICM-ID systems with different constellation mappers: (a) SP and LBPM constellation mappers, (b) MSEW and LBPM constellation mappers, (c) anti-Gray and LBPM constellation mappers; and (d) BER curves of the (3, 6) protograph code, (3, 6) TB-SC-P code, RJA protograph code, and VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code in an LBPM-mapped BICM-ID system. An 8-PSK modulation is considered.

can be seen, the proposed LBPM constellation mapper allows the (3, 6) protograph code to exhibit the best performance compared with the other three conventional constellation mappers. Generally speaking, the relative performance among the proposed LBPM, SP, MSEW, and anti-Gray constellation mappers in the case of 16-QAM modulation is identical to that in the case of 8-PSK modulation. This phenomenon verifies the effectiveness of the LBPM constellation mapper in the scenarios with different modulation orders.
Based on the LBPM-mapped 16-QAM modulation, we also compare the BER performance of four different protograph codes in the BICM-ID systems and present the results in Fig. 10(d). Different from the results in the 8-PSK modulation, the VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code achieves a significant gain of about 0.4 dB over the RJA protograph code at a BER of 10−5, which further achieves a gain of about 0.1 dB over the

(3, 6) TB-SC-P code and the original (3, 6) protograph code. According to the above observations, the proposed interleaving scheme not only significantly improves the SC-P-based BICMID systems, but also makes the SC-P codes a competitive alternative to other ECCs in high-rate and high-reliability wireless communication applications.
To further verify the superiority of the proposed LBPM constellation mappers, another two types of state-of-the-art counterparts (i.e., referred to as Gray-based precoding constellation mapper [8] and M 16a constellation mapper [58]) are used as benchmarks for performance comparison. As observed from Fig. 11(a), the (3, 6) protograph code with the proposed LBPM constellation mapper can exhibit better error performance than that with the Gray-based precoding constellation mapper. For the case of T1 = 8, the (3, 6) protograph code with the proposed LBPM constellation mapper only requires an SNR of about

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

Fig. 10. BER curves of the (3, 6) protograph code in the BICM-ID systems with different constellation mappers: (a) SP and LBPM constellation mappers, (b) MSEW and LBPM constellation mappers, (c) anti-Gray and LBPM constellation mappers; and (d) BER curves of the (3, 6) protograph code, (3, 6) TB-SC-P code, RJA protograph code, and VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code in an LBPM-mapped BICM-ID system. A 16-QAM modulation is considered.

5.2 dB to accomplish a BER of 2 × 10−5, while the code with the Gray-based precoding constellation mapper requires an SNR of about 6.3 dB to do so. Thus, the proposed LBPM constellation mapper possesses a gain of about 1.1 dB over the Gray-based precoding constellation mapper at a BER of 2 × 10−5. Similar conclusions can be drawn from Fig. 11(b) on the M 16a constellation mapper.
C. Performance for 64-QAM Modulated BICM-ID Systems
As a final example, we further perform simulations on the original (3, 6) protograph code, (3, 6) TB-SC-P code, RJA protograph code, VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code, and optimized VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code in a BICM-ID system with the LBPM-mapped 64-QAM modulation in Fig. 12 to demonstrate the feasibility of the VNMM scheme in higherorder-modulation scenarios.3 It should be noted that the LBPM constellation mapper for the 64-QAM modulation used here can be easily constructed by exploiting the two-step design method mentioned in Section III. As expected, our proposed VNMMaided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code can preserve its advantage and is still
3The principle of optimized VNMM scheme will be explained at the end of this paragraph.

superior to the RJA protograph code, (3, 6) TB-SC-P code, and original (3, 6) protograph code in terms of BER performance. Nonetheless, the performance gain from the VNMM scheme under the LBPM-mapped 64-QAM modulation is smaller than that under the LBPM-mapped 16-QAM modulation. Specifically, at a BER of 2 × 10−5, the VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code achieves a gain of about 0.4 dB over the RJA protograph code in the case of 16-QAM modulation, while the former only achieves a gain of about 0.1 dB over the latter in 64-QAM modulation. This phenomenon is due to the fact that the number of highly protected labeling bit positions is set as 2 in the proposed VNMM scheme. Therefore, although the decoding-wave phenomenon can be trigged in 64-QAM modulation, the number of highpriority blocks is only 50% of that of the general-priority blocks (i.e., the numbers of high-priority blocks and general-priority blocks equal 2 and 4, respectively).4 Thus, the coded bits in the middle area of the codeword in this case cannot converge as fast as those in the case of 16-QAM modulation.
4The block whose coded bits are assigned to the highly protected labeling bit positions is defined as a high-priority block, while the block whose coded bits are assigned to the generally protected labeling bit positions is defined as a general-priority block.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF TAIL-BITING SPATIALLY COUPLED PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES FOR BICM-ID SYSTEMS

403

the lowest-priority labeling bit positions, respectively. In order to verify the effectiveness of the optimized VNMM scheme, we apply such an optimized scheme to the LBPM-mapped 64QAM modulation and include the corresponding BER curve in Fig. 12. As can be seen, the optimized VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code achieves a significant gain of about 0.4 dB over the (original) VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code at a BER of 2 × 10−5.

Fig. 11. BER curves of the (3, 6) protograph code in the BICM-ID systems with different constellation mappers: (a) Gray-based precoding [8] and LBPM constellation mappers, (b) M 16a [58] and LBPM constellation mappers. A 16-QAM modulation is considered.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated the design and performance of spatially-coupled protograph (SC-P)-based BICM-ID systems, in which M -ary (M ≥ 8) PSK and QAM modulations are adopted. In particular, we put forward a two-step design approach to construct a type of LBPM constellation mappers for the SC-P-based BICM-ID systems. The proposed LBPM constellation mappers not only can allow the BICM systems to exhibit desirable capacities, but also can ensure excellent iterative performance of the BICM-ID systems. Furthermore, we have conceived a novel interleaving scheme, called VNMM scheme, tailored for use in SC-P-based BICM-ID systems to trigger the decoding-wave phenomenon in the turbo-like decoding process, which can therefore accelerate the convergence of a-posteriori MI corresponding to the TB-SC-P codes. As a further advancement, we have conceived a hierarchical EXIT algorithm to estimate the asymptotic decoding thresholds of TB-SC-P codes in the VNMM-aided BICM-ID systems. Both hierarchical EXIT analyses and simulations have illustrated that the proposed LBPM-VNMM-aided SC-P-based BICM-ID systems can achieve very desirable error performance and can significantly outperform the conventional BICM-ID systems. Thanks to the performance superiority, the proposed BICM-ID systems appear to be a good transmission technique for future wireless communication applications.

REFERENCES

Fig. 12. BER curves of the (3, 6) protograph code, (3, 6) TB-SC-P code, RJA protograph code, VNMM-aided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code, and optimized VNMMaided (3, 6) TB-SC-P code in a BICM-ID system. The LBPM-mapped 64-QAM modulation is considered.
To address this problem, the proposed VNMM scheme can be optimized according to the value of modulation order M (especially for M ≥ 64) as follows. The number of protection degrees can be set as m/2 rather than 2, where r denotes the ceiling r. In other words, m labeling bit positions can be divided into m/2 different priorities. Subsequently, the m blocks of a given codeword from the both ends to the middle area are assigned to the highest-priority, the second highest-priority, ...,

[1] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, May 1998.
[2] T. Fehenberger A. Alvarado, G. Bcherer, and N. Hanik, “On probabilistic shaping of quadrature amplitude modulation for the nonlinear fiber channel,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 34, no. 21, pp. 5063–5073, Nov. 2016.
[3] G. Böcherer, F. Steiner, and P. Schulte, “Bandwidth efficient and ratematched low-density parity-check coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 4651–4665, Dec. 2015.
[4] X. Li, A. Chindapol, and J. A. Ritcey, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding and 8PSK signaling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1250–1257, Aug. 2002.
[5] Y. Fang, G. Zhang, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, P. Chen, and G. Han, “Rootprotograph-based BICM-ID: A reliable and efficient transmission solution for block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 5921–5939, Sep. 2019.
[6] S. Chaabouni, N. Sellami, and M. Siala, “Mapping optimization for a MAP turbo detector over a frequency-selective channel,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 617–627, Feb. 2014.
[7] Q. Li, J. Zhang, L. Bai, and J. Choi, “Performance analysis and system design for hierarchical modulated BICM-ID,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3056–3069, Jun. 2014.
[8] H. M. Navazi and M. J. Hossain, “A novel symbol mapping method for BICM-ID systems for higher order signal constellations,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1323–1326, Aug. 2014.
[9] Z. Sun, L. Chen, X. Yuan, and Y. Yakufu, “Design and analysis of BICM-ID for two-way relay channels with physical-layer network coding,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 10170–10182, Nov. 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 69, NO. 1, JANUARY 2020

[10] H. Yan and H. H. Nguyen, “Distributed linear constellation precoding with BICM/BICM-ID in two-way relaying communications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 481–493, Jan. 2017.
[11] H. M. Navazi and M. J. Hossain, “Efficient multi-dimensional mapping using QAM constellations for BICM-ID,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 8067–8076, Dec. 2017.
[12] Y. Fang, G. Bi, Y. L. Guan, and F. C. M. Lau, “A survey on protograph LDPC codes and their applications,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1989–2016, Oct.–Dec. 2015.
[13] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Nov. 2007, pp. 3250– 3254.
[14] D. Divsalar and C. Jones, “Protograph based low error floor LDPC coded modulation,” in Proc. IEEE Military Commun., Oct. 2005, pp. 378–385.
[15] Y. Jin, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Optimized variable degree matched mapping for protograph LDPC coded modulation with 16QAM,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Sep. 2010, pp. 161–165.
[16] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “Threshold of protographbased LDPC coded BICM for Rayleigh fading,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[17] C. Tang, H. Shen, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Optimization of generalized VDMM for protograph-based LDPC coded BICM,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 853–856, May 2014.
[18] H. Zhou, M. Jiang, C. Zhao, and J. Wang, “Optimization of protographbased LDPC coded BICM-ID for the Poisson PPM channel,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 2344–2347, Dec. 2013.
[19] F. Zabini, B. Matuz, G. Liva, E. Paolini, and M. Chiani, “The PPM Poisson channel: Finite-length bounds and code design,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Aug. 2014, pp. 193–197.
[20] R. M. Tanner, “Convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes: A link between the theories of block and convolutional codes,” Univ. Calif. Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA, Tech. Rep., 1987, pp. 1–32.
[21] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[22] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[23] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 835–857, Feb. 2011.
[24] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[25] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[26] M. Battaglioni, A. Tasdighi, G. Cancellieri, F. Chiaraluce, and M. Baldi, “Design and analysis of time-invariant SC-LDPC convolutional codes with small constraint length,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 918– 931, Mar. 2018.
[27] M. Battaglioni et al., “Compact QC-LDPC block and SC-LDPC convolutional codes for low-latency communications,” in Proc. IEEE Pers., Indoor, Mobile Radio Commun., Sep. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[28] M. H. Tadayon, A. Tasdighi, M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and F. Chiaraluce, “Efficient search of compact QC-LDPC and SC-LDPC convolutional codes with large girth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1156–1159, Jun. 2018.
[29] V. Aref, N. Rengaswamy, and L. Schmalen, “Finite-length analysis of spatially-coupled regular LDPC ensembles on burst-erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3431–3449, May 2018.
[30] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek, “Finite-length construction of high performance spatially-coupled codes via optimized partitioning and lifting,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 3–16, Jan. 2019.
[31] T. Jerkovits, G. Liva, and A. G. I. Amat, “Improving the decoding threshold of tailbiting spatially coupled LDPC codes by energy shaping,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 660–663, Apr. 2018.
[32] C. Häger, A. G. I. Amat, F. Brännström, A. Alvarado, and E. Agrell, “Terminated and tailbiting spatially coupled codes with optimized bit mappings for spectrally efficient fiber-optical systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1275–1285, Apr. 2015.
[33] S. Cammerer, V. Aref, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink, “Triggering wavelike convergence of tail-biting spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Mar. 2016, pp. 93–98.

[34] M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and E. Paolini, “Complexity-constrained spatially coupled LDPC codes based on protographs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst., Aug. 2017, pp. 49–53.
[35] M. Schlter, N. U. Hassan, and G. P. Fettweis, “On the construction of protograph based SC-LDPC codes for windowed decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf., Apr. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[36] S. Cammerer, L. Schmalen, V. Aref, and S. ten Brink, “Wave-like decoding of tail-biting spatially coupled LDPC codes through iterative demapping,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Sep. 2016, pp. 121–125.
[37] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Minimum distance and trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 254–281, Jan. 2013.
[38] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[39] M. Stinner and P. M. Olmos, “On the waterfall performance of finitelength SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 345–361, Feb. 2016.
[40] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Randomly punctured LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 408–421, Feb. 2016.
[41] J. Tan, Q. Wang, C. Qian, Z. Wang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “A reducedcomplexity demapping algorithm for BICM-ID systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 4350–4356, Sep. 2015.
[42] Z. Wu, X. Gao, and C. Jiang, “Nonbinary LDPC-coded spatial multiplexing for rate-2 MIMO of DVB-NGH system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 201–210, Jun. 2018.
[43] J. Bao, Z. Ma, M. Xiao, T. A. Tsiftsis, and Z. Zhu, “Bit-interleaved coded SCMA with iterative multiuser detection: Multidimensional constellations design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 5292–5304, Nov. 2018.
[44] Q. Xie, K. Peng, J. Song, and Z. Yang, “Bit-interleaved LDPC-coded modulation with iterative demapping and decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., Apr. 2009, pp. 1–5.
[45] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. NewYork, NY, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[46] T. Cheng, K. Peng, Z. Liu, and Z. Yang, “Efficient receiver architecture for LDPC coded BICM-ID system,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 1089–1092, Jul. 2015.
[47] M. C. Valenti and X. Xiang, “Constellation shaping for bit-interleaved LDPC coded APSK,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2960– 2970, Oct. 2012.
[48] Q. Xie, J. Song, K. Peng, F. Yang, and Z. Wang, “Coded modulation with signal space diversity,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 660–669, Feb. 2011.
[49] J. Tan and G. L. Stuber, “Analysis and design of symbol mappers for iteratively decoded BICM,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 662–672, Mar. 2005.
[50] I. Kang, H. Kim, and L. H. Hanzo, “EXIT-chart aided design of rowpermutation assisted twin-interleaver BICM-ID,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 85–95, Mar. 2018.
[51] O. Levi, D. Raphaeli, and Y. Tate, “A novel shaping scheme for PAPR reduction in single-carrier modulation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 4222–4233, Sep. 2018.
[52] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” in Proc. IPN Progress Rep., vol. 154, Aug. 2003, pp. 1–7.
[53] Y. Fang, P. Chen, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, S. C. Liew, and G. Han, “Outagelimit-approaching channel coding for future wireless communications: Root-protograph low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 85–93, Jun. 2019.
[54] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density paritycheck codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[55] J. Hagenauer, “The EXIT chart—Introduction to extrinsic information transfer in iterative processing,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Signal Process. Conf., Sep. 2004, pp. 1541–1548.
[56] T. Van Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “Protograph-based LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2012, pp. 2166–2170.
[57] Q. Chen, L. Wang, P. Chen, and G. Chen, “Optimization of component elements in integrated coding systems for green communications: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2977–2999, Oct.–Dec. 2019.
[58] F. Schreckenbach, N. Gortz, J. Hagenauer, and G. Bauch, “Optimization of symbol mappings for bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 593–595, Dec. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

