1
Joint estimation and decoding algorithm for LDPC
code in different impulsive noise channel
Chong Xu, Hongbo Zhao and Ling Zhao
Abstract—This paper presents a joint estimation and decoding
algorithm for decoding over different impulsive noise in practical
use, as the state of most impulsive noise changes rapidly in
the wireless networks and cause performance degradation of
low-density parity-check (LDPC) code decoding. The proposed
algorithm fully utilizes the posteriori probability information
of the decoding algorithm to strengthen estimation instead of
regarding as the probability of input as equal probability. First,
we derive the simplified objective of estimation expression. Then
we designed the whole process of algorithm, which combines the
estimator and decoder in an iterative manner. The simulation
results show that the decoding performance of the proposed
decoder can reach nearly known real noise parameters decoder
within 0.1dB. Comparing with previous decoders, the proposed
decoder has lower bit error rate (BER).
Index Terms—Impulsive noise, joint estimation and decoding
algorithm, alpha-stable distribution, posteriori probability infor-
mation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Theoretically the additive white Gaussian noise is used for
exploring the decoding performance of LDPC code. How-
ever, the noise is impulsive in many practical communication
systems, such as powerline communication, wireless network
communication [1], shallow water communication [2]. Sym-
metric alpha-stable (S𝛼S) distribution has been suggested for
modelling impulsive noise in channel decoding. The heavy tail
property of the S𝛼S has been shown coincide with the impul-
sive nature of network interference [3] [4]. As most impulsive
noise is from man-made or atmospheric sources [5], the
state of the noise can change rapidly making LDPC decoder
performance worse. Compared with Gaussian distribution, the
probability density function (PDF) of S𝛼S distribution does
not have closed-form expression, which makes it hard to
estimate the state of the noise. Correctly estimating the state
of the channel noise is crucial for obtaining better error-
correcting performance.
Many researchers have found parameter estimation schemes
of S𝛼S distribution noise. For directly estimating parameters
of S𝛼S distribution noise, the classical methods worked well,
such as the quantile method [6], the characteristic function
method [7] and the fractional lower order moment method
[8]. However, to obtain better performance, the estimator
should take full advantage of the soft output messages from
the decoder. Classical parameter estimation methods only
used hard decision messages which caused information loss
C. Xu, H. Zhao, and L. Zhao are with the School of Electronic and
Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail:
xuzhuang@buaa.edu.cn; bhzhb@buaa.edu.cn; zhaoling@buaa.edu.cn)
and decoding performance degradation. Such problem that
the posteriori information of decoder is not fully used, also
existed in recent unsupervised parameters algorithm [9] [10].
In [11], a Bayesian framework estimation scheme was pro-
posed to reduce the impact of impulsive noise and solved
such problem. The Sampling-Importance Resampling (SIR)
estimation method was implemented to estimate impulsive
noise parameters by randomly sampling and counting particles
weights. However, calculating all samples weights requires
huge operations and resources. Recently neural network was
also implemented for decoding over impulsive noise channel
without estimation procedure [12], reaching to near-maximum
likelihood performance. However, the training process costs
too much time and training long codes is unrealistic except
for short codes. In brief, these methods have greater theoretical
significance than practical significance.
To make full use of the posteriori probability information
and obtain accurate channel state without relying on long
training sequences and long pilot symbols, the Bayesian frame-
works in [11] [13] jointed estimation and decoding algorithm.
The joint estimation and decoding method can reduce channel
efficiency especially in single-carrier systems. So this paper
focuses on this non-data-aided manner and fully utilizes the
posteriori probability information.
In this paper, the gradient based EM (GB-EM) decoder is
proposed to estimate the state of the channel and decode over
different impulsive noise. When it is difficult to acquire the
closed-form estimation expression of impulsive noise, the gra-
dient descent algorithm is introduced to deal with searching for
maximum point of estimation expression iteratively. Finally,
our proposed GB-EM algorithm’s estimation accuracy and
decoding performance are analyzed by numerical simulation
results, proving our algorithm’s effectiveness.
The content of paper is organized as follows: Section
II reviews the background knowledge of S𝛼S distribution
and parameter estimation. Section III deduces the simplified
objective of estimation and designs the operating process of
the algorithm. Section IV shows the simulation performance
and numerical results analysis. Section V presents conclusion.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Impulsive Noise Channel
The channel noise considered in this paper is the additive
S𝛼S impulsive noise. The channel model is composed of
𝐿long LDPC-coded BPSK symbols transmitted over the
impulsive noise. The received signal is y = x + n where
x = [𝑥1, 𝑥2, .., 𝑥𝐿], x represents BPSK symbols {−1, +1} and n
2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)
978-1-6654-4266-4/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
1111
2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) | 978-1-6654-4266-4/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WCNC51071.2022.9771567
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2
is an independent and identically distributed random variable
following S𝛼S distribution with characteristic exponent 𝛼and
dispersion 𝛾. 𝛼decides the degree of impulsiveness of the
distribution. As 𝛼decreases, the noise becomes more impul-
sive and the tail of the PDF becomes heavier, which increases
the likelihood of having impulses with large amplitudes. 𝛾is
a scale parameter similarly to the variance in the Gaussian
case. Fig .1 shows various PDFs of S𝛼S distribution. In the
impulsive noise, the range of exponent 𝛼is 1 ≤𝛼≤2 and
𝛾is 0 < 𝛾≤1 and 𝜃= (𝛼, 𝛾) is used to represent the
noise parameters. The S𝛼S distribution does not have closed-
form expression for PDF except Gaussian distribution case
(𝛼=2) and Cauchy distribution case (𝛼=1). The PDF of S𝛼S
is determined by its characteristic function
𝜑(𝜔) = 𝑒−|𝛾𝜔|𝛼.
(1)
Through the inverse Fourier transform integral, the PDF of
S𝛼S can be derived that
𝑓𝜃(𝑥) = 1
2𝜋
∫+∞
−∞
exp (−|𝛾𝜔|𝛼) 𝑒−𝑖𝜔𝑥𝑑𝜔.
(2)
To quickly obtain PDF of S𝛼S, this paper uses the fast
algorithm in [14]. Since the second order moment for S𝛼S
distribution is infinite, the geometric signal-to-noise (GSNR)
is used to describe the signal and the noise. The GSNR is
given as
𝐺𝑆𝑁𝑅=
1
2𝐶𝑔
©­
«
𝐴
𝐶
1
𝛼−1
𝑔
𝛾
ª®
¬
2
,
(3)
where 𝐴= 1 and 𝐶𝑔≈1.78. The corresponding 𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 is
defined as
𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 = 𝐺𝑆𝑁𝑅
2𝑅
,
(4)
where R is the code rate.
Fig. 1. PDF of S𝛼S distribution at various values of 𝛼and 𝛾= 1.
B. Parameter Estimation
The channels we are considering in this paper are memory
less, binary input, and symmetric output channels. For 𝐿long
LDPC code, the maximum likelihood estimation of 𝜃is given
by
ˆ𝜃= arg max
𝜃
𝑝(y | 𝜃)
= arg max
𝜃
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
log 𝑝 𝑦𝑗| 𝜃.
(5)
In Sum-Product decoding algorithm, the channels are com-
pletely described by the conditional probability 𝑝(𝑦| 𝑥) of
the output 𝑦given the input 𝑥. The channel log-likelihood
ratio (LLR) is given by
Λ𝜃(𝑦) = log 𝑝(𝑦| 𝑥= +1)
𝑝(𝑦| 𝑥= −1) = log 𝑓𝜃(𝑦−1)
𝑓𝜃(𝑦+ 1) .
(6)
In this paper the posteriori probability of input 𝑥is fully
used for parameter estimation, which can be obtained by the
decoding soft output posteriori log-likelihood ratio using
Λ𝑎𝑝𝑝(𝑦) = log 𝑝(𝑥= +1 | 𝑦)
𝑝(𝑥= −1 | 𝑦) .
(7)
Therefore, the posteriori LLR is a rewrite of the posteriori
probability 𝑝(𝑥| 𝑦) = 1/ 1 + 𝑒−𝑥Λ𝑎𝑝𝑝(𝑦). To precisely calcu-
late the maximum likelihood estimation of 𝜃, the probability
of input 𝑥is not simply considered as 0.5, but is the posteriori
probability 𝑝(𝑥| 𝑦).
III. GB-EM ALGORITHM
In previous researches, the estimation algorithm of param-
eter is based on the assumption that the probability of input
𝑥is 0.5. The estimation algorithm does not make fully use of
posteriori information that is the soft output of the decoding
algorithm. The EM algorithm is based on the joint channel
estimation and decoding framework, which combines LDPC
decoder and estimator. In each iteration, log-likelihood ratio
Λ𝜃(𝑦) is updated according to the previous estimation of
channel state. Then decoder outputs the posteriori probability
Λ𝑎𝑝𝑝(𝑦), which is the soft channel messages used for the
estimation.
Based on EM algorithm, the output 𝑦is referred as observ-
able variable and the input 𝑥is referred as latent variable,
because it could not be concluded whether received symbol 𝑦
comes from 𝑥= +1 or 𝑥= −1. The objective of estimation is
derived by
ˆ𝜃= arg max
𝜃
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
log 𝑝 𝑦𝑗| 𝜃
= arg max
𝜃
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
log
∑︁
𝑥𝑗
𝑝 𝑦𝑗, 𝑥𝑗| 𝜃
= arg max
𝜃
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
log
∑︁
𝑥𝑗
𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗
 𝑝 𝑦𝑗, 𝑥𝑗| 𝜃
𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗

.
(8)
The equation (8) could be referred as the expectation of
logarithmic function. Due to the convexity of logarithmic
2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)
1112
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3
Sum-product 
Decoding
Compute LLR
Update 
parameters
Compute gradient
Gradient condition
Estimation condition
Yes
No
No
Yes
ˆx
( )
app y

( )
y


( )
G 

( | )
p x y
(0)
ˆ
y
Fig. 2. The working process of the proposed GB-EM algorithm.
function, the objective of estimation has a lower bound, which
can be derived that
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
log 𝑝 𝑦𝑗| 𝜃 =
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
log
∑︁
𝑥𝑗
𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗
 𝑝 𝑦𝑗, 𝑥𝑗| 𝜃
𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗

≥
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
∑︁
𝑥𝑗
𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗
 log 𝑝 𝑦𝑗, 𝑥𝑗| 𝜃
𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗

(9)
The estimation of parameters is to maximize the lower
bound. The condition for equality of equation (9) is to
maximize the lower bound. To optimize the estimation of
parameters, we fix the value of the posteriori probability
𝑝(𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗) and the objective can be derived that
ˆ𝜃= arg max
𝜃
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
∑︁
𝑥𝑗
𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗
 log 𝑝 𝑦𝑗, 𝑥𝑗| 𝜃 −
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
∑︁
𝑥𝑗
𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗
 log 𝑝 𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗

.
(10)
Therefore, the second term of the equation (10) is the
cross entropy of decoder output, which is unrelated with noise
parameters 𝜃. To simplify the estimation of parameters, take
into all related equations and the objective can be rewrite as
ˆ𝜃= arg max
𝜃
𝐿
∑︁
𝑗=1
∑︁
𝑥𝑗
1
1 + 𝑒−𝑥𝑗Λ𝑎𝑝𝑝(𝑦𝑗) log 𝑓𝜃(𝑦𝑗−𝑥𝑗).
(11)
We use 𝐺(𝜃) = Í𝐿
𝑗=1
Í
𝑥𝑗
1
1+𝑒−𝑥𝑗Λ𝑎𝑝𝑝(𝑦𝑗) log 𝑓𝜃(𝑦𝑗−𝑥𝑗) to
represent the estimation equation (11) for convenience. 𝐺(𝜃) is
a nonnegative weighted sum of log 𝑓𝜃(𝑦𝑗−𝑥𝑗) function. So we
only need to analysis the convexity of 𝑓𝜃(𝑦𝑗−𝑥𝑗). For the PDF
of S𝛼S equation (2), we can not derive closed-form expression.
The optimization of equation (11) can not be proved to be
convex theoretically. However, the scatter diagram of 𝐺(𝜃)
depicted in Fig. 3 proves that the optimization of equation (11)
could be nearly convex. Based on this assumption, the gradient
descent algorithm is used to search for the maximum of
estimation function. The joint channel estimation and decoding
algorithm can be summarized as these procedures:
(1) Initiation:
At the initiation step, the initial value of impulsive noise
parameters are assumed to be ˆ𝜃(0) = ( ˆ𝛼(0), ˆ𝛾(0)), which are
randomly set within their ranges. Under this assumption, the
initial channel LLR can be obtained. Decoder can output the
posteriori LLR Λ𝑎𝑝𝑝(𝑦).
(2) Maximize the estimation function:
From the output posteriori LLR Λ𝑎𝑝𝑝(𝑦) of decoder, the
fixed posteriori probability 𝑝(𝑥𝑗| 𝑦𝑗) can be obtained and
the current codeword of input x can also be obtained by hard
decision.
To solve the optimization of estimation, gradient descent
algorithm is used for searching the maximum of 𝐺(𝜃). The
gradient of 𝐺(𝜃) can be calculated as
∇𝐺(𝜃) = 𝐺(𝜃+ Δ𝜃) −𝐺(𝜃)
Δ𝜃
.
(12)
Therefore the estimation parameters 𝜃𝑛+1 in gradient descent
iteration 𝑛+ 1 can be updated by the current gradient
𝜃𝑛+1 = 𝜃𝑛+ 𝜂𝜃∇𝐺(𝜃𝑛),
(13)
where 𝜂𝜃= (𝜂𝛼, 𝜂𝛾) are update rates of noise parameters.
After the gradient descent algorithm find the maximum value
of 𝐺(𝜃), the maximum value will be used as the noise
parameters in the next estimation iteration 𝑚+ 1. Then, the
noise parameters ˆ𝜃𝑚+1 will go back to decoder to output the
posteriori LLR. The whole estimation iteration keep training
until that the max estimation iteration condition 𝑀is met.
The max gradient descent iteration condition is 𝑁. The whole
processing of algorithm is depicted in Fig. 2. The general steps
taken in the GB-EM algorithm are provided in Algorithm 1.
Fig. 3 shows the process of one GB-EM estimation iteration.
The initial parameters 𝛼and 𝛾are set to 1.392 and 0.372.
The real channel noise parameters 𝛼and 𝛾are 1.5 and 0.45.
Through one estimation iteration, the estimation value of 𝛼and
𝛾are 1.4837 and 0.443, which are close to the real value. In the
beginning of gradient descent algorithm process, the gradients
of 𝛼and 𝛾are huge since the initial given parameters differ a
lot from real parameters. Accordingly, the updates of 𝛼and 𝛾
are huge. In later period, the estimation parameters are close
to real parameters so that the updates of 𝛼and 𝛾are getting
small. The estimation parameters are gradually converged.
2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)
1113
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4
G(θ)
Fig. 3. Gradient descent algorithm operating processing
Algorithm 1 Gradient Based EM Algorithm
1: Initialization: ˆ𝜃(0) = ( ˆ𝛼(0), ˆ𝛾(0))
2: for 𝑚= 0 : 𝑀do
3:
Compute 𝑝(𝑥𝑖| 𝑦𝑖) from Λ𝑎𝑝𝑝(𝑦)
4:
Compute 𝐺(𝜃)
5:
for 𝑛= 0 : 𝑁do
6:
Compute gradient ∇𝐺(𝜃)
7:
Update noise parameters 𝜃𝑛= (𝛼𝑛, 𝛾𝑛)
8:
end for
9:
ˆ𝛼(𝑚+1) = 𝛼𝑁and ˆ𝛾(𝑚+1) = 𝛾𝑁.
10: end for
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, the decoding performance of the proposed
GB-EM algorithm under different degree of impulsive noise is
evaluated using Monte-Carlo simulations, comparing with the
ideal BP decoder and SIR decoder. The code in simulation is
Mackay’s rate 1/2, length 8000 (3,6) regular LDPC code.
In the proposed method, update rate of parameters 𝛼and 𝛾is
very crucial. For S𝛼S impulsive noise, the estimation boundary
of parameters 𝛼and 𝛾is quite limited, but the gradients of
parameters 𝛼and 𝛾range to thousands. If update rate of
parameters is too high, the estimating parameters 𝛼and 𝛾
will easily get out of the boundary. If real values of parameters
𝛼and 𝛾are near the boundary, the updating procedure will
easily get out of the boundary. However, if update rate of
parameters 𝛼and 𝛾is too low, the update processing can
be quite slow, which means more gradient descent iteration
and more computation is required. For this 𝐿= 8000 LDPC
code, the proper update rate value of parameters 𝛼and 𝛾are
𝜂𝛼= 1 × 10−4 and 𝜂𝛾= 1 × 10−5 and max gradient iteration
𝑁= 20 is suitable. The initial values of parameters 𝛼and 𝛾
are randomly set within the boundary.
A. Analysis of estimation performance
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show mean and root mean squard error
(RMSE) of estimated parameter 𝛼and 𝛾with different EM
Fig. 4. RMSE of estimation parameter 𝛼under light, moderate and heavy
impulsive noise.
Fig. 5.
RMSE of estimation parameter 𝛾under light, moderate and heavy
impulsive noise.
iteration 𝑚under light, moderate and heavy impulsive envi-
ronments, referring to noise parameter 𝛼= 1.8, 𝛼= 1.5 and
𝛼= 1.2. RMSE of estimated parameters 𝛼and 𝛾tend to de-
scend with EM iteration 𝑚increasing, which means that more
iteration contributes to more estimation and better decoding
performance. This is mainly because the posteriori probability
information output by decoder is more reliable after more EM
iteration 𝑚. Notably the estimation of parameters is getting
converged with more EM iteration 𝑚. Furthermore, increasing
EM iteration brings more calculation.
B. EXIT curves of decoders
According to [15] [16], the extrinsic information transfer
(EXIT) curves are used to analyze the convergence of decoder.
EXIT curves describe the relationship between the priori
information and the extrinsic information. We define 𝐼𝑎𝑣and
𝐼𝑒𝑣as the priori information and the extrinsic information
of variable node, respectively. Similarly, we denote 𝐼𝑎𝑐and
𝐼𝑒𝑐for check node. Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 show the EXIT curves
of different decoders under light and heavy impulsive noise
environment. In order to allow the decoding, it is needed a
2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)
1114
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5
Check
nodes
Variable 
nodes
Fig. 6. EIXT curves with regular (3,6) LDPC for different decoders at 𝛼=
1.8.
Variable 
nodes
Check
nodes
Fig. 7. EIXT curves with regular (3,6) LDPC for different decoders at 𝛼=
1.2.
tunnel between variable node and check node curves. Under
the same channel conditions, the wider the tunnel is, the better
the performance of decoder is. Fig. 6 represents the case of
𝛼= 1.8 and 𝛾= 0.485. The decoder performs similarly to the
ideal decoder and SIR decoder because the tunnels between
variable node and check node are close. The convergence of
these decoders is nearly the same. Fig. 7 represents the case
of 𝛼= 1.2 and 𝛾= 0.348, which reveals the same conclusion.
C. BER performance of decoders
Fig. 8 shows the BER of the proposed GB-EM decoder
(𝑀= 2, 𝑁= 20) comparing with SIR decoder, base decoder
and perfect known channel parameter ideal BP decoder un-
der light, moderate and heavy impulsive noise environment
(𝛼= 1.8, 𝛼= 1.5 and 𝛼= 1.2). SIR decoder with the
1
0
0
BER
Ideal-  =1.8
GB-EM-  =1.8
SIR-
=1.8
Base-  =1.8
Ideal-  =1.5
GB-EM-
=1.5
SIR-  =1.5
Base-  =1.5
Ideal-
=1.2
GB-EM- =1.2
SIR-  = 1.2
Base-
=1.2
Fig. 8. BER of (8000,4000) LDPC code under different impulsive noise.
optimal decoding performance parameters in [11] is consid-
ered. The base decoder is randomly given initial parameters
𝛼and 𝛾without estimation. The ideal BP decoder will also
be considered which is given perfect knowledge of channel
working as ideal decoder. From experimental results, it can be
concluded that the proposed GB-EM decoder gains 0.3-0.4dB
than previous SIR decoder and reduces BER significantly
comparing with initial parameters base decoder. BER of GB-
EM decoder is very close to ideal BP decoder within 0.1dB
under different degree of impulsive noise environment.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel joint estimation and decoding al-
gorithm is proposed for decoding LDPC code over different
impulsive noise environment. The proposed algorithm make
full use of the posteriori probability information output by de-
coder iteratively updating the noise parameters of the channel
instead of simply regarding the probability of input as equal
probability, which avoids less information loss. The whole
process of algorithm is designed to combine the estimator
and decoder. When the posteriori probability information is
more reliable, the estimation of channel state is more accurate.
The simulation results show that the decoding performance of
the proposed GB-EM decoder is close to ideal BP decoder
within 0.1dB under heavy, moderate and light impulsive noise
environment. Furthermore, the proposed GB-EM decoder can
be implemented efficiently through high-performance comput-
ing platform such as Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)
or Graphics Processing Unit (GPU), which is suitable for
software define radio receivers.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Middleton, “Non-gaussian noise models in signal processing for
telecommunications: new methods an results for class A and class B
noise models,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 1129–1149,
1999.
2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)
1115
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
6
[2] X. Kuai, H. Sun, S. Zhou, and E. Cheng, “Impulsive noise mitigation
in underwater acoustic OFDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 8190–8202, 2016.
[3] N. C. Beaulieu and S. Niranjayan, “Uwb receiver designs based on
a gaussian-laplacian noise-plus-mai model,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 997–1006, 2010.
[4] Q. Z. Ahmed, K.-H. Park, and M.-S. Alouini, “Ultrawide bandwidth
receiver based on a multivariate generalized gaussian distribution,” IEEE
Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1800–1810, 2015.
[5] Z. Mei, M. Johnston, S. Le Goff, and L. Chen, “Performance analysis
of LDPC-coded diversity combining on rayleigh fading channels with
impulsive noise,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 2345–2356,
2017.
[6] McCulloch and J. Huston, “Simple consistent estimators of stable
distribution parameters,” Communications in Statistics Simulation &
Computation, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1109–1136, 1986.
[7] S. M. Koyon and D. B. Williams, “On the characterization of impulsive
noise with 𝛼-stable distributions using fourier techniques,” in Con-
ference Record of The Twenty-Ninth Asilomar Conference on Signals,
Systems and Computers, vol. 2, 1995, pp. 787–791 vol.2.
[8] Xinyu Ma and C. L. Nikias, “Parameter estimation and blind channel
identification in impulsive signal environments,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 2884–2897, 1995.
[9] Y. Mestrah, A. Savard, A. Goupil, G. Gelle, and L. Clavier, “Robust and
simple log-likelihood approximation for receiver design,” in 2019 IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2019,
pp. 1–6.
[10] Y. Mestrah, A. Savard, A. Goupil, G. Gellé, and L. Clavier, “An
unsupervised llr estimation with unknown noise distribution,” EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 26, pp. 1–11,
2020.
[11] Y. Hou, R. Liu, B. Dai, and L. Zhao, “Joint channel estimation and
LDPC decoding over time-varying impulsive noise channels,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2376–2383, 2018.
[12] Y. Hu, L. Zhao, Z. Yan, A. Kaushik, Y. Hou, and J. Thompson,
“Gatednet: Neural network decoding for decoding over impulsive noise
channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1381–1384, 2019.
[13] M. Nassar and B. L. Evans, “Low complexity EM-based decoding for
OFDM systems with impulsive noise,” in 2011 Conference Record of
the Forty Fifth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers
(ASILOMAR), 2011, pp. 1943–1947.
[14] F. Simmross-Wattenberg, M. Martín-Fernández, P. Casaseca-De-La-
Higuera, and C. Alberola-López, “Fast calculation of 𝛼-stable density
functions based on off-line precomputations. application to ML param-
eter estimation,” Digital Signal Processing, vol. 38, pp. 1–12, 2015.
[15] Z. Mei, M. Johnston, S. Le Goff, and L. Chen, “Finite length analysis
of low-density parity-check codes on impulsive noise channels,” IEEE
Access, vol. 4, pp. 9635–9642, 2016.
[16] B. Dai, R. Liu, and Z. Mei, “Novel non-linear demapper for soft
decision decoder of ldpc codes in impulsive noise,” Communications,
IET, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 796–801, 2019.
2022 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)
1116
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:09:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
