738

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 4, APRIL 2022

Node-Wise Scheduling Algorithm of ADMM Decoding Based on Line Segment Projection
Qiaoqiao Xia , Pinquan He , Xin Wang , Huiyang Liu , and Qinglin Zhang

Abstract— In order to simplify the node-wise scheduling algorithm of the alternating direction method of multipliers (NS-ADMM) decoding, approximate line segment projection algorithm (LSA) is adopted to perform the projection in the node-wise scheduling algorithm. Experimental results show that using approximate line segment projection instead of precise projection in node-wise scheduling algorithm will yield a poor frame error rate (FER) performance. To solve this problem, dynamic scheduling strategy that selects the message-passing schedule according to the convergence status of the check node is proposed. Simulation results demonstrate that the modified node-wise scheduling algorithm based on line segment projection outperforms existing decoding algorithms in terms of FER performance and convergence speed, while it has good error correction performance with a lower computational complexity.
Index Terms— Alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, check polytope projection, message scheduling.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE linear programming (LP) decoding method for LDPC codes, having all-zeros assumption and maximumlikelihood certification property, was first proposed by Feldman in [1]. However, the development of LP decoding is still limited by excessive complexity. With the advance of the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) technique, a significant improvement towards LP decoding optimization has been made possible. By combining the benefits of LP with the framework of ADMM, Barman et al. subsequently proposed an efficient LP decoding algorithm based on ADMM (ADMM-LP) [2]. Though the ADMM-LP improves the decoding efficiency, the implementations of the ADMM-LP decoders still suffer from high computation complexity and the decoding performance was actually worse than the BP at the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regions. To enhance the FER performance, the work [3] proposed an ADMM-LP decoding algorithm using a weighted penalty function. The Euclidean projection operation is the most complex part in the ADMM
Manuscript received November 8, 2021; revised December 3, 2021; accepted January 6, 2022. Date of publication January 14, 2022; date of current version April 11, 2022. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62101204, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province under Grant 2020CFB474 and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant CCNU20ZT002. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was K. Wan. (Corresponding author: Qinglin Zhang.)
The authors are with the College of Physical Science and Technology, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: xiaqq@mail.ccnu.edu.cn; hpqztsc@mail.ccnu.edu.cn; wangx@mail.ccnu. edu.cn; lhy2020112205@mail.ccnu.edu.cn; zhangqinglin@mail.ccnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3143235

decoding. To reduce the complexity of the ADMM-LP decoding algorithm, Wei et al. proposed a new method to reduce the decoding complexity of ADMM-based LP decoder by decreasing the number of Euclidean projections [4]. In [5], Zhang et al. showed that the projection onto the parity polytope can be transformed to the projection onto a simplex. Jiao et al. proposed to simplify the Euclidean projection by building lookup tables (LUTs) and quantizing the inputs to approach approximate Euclidean projections at low computational complexity [6]. In [7], a novel and fast projection algorithm was proposed without sorting and iterative operations. In the proposed algorithm, line segment projection replaces check polytope projection to approach approximate Euclidean projection at low computational complexity. By alternately adopting even-vertex projection algorithm (EVA) and other accurate projection algorithms, Xia et al. in [8] proposed an innovative and simple hybrid projection algorithm (HPA) which can increase the percentage of unuseful projections. To speed up decoding speed, in [9] and [10], by analyzing the horizontal scheduling and vertical scheduling algorithms in the BP decoding algorithm, a formulation of the ADMM decoding algorithm with modified computation scheduling was proposed by Debbabi et al. Jiao et al. investigated the node-wise scheduling for ADMM decoders and proposed a reduced-complexity method for the NS-ADMM decoder by avoiding Euclidean projections involved in the calculation of message residuals [11]. In order to speed up the decoding speed and reduce the complexity of Euclidean projection, a novel method combining the line segment projection algorithm [7] with the node-wise scheduling algorithm [11] is proposed in this letter. It is verified by experiments that directly using LSA to replace cut search algorithm (CSA) [12] in NS-ADMM will yield the poor decoding performance. To solve this problem, by deeply exploring the characteristics of NS-ADMM and LSA, we propose a new scheduling strategy that selects the message-passing schedule according to the convergence status of the check node so that LSA can be suitable for NS-ADMM. The experimental results show that this proposed algorithm has a significant improvement in FER performance, convergence rate, and decoding time.
II. PRELIMINARIES
Consider a binary LDPC code C of length n, is defined by an m × n parity check matrix H. Let i ∈ I = {1, 2, 3, . . . , n} and j ∈ J = {1, 2, 3, . . . , m} be the index of the columns and rows of check matrix H. Let di be the degree of the variable node vi and dj be the degree of the check node cj.

1558-2558 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:10:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIA et al.: NODE-WISE SCHEDULING ALGORITHM OF ADMM DECODING BASED ON LINE SEGMENT PROJECTION

739

Let Nv(i)(Nc(j)) be the set of check nodes (variable nodes) adjacent to variable node vi (check node cj). Suppose that a codeword x ∈ C is transmitted over a memoryless binary-
input output-symmetric (MBIOS) channel, and the received vector is y. The LP decoding model with ADMM can be described as follows:

min γT x s.t. Pjx = zj, zj ∈ PPdj , ∀j ∈ J (1)

where γ ∈ Rn is the vector of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs)

defined

as

γi

=

log(

Pr Pr

(yi /xi (yi /xi

=0) =1)

)

for

all

i

∈

I.

While

Pj ,

selecting dj components of x involved in j-th check node, is a

dj × n transfer matrix. zj is the auxiliary vector of check node

cj. PPdj is the convex hull of all permutations of a length-dj

binary vector with even number of ones.

The augmented Lagrangian of (1) can be described in the

form as follows:

Lµ(x,z,λ) = γTx+

λj

T

(Pj

x − zj

)

+

μ 2

Pj x−zj22

j∈J

j∈J

(2)

where λj ∈ Rdj is the Lagrangian multipliers, and μ > 0 is penalty parameter. The update rules of x, z and λ can be described as follows:

xik+1 =

1 [0,1] di

j∈Nv (i)

(zjk)i

−

1 µ

(λjk

)i

−

1 µ

γi

(3)

zj k+1 = PPdj Pj xk+1 + λkj /μ

(4)

λj k+1 = λkj + μ Pj xk+1 − zjk+1

(5)

where k ≥ 0 denotes the iteration number, while [0,1] is the projection to the interval [0, 1], and PPdj is the Euclidean projection onto the check polytope.

III. NODE-WISE SCHEDULING ALGORITHM BASED ON LINE SEGMENT PROJECTION
Simple approximate projection algorithm and appropriate message scheduling strategies are effective for reducing the decoding complexity and speeding up the convergence rate of ADMM-LP decoders. Inspired by these methods, an improved idea combining the LSA proposed by [7] with the NS-ADMM proposed by [11] is proposed. It is verified by experiments that directly using LSA to replace CSA in NS-ADMM will yield a poor decoding performance. This section explores the characteristics of NS-ADMM and LSA, and proposes the dynamic scheduling strategy that selects the message-passing schedule according to the convergence status of the check node so that LSA can be suitable for NS-ADMM and has good decoding performance.

A. Node-Wise Scheduling Algorithm
Different from the horizontal (or vertical) hierarchical scheduling algorithm, the work [11] designed the NS-ADMM decoder that used message residuals to indicate which message should be updated firstly. The residual corresponds to each check node is the largest magnitude of the difference between the check node message generated in the current iteration and in the previous iteration. Algorithm 1 presents the calculation

process of check node residuals. The intuition is that the larger this difference, the further this part of the graph is from convergence. Therefore, propagating messages with large differences first will make ADMM converge with fewer message updates. Algorithm 2 presents the decoding process of NS-ADMM.
Lines 1-3 of Algorithm 2 initialize the relevant variables; Algorithm 1 is used to calculate the residuals of all check nodes. After finding the cm with the largest residuals, we update and propagate simultaneously all the check-tovariable messages that correspond to the same check node cm. Then for each neighborhood variable node vp of cm, update and propagate the message passed from vp to its neighborhood check nodes.
Algorithm 1 Calculating the Residual r(cj ) [11] Input: xk+1: obtained by x update at the current iteration; λjk:
Lagrange multipliers at the previous iteration; Lkj : stored in advance at the previous iteration.
É ¡¡ 1: Compute zjk+1 = PPdj Pj xk+1 + λjk/μ
2: Compute λkj +1 = λjk + μ Pj xk+1 − zkj +1
¬¬ ¬¬ 3: Compute Lkj +1 = zjk+1 − λkj +1/μ
4: r (cj ) = maxi∈Nc(j) Ljk→ +1i − Lkj→i

Algorithm 2 NS-ADMM Decoding for LDPC Codes [11]

1: Construct the log-likelihood vector γ based on received word y

2: Construct the dj × n matrix Pj for all j ∈ J 3: Initialize λj as the all-zero vector, zj as the all 0.5 vector for all
j ∈ J , count = 0

É 4: Compute all residuals r(cj) based on Algorithm 1
5: Find m ← arg maxj∈J r (cj)

6: 7:

Compute Compute

λzmm←←λmPP+dmμ((PPmmxx+−λzmm/)μ)

8: r (cm) ←0

É È 9: for all vp ∈ Nc(m) do

10:

xp←

1 [0,1] |Nv (p)|

q∈Nv (p)

(zq )p

−

1 µ

(λq

)p

11: for all cq ∈ Nv (p) \cm do

12: Compute r(cq) based on Algorithm 1

−

1 µ

γp

13: end for

14: end for

15: count←count + 1

16: if count%M = 0 then

17: if Stopping rule is not satisfied then

18: go to line 5.

19: end if

20: end if

B. Line Segment Projection Algorithm
An efficient computation of the approximate projection can dramatically reduce the complexity of check polytope projection. Line segment projection was proposed to replace the check polytope projection to approach approximate Euclidean projection at low computational complexity. The simulation results show that the LSA can substantially reduce the projection time while maintaining the FER performance. The initial steps of the LSA are consistent with the CSA. For a vector v ∈ Rdj , let u = [0,1]dj v, if u is in the check polytope, it is the desired projection value; otherwise, line

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:10:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

740

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 4, APRIL 2022

Fig. 1. The FER performance of C1 for ADMM decoders with different algorithms.

segment projection is performed [7]. LSA identified the two even vertices A and B which are closest to v and formed the line segment LAB. Since most of the elements in vertex A and vertex B are equal, the whole calculation process only involves mathematical operations on two dimensions, which means the complexity of the algorithm is only linear and very simple. The values of elements in the two dimensions of AB can only be −1 or 1, and in the other dimensions, the values of elements in AB are 0. It means that the elements of the final projection value z are more likely to be 0 or 1.
C. Improvement Strategy
NS-ADMM can speed up the decoding rate and LSA can dramatically reduce the complexity of check polytope projection. This motivates us to investigate the LSA for NS-ADMM decoders. However, the simulation results shown in Fig.1 demonstrate that, using LSA instead of precise projection in NS-ADMM yields a poor FER performance.
In Fig.1, the experiment adopts (576,480) rate-5/6 code C1 from IEEE802.16e standard. In the simulation, the parameter α of the penalty function l1 is set to 2.0 and μ is set to 5.0, the maximum number of iteration is set as 20. Compared with node-wise scheduling algorithm based on cut search projection (NS-ADMM-CSA-r) [11] (-r denotes dynamic scheduling strategy using r(cj ) in Algorithm 1), the FER of NS-ADMM-LSA-r is seriously deteriorated, which means that replacing the projection in NS-ADMM with LSA will not improve the decoding performance. FL-ADMM-CSA [12] denotes the flooding scheduling of ADMM-CSA. The following will investigate the reason why LSA cannot be applied to NS-ADMM.
Simulation results show that as NS-ADMM-CSA-r converges, the differences between the messages before and after an update diminish. It means that with the increase of the iteration, the maximum residuals of NS-ADMM-CSA-r under different SNR will gradually approach to zero. However, as shown in Fig.2, the maximum residuals of NS-ADMM-LSA-r under different SNR fail to approach to zero as the number of iteration increases. We think the reason is that LSA belongs to the approximate projection algorithm and it will result in a large deviation of calculation of the residuals. It means that NS-ADMM-LSA-r can not locate the check node in the part of the graph that has not converged yet, even the check node has a large residual, which will lead to

Fig. 2. The maximum s(cj) for proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s and the maximum r(cj ) for NS-ADMM-LSA-r of C1 under different SNRs.
the poor FER performance. In this letter, we propose a novel dynamic scheduling strategy that selects the message-passing schedule according to the convergence status of the check node. We first define the convergence status of a check node cj, denoted by s(cj). This is given by the maximum magnitude of the difference between the x at the current iteration and z at the previous iteration, computed as Algorithm 3. It is worth mentioning that zj can be seen as the copy of x due to Pjx = zj, and Pj is the selecting matrix. So Pjxk+1 − zjk can measure the convergence status of the current node. The intuition is that the larger this difference, the further this part of the graph is from convergence. Therefore, propagating messages with large differences first will make decoders converge with fewer message updates. As shown in Algorithm 3, calculating the convergence status of the check node s(cj) is similar to the primal residual of ADMM algorithm defined by Pjxk+1 − zj k+1. However, s(cj) is much simpler than that of primal residual and can avoid the complex Euclidean projections involved in the calculation.
Algorithm 3 Calculating the Convergence Status of the Check Node s(cj) Input: xk+1: obtained by x update at the current iteration; zjk: Line
segment projection at the previous iteration. 1: s(cj ) = maxi∈Nc(j)|(Pj xk+1)i − (zkj )i| 2: return s(cj)
In Fig.2, the convergence status of the proposed node-wise scheduling algorithm based on line segment projection (NS-ADMM-LSA-s, -s denotes dynamic scheduling strategy using s(cj ) in Algorithm 3) approaches zero with the increase of the iteration number, indicating that selecting the message-passing schedule according to the convergence status of the check node enables LSA to apply to the NS-ADMM algorithm. Define the average degree of variable and check nodes be dv and dc, respectively. We analyzed the number of scheduling strategy calculations per iteration and projection calculations per message passing for three scheduling schemes as shown in Table I. As shown in Table I, the scheduling strategy adopted by proposed NS-ADMMLSA-s can avoid the complex check polytope projections and save a large number of additions compared to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:10:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIA et al.: NODE-WISE SCHEDULING ALGORITHM OF ADMM DECODING BASED ON LINE SEGMENT PROJECTION

741

TABLE I SCHEDULING STRATEGY CALCULATIONS PER ITERATION AND PROJECTION CALCULATIONS PER MESSAGE PASSING FOR DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS

Fig. 3. The FER performance of C1 at 5.0dB and C2 at 2.0dB for ADMM decoders with different scheduling algorithms at different maximum number
of iteration.

Fig. 4. The FER performance of C1 and C2 for ADMM decoders with different scheduling algorithms.

NS-ADMM-CSA-r. The proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s also has lower computational complexity than RC-NS-ADMM-CSA (RC-NS-ADMM-CSA [11] denotes the reduced complexity of NS-ADMM-CSA-r). Specifically, it can save M (3dc − 7 + dv(dc − 1)) additions, M (dclogdc − 4) − dv(dc − 1)2 comparisons and M (dc − 1) multiplications. Additionally, LSA is the approximate projection algorithm and the elements of the projection value z are more likely to be 0 or 1. The zj can be seen as the copy of x due to Pjx = zj, which is equivalent to a penalty for x to keep it away from the fractional vertices. Therefore, the convergence speed of the proposed NS-ADMMLSA-s may be faster than NS-ADMM-CSA-r.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In our simulations, the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation is supposed. Two LDPC codes are chosen for simulations: a (576,480) rate-5/6 code C1 from IEEE 802.16e standard [13] and a (2640,1320) rate-1/2 Margulis code C2. The l1 penalty function g (x) = −α |x − 0.5| is used through simulations. The parameters μ and α are optimized based on [3] and we set the μ to 5.0, 4.0, α to 2.0, 1.0 for C1 and C2, respectively. All the ADMM decoders use early-termination

technology based on HT x = 0. In the simulations, random codewords are adopted. The maximum number of iterations is set to 20 and the points plotted in all FER curves are obtained by generating at least 100 error frames.
Fig.3 shows the FER performance of different scheduling algorithms at different maximum number of iteration for C1 and C2. It can be seen that the convergence behavior of FL-ADMM-LSA [7] is slightly faster than that of FL-ADMM-CSA and the convergence speed of the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s is faster than NS-ADMM-CSA-r and RC-NS-ADMM-CSA. It means that the proposed dynamic scheduling strategy is suitable for proposed NS-ADMMLSA-s and can enable LSA to apply to the NS-ADMM algorithm.
Fig.4 shows FER performance of ADMM decoders with various scheduling schemes when the maximum number of iterations is set to 20. It can be seen that the FER performance of the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s is far superior to other decoders. For example, for C1, when FER = 1 × 10−4, performance gain for the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s are about 0.42dB and 0.55dB compared to NS-ADMM-CSA-r and RC-NS-ADMM-CSA; for C2, when FER = 1 × 10−3, performance gain for the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:10:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

742

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 4, APRIL 2022

Fig. 5. The average number of iteration of C1 and C2 for ADMM decoders with different scheduling algorithms.
Fig. 6. The average decoding time of C1 and C2 for ADMM decoders with different scheduling algorithms.
about 0.08dB and 0.10dB compared to NS-ADMM-CSA-r and RC-NS-ADMM-CSA.
Since the computational complexity is determined by the actual number of iterations, we compare the average number of iterations for different scheduling algorithms in Fig.5. For C1, It can be seen that the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s is significantly less than other decoding algorithms. For C2, it can be seen that the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s is significantly less than FL-ADMM-CSA and slightly less than NS-ADMM-CSA-r for average number of iterations. It means that the convergence speed of the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s is faster than that of other decoding algorithms.
In Fig.6, we also plot the average decoding time comparison for C1 and C2 using different decoders. The evaluation

platform is composed of an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8700 CPU @ 3.20GHz and 16GB DDR4 running at 2400MHz. The operating system employed is Ubuntu 16.04. It can be seen that there is an obvious average decoding time gap between the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s and NS-ADMMCSA-r. For instance, the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s can save the average decoding time with regard to NS-ADMM-CSA-r, by roughly 80% at 4.5dB for C1, by roughly 36% at 1.8dB for C2. And it can further save the average decoding time with regard to RC-NS-ADMM-CSA, by roughly 67% at 4.5dB for C1, by roughly 32% at 1.8dB for C2.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we have proposed a novel method combining the line segment projection algorithm with the node-wise scheduling algorithm for the ADMM decoding of LDPC codes. In particular, we have put forward the scheduling strategy that selected the message-passing schedule according to the convergence status of the check node. Simulations show that the FER performance and decoding time of the proposed NS-ADMM-LSA-s are far superior to other scheduling algorithms. Meanwhile, the proposed method converges significantly faster than other scheduling algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[2] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7870–7886, Dec. 2013.
[3] X. Liu and S. C. Draper, “The ADMM penalized decoder for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2966–2984, Jun. 2016.
[4] H. Wei, X. Jiao, and J. Mu, “Reduced-complexity linear programming decoding based on ADMM for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 909–912, Jun. 2015.
[5] G. Zhang, R. Heusdens, and W. B. Kleijn, “Large scale LP decoding with low complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 2152–2155, Nov. 2013.
[6] X. Jiao, J. Mu, Y.-C. He, and C. Chen, “Efficient ADMM decoding of LDPC codes using lookup tables,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1425–1437, Apr. 2017.
[7] Q. Xia, Y. Lin, S. Tang, and Q. Zhang, “A fast approximate check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1520–1523, Sep. 2019.
[8] Q. Xia, X. Wang, H. Liu, and Q. L. Zhang, “A hybrid check polytope projection algorithm for ADMM decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 108–112, Jan. 2021.
[9] I. Debbabi, B. L. Gal, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, and C. Jego, “Fast converging ADMM penalized algorithm for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 644–647, Apr. 2016.
[10] I. Debbabi, B. Le Gal, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, and C. Jego, “Comparison of different schedulings for the ADMM based LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Sep. 2016, pp. 51–55.
[11] X. Jiao, J. Mu, and H. Wei, “Reduced complexity node-wise scheduling of ADMM decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 472–475, Mar. 2017.
[12] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient iterative LP decoding of LDPC codes with alternating direction method of multipliers,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Jul. 2013, pp. 1501–1505.
[13] LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY, Standard C802.16e-05/0066r32005, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:10:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

