772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 7, JULY 2017

On Die Bit Error Rate Estimator for NAND Flash Memory
Mustafa N. Kaynak, Patrick R. Khayat, and Sivagnanam Parthasarathy

Abstract—In this brief, we propose a simple bit error rate (BER) estimator utilizing the parity check constraints of a low-density parity-check code-based error correction coding (ECC) scheme. The proposed estimator can be efficiently implemented on flash memory die with a very small area cost. We articulate applications in which flash memory controllers can take advantage of having the BER estimate before the ECC decoding scheme to significantly reduce programming errors and improve system performance in terms of latency and throughput.
Index Terms—Bit error rate (BER) estimation, error correction codes (ECCs), flash memory.
I. INTRODUCTION
F LASH memory-based storage systems are superior to legacy magnetic recording systems in terms of read/write throughput, reliability, latency, power consumption, as well as the wide range of operating temperatures. These advantages resulted in flash memory to become the main storage option for mobile phones, tablets, digital cameras, music players, and thumb drives. More recently, solid state drives (SSDs) started to replace hard disk drives in higher-end laptops. Similarly, highly reliable enterprise-class SSDs have become very attractive to data centers because of their capability to deliver very high input/output operations per second.
Like any communication system, flash memory devices are subject to errors. End-of-life bit error rates (BERs) of nextgeneration flash memory devices will be higher due to smaller cell geometries, severe noise and disturb mechanisms, as well as storing more bits per cell (bits/cell). Flash memory controllers used to employ Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem codes for error correction, however, there has been a significant push to employ more powerful error correction codes (ECCs) such as capacity approaching low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] and powerful ECC decoders [3], [4] in nextgeneration controllers.
Flash memory requires management to serve various markets with different endurance (program/erase cycle) and retention requirements using single bit/cell (SLC), two bits/cell (MLC), or three bits/cell (TLC) storage. Having a
Manuscript received July 1, 2016; revised September 10, 2016; accepted September 11, 2016. Date of publication September 15, 2016; date of current version June 23, 2017. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor F. C. M. Lau. (Corresponding author: Mustafa N. Kaynak.)
The authors are with Micron Technology, San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: mkaynak@micron.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2016.2610186

BER estimate of the data read from flash before ECC decoder can be very helpful in memory management to improve the system performance in terms of throughput and latency.
In the literature, there has not been much work on estimating the error rate for flash memory management. One can use an error detection code (EDC) with low-parity overhead to estimate BER. However, EDC parity overhead reduces available parity overhead for ECC, which is quite problematic.
For flash memory, [5] proposes fast error rate estimation based on known test data or comparison between the shapes of the data read/written from/to flash memory. Both methods suffer from rate penalty given the need to store extra information and they need to be implemented in the controller. In addition, test data-based approach does not produce a BER estimate on the fly for the data read from the memory, which is important to take action for memory management.
If an LDPC code-based ECC scheme is used at the flash memory controller, we could instead use parity constraints of LDPC code to estimate the BER without paying any rate penalty. In this brief, we propose a simple, easy to implement on die BER estimator (“bEST”) utilizing LDPC code constraints to estimate the page or codeword BER. The idea is simply to use a scaled version of the number of parity violations as a measure of BER. Using bEST results in improved system performance in various applications covering soft information usage, different programming and caching scenarios. As will be shown later in this brief, a high-throughput, low-latency bEST can be efficiently implemented on flash die with very small area cost. To the best of our knowledge, bEST is the first on die BER estimator that does not suffer from rate penalty.
II. BIT ERROR RATE ESTIMATOR
In this section, we first give a brief system overview followed by the high-level description of bEST in Section II-B and on die implementation in Section II-C.
A. System Overview
Each flash cell is a floating gate transistor and information is stored by trapping the electrons in the floating gate via “Fowler–Nordheim tunneling” [6]. The number of electrons trapped in the floating gate determines the “threshold voltage” of the flash cell. Flash memory channel is subject to various noise and disturb mechanisms such as read disturb, program disturb, cell-to-cell interference, random telegraph noise, retention charge loss as well as programming errors [7], [8].

1549-7747 c 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:05:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAYNAK et al.: ON DIE bEST FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY

773

Each flash cell stores a symbol. For MLC, the symbol size is two bits and there are 22 = 4 states that are called levels.
Similarly, for TLC flash parts, each cell stores a three bit symbol with 23 = 8 levels. Each bit of a symbol stored in a flash
cell is part of a “page.”

B. Concept
LDPC codes are linear block codes with a set of parity check equations. For regular LDPC codes, fixed number (called “row weight” and denoted with K) of codeword bits are protected by a parity check. Similarly, each codeword bit is protected by a fixed number (called “column weight” and denoted with C) of parity checks.
In general, industrial applications use highly structured quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes that enable practical hardware implementation. Parity check matrices (H) of regular QC-LDPC codes are composed of C × K circulants each of which are cyclic shifts of the identity matrix. A circulant row of H called a “layer” is composed of Q parity checks, where Q is the circulant size. If XOR’ing the bits for a parity check results in one, there are odd number of bit errors among K bits of the parity check. If XOR results in zero, there are no or even number of bits errors. For QC-LDPC codes, each codeword bit participates in a single parity check per layer. This property of QC-LDPC codes makes it possible to use the number of parity check violations in a single layer of H as a measure of the number of input bit errors of the LDPC codeword.
To retrieve the bits participating in a parity check, QC-LDPC decoders employ “barrel-shifters” that can become expensive for hardware implementation especially for large circulant sizes. Having barrel shifter logic in a flash die is not desirable; therefore we propose to use an interleaver in the write path of the controller. This interleaver shuffles ECC encoder output such that the codeword bits for each parity check equation of a single layer of the code are in a consecutive order. This could be problematic in case of burst errors; however, flash memory is not subject to burst errors. In the read (decode) path, a de-interleaver is needed to put the bits back to the order encoder generated.
Clearly, even number of bit errors per parity check will not be detected and there is no way of knowing the exact number of bit errors per parity error. Probabilities for these cases increase with increasing BER. Due to this limitation, the number of parity violations is only a lower bound on the number of bit errors per codeword. To produce a more accurate BER estimate (BEREST), we use a scalar α ≥ 1. Optimal scalar for a given input BER is defined as the mean of average number of parity violations divided by the number of input bit errors. Assuming a binomial distribution, optimal scalar can be analytically computed.
C. Hardware Implementation
Checking a parity constraint requires XOR’ing the bits participating in the parity check. Given that the interleaver puts codeword bits in order for each parity-check equation of the layer used for the estimate, as data streams from the flash die

Fig. 1. bEST implementation.
Fig. 2. Simplified bEST datapath.
to the controller via open NAND flash interface (ONFI) channel, we serially XOR every K codeword bits and then add the results of the XOR operations. Once the data is transferred to the controller, we get the number of parity violations.
The next step is to multiply the number of parity violations with the scalar to estimate the number of bit errors. For this purpose, one needs to use a quantized scalar that is a function of the number of parity violations. This scalar is simply implemented with right shift and add operations. Finally, we determine the BER estimate by dividing the estimated number of bit errors with the sample size: BEREST = α × Parity Violations/Sample Size. As will be shown in Section IV, the accuracy of BEREST depends on the sample size and the scalar.
Fig. 1 shows the block diagram of the proposed on-die implementation, where N parity check equations are used for the estimate. Given that the smallest data transferred from the die is an ECC codeword, it is preferred for N to be an integer multiple of the circulant size of the LDPC code.
The proposed estimator is implemented with 28 nm technology resulting at 333 MHz clock speed and 0.015 mm2 at worst case process corner conditions (temperature and voltage). Fig. 2 shows the simplified hardware data path of bEST. The design is capable of computing parities of up to two circulants in one cycle when data is available. Parity results are accumulated in the “parity violations accumulator.” Input data arrives at 64 bits/cycle (u[63:0]) and the control logic is provided with circulant size information (Q) and the length of the zero pad bits, which are used to adjust ECC code rate. Based on Q and the number of circulant parities computed, the shift, align and merge logic, shifts out the bits that were consumed for parity computation, aligns the incoming bits u[63:0] to account for the residual bits left after the shift and merges the aligned

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:05:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 7, JULY 2017

incoming bits with the residual bits to load in the 128 bit alignment buffer. The control logic determines the number of circulants to be used for parity violations computation based on Q before asserting “valid.”
Parity violations are computed as the data streams out of the NAND page buffer. Therefore at the end of a transfer of a codeword, parity violation count is immediately available. bEST circuit requires one more cycle to report back the bit error estimate after multiplication with the scalar. In this regard it has a single-cycle latency of 3 ns. bEST processes 64 bits at each clock cycle resulting 2.6 GB/s throughput, which is significantly higher than the bandwidth of the most recent ONFI specification of 1.6 GB/s.
In the latest 3-D NAND [9], CMOS circuits are formed underneath the array and there is sufficient space to fit the circuitry for bEST without increasing the die size. Finally, power consumption of bEST is very small compared to flash die power given the simple hardware implementation.
III. APPLICATIONS
In this section, we discuss potential applications for the proposed bEST. In general bEST applications check whether BEREST is greater or less than a predetermined threshold (BERTH). In this regard, we have a detection problem with false alarms and misses that are defined as follows.
1) False Alarm: BER ≤ BERTH and BEREST > BERTH. 2) Miss: BER > BERTH and BEREST < BERTH. For the detection problem, decreasing BERTH decreases the misses at the expense of increased false alarms and increasing BERTH decreases false alarms at the expense of increased misses. Depending on a given applications tolerance to false alarms and misses, one can adjust the detection threshold BERTH. In the context of detection problem, a lower cost implementation alternative is to compute the number of parity violations on the die and then readjust the BERTH using the scalar instead of computing BEREST in the die.
A. Programming Error Mitigation
To meet the write throughput requirements of the underlying application, different methods can be used for programming MLC/TLC systems depending on the capabilities of the flash cells. Some approaches program the flash cell in multiple passes, i.e., first pass programs one or more pages to the flash cell and then program the remaining pages in later passes. Programming in the second or higher passes may require reading already programmed pages that are then combined with the page(s) to be programmed to determine the level of the cell. The read operation performed prior to programming a page is called a “preread” and is subject to bit errors that will result in incorrect level information programmed to the cell, i.e., “level misplacement.”
These “programming errors” can be considered as write-in errors, i.e., writing erroneous data to the flash. For hard-input ECC decoding these bit errors are not any different from other errors. However, for soft-input ECC decoding, these bit errors may cause erroneous bits with high reliability presented to the ECC decoder. These “high reliability errors” (HREs) can significantly degrade soft ECC performance if they are high

Fig. 3. Programming error mitigation.
enough [10]. Therefore, it is important to reduce them as much as possible. Clearly, employing single-pass programming or avoiding prereads in programming by buffering all page information eliminates level misplacements altogether.
If the programming algorithm has to employ prereads, then the preread information can be first sent to the controller for error correction and then corrected information is used in the next pass. However, this approach is quite costly in terms of latency and bandwidth given that large amount of data has to be transferred from the ONFI channel and ECC decoder will be kept busy. We can reduce the cost of this approach significantly by using bEST to only send preread pages with high BEREST to the controller for error correction. This is accomplished by comparing BEREST against a predetermined threshold, BERTH. Using a lower BERTH results in un-necessarily sending some preread pages to controller for error correction and using a higher BERTH results in having some ECC codewords with high HRE rates that will be problematic for soft ECC decoder. BERTH is determined based on the tolerance of the soft ECC decoder to HREs. Fig. 3 shows the block diagram of bEST-based programming error mitigation for two-pass MLC programming.
B. Automatic Soft Information Generation
Extracting soft information from flash memory is costly due to the higher number of senses required. Furthermore transferring the soft information from the ONFI channel causes throughput loss given that multiple flash dice share the same ONFI channel to send/receive information to/from the controller. Given these challenges, by default hard information is first used at the ECC decoder. In case of ECC failure with hard information, firmware can request soft information from the flash die resulting a large latency that is problematic for applications that require the small worst case latency.
For this case, bEST can be used as follows. While streaming out the hard information to the controller, the die estimates the codeword or page BER, which is compared to a BERTH. If the die determines that the BER is too high for the hard ECC to correct, then it automatically prepares the soft information that can be requested by the controller in the case of hard ECC failure. This approach reduces the worst latency significantly.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:05:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAYNAK et al.: ON DIE bEST FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY

775

Fig. 4. Automatic soft information generation.

Fig. 5. PDF of estimated BEREST using optimal scalar α.

For this application, we get false alarms when bEST automatically generates soft information with the belief that errors are too high for the hard ECC to correct even though ECC could correct the errors with just hard information. Similarly, we end up with misses when bEST decides that errors are correctable with only hard information even though ECC decoder could not correct the errors with just hard information.
For soft information generation, miss events are more problematic, therefore it is preferred to lower misses at the expense of increased false alarms. Fig. 4 shows the block diagram of automatic soft information generation.
C. SLC to MLC/TLC Data Compaction
Most flash memory devices use MLC/TLC cells that are slower to program compared to SLC cells and this significantly reduces the write speed of the memory device. To alleviate this problem, one can use SLC caching, i.e., host data is first written to SLC blocks, which are later compacted to MLC/TLC blocks by firmware. The advantage of SLC caching is faster write speed. However, the disadvantage is the increased write amplification given that each host write may require two writes to the flash: one for the initial SLC write and one for the compaction.
For error free data compaction, SLC pages are read and transferred to controller for error correction and then corrected data is written to MLC/TLC blocks. This approach requires moving large amounts of data through the ONFI channel and keeps the ECC engine busy. Alternatively, one can use the page buffers on flash die to compact the data: internally read multiple SLC pages to the page buffers and then write the data on page buffers as MLC or TLC. In this case, the data never leaves the flash die.
Even though this approach simplifies data compaction significantly, one major problem is that errors in SLC page reads can potentially cause level misplacements that might be problematic [10]. To alleviate this problem, bEST can be used to determine SLC pages having higher error rate estimates that could be problematic for the ECC after data compaction. Only these identified SLC pages are sent to the controller for error correction and the corrected data is sent back to the die

for data compaction. The determination is done by comparing BEREST against a predetermined BERTH. This proposal simplifies SLC to MLC/TLC compaction and reduces the traffic on ONFI channel significantly.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we first analyze the accuracy of the BER estimate for a row weight of K = 50, which results in LDPC code rates of (0.92, 0.90, 0.88) using column weights (C) of 4, 5, and 6 respectively. For this purpose, at two different BER points of 2 × 10−3 and 4 × 10−3, millions of LDPC codewords are generated randomly and their input BERs are estimated using the proposed scheme. For the bEST, we used optimal scalars and three different sample sizes, namely 2 KB (N = 360), 4 KB (N = 720), and 16 KB (N = 2880), which are typical codeword, host and flash page sizes, respectively. Finally for each BER point and sample size we generate the probability distribution function (PDF) of BEREST as shown in Fig. 5. We observe that, increasing sample size improves the accuracy of BEREST leading to tighter distribution. Furthermore, as input BER increases, BEREST gets less accurate resulting in a wider distribution. Given that the number of parity violations is upper bounded by the number of input bit errors, we have BEREST ≤ α × BER. Since optimal α increases with increasing BER, the right tail of the PDF of BEREST is longer at higher BER.
We next analyze the performance of bEST-based detection scheme for 2 and 16 KB sample sizes for two different BER detection thresholds (BERTH) of 2 × 10−3 and 4 × 10−3. Fig. 6 shows the miss probability (MP) and false alarm probability (FAP) as a function of BER. As expected, larger sample sizes result in smaller MP and FAP. In addition, FAP and MP are smaller at lower detection thresholds. Given BEREST ≤ α × BER, FAP > 0 only for BER > BERTH/α. This is the reason why FAP tail is shorter in Fig. 6. There is no such bound for MP.
Fig. 7 shows the effect of the scalar on FAP and MP for 4 KB sample size assuming BERTH = 4 × 10−3. Even though the optimal scalar leads to lower MP and FAP at a given BER; quantized scalar delivers acceptable performance. Further

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:05:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 7, JULY 2017

Fig. 6. Effect of sample size on FAP and MP using optimal α.

tTurnAroundTime (which will most likely be the case). This example clearly demonstrates that bEST reduces worst case latency significantly and hence improve quality of service.
Furthermore, BEREST does not need to be very precise to take advantage of the performance benefits. As an example, for automatic soft information generation, less accurate BEREST may result in some misses for which soft information is not generated automatically. But for all other cases that are correctly identified to need soft information, performance benefit of much lower latency will still be observed.
Finally, proposed method can be extended to less structured LDPC codes, where each parity check can be used to detect bit errors among the bits participated in the parity check. Similar to QC-LDPC codes, we will not be able to detect even bit errors and unable to determine the exact number of bit errors. In addition, depending on the row weight distribution of the LDPC code, we may count some bit errors more than once resulting in less accurate BEREST. However, one can alleviate these issues by being more conservative in picking BERTH at the expense of giving up some system performance benefits.

V. CONCLUSION
In this brief, we proposed an on-die bEST with very low hardware implementation cost for NAND flash memory. Proposed estimator leverages the parity check constraints of the LDPC code that is used as the underlying ECC for the memory controller. We also elaborated on applications that can use bEST to significantly improve system performance in terms of throughput and latency. Simulation results have also shown that the proposed estimator can be successfully used for various detection problems.

Fig. 7. Effect of scalar α on FAP and MP.
TABLE I LATENCY BREAKDOWN
simulations have shown that using three bit quantization on the fractional part of the scalar leads to near optimal performance.
We next give an example on potential system performance improvements with automatic soft information generation. Assume that the host requests 4 KB data from flash, which is not correctable by ECC decoder using only hard information. For this case, Table I shows the latency steps among which firmware architecture dependent tTurnAroundTime (the time it takes for the firmware to reissue the soft read for the same 4 KB data) is very high, especially for high queuedepth systems. With bEST-based automatic soft information generation, once hard information is transferred to the controller, soft information generation is initiated and by the time controller requests soft information from the die, it will be ready in page buffers when tSoftRead ≤ tHardECCDecode +

REFERENCES
[1] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[2] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.
[3] C. Aslam, Y. Guan, and K. Cai, “Retention-aware belief-propagation decoding for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/ 7551127/
[4] Y. Hu et al., “A dominating error region strategy for improving the bitflipping LDPC decoder of SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 578–582, Jun. 2015.
[5] A. Navon and E. Sharon, “Systems and methods for fast bit error rate estimation,” U.S. Patent US 20 150 378 801 A1, May 2015
[6] J. Brewer and M. Gill, Eds., Nonvolatile Memory Technologies With Emphasis on Flash: A Comprehensive Guide to Understanding and Using Flash Memory Devices. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, Jan. 2008.
[7] T. Parnell, N. Papandreou, T. Mittelholzer, and H. Pozidis, “Modelling of the threshold voltage distributions of sub-20nm NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., Austin, TX, USA, Dec. 2014, pp. 2351–2356.
[8] V. Taranalli, H. Uchikawa, and P. H. Siegel, “Channel models for multi-level cell flash memories based on empirical error analysis,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3169–3181, Aug. 2016.
[9] T. Tanaka et al., “7.7 A 768Gb 3b/cell 3D-floating-gate NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, USA, Jan. 2016, pp. 142–144.
[10] P. Khayat, M. N. Kaynak, S. Parthasarathy, and S. S. Tehrani, “Performance characterization of LDPC codes for large-volume NAND flash data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, May 2015, pp. 1–4.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:05:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

