1
LDPC-RS Two Dimensional Code for the Next Generation Cloud Transmission System
Sung Ik Park, Senior Member, IEEE, Yiyan Wu, Fellow, IEEE, Heung Mook Kim, Member, IEEE, Sunhyoung Kwon, Member, IEEE, Liang Zhang, Member, IEEE, Bo Rong, Member, IEEE, Namho Hur, Member, IEEE, and
Jeongchang Kim, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper proposes a two dimensional (2D) code, which has vertical raptor-like rate-compatible LDPC code and horizontal Reed Solomon (RS) code, for the terrestrial CTxn system. The proposed 2D code not only removes error-floor phenomenon with a help of RS code, but also does not require a complex interleaver for stable reception under fading channels because the 2D code itself provides block-type interleaver.
Index Terms— Cloud transmission, LDPC code, RS code

2D In form atio n A rray
1st R S Encod ing

R S P arity

2nd LD PC En co d in g
LD P C P arity Parity on P arity

I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, the cloud transmission (CTxn) for the next generation terrestrial broadcasting has been proposed in [1]. It is a pioneering study intended to use more efficiently the radio frequency (RF) spectrum. According to [1], the key issue of the CTxn system is the high degree of robustness against co-channel interference. Since the impact of co-channel interference is equivalent to that of an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), the cloud transmission system should have a signal to noise ratio (SNR) threshold of -2 to -3 dB. In [2] and [3], the authors proposed a class of raptor-like rate-compatible low density parity check (LDPC) codes to achieve negative SNR thresholds. Since the proposed codes have raptor code’s property, they can be decoded with a truncated codeword for power saving and less latency under high SNR regions.
In this paper, we propose a two dimensional (2D) code, which has vertical raptor-like rate-compatible LDPC code and horizontal Reed Solomon (RS) code, for the terrestrial CTxn system. The proposed 2D code not only removes error-floor phenomenon with a help of RS code, but also does not require a complex interleaver for stable reception under fading channels because the 2D code itself provides block-type interleaver.
This research was supported by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, Rep. of Korea, under the support program supervised by the Korea Communications Agency (KCA) (Development of Terrestrial Broadcasting Technology for Next Generation DTV).
S. I. Park, H. M. Kim, S. Kwon, and N. Hur are with the Broadcasting System Research Department, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, 305-700, Korea (e-mail: {psi76, hmkim, shkwon, namho}@etri.re.kr).
Y. Wu, L. Zhang, and B. Rong are with the Communications Research Centre Canada, 3701 Carling Ave., Ottawa, ON K2H 8S2 Canada (e-mail: {yiyan.wu, liang.lu-zhang, bo.rong}@crc.ca).
J. Kim is with the Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering, Korea Maritime University, Busan 606-791, Korea (e-mail: jchkim@hhu.ac.kr).

Fig. 1. Proposed 2D code based on LDPC and RS codes
Furthermore, since the vertical LDPC code has a raptor-like rate-compatible property [3], the proposed 2D code can be adaptively decoded according to a received SNR value to reduce decoding latency and complexity.
II. 2D CODE BASED ON LDPC AND RS CODES
In this section, we propose a novel 2D code which has vertical LDPC code and horizontal RS code as shown in Fig. 1. The proposed 2D code removes possible error-floor caused by the LDPC code with a help of the horizontal RS code because it is equivalent to a concatenated error correction code. It does not require a complex interleaver to cope with fading channel because the 2D code itself provides a block-type interleaver. Furthermore, since the vertical LDPC code has a raptor-like rate-compatible property, the proposed 2D code can have variable latency and decoding complexity.
For an encoding process of the 2D code shown in Fig. 1, RS parity is first generated and horizontally added. After the horizontal RS encoding, the RS codeword is read column by column, top to bottom, and then LDPC parity is calculated and added vertically. At the receiver side, the RS decoding is conducted after the LDPC decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:30:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

To reduce the decoding latency and complexity, the LDPC encoded data need to be divided in multiple blocks as shown in Fig. 2. As in Fig. 2, we consider the quarter-rate LDPC code with the length of 64,800 and parallel factor of 30. If we assume the block size is 30, each LDPC encoded data are divided into 2,160 blocks, so that LDPC code can be truncated from R = 1/4 to higher code rates. For example, if 780 (= 540 information blocks + 240 parity blocks), 1080, 1300, and 1620 blocks in one LDPC codeword (= 540 information blocks + 1620 parity blocks) are received, the LDPC code can be truncated to the code rates of 2/3, 1/2, 2/5, and 1/3, respectively. For modulation and transmission, since the row by row transmission provides time and frequency interleaving effects, each block of LDPC codeword is read out horizontally as shown in Fig. 2. Note that since the vertical LDPC code has raptor-like rate-compatible feature, it can be successfully decoded with whole or part of parity. This means that the block-wise horizontal transmission enables early decoding of the vertical LDPC code according to the received SNR.
In order to demonstrate the performance of the proposed 2D code for the CTxn system, we performed computer simulations based on the orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) system. We adopted OFDM system parameters from the DVB-T2 system such as 6 MHz RF bandwidth (occupied bandwidth = 5.707 MHz), 4096 fast Fourier transform (FFT), 1/16 guard interval, 1.674 kHz carrier spacing, and QPSK symbol mapping. For the simulation, we used the quarter-rate vertical LDPC code with the length of 64800 bits and the horizontal RS code with the length of 160 bytes, and the perfect synchronization and channel estimation were assumed at the receiver side.
Fig. 3 shows the BER performance of the proposed 2D code under AWGN and TU-6 channels. For the mobile TU6 channel, 120 km/h vehicle speed was assumed, and the parity bytes used for the RS code were 2, 8, and 14 bytes (error correction capability (t) = 1, 4, and 7). As shown in Fig. 3, when 8 bytes for RS parity were used, the proposed 2D code had thresholds about -3.33 dB and -1.68 dB in the AWGN and TU-6 channels, respectively. Since the proposed 2D code provided a block-type interleaver, it showed superior performance under various fading channels. In addition, 14 RS parity bytes ( t = 7) provided about 0.05 to 0.25 dB gain under two channels compared to the LDPC code only. The LDPC code was the major force to deal with the AWGN and TU-6 channels because it has much stronger error correction capability and longer codeword length than the RS code. Note that the primary purpose of the RS code was removing an error-floor phenomenon.

Fig. 2. Block division and output order of the proposed 2D code
Fig. 3. BER performance of the proposed 2D code under AWGN and TU-6 channels according to different RS parity bytes.
Cloud Transmission System,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting. Special Issue FOBTV, June 2014 (DOI: 10.1109/TBC.2014.2304134) .

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Wu, B. Rong, K. Salehian, and G. Gagnon, “Cloud Transmission: A New Spectrum-Reuse Friendly Digital Terrestrial Broadcasting Transmission System,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 329-337, Sept. 2012.
[2] S. I. Park, H. M. Kim, Y. Wu, and J. Kim, “A Newly Designed Quarter Rate QC-LDPC Code for the Cloud Transmission System,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 59, no. 1, March 2013.
[3] S. I. Park, Y. Wu, H. M. Kim, N. Hur, and J. Kim, “Raptor-Like Rate Compatible LDPC Codes and Their Puncturing Performance for the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:30:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

