A High Throughput and Low BER Implementation Method in TG Wireless Transmission System

Guochun WAN1, Guizhu YIN2
Department of Electronics Science and Technology Tongji University Shanghai, China

Lan CHEN3, Qian ZHANF4, Yongqing FAN5
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering Shanghai Institute of Technology Shanghai, China

Abstract—Along with the development of high-speed railway, higher and higher technical requirements for the mobile communication system in it are raised. Communication Based Train Control (CBTC) will be based on mobile communication, of which the key problem is how to support high reliability of data transmission in order to improve utilization of tracks and enhance train’s safety. The applications of LDPC in reliable high-speed data transmission which serves fault monitor and early-warning system in train-ground (TG) wireless communication are proposed. The design of high-throughput and complexity reduction for regular and irregular LDPC codes has been considered in decoding algorithm and architectural in order to accord with the performance of reliable train-ground information transmission. A parallel message updates and implement method are presented for LDPC decoder of trainground system that bring negligible loss in performance compared to the ideal case. A new implement method which is designed of very large scale integration have been proposed in this paper. The LDPC decoder has been applied in reliable trainground high throughput fault monitor and digital early-warning communication system. Testing result demonstrates that the proposed architecture achieves a throughput of 18.629Mbps, which meets the performance requirements of reliable high data transmission and higher throughout.
Keywords—communication based on train control; low density parity check codes; reliable transmission; decoder architectures
I. INTRODUCTION
Real-time traffic information is an essential and important factor in Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) such as safe management, traffic control, route guidance, accident detection and so on. Probe-vehicle technique is an effective method of collecting real-time traffic information on railway information system. A technically feasible and cost-effective wireless communication network is in great demand so that large amounts of traffic data sampled by probe vehicles over a large geographical area can be sent to the vehicle working condition detect processing center [1].
As a typical hard real-time system, CBTC must transmit instructions in appointed time windows between station and train. The key problem of CBTC is how to release control data in time slot much more quickly to ensure operating safety.

At present, the development of high-speed railway has put forward higher requirements for mobile communication systems. It mainly means that its network architecture, hardware devices and software algorithms must adapt to the capability to meet train speed [1].The fault monitor and earlywarning system is as shown in figure 1.
Fig. 1. The overall framework of vehicle condition detect system
An efficient and reliable train-ground communication system is the key to insure the safety of the train. The invention and development of low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) narrow the gap between real system performance and channel capacity. In this dissertation, the theory, design and implement methods in reliable TG wireless communication based on LDPC codes are studied. We propose an approach to construct a class of LDPC codes that have relatively structured bipartite graph topologies that lead to very good performance and are directly fit to the decoder devices of TG communication system.
II. TRAIN-GROUND COMMUNICATION SYSTEM PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS BASED ON 802.11
The train-ground communication, which is the basis for train control system, is one of the key technologies for CBTC. At present, IEEE 802.11 series standard WLAN has become

978-1-4799-4315-9/14/$31.00 c 2014 IEEE

183

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:24:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

one of directions, to which train ground communication can further develop. we need to think about the impact of the train speed on physical transmission. After AP (Access Point) deployment, we have a SNR more than 20dB along the railway. The FER of Train-Ground communication system which works in 11Mbits/s operation mode, under Rayleigh channel with different Doppler shifts, according to 802.11b and 802.11 standard [6].
Packet loss rate and Packet delay are two important parameters for train-ground system. The control information can not be sent to train due to packet loss which has a great impact on the efficiency of the traffic. The packet delay must be strictly less than CBTC train communication cycle, otherwise the information received by the train is not real-time information, which has a bad impact on control accuracy [6].
III. TDMP OPTIMIZING ALGORITHM APPROPRIATE AND SUITABLE FOR TRAIN-GROUND COMMUNICATION
A. Implementation issues of LDPC decoder
LDPC codes are a class of linear error-correcting block codes. A LDPC code is defined as the null space of a paritycheck matrix H with the structural properties at reference [2].
The main challenge in the LDPC code decoder implementation is how to effectively manage the message passing during the iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding [4].
One of the attractions of LDPC codes is their simple description in terms of a random sparse parity-check matrix, which makes it easy to construct LDPC codes of any rate, which can be built by specifying a fixed weight for each row and each column, and constructing at random subject to those constraints[2].
B. Algorithm Descriptions
The turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm will be described with the help of the parity-check matrix H shown in reference [4], which has six parity check equations corresponding to a code of length 12. The algorithm is based on decoding the rows of the parity-check matrix sequentially. Extrinsic messages generated from decoding earlier rows are used as input prior messages to decode subsequent rows. To each row i in H, we associate the vector Ȝi=[Ȝi1, …, ȜiCi] of extrinsic message corresponding to the nonzero entries in that row. The number of nonzero ci in a row is called the weight. Let Ii denote the set of indexes of the nonzero entries of row i in H[4][8].
C. Implementation of an information processing unit
The equations are an exception to the prescribed specifications of this template. You will need to determine whether or not your equation should be typed using either the Times New Roman or the Symbol font (please no other font). To create multileveled equations, it may be necessary to treat the equation as a graphic and insert it into the text after your paper is styled.

Based on the algorithm research above, this section is dedicated to exploring an implementation that can express information of the process path [5].

A further analysis on information of the check node is shown in the renewal equation (1).

¦ Rij [k] = ψ −1[ ψ ( Q j′ri [k] )]δij

(1)

j′≠ j′∈R[i]

Equation

(1)

includes

a

non-liner

function ψ (x) = −(1/ 2) log(tanh( x / 2)) , and its inverse

function ψ −1(x) . Normally, for the implementation of this

function on hardware, Look-up Table (LUT) is needed. But this function has following two limits:

Because of nonlinearity of ψ (x) and ψ −1(x) , when ψ (x) is quantized, dynamic scale is restricted. This non
linearity easily leads to worse performance in hardware implementation of the algorithm, convergence speed also slows down, which shown as decoding delayed is prolonged, switching times are increased, and decoder’s power consumption is worse.

Implementing parallel renewal equation (1) will need 2r LTU, in which r is the number of check nodes. Size of LTU
becomes more important as the accuracy is increasing, because they are pointing to the key path, for which pipeline organization is necessary. So they tend to increase minimum clock cycle [4].

For the question proposed above, an optimized BCJR algorithm can be used to replace computing information on check nodes. The key algorithm equation can be simplified as equation (2) (3) and (4) [4][5][6].

α1′ = ln(eα1 + eα2 +λ ) ,α2′ = ln(eα1 +λ + eα 2 )

(2)

β1′ = ln(eβ1 + eβ2 +λ ) β2′ = ln(eβ1 +λ + eβ2 )

(3)

Λ = ln(eα1 +β2 + eα2 +β1 ) − ln(eα1 +β1 + eα2 +β2 )

(4)

In equation (2)-(4), λ is input prior and intrinsic channel
reliability value of the code bit associated with that trellis section, ȁ is the updated output reliability of that code bit, and Į and ȕ are intermediate forward and backward state metrics. Equation (2) and (3) are called the forward and backward state metric recursions. For LDPC code, the length of grids is the number of bits for each check node, namely the value of r in
LDPC code (c , r) . Comparing with 1K [4] for Turbo, its
value is relatively small, between 3 and 8. If function Γ(x, y)
is:

Γ(x, y) = max(x, y) + ln(1 + e− x−y ) = max(x, y) + δ (x − y) (5)

In which, δ (⋅) is for single value’s corrected value. This
corrected equation can be realized through two similar methods, LUT or an accurate liner functional equation. The following is the approximate corrected equation (6) suitable for hardware implementations proposed for single values [4][7][8].

184

2014 IEEE 9th Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:24:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

δ (x) ≈ max(5 − x ,0)

(6)

84

Equation Γ(x, y) through correction is approximated as:

Γ(x, y) ≈ max(x, y) + max(5 − x − y , 0) 84
(7)
A further analysis of non-liner function performance of the check nodes non information transfer equation,
ψ (x) = (sgn(x),ψ (x) ) = (sgn(x),−log tanh x / 2) and its
inverse function ψ −1(x) are investigated. When x ≤ 2 , there
is a big dynamic scale, when x > 2 , it becomes smoother.
LUT is always adapted in hardware to increase accuracy and scale of width. The other two quantifiable functions should be each other’s inverse function, as this will form a bigger compound function, with these factors limiting code length for the decoder.
In order to easily find a method for hardware implementation, a replaceable function should be sought out for computing information. We define a two-variable function
q(x, y) as:

q(x, y) = log[e(x+ y) + 1] [ex + ey ], (x, y) ∈ R2

(8)

Through investigation of equation (8), proprieties for the two-variable function are shown as follows[4][8]:

According to proprieties shown above, q(x, y) is used to represent ψ (x) , and shown as equation (9).

sgn(xy) ⋅ψ −1(ψ ( x ) +ψ ( y )) = q(x, y)

(9)

With recurrence methods, the following rules are induced:

c

¦ sgn(∏

c i=1

xi

)

⋅ψ

−1 (

ψ ( xi )) = q("(q(q(x1, x2 ), x3 ),"), xc )

i =1

(10)

In order to reduce quantization noise effect during

communication, we use equation (2) minus equation (3), with

Δ

Δ

measurement error shown as Δα =α2 − α1 and Δβ = β2 − β1 .

Converted equation is shown as follows, with q(x, y) :

Δα ′ = ln(eΔα + eλ ) − ln(1 + eΔα+λ ) = q(Δα , λ)

(11)

Where

Δ
q(x, y) =Γ(x, y) − Γ(x + y,0) = q0 (x, y) + δq (x, y)
(12)

And q(x, y) = max(x, y) − max(x + y,0) which is the
main part of the approximation. δ q (x, y) is a corrected
function with double variables.

IV. SYNTHESIZING AND TESTING RESULTS A. Testing structure
Part of TG-LDPC FEC sending section to receiving terminal structure chart is given in reference [4] and [8]: random scrambled data will be encoding through extrinsic code BCH first, then LDPC decoding, QAM (Quadrature Amplitude Modulation) mapping, two threads of signs I, Q is produced. They will be interlaced first, and then go through the noisy channel. Situation in receiving section is the inverse process of the sending terminal. B. Proper TG decoding method for train-ground transmission
The decoding realization of TG forward error correction is shown in figure 2. There are balanced data from i, q and Signal response strength |h| estimated by channel. Three inputs port data go through symbol deinterleaver unit first, and then enter higher order QAM soft demapping unit. Every bit’s log likelihood rate will be output. When carrying on fixed point operation, estimated value for signal to noise ratio and channel respond intensity should be considered.
Fig. 2. TG LDPC forward error correction decoder flow chart
C. The setting up of testing environment According to monitor service requirements, two monitory
information should be uploaded to train-ground control center. Transmission bandwidth for each of the thread shouldn’t be narrower than 3 Mbps; idle port overall bandwidth shouldn’t be narrower than 6 Mbps.
Testing is taken on at the direction of A station to F station, Metro testing line. Railway is 1.257km long totally. Railway side equipment are set up in the way shown in figure 3, the highest speed per hour of the train is 100km/h.
Fig. 3. Railway side equipment setting up

2014 IEEE 9th Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA)

185

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:24:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

D. Simulation and testing results
When train passing from F Station to A Station, we can see from the throughput capacity testing of train-ground information transmission shown in figure 4. Average throughput is 18.629Mbps, and maximum throughput is 18.868Mbps.

Fig. 4. Throughput capacity testing for train from point F to point A

TABLE I.

ESTIMATED NOISE-SIGNAL RATIO, TG LDPC AVERAGE

ITERATION TIMES, SINGLE FRAME MAXIMUM ITERATIONS FOR MULTI-

CARRIER DYNAMIC AND STATIC INFORMATION CHANNEL

V. CONCLUSIONS
Considering the encoding requirements in information channel of high throughput capacity, low complexity, and low time-delay for reliable TG wireless communication, this paper carried on the analysis about key problems including decoding implementation complexity on LDPC hardware, memorizer usage, and transmission delay. Optimized implementation method and major realization structure is proposed. To solve decoding waiting problem between two phase iterations, multi code rate TDMP algorithm is investigated. Based on principle of practicability, implementation of soft-input-soft-output message process unit and normalized TDMP optimized algorithm are proposed. The simulation results show that the proposed optimization method can judge and weigh between decoding performance and implementation complexity. Compared with standard decoding algorithm, the optimized algorithm proposed by us has following advantages: 1) convergence speed is improved with the same iteration times. 2) Memorizer usage and decoding complexity are reduced.
Results in this paper further proved optimized LDPC’s perfect error correction, anti-interference, and real-time proprieties, which can satisfy the performance requirements of train-ground reliable data transmission.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The paper is supported by science and technology research key foundation of Shanghai education commission (No. 14ZZ163) and science and technology development foundation of Shanghai Institute of Technology (No. KJ2012-05).

Table I gives train-ground communication oriented multicarrier, single carrier data souse TG LDPC decoding performance simulation results under the condition of static and dynamic channel with multi-modes (mode1, mode2, mode3, mode4, mode5, mode6, mode7), multi-channels (Rice declining channel, AWGN, Rayleigh declining channel). Simulation condition is based on testing standard given by Chinese MII, simulation period is 2 short interlace period (340 signal frames), dynamic information channel is with code interleaver, static information channel is without code interleaver, and fixed point is adapted. LDPC_max_iter is maximum iteration times for LDPC, and LDPC_iter_avg is average iteration times.

REFERENCES
[1] Bin Ning, Tao Tang,ziyou Gao. Intelligent Railway Systems in China. IEEE Intelligent Systems, Ocr. 2006, Vol. 21, No.5, pp,80-83.
[2] R.G.Gallager. Low-density parity-check codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 1962; 8(1) : 21-28.
[3] Framing structure, channel coding and modulation for digital television terrestrial broadcasting system. GB20600-2006. 2006; China..
[4] Mohammad M. Mansour. A Turbo-Decoding Message-Passing Algorithm for Sparse Parity-Check Matrix Codes. IEEE Transactions On Signal Processing 2006; 54(11): 4376-4392.
[5] Marjan Karkooti and Joseph R.Cavallaro. Semi-Pafallel Reconfigurable Architectures for Real-Time LDPC Decoding. ITCC Proceeding of Intermational Conference on Information Technology: Coding and Computing, 2004, 579-585.
[6] Kin K. Leung, Zoran Kostic Outdoor IEEE 802.11 Cellular Networks: Radio and Mac Design and Their Performance. IEEE Trans.Veh.Technol, vol.56, pp.2673-2684, September 2007:2 – 4.
[7] Chung S Y, Forney G D. On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit. IEEE Communications Letters 2001; 5(2): 58-60.
[8] Mohammad M. Mansour, Naresh R. Shanbhag. High-Throughput LDPC Decoders. IEEE Transactions On Very Large Scale Integration Systems 2003; 11(6): 976-979.

186

2014 IEEE 9th Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:24:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

