IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 60, NO. 2, JUNE 2014

239

Raptor-Like Rate Compatible LDPC Codes and Their Puncturing Performance for the Cloud Transmission System
Sung Ik Park, Senior Member, IEEE, Yiyan Wu, Fellow, IEEE, Heung Mook Kim, Member, IEEE, Namho Hur, Member, IEEE, and Jeongchang Kim, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper proposes a class of raptor-like rate compatible low-density parity check (LDPC) codes for the cloud transmission (CTxN) system. The proposed LDPC codes have lengths of 16,200 and 64,800 which are the same as those of DVB T2/S2 LDPC codes so that the CTxn system can easily be combined with the DVB-T2/S2 system for a second layer service. As the proposed LDPC codes are optimized at low coding rate range (R < 1/2), their performance is not only close to the Shannon limit, but also better than the DVB-T2/S2 LDPC codes. Moreover, the proposed LDPC codes have raptor code’s property so that they can be decoded with a punctured codeword at the receiver for power saving and less latency under high signal-to-noise ratio regions.
Index Terms—Cloud transmission, low-density parity check (LDPC) code, low-rate, puncturing, rate compatible.

I. Introduction

Fig. 1. PCM structure of the proposed low-rate QC-LDPC code.

R ECENTLY, the cloud transmission (CTxn) system for the next generation terrestrial broadcasting has been proposed [1]. It is a pioneering study that is intended to use the radio frequency (RF) spectrum more efficiently. According to [1], the CTxn system is robust to co-channel interference and immune to multipath distortion. Hence, it can reduce or even eliminate TV White-Space (TVWS) in order to be more robust and co-exist with the unlicensed devices. It can also increase the spectrum utilization significantly (3 to 4 times) by making all terrestrial RF channels in one city available for broadcast service. Moreover, it can support layered services for mobile, pedestrian, and indoor reception. The key issue of the CTxn system is the high degree of robustness against co-channel
Manuscript received August 26, 2013; revised January 19, 2014; accepted January 22, 2014. Date of publication February 19, 2014; date of current version June 4, 2014. This work was supported by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP), Korea, in the ICT Research and Development Program 2013 (Development of Terrestrial Broadcasting Technology for Next Generation DTV).
S. I. Park, H. M. Kim, and N. Hur are with the Broadcasting System Research Department, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon 305-700, Korea (e-mail: psi76@etri.re.kr; hmkim@etri.re.kr; namho@etri.re.kr).
Y. Wu is with the Communications Research Centre Canada, Ottawa, ON K2H 8S2, Canada (e-mail: yiyan.wu@crc.ca).
J. Kim is with the Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering, Korea Maritime University, Busan 606-791, Korea (e-mail: jchkim@hhu.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2014.2304134

interference. Since the impact of co-channel interference is equivalent to that of an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) [2], [3], the CTxn system should have an AWGN signal to noise ratio (SNR) threshold of −2 to −3 dB. A negative SNR threshold value means that the system can withstand combined noise, co-channel interference, and multipath distortion power that is higher than the desired signal power.
In [1], the authors considered a quarter-rate low density parity check (LDPC) code of the DVB-T2/S2 system to achieve negative SNR thresholds, and they verified that quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK) has better spectrum efficiency than binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) in the SNR range of −5 to 0 dB. They also simulated that the QPSK-based quarter-rate LDPC code has 0.5 dB better SNR performance than the BPSK-based half-rate LDPC code at bit error rate (BER) = 10−4.
It is well-known that the DVB-T2/S2 LDPC codes with a length of 64800 can approach the Shannon limit within 0.8 dB for code rates of R ≥ 1/2. However, at quarter-rate, the code is 1.29 dB away from the Shannon limit because it is not well-optimized at the low coding rate range [4]. In [4], the authors proposed the newly designed quarter-rate LDPC code for CTxn system, and the designed code with a length of 64K was only 0.6 dB away from Shannon limit. Moreover, they verified that the QPSK-based quarter-rate LDPC code has 1 dB better SNR performance than the BPSK-based half-rate

0018-9316 c 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 60, NO. 2, JUNE 2014

Fig. 2. PCM structure of the proposed low-rate QC-LDPC code.

LDPC code at BER = 2 × 10−6. However, since the codeword length of the designed code is different from that of the DVBT2/S2 system, the DVB system cannot be easily used as a second layer of CTxn system. In addition, in order to support layered services for mobile, pedestrian, and indoor reception, the CTxn system needs to have various code rates of LDPC codes.
In this paper, we propose a class of raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes, which support rates of 1/6, 1/5, 1/4, 1/3, 2/5, and 1/2. We also present performance of whole or punctured codeword under AWGN channel. Since the designed LDPC codes have lengths of 16200 and 64800 which are the same with those of DVB T2/S2 LDPC codes, the CTxn system can be easily combined with the DVB-T2/S2 system for a second layer service. Moreover, since the designed codes have raptor code’s property [5], they can be decoded with a punctured codeword at the receiver for power saving and less latency under high SNR regions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, the newly designed raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes for the CTxn system are proposed. In Section III, computer simulation results of the proposed LDPC codes based on whole or punctured codewords are provided. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section IV.
II. Newly Designed Low-Rate LDPC Codes
LDPC codes—first discovered by Gallager [6]—were rediscovered to be Shannon-limit-approaching codes over AWGN channel [7]. It is well-known that they have many advantages including asymptotically better performance than turbo codes, parallelizable decoding, self-error-detection capability by syndrome check, etc. A conventional LDPC code is defined by

a sparse parity-check matrix (PCM), which is often randomly

generated. However, randomly constructed LDPC codes need

a significant amount of memory to store their parity-check

matrices. It may also be hard to access the memory and

encode/decode data efficiently. For these reasons, algebraically

structured LDPC codes have received much interest recently

since they are more attractive for implementation purpose and

their commercial use.

It has been known that quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC)

codes may be good candidates to solve the memory problem

[8]. A QC-LDPC code is characterized by PCM, H, which

consists of small square blocks with the zero matrix or

circulant permutation matrix. Note that a circulant permutation

matrix can be obtained by shifting each row of the identity

matrix. For example, let J be the L×L permutation matrix

given by

⎡

⎤

0 1 0 ··· 0

JL×L

=

⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢

0 ...
0

0 ...
0

1 ...
0

··· ... ···

0 ...
1

⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥

1 0 0 ··· 0

It is clear that Ji is just the circulant permutation matrix, which shifts each row of the L×L identity matrix I(= J0) to the right by i times for any integer i, 0≤i<L. We need only the exponent i to store the information on Ji, and therefore, the required amount of memory for storing PCM can be reduced by a factor of 1/L.
In this section, we present a new class of raptor-like rate compatible QC-LDPC code for the CTxn system, which has the structured PCM as depicted in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1, A and C are g×K and (N − K − g)×(K + g), respectively, and they are

PARK et al.: RAPTOR-LIKE RATE COMPATIBLE LDPC CODES AND THEIR PUNCTURING PERFORMANCE FOR THE CLOUD TRANSMISSION SYSTEM

241

Fig. 4. BER versus SNR of the BPSK-based half-rate and the QPSK-based quarter-rate LDPC codes (after 50 iterations).

Fig. 5. Punctured PCM from the designed quarter-rate LDPC code with a length of 64800.

composed of L×L zero matrices and circulant permutation

matrices. Note that N and K are the codeword length and

information block length, respectively. Z is g×(N − K − g)

zero matrix, D is (N − K − g)×(N − K − g) identity matrix,

and B is g×g and a blockwise dual diagonal matrix, which

has the following structure:

⎡

⎤

IL×L 0 0 · · · 0 0 0

Bg×g

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢

IL×L 0 ...
0

IL×L IL×L
...
0

0
IL×L ...
0

··· ··· ...
···

0 0 ... IL×L

0 0 ... IL×L

0 0 ... 0

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥ .

0 0 0 · · · 0 IL×L IL×L

It is easily checked that the PCM in Fig. 1 has a simple cascaded structure of the PCM [A B] and the PCM [C D]. In other words, the LDPC code in Fig. 1 can be obtained by a concatenation of the codes specified by [A B] and [C D]. In Section XI of [9], Richardson and Urbanke showed that this cascaded construction provides an ideal framework for low-rate LDPC codes. Furthermore, they showed that a concatenation of a proper high-rate code and a large number of single parity-check codes can achieve good noise thresholds close to the Shannon limit.
The proposed irregular QC-LDPC codes having the PCM defined in Fig. 1 can provide an efficient encoding algorithm due to their lower triangular form. Let c = (s, p1, p2) be a codeword, where s denotes the systematic part, p1 and p2 denote the parity parts corresponding to B and D, respectively. The codeword c is specified by HcT = 0, and it can be split into two equations as follows:

AsT+BpT1 = 0

(1)

C(s, p1)T+DpT2 = 0

(2)

Since B has a blockwise dual diagonal structure, the encoding process for calculating p1 in Eq. (1) can be carried out by a block-type accumulator structure as shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 6. BER versus SNR of the punctured LDPC codes with rates of 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, and 2/3.
Furthermore, D is the identity matrix, and thus, p2 is easily calculated by p2T = C(s, p1)T. Consequently, the proposed QCLDPC codes have an efficient linear-time encoding algorithm.
For the CTxn system, we have designed raptor-like rate compatible QC-LDPC codes with L = 30, whose code rates are 1/6, 1/5, 1/4, 1/3, 2/5, and 1/2, respectively. In order to use the DVB system as a second layer of the CTxn system, the designed codes have lengths of 16200 and 64800, which are the same with those of DVB T2/S2 LDPC codes. As a reference, the list of variable and check node degrees, and the total number of nodes with those degrees for all code rates are shown in Tables I and II, respectively. The sizes of each component matrix A, B, C, D, and Z are also shown in Table III. The degree distributions in Tables I and II are obtained by using the density evolution method in [10], [11]. Note that the designed low-rate LDPC codes, which have two different codeword lengths, use the same variable node

242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 60, NO. 2, JUNE 2014

Fig. 3. BER performance of the designed raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes. TABLE I
Number of Variable Nodes of Various Degrees

degree distribution, but they use different check node degree distributions for each codeword length.
III. Simulation Results
In order to demonstrate the performance of the designed raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes, we performed computer simulations based on QPSK modulation and the loglikelihood ratio (LLR) based sum-product algorithm (SPA) with 50 iterations [4]. Fig. 3 shows the BER performance of the designed raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes under AWGN channel, and comparison with the DVB-T2/S2 LDPC

codes. Table IV and V show the performance gap from the Shannon limit at BER = 10−6 and the complexity of the designed LDPC codes that is proportional to a number of ones in PCM, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3 and Table V, for 50 decoding iterations, the designed quarter-rate LDPC code at the length of 64800 outperformed the DVB LDPC code about 0.75 dB, but its complexity was about 43% higher than the DVB LDPC code. However, the designed quarterrate LDPC code with a length of 16200 did not only show about 0.48 dB improvement, but also had 64% less complexity. Furthermore, as shown in Table IV, the designed low-rate LDPC codes with a length of 64800 were within about 0.55 dB

PARK et al.: RAPTOR-LIKE RATE COMPATIBLE LDPC CODES AND THEIR PUNCTURING PERFORMANCE FOR THE CLOUD TRANSMISSION SYSTEM

243

TABLE II Number of Check Nodes of Various Degrees

TABLE III Sizes of Component Matrices

to 0.65 dB compared to the Shannon limit at BER = 10−6. It can be noted from Fig. 3 that the designed LDPC codes based on the proposed structure outperformed the DVB-T2/S2 LDPC codes at low coding rate range (R < 1/2). However, when the coding rate increased, the advantage of the proposed LDPC codes diminished.
Although the QPSK-based quarter-rate and BPSK-based half-rate LDPC codes have the same data capacity, they perform quite differently. Fig. 4 shows the BER performance of both schemes under AWGN channel. As verified in [1] and [4], the QPSK-based quarter-rate QC-LDPC codes showed much better performance. At BER = 10−6, the QPSK-based quarter-rate QC-LDPC code with a length of 64800 had about 0.9 dB gain compared to the BPSK-based half-rate QCLDPC code with the same length. The reason why the QPSKbased quarter-rate QC-LDPC codes are better is that there is theoretically about 4 dB coding gain if we use a quarter-rate code instead of a half-rate code. Nevertheless, if we increased modulation order from BPSK to QPSK, there was about 3 dB loss. Therefore, overall 1 dB gain could be achieved.
In addition, there is another good feature in the proposed LDPC codes. The proposed LDPC code can be easily punctured from dedicated low-rate mother code to form higher code rates, while keeping relatively good performance. Since the PCM [C D] of the designed LDPC codes consists of a large number of single parity-check codes, the designed LDPC codes can be punctured to form different code rates as

TABLE IV Performance Gap from Shannon Limit of the DEsigned LDPC
Codes at BER = 10−6 (after 50 iterations)
shown in Fig. 5. This is the reason that the proposed LDPC codes are called the raptor-like rate compatible codes. For example, by puncturing 50% and 83.3% of the quarter-rate mother PCM, the punctured LDPC codes with rates of 1/3

244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 60, NO. 2, JUNE 2014

TABLE V Complexity for the Proposed LDPC Codes

can be achieved, which significantly reduces the decoding complexity and delay.

IV. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed the newly designed raptor-like rate compatible QC-LDPC codes for the cloud transmission system. Since the proposed LDPC codes have an ideal framework at low coding rate range (R < 1/2), the designed codes with a length of 64800 are within about 0.55 dB to 0.65 dB compared to the Shannon limit at BER = 10−6. Furthermore, the designed LDPC codes have raptor code’s property, so that they can be decoded with a part of original codeword at the receiver to reduce power consumption and latency under high signal to noise ratio (SNR) regions.

TABLE VI Complexity and latency of Punctured LDPC Codes
and 1/2 can be easily generated, respectively. Meanwhile, as shown in Table VI, the punctured LDPC codes with rates of 1/3 and 1/2 had 28% and 56% less complexities, respectively. This means that the designed raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes can be successfully decoded with a part of original codeword at high SNR environments. This property is similar to that of raptor code. Hence, a receiver can reduce the computation complexity, power consumption and decoding latency while decoding with punctured codeword. Furthermore, since the raptor-like rate compatible LDPC code can be decoded at different code rates while only storing the PCM of the mother code, the receiver can reduce a lot of memory to store PCM. Fig. 6 shows the BER performance of the raptor-like rate compatible LDPC code, which was punctured by simply cutting or puncturing the last part of the codeword to form rates of 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, and 2/3, respectively. In Fig. 6, the dedicated DVB-T2/S2 LDPC codes with a length of 64,800 (non-truncated) were also used as references. As shown in Fig. 6, the punctured LDPC code had the same or worse performance compared with the dedicated DVBT2/S2 LDPC code. Especially, the more punctured LDPC code means further performance degradation because it has shorter codeword length. In high received SNR, for example, the SNR is 5 dB above threshold of the quarter-rate mother LDPC code, the receiver can use punctured half-rate LDPC code. This significantly reduces the computation complexity and decoding delay by 56% and 50%, respectively. If the SNR is 8 dB above the threshold, the punctured LDPC code with a rate of 2/3 can be used, which reduces the decoding delay by 62.5%. Note that in large percentage of coverage areas of the terrestrial broadcasting environment, higher receiving SNRs

References
[1] Y. Wu, B. Rong, K. Salehian, and G. Gagnon, “Cloud transmission: A new spectrum-reuse friendly digital terrestrial broadcasting transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 329–337, Sep. 2012.
[2] Y. Wu, E. Pliszka, B. Caron, P. Bouchard, and G. Chouinard, “Comparison of terrestrial DTV transmission systems: The ATSC 8-VSB, the DVB-T COFDM and the ISDB-T BST-OFDM,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 101–113, Jun. 2000.
[3] J. Montalban, B. Rong, S. I. Park, Y. Wu, J. Kim, H. M. Kim, L. Zhang, C. Nadeau, S Lafle`che, P. Angueira, and M. Velez, “Cloud transmission: System simulation and performance analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast. (BMSB), Jun. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[4] S. I. Park, H. M. Kim, Y. Wu, and J. Kim, “A newly designed quarter rate QC-LDPC code for the cloud transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 155–159, Mar. 2013.
[5] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, Jun. 2006. pp. 2551–2567.
[6] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[8] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1794, Aug. 2004.
[9] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” Communication Theory Laboratory, Tech. Rep. LTHC-Report-2004-001, 2004. [Online]. Available: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary? doi=10.1.1.106.7310.
[10] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[11] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke. (2007). Modern Coding Theory, [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/doku.php?id=en: publications:mct.
Sung Ik Park (A’07–M’08–SM’13) received the B.S.E.E. degree from Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea, in 2000, the M.S.E.E. degree from POSTECH, Pohang, Korea, in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree from Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea, in 2011.
Since 2002, he has been with the Broadcasting System Research Department, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, where he is a Senior Member of Research Staff. His research interests include the areas of error correction codes and digital communications, in particular, signal processing for digital television. He currently serves as an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions On Broadcasting. He received the Scott Helt Memorial Award, which is the Best Paper Award of the IEEE Transactions On Broadcasting in 2009, and the Best Paper Award of the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting, respectively.

PARK et al.: RAPTOR-LIKE RATE COMPATIBLE LDPC CODES AND THEIR PUNCTURING PERFORMANCE FOR THE CLOUD TRANSMISSION SYSTEM

245

Yiyan Wu (S’85–M’90–SM’95–F’01) received the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 1986 and 1990, respectively.
After graduation, he was with Telesat Canada as a Senior Satellite Communication Systems Engineer. In 1992, he joined Communications Research Centre Canada and is currently a Principle Research Scientist. His research interests include broadband multimedia communications, digital broadcasting, and communication systems engineering. Dr. Wu is a member of the IEEE Broadcast Technology Society Administrative Committee, and a member of the ATSC Board of Directors, representing the IEEE. He is the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE Transactions On Broadcasting. He has more than 300 publications and received many technical awards for his contribution to the research and development of digital broadcasting and broadband multimedia communications. He is a Fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering and an Adjunct Professor of Carleton University, Ottawa.

Namho Hur (S’96–A’00–M’04) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and electronic engineering from the Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Korea, in 1992, 1994, and 2000, respectively. He is currently with the Broadcasting and Telecommunications Media Research Laboratory, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Daejeon, Korea. He is the Managing Director of the Broadcasting System Research Department, ETRI. He was an Executive Director of Association of Realistic Media Industry (ARMI), Korea. ARMI was established to promote realistic media industry including 3DTV and UHDTV broadcasting industry. Also, he has been an Adjunct Professor with the Department of Mobile Communications and Digital Broadcasting, University of Science and Technology (UST), Korea, since 2005. For the collaborative research in the area of multiview video synthesis and the effect of object motion and disparity on visual comfort, he was with Communications Research Centre Canada from 2003 to 2004. His main research interests include the field of next-generation digital broadcasting systems, such as terrestrial UHD broadcasting systems, UHD digital cable broadcasting systems, mobile HD broadcasting systems, and backward-compatible 3D-TV broadcasting systems for mobile, portable, fixed 3-D audiovisual services.

Heung Mook Kim (M’06) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronics and electrical engineering from POSTECH, Pohang, Korea, in 1993 and 1995, respectively, and the Ph. D. degree from KAIST, Daejeon, Korea, in 2013. He was with the POSCO Technology Research Laboratory, Pohang, from 1995 to 2001, and with Maxwave, Inc., Daejeon, from 2002 to 2003. Since February 2004, he has been with the Broadcasting System Research Group, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, Daejeon, where he is the Director of the Terrestrial Broadcasting Research Section. His research interests include the areas of digital and radio frequency (RF) signal processing and RF transmission for digital communications and digital television.

Jeongchang Kim (S’05–A’08–M’12) received the B.S. degree in electronics, communication and radio engineering from Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea, in 2000, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Korea, in 2002 and 2006, respectively, both in electronic and electrical engineering. From 2006 to 2008, he was with POSTECH Information Laboratories, Korea, as a Full-Time Research Staff. From 2008 to 2009, he was with the Educational Institute of Future Information Technology, POSTECH, as a Research Assistant Professor. From 2009 to 2010, he was with the Broadcasting Systems Research Department, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, as a Senior Member of Engineering Staff. In 2010, he joined the Department of Electronics and Communications Engineering, Korea Maritime University, Busan, Korea, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His current research interests include MIMO, OFDM, DTV transmission, maritime radio communications, and implementation of digital communication systems.

