Multilevel Error Correction Scheme for MLC Flash Memory

Zhiqiang Cui, Zhongfeng Wang, and Xinming Huang* *Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01609
Email: xhuang@wpi.edu

Abstract— Storing multiple bits in a flash memory cell is a primary technique to linearly increase flash memory capacity, but memory endurance is tremendously sacrificed. This paper presents a multilevel fault tolerance technique for MLC flash memories. The main idea is to explore multilevel forward error correction (FEC) for multiple bits in a flash cell. The associated practical implementation issues are well addressed in this paper. Compared to the conventional error protection methods for flash memory, the proposed multi-level FEC approach can obtain much larger system coding gain using the same amount of redundant bits. As a result, the proposed technique reduces power consumption considerably compared to the conventional methods since the required throughout of LDPC codec is drastically reduced. It can also increase flash memory endurance as it can allocate more redundancy to LDPC code while maintaining overall redundancy ratio.
I. INTRODUCTION
Flash memory based storages have gained increasing attraction in both academia and industry for its fast access speed and low power consumption. The continuous growth of flash memory density has significantly reduced the cost of flash storage and enabled the technique to be widely utilized to enhance the system performance for mobile devices, personal computers, and cloud computing centers. The increase of flash memory density has been mainly driven by two approaches. One is cell density increase with semiconductor technology scaling down and 3D NAND flash memory. The other is multi-level per cell (MLC) technique, i.e., storing multiple bits in a flash memory cell. MLC technique is becoming a dominant approach to linearly increase storage capacity for the same flash memory.
Fig 1. shows an example of threshold voltage and distribution in a 2-bit NAND flash memory. Four separate states are required to indicate the possible combination of the 2-bit in a cell. After a block of a NAND flash memory is erased, the threshold voltages of all NAND cells are in erase state. If the two bits being programmed for a cell is “11”, the cell will stay in erase state. Otherwise, the cell threshold voltage will move to one of the three possible programmed states to indicate a combination of the programmed two bits. Due to the floating gate charge detrapping, stress induced leakage current, read/program disturbs, inter cell interference, and other reasons, the threshold voltage of a flash memory cell is not a static value [1]. voltage of flash memory can be modeled as a Gaussian distribution with decent accuracy, though it is

not a strict Gaussian distribution [2]. To increase the memory density by introducing more threshold voltage states, the voltage gap between adjacent states is significantly narrowed down. Hence, the storage raw reliability and accordingly the memory endurance are tremendously sacrificed.
Figure 1. Threshold voltage states of a 2-bit NAND flash memory.
More specifically, the noise deviation is very small at begin-of-life and not many redundant bits are required to protect the user data. However, as the number of program and erase (P/E) cycle increases, the noise deviation is substantially increased. The phenomena either confines the life of flash memory or requires significant amount of redundant bits to protect the user data in order to extend the life of flash memory. Recently, strong FEC codes, such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, are utilized to protect the user information from flash memory data corruption. Every page in MLC is independently protected by LDPC codes. In general, the coding approach is robust. However, the benefits are along with very high cost in flash memory utilization, codec complexity and power consumption. Inspired by the multilevel error correction techniques for digital communication systems [3][4][5], a multilevel fault tolerance scheme for MLC flash memory is explored to significantly reduce the hardware cost compared to conventional approaches. It can also increase flash memory endurance as it can allocate more redundancy to LDPC codes while maintaining the overall redundancy ratio. In Section II, The overall multilevel FEC architecture is presented. The flash memory read scheme adapting to the proposed multilevel FEC coding and decoder components are addressed in Section III. The system performance simulation results are also provided. The conclusions are drawn in Section IV.

978-1-4799-3432-4/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

201

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:30:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. THE ARCHITECTURE OF PROPOSED MULTILEVEL FAULT TOLERANCE SCHEME
A. Multilevel FEC code for MLC Flash Memory Multilevel error correction, which jointly optimize
coding and signal mapping, has been utilized to improve the performance of digital communication systems [3][4] [5]. Recently, the concatenation of BCH and TCM was explored to improve MLC flash memory reliability [6]. Product code schemes for error correction in MLC flash memories were investigated in [9]. In this paper, a new approach is proposed to exploit both the large coding gain from quasi-cyclic LDPC code [11] and up to 6dB set partition gain from multilevel coding to maximize the system performance.
After block erase operation, the threshold voltage of NAND flash memory cells are in the erase state with lowest voltage value. The programming operation can only increase the threshold voltage and move it to one of programmed states. For 2-bit MLC flash memory, the erase state is also used to indicate a programmed value of “11”. There are 6 possible coding schemes for the remaining 3 states as listed in Table I.
TABLE I. THRESHOLD VOLTAGE STATE ENCODING SCHEMES
The first four coding schemes are suitable for the multilevel error correction [3][4]. Let us choose the first one as an example to illustrate the flash memory read access for multilevel FEC scheme. The programmed value of each state and the read reference voltages are shown in Fig. 2. Conventionally, three reference voltages, as indicated by V0, V1, and V2, are required for flash memory read to get the hard decision information. For the multilevel FEC scheme, the three reference voltages are used only for the hard decision values of the higher page, the MSBs of the cells in the same word line of a flash memory. Two additional reference voltages, as indicated by VL0 and VL1, are needed to get the hard decision values of the lower page. More specifically, if the MSB of the 2-bit in a flash memory cell is decided to be 1, the cell threshold voltage state is partially decided. It can only be either S0 or S2. The value of LSB is decided by the reference voltage of VL0. Otherwise, the cell threshold voltage stage is either S1 or S3, and the value of the LSB is decided by the reference voltage of VL1.

Figure 2. State encoding and read reference voltages of a 2-bit NAND flash memory.
It can be seen from Fig. 2 that if the value of the MSB in a memory cell is correctly decided, the distance of two possible threshold voltage states are 2D. On the contrary, the conventional approach only utilizes the distance of D to differentiate the threshold voltage state and make a hard decisions. Under Gaussian noise channel mode, the raw bit error rate of the lower page is significantly decreased due to the 6dB partitioning gain acquired from the multilevel FEC scheme. For very large noise deviation, by introducing more threshold voltage references and issuing more flash memory read operations, soft message LDPC decoding can be utilized to further improve the system reliability.
B. Multilevel Encoding Scheme
Fig. 3 shows the multilevel encoding architecture of the proposed fault tolerance scheme for MLC flash memory. In order to be adaptive to the deterioration of noise deviation during the whole life of flash memory, multi-rate FEC code is considered [10]. Here, only two typical extreme cases are discussed. For the simplicity of description, the scheme for 2-bit MLC is illustrated. It is assumed that the page size of flash memory is 8K bytes without spare bytes. The scheme can be easily extended to more than two bits per cell flash memory, flash memory with spare bytes, and more noise deviation ranges.
At the begin-of-life of flash memory, the raw bit error rate is very low. A coding scheme with less coding gain as shown in Fig. 3(a) is sufficient to recover the corrupted bits. A BCH code (3968, 3776, t=16) with 192 redundant bits is chosen to correct at most 16 errors in a codeword. In total, 32 BCH codewords are processed in the first level encoding to fit the size of two flash memory pages. Then, an interleaving stage is performed by a splitter to separate every 31 bits of a BCH codeword into two branches. Every 16 out of 31 bits are not further encoded as shown in the upper branch. 8K bytes are collected from the upper branch for one flash memory page. In the lower branch, every 15 out of 31 bits are encoded by a (32768, 30720), rate-15/16 LDPC code. Two LDPC codewords are serially concatenated together for another flash

202
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:30:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

memory page. Thus, for every two flash memory pages, the number of total information bits is 3776*32=120,832. The number of total coded bits is 16K bytes (i.e. 16*1024*8=131072 bits). The overall ratio of information bits to coded bits is 120832/131072=0.922.

read twice with different reference voltages. After the bit sequence in the page 0 is recovered, its value is used to select the bit value in the same sequence index of the page 1. Then the LDPC parity bits in the page 0 is removed. The remaining bits are merged with the bits in the page 1 and transferred to BCH decoder for original user data recovery.

Figure 3. The encoding block diagram of the multilevel fault tolerance scheme.
At the end-of-life of flash memory, a scheme with very high coding gain is necessary to recover the massive number of corrupted bits. As shown in Fig. 3(b), a (3072, 2880, 16) BCH code is utilized for the first level encoding. Similar as above, the bits of 32 BCH code blocks are split with a ratio of 16:8. In the second level encoding, every 8 out of 24 bits are encoded by a (32768, 16384), rate-1/2 LDPC codes. The number of total information bits is 2880*32=92,160.The overall ratio of information bits to coded bits is 92160/131072=0.703.
In the encoding schemes described above, the BCH code can also recover the possible very limited number of errors due to the error floor of LDPC codes. Thus, the requirement of very low error floor for LDPC codes is largely relaxed. For the consideration of hardware implementation, both BCH codes are defined over GF(2^12). The LDPC codes are quasi-cyclic codes with the same sub-matrice size. So the same reconfigurable BCH and LDPC codec can be reused for all possible noise deviation ranges. It should be mentioned that if the noise deviation is very small at the begin-of-life of a flash memory, the LDPC encoding/decoding can be turned off to maximize the flash memory utilization.
C. Multilevel Decoding Scheme
Fig. 4 shows the proposed multilevel decoding scheme. The page protected by LDPC code, denoted as page 0, is read from MLC flash memory and decoded with LDPC decoder. Meanwhile, the other page, denoted as page 1, is

Figure 4. The decoding block diagram of the multilevel fault tolerance scheme.
III. COMPONENTS FOR MULTILEVEL FEC SCHEME A. The Proposed Multi-rate LDPC Codes
The parity check matrix (i.e., H matrix) of the proposed quasi-cyclic LDPC codes contains 64 block columns. Each block is a 512x512 cyclic shift permutation matrix (also called as circulant). For the rate 15/16 LDPC code, the H matrix is a 4x64 block matrix. The column weight and row weight are 4 and 64, respectively. For the rate 1/2 LDPC code, the H matrix consists of 32x64 sub-matrices. The column weight and row weight are 4 and 8, respectively. In either case, the number of (non-zero) circulants in the H matrix is 256.
B. LDPC Decoder The LDPC decoder has three stages. They are
concurrently active for back-to-back LDPC decoding. The first stage is input process and buffering unit. It accepts raw messages from flash memory read engine and provides intrinsic messages for LDPC decoder engine. The second stage is layered LDPC decoder engine with Min-Sum algorithm [7][8]. The third stage is output buffering unit. The computation core of the layered LDPC decoder parallelly accesses 512 messages from the input buffer or internal scratch memories.
Figure 5. The architecture of quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder.

203
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:30:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

During the LDPC decoding, all computation components and cyclic shifter are active in the same cycle. If there is no memory access contention, it takes 256 clock cycles to complete the computation of an iteration. However, the extrinsic message memories have readafter-write (RAW) data contention. In such a case, VNU Plus unit has to be stalled until the RAW data contention is resolved. In general, 10% clock cycle overhead is needed for stalling. For the target bit error rate of 1e-16, the average number of decoding iterations is at most 4 for both the LDPC codes. With 28nm CMOS technology, it is not difficult to reach a clock frequency of 700MHz. Therefore, the average decoding throughput is at least
32768 bits * 700 MHz/ (4*256*110%) = 2.5GBytes/s Because the LDPC decoder only performs decoding for one branch, the overall FEC system throughput is 5GBytes/s or 40Gbits/s for 2-bit MLC flash memory.
C. BCH Code and Decoder
The outer BCH code is designed for two purposes: 1) to eliminate the error floor of the LDPC codes, 2) to correct bit errors of the upper branch. The basic rule is to ensure the net coding gain of BCH code plus set partition gain is larger than the net coding gain of associated LDPC codes in the multilevel coding scheme. A BCH (t=16) decoder with over 40Gb/s throughput can be simply built.
D. Simulation Performance
Simulation results for the two considered cases are shown in Fig. 6. The threshold voltage of flash memory is modeled as a Gaussian distribution as concluded in [2]. Unlike digital communication, threshold voltage does not mean signal strength. It is used to only indicate a cell status. To be consistent with the definition of signal-tonoise ratio in BPSK signaling, D/2 is used as signal strength for equivalent Eb/No calculation, where D stands for the voltage difference between two neighboring threshold voltage states as shown in Fig. 4. It is projected that the weak coding scheme can bring a net coding gain of over 10dB, and the strong coding scheme can obtain net coding gain of over 12.5dB at target bit error rate of 1e-16.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented efficient coding schemes based on set partition and code concatenation for MLC flash memory. Associated VLSI implementation issues are discussed. The proposed method can save significant power compared to conventional methods as the required throughout of LDPC codec is much reduced. It can also increase flash memory endurance as more redundancy can be allocated to LDPC code while keeping overall redundancy ratio. On the other hand, the proposed approach can increase memory utilization without impairing the system reliability.

Figure 6. Performance simulation of the multilevel FEC schemes.
REFERENCES
[1] J. H. Yoon and G. A. Tressler, “Advanced flash technology status, caling trends and implications to enterprise SSD technology enablement,”http://www.flashmemorysummit.com/English/Collate rals/Proceedings/2012/20120821_TA12_Yoon_Tressler.pdf
[2] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. 2013 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), pp. 1285 - 1290, 2013.
[3] U. Wachsmann,R. F. H. Fischer, and J. B. Huber, "Multilevel codes: theoretical concepts and practical design rules,", IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1361 1391, July 1999.
[4] H. Imai and S. Hirakawa, “A new multilevel coding method using error correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-23, pp. 371–377, May 1977.
[5] C. Bergey, et al., "PAM8 baseline proposal," IEEE P802.3bm standard meeting, Jan. 2013. Available at http: //www.ieee802.org/3/bm/public/jan13/bhatt_01_0113_optx.pdf.
[6] S. Li and T. Zhang, "Improving multi-level NAND flash memory storage reliability using concatenated BCH-TCM coding,” IEEE Transactions on VLSI systems, vol 18, no 10, pp. 1412 - 1420, Oct. 2010.
[7] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes,” 39th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers, pp. 729-733, 2005.
[8] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, "Extended layered decoding of LDPC codes," in Proc. of the 18th ACM Great Lakes symposium on VLSI, pp. 457-462, 2008.
[9] C. Yang, Y. Emre and C. Chakrabarti, "Product code schemes for error correction in MLC NAND flash memories," IEEE Trans. on VLSI Systems, vol 20, no. 12, Dec. 2012, pp. 2302-2314.
[10] T-H. Chen, Y-Y. Hsiao, Y-T. Hsing and C-W. Wu, "An adaptiverate error-correction scheme for NAND flash memory," 27th IEEE VLSI Test Symposium, pp. 53-58, 2009,
[11] M.P.C. Fossorier, "Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices," IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788-1793, Aug 2004.

204
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:30:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

