IEEE EMBEDDED SYSTEMS LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, JUNE 2014

29

A High Throughput Efficient Approach for Decoding LDPC Codes onto GPU Devices
Bertrand Le Gal, Christophe Jego, and Jérémie Crenne

Abstract—Low density parity check (LDPC) decoding process is known as compute intensive. This kind of digital communication applications was recently implemented onto graphic processing unit (GPU) devices for LDPC code performance estimation and/or for real-time measurements. Overall previous studies about LDPC decoding on GPU were based on the implementation of the flooding-based decoding algorithm that provides massive computation parallelism. More efficient layered schedules were proposed in literature because decoder iteration can be split into sublayer iterations. These schedules seem to badly fit onto GPU devices due to restricted computation parallelism and complex memory access patterns. However, the layered schedules enable the decoding convergence to speed up by two. In this letter, we show that: 1) layered schedule can be efficiently implemented onto a GPU device; and 2) this approach—implemented onto a low-cost GPU device—provides higher throughputs with identical correction performances (BER) compared to previously published results.
Index Terms—Graphic processing unit (GPU), layered-based algorithm, low density parity check (LDPC), throughput optimized.
I. INTRODUCTION
F ORWARD error correction (FEC) techniques are now present in most embedded systems for correcting data transmission (wireline or wireless) or storage errors (DRAM or magnetic storage devices). One of the most powerful FECs is based on low density parity check (LDPC) code family [1]. This family of FECs has been adopted as part of several digital communication standards. For instance, LDPC codes are present in the second generation of the digital video broadcasting (DVB-X) standards [2]. The standardized LDPC codes are binary and structured. Decoding process is applied on frames from hundreds up to thousands of lengths. The length, the irregularity and the huge computation make the decoding process difficult to implement.
Multicore and many-core devices such as GPU are attractive due to their large number of streaming multiprocessors and computation cores. However, taking advantage of GPU parallelism limits the algorithmic choice to ones providing easy to manage computation parallelism. It means that efficient implementations onto GPU of algorithms with execution hazards and uncollapsed memory accesses are a very challenging task.
Manuscript received November 21, 2013; accepted February 22, 2014. Date of publication March 11, 2014; date of current version May 23, 2014. This manuscript was recommended for publication by M. Balakrishnan.
The authors are with the University of Bordeaux, IPB/ENSEIRB-MATMECA, Talence 5218, France (e-mail: christophe.jego@ims-bordeaux.fr; bertrand.legal@ims-bordeaux.fr; jeremie.crenne@ims-bordeaux.fr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this letter are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LES.2014.2311317

Fig. 1. BER performance of the

LDPC code depending on the

number of decoding iterations (flooding schedule).

In spite of this, GPU usage increases for digital communication system simulations and implementations due to its software flexibility. Implementation of LDPC decoder onto GPU device is an active research domain [3]–[8]. Latest and previous works [3]–[13] on LDPC decoder implementation have focused on Flooding-based algorithm implementation. Indeed, this decoding algorithm maps well onto the GPU programming model. However, more efficient decoding algorithms, i.e., layered-based algorithms were introduced [14]. Such algorithms have been discarded since the first GPU works [9] due to their characteristics that badly fit with the GPU programming model. Indeed, these algorithms provide irregular internal computation parallelism (intracodeword). This parallelism level seemed impossible to map on GPU targets. In this letter we demonstrate that the horizontal layered schedule can be efficiently implemented onto a GPU device. To take advantage of many-core architectures we only focused on intercodeword parallelism that enables high usage rate of processing cores and collapsed memory accesses. Experimental results that were obtained using a low-cost GPU device are more than 10 times higher than related works ones.
The rest of the letter is structured as follows. In Section II, related works are summarized. Section III presents the proposed LDPC decoding algorithm that was selected for GPU implementations. Finally, Section IV gives experimental results and compares them to previous ones.
II. RELATED WORKS
Many recent works have focused on mapping LDPC decoders on GPU devices [3]–[13]. Work objectives were to achieve high or real-time decoding throughputs for different kind of LDPC codes (short or long frame length, regular, or irregular codes,

1943-0663 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:26:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

30

IEEE EMBEDDED SYSTEMS LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, JUNE 2014

etc.). However, those high throughput performances were obtained for costly GPU devices such as NVIDIA Tesla C2050 [11], NVIDIA Titan [6] or ATI HD5870 [5] devices.
GPU decoder implementations were based on the standard message passing or two-phase message passing (TPMP) algorithm. This algorithm is provided in Algorithm 1 (Offset Min–Sum variant) works in two phases. In the first phase, all the variable nodes send messages to their neighboring parity check nodes, and in the second phase the parity check nodes send messages to their neighboring variable nodes.
Algorithm 1 Flooding Min-Sum algorithm

1: Kernel 1: Initialization

2: for all

do

3:

4: end for

5: for all

do

6:

Kernel 2: Computation of messages

7:

for all

do

8:

9:

10:

end for

11:

Kernel 3: Computation of messages

12:

for all

do

13:

14:

end for

15: end for

16: Kernel 4: Hard decision from soft-values

17: for all

do

18:

19: end for

To achieve high-throughput performances, GPU related works have focused on improving the mapping of such decoding algorithm on GPU devices using different optimization schemes such as data packing methods, memory coalescing techniques [3], [11] or decoder stopping cirteria [10]. Some implementations are dedicated/limited to particular classes of LDPC codes such as Quasi-Cyclic ones [4]. Other works focused on providing generic approaches that optimize workload by taking into account GPU architectures [8].
Depending on the LDPC code structures, the optimization set and decoding algorithms, the GPU-based decoder achieve up to 300 Mbps throughput while executing a small amount of decoding iterations on costly GPU devices. These interesting performances are unbalanced by low-correction performances achieved. Indeed, the reduction of decoding iteration number enables to decrease the computation complexity but also deteriorates the code correction power. Fig. 1 illustrates the direct impact of the amount of decoding iterations on BER performances. In many works the number of decoding iteration is quite low (e.g., limited to 10 as in [6]).

III. PROPOSED APPROACH Algorithm 2 Horizontal Layered Min-Sum algorithm

1: Kernel 1: Initialization

2: for all

do

3:

4: end for

5:

Process

decoding iterations

6: for all

do

7:

Kernel 2: For each check node in the code

8:

for all

do

9:

Compute

message

10:

for all

do

11:

12:

end for

13:

Compute

message

14:

for all

do

15:

16:

17:

end for

18:

Immediately update

19:

for all

do

20:

21:

end for

22:

end for

23: end for

24: Kernel 3: Hard decision

25: for all

do

26:

27: end for

More efficient layered schedules, such as horizontal layered-based decoding algorithm, were proposed in literature [12]. The parity check matrix can be viewed as layered graph decoded sequentially. Decoder iteration is then split into sub layer iterations. The layered schedules enable the decoding convergence to speed up by two. But, a major drawback of the layered schedules comes from irregular memory accesses and a low internal computation parallelism level. In previous works, these characteristics have discarded it from GPU implementation [9]. Indeed, by comparison with a standard schedule that is composed of two sequential loop kernels with no data dependencies into kernel loops [10], a horizontal layered-based schedule is composed of a single loop kernel (Kernel 2 in Algorithm 2) with some data dependencies between consecutive loop iterations. The LDPC decoding algorithm given in Algorithm 2 can be summarized as follow: for all the check node (CN) computations, the values are computed using the variable node (VN) messages linked to it. Once, a CN is computed, the corresponding VN are immediately updated from the received messages. This process is repeated times that corresponds to the number of iterations. As previously explained, the exploitation of intraframe computation parallelism is quite impossible for this schedule. Indeed, Kernel 2 in Algorithm 2 has limitations in terms of parallel execution. Iteration can be executed if only previous iterations using the VN messages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:26:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GAL et al.: A HIGH THROUGHPUT EFFICIENT APPROACH FOR DECODING LDPC CODES ONTO GPU DEVICES

31

TABLE I THROUGHPUT (T/P IN MBPS) COMPARISON BETWEEN RESULTS IN [3] AND
PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATIONS ONTO GTX 660 GPU DEVICE

Fig. 2. Proposed experimental setup for GPU-based LDPC decoding.

are done. It means that computation dependency management cannot be efficiently solved onto GPU devices. However, it is still possible to exploit interframe parallelism. Each thread executed on the GPU device processes the identical computations for successive frames. However, this approach suffers from massively uncollapsed memory accesses. Indeed, VN messages from consecutive frames are not aligned in GPU memory. To solve this issue a data interleaving process has to been performed before the decoding task. Similarly, a deinterleaving task has to be performed at the end of the decoding process to transmit the decoded frames. Interleaving/deinterleaving processes are time consuming. Fortunately, they are only executed one time per decoding and enables efficient collapsed memory accesses process in the time consuming part of the decoding process. Moreover, frame interleaving and desinterleaving tasks are similar to matrix transposition. Many solutions can be applied to efficiently implement this task as for example [15].

with the number of VN associated to the LDPC code and

m the number of messages. To speed-up the decoding process,

SIMD capability of the cores of the NVIDIA GPU [16] was

also used. By, using SIMD instructions, a single GPU core can

process one 32-bit value, two 16-bit values or four 8-bit values,

in parallel. Hence, a thread processes 8-bit data from four

frames. Thus, the maximum thread number that is processed by

a GPU device is

.

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

The experimentations were carried out by decoding LDPC

codes using a GTX-660 GPU programmed with the

lan-

guage. The programs1 complied with GCC-4.6 and CUDA 5.0.

The GTX-660 GPU is composed of 5 multiprocessors. Each

multiprocessor contains 32 stream processors. The host plat-

form uses a GNU/Linux kernel 2.6.31-22

. The selected

experimentations are identical to ones used in [3], [10], [11].

This experimental context enables as far as possible fair result

comparisons.

IV. PARALLEL PROCESSING OF FRAMES

A. Performance Comparison on an Identical GPU Target

The GPUs from NVIDIA, based on the Ccompute unified

device architecture (CUDA), contain several multiprocessors.

Each multiprocessor is composed of stream processors that can

simultaneously compute thousands of threads thanks to a single-

instruction multiple-thread (SIMT) approach.

The host CPU is in charge of encoding frames, noising the

codewords from an AWGN channel and computing the BER

performance. From the decoder point of view, host CPU sends

and receives data to/from the GPU device, controls the kernel

execution on the GPU (see Fig. 2). The host CPU launches

one thread per frame to decode. The thread that is executed on

the GPU device processes the overall CN/VN computations for

iterations. The implementation of the overall Algorithm 2

in a single GPU function enables to limit exchanges between the

CPU host and the GPU device during the decoding process. At

the end of the decoding, hard decisions are taken and decisions

are sent back to the host CPU.

The major drawback of this approach comes from memory

requirement. Indeed, processing a large set of frames in parallel

involves to store many internal data in the GPU device. This

issue was solved by packing four VN or CN values in a 32-bits

word and by optimizing the memory footprint of the LDPC de-

coders. Memory footprint of LDPC decoder that contains lay-

ered-based schedule is about 40% lower to flooding-based ones

[14]. Indeed, layered-based approach removes the storage of

VN-to-CN messages. Actually, the maximum number of frames

that can be decoded in parallel on the GPU device is expressed

as

.

A first set of experimentations was performed using the original LDPC decoder description from Gabriel Falcao and the GTX 660 GPU device: to best our knowledge, Falcao works are the ones that provide the highest decoding throughputs, its GPU decoder source code is freely available from Internet (gpucomputing.net).
The throughput values obtained using Falcao decoder on the GTX 660 device can be compared with results given in [3] for a GTX 8800 GPU device. In parallel, throughput values2 of our decoder description were evaluated by experimentations in the same context than for the Falcao decoder. In particular, 8-bit precision is considered for the different decoder descriptions. It means that four messages are stored in a 32-bit word. All the results are summarized in Table I for four different LDPC codes. Moreover, a speed-up factor is given for the GTX 660 GPU. This factor corresponds to the gain between our decoder implementations and Falcao decoder implementations. Gains between 11.8 and 26.5 in favor implementations can be observed using the same GPU device. Throughput improvement comes from: 1) the decoding scheduled that requires two time less computations; 2) a fully collapsed execution of the decoding process; and 3) efficient usage of the SIMD instruction that is available in the processing.
1Layered-based decoders source codes can be freely downloaded on author’s webpage.
2Throughputs take into account the overall tasks required for LDPC codeword decoding onto the GPU device: data transfers, interleaving, desinterleaving and Algorithm 2 kernel execution.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:26:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

32
TABLE II THROUGHPUT (MBPS) COMPARISON FOR DIFFERENT LDPC DECODERS

IEEE EMBEDDED SYSTEMS LETTERS, VOL. 6, NO. 2, JUNE 2014
TABLE III TNDC COMPARISON FOR DIFFERENT LDPC DECODERS

According to Table I results, one can notice that throughput

performance provided by the proposed decoder seems constant

independently of the LDPC code length contrary to Falcao one.

For (4000, 2000) LDPC code, the processing time for 4096

threads that process 16384 codewords is approximatively 69 ms

with 5 iterations3. Data transfers take about

ms. Thread

processing takes about 46 ms. Interleaving steps need about

ms. 25 decoding iteration configuration needs approxi-

mately 258 ms:

ms for data transfers, 235 ms for thread

processing and

ms for interleaving steps.

B. Performance Comparison on Different GPU Devices

Other comparison results with recent published works are

clearly detailed in Table II. Our implementations outperform

the state of the art ones. Note that it is difficult to make relative

speed-up comparisons. Indeed, GPU devices have different

characteristics: amount of stream multiprocessors, CUDA

cores, working frequencies, etc. However, related are based

on more costly GPU devices compared to the low-cost GTX

660 GPU selected in our work.4 Device characteristics make

us suppose that the speed-up factor obtained is significantly

higher than the ones observed in Table II.

Indeed, our implementations always provide higher

throughput performance compared to related work ones.

Speed-up factors are ranging from 2 up to 18. As example,

a factor 3 is observed by comparison with [6]. However, the

GTX Titan device used in [6] contains about more cores,

more multiprocessors and more DDR memory.

To provide a fair comparison of different works, in Table III, a

metric named TNDC (Throughput under Normalized Decoding

Cost) introduced in [13] is considered. This metric is expressed

in bit per second per processing unit per kiloHertz. It enables

comparison of performances independently of the amount of

processing cores and their working frequencies. TNDC values

demonstrate that proposed implementations provide to

higher values than ones issues from related works. Highest dif-

ferences are achieved for small LDPC codes. For DVB-S2 long

frame code (64800, 32400), the throughput of proposed decoder

is limited by the GPU workload. GTX 660 contains 2 GB of

memory that limits the amount of threads. Tesla C2050 device

contains 3 GB of memory. Using 3 GB of memory, proposed

decoder would achieve its nominal processing workload (2152

threads) with an

throughput increase.

3Values captured using NVIDIA Visual Profiler.

4The prizes of the recent GPU devices were obtained on Amazon market:

NVIDIA Tesla C2050 ( ), NVIDIA GTX TITAN (

), ATI Radeon

HD5870 ( ) and NVIDIA GTX 660 ( ).

VI. CONCLUSION
A novel approach for GPU-based LDPC decoding was presented in this letter. It is based on an efficient layered schedule for the decoding process. This approach was discarded since the first work on GPU-based LDPC decoder due to its poor mapping on GPU programming model [9]. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed GPU implementations are very competitive. Indeed, throughput values are higher than real-time processing requirements and more than 10 times higher than related work ones. Moreover, these results were achieved onto a low-cost GPU device. It opens the way for real-time LDPC decoding on General-Purpose GPU that should provide relatively lower performance than GPU ones but for low power consumption.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] EN 302 307 V1. 1.1, European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), Digital video broadcasting (DVB).
[3] G. Falcao, L. Sousa, and V. Silva, “Massively LDPC decoding on multicore architectures,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 309–322, 2011.
[4] H. Ji, J. Cho, and W. Sung, “Memory access osptimized implementation of cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes on a GPGPU,” J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 149–159, 2011.
[5] G. Falcao et al., “Portable LDPC decoding on multicores using openCL,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 29, no. 4, Jul. 2012.
[6] G. Wang, M. Wu, B. Yin, and J. R. Cavallaro, “High throughput low latency LDPC decoding on GPU for SDR systems,” presented at the IEEE Global Conf., 2013.
[7] G. Falcao, J. Andrade, V. Silva, S. Yamagiwa, and L. Sousa, “Stressing the ber simulation of ldpc codes in the error floor region using gpu clusters,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst., 2013.
[8] G. Wang, M. Wu, Y. Sun, and J. R. Cavallaro, “GPU accelerated scalable parallel decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Asilomar Conf., 2011, pp. 2053–2057.
[9] G. Falcao, “Parallel algorithms and architectures for ldpc decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, FCTUC, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2010.
[10] G. Wang, M. Wu, Y. Sun, and J. R. Cavallaro, “A massively parallel implementation of QC-LDPC decoder on GPU,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Appl. Specific Process., 2011, pp. 82–85.
[11] G. Falcao, J. Andrade, V. Silva, and L. Sousa, “GPU-based DVB-S2 LDPC decoder with high throughput and fast error floor detection,” Electron. Lett., vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 542–543, Apr. 2011.
[12] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., 2004, pp. 107–112.
[13] Y. Ying, K. You, L. Zhou, H. Quan, and X. Zeng, “A pure software LDPC decoder on a multi-core processor platform with reduced inter-processor communication cost,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2012, pp. 2609–2612.
[14] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, J. Tousch, and J.-L. Danger, “Generic description and synthesis of LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2084–2091, Nov. 2007.
[15] G. Ruetsch and P. Micikevicius, NVIDIA, Optimizing Matrix Transpose, NVIDIA Corp. Jan. 2009.
[16] NVIDIA, Application Guide, Parallel Thread Execution ISA, NVIDIA Corp., version 3.2 Jul. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 18:26:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

