IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

485

Message-Passing Algorithms for Counting Short Cycles in a Graph
Mehdi Karimi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A message-passing algorithm for counting short cycles in a graph is presented. For bipartite graphs, which are of particular interest in coding, the algorithm is capable of counting cycles of length g, g + 2, . . . , 2g − 2, where g is the girth of the graph. For a general (non-bipartite) graph, cycles of length g, g + 1, . . . , 2g − 1 can be counted. The algorithm is based on performing integer additions and subtractions in the nodes of the graph and passing extrinsic messages to adjacent nodes. The complexity of the proposed algorithm grows as O(g|E|2), where |E| is the number of edges in the graph. For sparse graphs, the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms the existing algorithms, tailored for counting short cycles, in terms of computational complexity and memory requirements. We also discuss a more generic and basic approach of counting short cycles which is based on matrix multiplication, and provide a message-passing interpretation for such an approach. We then demonstrate that an efficient implementation of the matrix multiplication approach has essentially the same complexity as the proposed message-passing algorithm.
Index Terms—Counting cycles in a graph, bipartite graph, girth, short cycles, closed walks, tailless backtrackless closed walks, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
G RAPHICAL models are widely used in different branches of science and engineering to represent systems and facilitate the description of inference algorithms. The structure of the graphs consequently plays an important role in the dynamics of the system and the performance of the corresponding algorithms. One important example, which has many applications in areas such as artificial intelligence, signal processing and digital communications, is the factor graph representation of systems and the sum-product algorithm [20]. Factor graphs are bipartite graphs and the sum-product algorithm is a generic message-passing algorithm which operates in a factor graph. One notable application of factor graphs and message-passing algorithms is in channel coding, where widely popular schemes such as turbo codes [4] and lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes [11] can be considered as specific instances. In particular, a specific instance of a factor graph is a Tanner graph [32], which is used to represent an LDPC code. In fact, LDPC codes, which are famous for their capacity-approaching performance on many communication channels, owe their popularity to the good performance of
Paper approved by E. Ayanoglu, the Editor for Communication Theory and Coding Applications of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received July 11, 2012; revised August 7, 2012.
Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (e-mail: {mkarimi, ahashemi}@sce.carleton.ca).
A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the 2010 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 2010.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2012.100912.120503

the iterative message-passing algorithms that can decode these codes with relatively low complexity. The low complexity is a consequence of the sparsity of the Tanner graph.
In practical error correction schemes, finite-length codes have to be used. For such codes, the performance of the message-passing algorithms is closely related to the structure of the graph, in general, and its cycles, in particular. In [21], the girth distribution of the Tanner graph was related to the performance of an LDPC code. Numerous publications since have used the cycle structure of the Tanner graph as an important measure of the performance of LDPC codes, with the general belief that for good performance, short cycles should be avoided in the Tanner graph of the code. In [34], Xiao and Banihashemi devised message-passing schedules based on the cycle and closed-walk distributions of the Tanner graph that improved the error correction performance of iterative decoding algorithms compared to the conventional parallel (flooding) schedule. In [14], a code construction, known as progressive edge growth (PEG), was devised to maximize the local girth of the graph in a greedy fashion. Halford and Chugg [12] showed that in addition to the girth, the number and statistics of short cycles are also important performance metrics of the code. In [35], error rates of finitelength LDPC codes were accurately and efficiently estimated by enumerating and testing the subsets of short cycles as error patterns. More recently, it was demonstrated that the majority of the dominant trapping sets of an LDPC code, responsible for the error floor of the code, consist of short cycles [16], [17], [18]. Related to this, Asvadi et al. [2] devised cyclic liftings that improve the error floor performance of LDPC codes significantly by breaking the short cycles involved in the dominant trapping sets of the base code. The close relationship between the performance of graph-based coding schemes and the cycle structure of the graph, especially the number of short cycles, motivates the search for efficient algorithms that can count cycles of different length in the graph. In the context of coding, the graph is often bipartite. This includes the Tanner graph of LDPC codes.
Counting and enumerating (finding) cycles in a general graph are both known to be hard problems [10]. Much work has been dedicated to lower the complexity of solving these problems. Two well-known examples of algorithms for cycle enumeration are the Tarjan algorithm [33] and the Johnson algorithm [15]. These algorithms have complexities O(n|E|(C + 1)) and O((n + |E|)(C + 1)), respectively, where |E| is the number of edges, n is number of nodes, and C is number of cycles in the graph. It is worth noting that the number of cycles, C, may itself increase exponentially

0090-6778/13$31.00 c 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

with n. Also noteworthy is that it is not straightforward to graph. Their expression, however, is limited to only the

use the Tarjan and the Johnson algorithms for specifically number of 6-cycles, and involves several summations over

finding cycles of a given length. Another algorithm for finding the elements of powers (up to 6) of the adjacency matrix.

cycles is the Bax algorithm [3], which is of time complexity Fan and Xiao [9] presented a method for counting cycles of
O(2npoly(n)) and storage complexity O(poly(n)). This al- length 2k, 2 ≤ k ≤ 5, in the Tanner graph of LDPC codes. gorithm can be easily adopted to find cycles of a given length The complexity of their method is O(mk+1) where m is the

in a graph. More recently, Schott and Staples [26], [27], [28] number of the check nodes in the graph. Their method quickly

studied the problems of counting and enumerating cycles of a becomes prohibitively complex even for counting cycles as

given length k, also referred to as k-cycles, in a graph through short as 6, particularly in graphs with large m. An algorithm

zeon algebra. By using an adjacency matrix, called nilpotent with similar complexity was proposed in [7] for counting only

adjacency matrix [24], [25], they demonstrated that k-cycles
can be enumerated and counted using the k-th power of
this adjacency matrix. Their method for enumerating k-cycles is of time complexity O(nω+k−1) and storage complexity O(n22n), where ω ≤ 3 is the exponent representing the

the shortest cycles of a Tanner graph. Halford and Chugg [12] presented a method for counting short cycles of length g, g +2 and g + 4 in bipartite graphs with girth g. The complexity of their method is O(gn3), where n is the size of the larger set
between the two node partitions.

complexity of matrix multiplication, and is shown to be faster In this paper, we present an algorithm that counts the

than the algorithms of the Tarajan and the Bax [28]. The cycles of length g, g + 2, . . . , 2g − 2 in a bipartite graph. The

method proposed in [27] for counting k-cycles in a graph with algorithm is based on message-passing on the edges of the n vertices has the worst case time complexity of O(nω+12n). graph, where the messages are computed at the nodes with

The average time complexity of the method for counting k- integer additions and subtractions. The algorithm can also be

cycles in a random simple (i.e, without parallel edges) graph is O(nω+1(1 + p)n), where p is the edge-existence probability.

In the case of sparse graphs, the average complexity of the

algorithm for counting k-cycles is O(n4(1 + q)n), where q

satisfies

e

≤

q(

n(n−1) 2k

−

1).

It

should

be

however

noted

that,

these average complexities can be very large even for small

applied to general (non-bipartite) graphs to count cycles of length g, g + 1, . . . , 2g − 1. The complexity of the proposed algorithm is O(g|E|2), where |E| is the number of edges in the graph. For sparse bipartite graphs, the proposed algorithm
can significantly outperform the algorithm of [12] in terms
of both computational complexity and memory requirements.

values of p (or q). For example, for a (500, 250) regular As an example, for a regular graph with node degrees 3 and

LDPC code with left-degree 3, the average complexity of 6 corresponding to an (8000,4000) LDPC code, the proposed the algorithm for counting 8-cycles is ≈ 1.3 × 1025. Still, the algorithm is more than 30 times faster than the method of

most prohibitive part of Schott and Staples’ algorithm is its [12] and requires less memory by a factor of about 600. storage complexity of O(n22n), which increases very rapidly Conceptually also, the proposed algorithm is much simpler

with n. In [5], Cash used the immanants of the adjacency than the algorithm of [12], in which complex matrix equations

matrix of the graph to count the k-cycles. Cash’s method is are involved in the counting process. Noteworthy is also the

prohibitively complex even for counting short cycles. The most fact that for graphs with g ≥ 6, the proposed algorithm is

computationally demanding part of his method is determining capable of counting short cycles of lengths up to at least the

the irreducible character matrix of the symmetric group Sn.

This matrix i√s a P (n) × P (n) matrix of integers, where

P (n)

≈

exp(π √2n/3) 4n 3

(e.g.,

for

n

=

1000,

P (n)

≈

2.4 × 1031).

Cash applied his method for counting cycles in a graph with

30 nodes, where it took three weeks to generate the matrix on

a desktop computer operating at 1.4 GHz [5].

Another approach to count or to enumerate cycles or closed walks in a graph is by using different types of zeta functions [29], [13], [30]. In [29], it is shown that closed walks of length k and k-cycles of a graph can be counted or enumerated through finding the trace of the k-th power of a properly defined adjacency matrix (see also [30]). Horton [13] showed that the girth g of a graph and the number of cycles with length g can be determined from the Ihara zeta function of the graph.

Attempts are also made to find efficient algorithms for finding short cycles in a graph. Alon et al. [1] presented

same value as the algorithm of [12] does. As part of this paper, we also present an interpretation of the
matrix multiplication approach of [29] as a message-passing algorithm over a trellis diagram. Moreover, we provide an efficient implementation of the approach which has basically the same complexity as the proposed message-passing algorithm.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. In Section III, we develop the proposed algorithm and give a simple example. In our presentation, we use bipartite graphs for the sake of simplicity and for the reason that the graphs involved in most coding applications are bipartite. The pseudo code for the algorithm is presented in Section IV. Discussions on complexity and memory requirements and comparisons with the algorithm of [12] and the matrix multiplication approach will follow in Section V. Section VI contains numerical results. Section VII concludes the paper.

methods for counting short cycles in a general graph. The complexity of their algorithm however is prohibitively high for longer cycles, say beyond 7. Chang and Fu [6] derived

II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS An undirected Graph G = (V, E) is defined as a set of

an expression for the number of 6-cycles in a graph, by nodes V and a set of edges E, where E is some subset of

subtracting the number of closed walks that are not 6-cycles the pairs {{u, v} : u, v ∈ V, u = v}. In this definition and from the total number of closed walks of length 6 in the without loss of generality in the context of this paper, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI and BANIHASHEMI: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS FOR COUNTING SHORT CYCLES IN A GRAPH

487

exclude loops using the condition u = v. Parallel edges are between any two nodes of the graph can be easily determined

also indistinguishable by this definition and are excluded for using the powers of this matrix. More precisely, the entry in

simplicity. A walk of length k in G is a sequence of nodes v1, v2, . . . , vk+1 in V such that {vi, vi+1} ∈ E for all i ∈ {1, . . . , k}. Equivalently, a walk of length k can be described
by the corresponding sequence of k edges. A walk is a path

the ith row and the jth column of Ak, (Ak)ij, is the number of walks of length k between nodes i and j. In particular, (Ak)ii
is the number of closed walks of length k containing node i, and tr(Ak) is the total number of closed walks of length k,

if all the nodes v1, v2, . . . , vk are distinct. A walk is called a where tr(·) denotes the trace of a matrix. closed walk or a cycle if the two end nodes are identical, i.e., For a graph G = (V, E), the (Hashimato) directed edge

if v1 = vk+1 in the previous description. It should be noted that in this definition of a cycle, the nodes vi, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, are not necessarily distinct. Consider a cycle c of length (c) = k
represented by the sequence of edges ei1 , ei2 , . . . , eik . The cycle c is backtrackless if eis = eis+1 for any s ∈ {1, . . . , k − 1}. The cycle c is tailless if ei1 = eik . The cycle c is called primitive if c is not obtained by going r > 1 times around some other cycle b (i.e., c = br). Two cycles of the same
length are equivalent if both have the same set of edges and
nodes and one is obtained by changing the starting node of

matrix, denoted by Ae, is a 2|E| × 2|E| matrix defined as follows. For every edge ei ∈ E, consider two directed edges
with opposite directions and denote them by fi and f|E|+i. The entry (Ae)ij is defined as [29]

(Ae)ij =

1 if edge fi feeds into edge fj with no backtracking, 0 otherwise.

In particular, (Ae)ij = 0, for j = i + |E|, i = 1, . . . , |E|, and for j = i − |E|, i = |E| + 1, . . . , 2|E|. In general, the matrix
Ae can be represented as

the other one. A cycle c is called simple if all the nodes vi, 1 ≤ i ≤ k, are distinct. Clearly, every simple cycle is tailless

Ae =

A C

B D

,

and backtrackless, but the reverse is not necessarily true. In this paper, we are mainly interested in simple cycles unless specified otherwise. We also refer to “simple cycles” as just “cycles” in the rest of the paper. We also use the term tbc walk to refer to a tailless backtrackless closed walk.
In a graph G, cycles of length k, also referred to as k-cycles,

where A, B, C and D are |E|×|E| matrices with the following properties:
a. B = BT , and C = CT , b. D = AT , c. bii = cii = 0, ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , |E|}.

are denoted by Ck. We use Nk for |Ck|, where equivalent One important property of the directed edge matrix is that cycles are counted only once. To each undirected walk (cycle), tr(Aek) is the number of tbc walks of length k in the graph. we associate two directed walks (cycles), depending on which

end node or edge is selected as the starting point. This concept

III. MAIN IDEAS OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM

is important in the description of the proposed algorithm since the direction of edges is of consequence in message-passing

A. Message Passing

algorithms.

A message-passing algorithm operates in a graph by com-

A graph G(V, E) is called bipartite if the set V can be puting messages at the nodes and passing them along the edges

partitioned into two disjoint subsets U and W (V = U ∪ W to the adjacent nodes. A well-known example is the sum-

and U ∩ W = ∅) such that every edge in E connects a node product algorithm operating in a factor graph [20]. Message

from U to a node from W . We denote |U | by n and |W | passing algorithms often have the property that a message

by m. Tanner graphs of LDPC codes are bipartite graphs, in sent along an edge e is not a function of the message previ-

which U and W are referred to as variable nodes and check ously received along e. We refer to this property as extrinsic

nodes, respectively. Parameters n and m in this case are the message-passing. An example is shown in Fig. 1, where the

code block length and the number of parity check equations, operation at node v1 is multiplication. Extrinsic message-

respectively.1

passing, for example, is known to be an important property of

The girth g of a graph is the length of a shortest cycle in good iterative decoders [23]. The algorithm proposed in this

the graph. For bipartite graphs, all cycles have even lengths paper also has this property.

and g is an even number. The number of edges connected to For bipartite graphs G(U ∪W, E), a natural message-passing

a node v is called the degree of v, and is denoted by dv. We schedule is for every node in U to send messages to adjacent call a bipartite graph G = (U ∪ W, E) regular if all the nodes nodes in W followed by every node in W to send messages

in U have the same degree du and all the nodes in W have to adjacent nodes in U . This is referred to as parallel schedule

the same degree dw. Otherwise, the graph is called irregular. and is used often in iterative decoding algorithms. In this case,

For a regular graph, it is easy to see ndu = mdw = |E|.

a complete cycle of message-passing from U to W and then

The adjacency matrix of a graph G is the matrix A = (aij ), from W to U is called one iteration. We assign discrete time t

where aij is the number of edges connecting node i to node to message-passing, starting from time index zero followed by j for all i, j ∈ V . Matrix A is symmetric and since we have positive integer values. Corresponding to a time index t ≥ 0,

assumed that G has no parallel edges or loops, aij ∈ {0, 1} we associate an iteration number = t/2 + 1 ≥ 1. The for all i, j ∈ V , and aii = 0 for all i ∈ V . One important time indices t = 2 − 2 and t = 2 − 1 correspond to the

property of the adjacency matrix is that the number of walks first and the second halves of the iteration . We also refer

to messages passed at t = 0 as initial messages, and use the

1For LDPC codes, the biadjacency matrix of the Tanner graph is the parity check matrix H of the code. Using H, one can thus obtain the Tanner graph, and implement the message-passing algorithm proposed here.

notation m(u→) w for a message passed from node u to node w at iteration . The notations mu( ←)e and mu( →)e are used for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

algorithm can count short cycles of the graph. Consider a cycle

C of length 2k as depicted in Fig. 2(a). Suppose that node v1 of C passes the monomial X as the initial message at t = 0 to

v2. Due to the extrinsic property of message-passing, X will be passed to v3 from v2 at t = 1 and continues its journey

around the cycle, one node at a time, until it reaches back

Fig. 1. An extrinsic message-passing algorithm: a) messages received by v1 at t, b) messages sent by v1 at t + 1

to v1 at t = 2k − 1 and at the end of iteration k, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Clearly, if node v1 had also passed a monomial Y along the edge e2 to v2k at t = 0, it would have also received Y from v2 along e1 at the end of iteration k. So the iteration number at which node v1 receives back the messages it passed at the first iteration is half the length of the cycle.

The following lemma puts this basic idea in the context of the

message-passing in a general graph.

Lemma 1: Suppose that C is a cycle of length 2k in a

bipartite graph G = (V, E), and v ∈ V is in C. Denote the

two adjacent edges of v in C by e1 and e2. Assume that the message-passing algorithm is initiated on the side of the graph

which includes v by passing 1 along every edge in E, except

e1 and e2. For e1 and e2, the initial messages are monomials X1 and X2, respectively. Then, at iteration k, node v will receive one copy of X2 and one copy of X1 along e1 and e2, respectively, where both copies have traveled through all the

edges of C.

Proof: The proof is straightforward and follows directly

from the definition of extrinsic message-passing.

Fig. 2. Message passing for a cycle of length 2k. a) initial message X is passed along e1 , b) after k iterations, v1 receives X along e2.
the incoming and the outgoing messages to and from node u along edge e at iteration , respectively.
In the general context of iterative decoding, all nodes in the same partition (U or W ) perform the same type of operation to generate their messages. The types of operation however are usually different for the two partitions and depend on

It is easy to see that if the node v in Lemma 1 is in NNat22vvikk;;teee11r,,aeet22ioccnyockpli,eesnsooodffeleXvng1wthailll2okrnegwcehei1vicehaNnadl2vlk;eien12,c,el2uredcseoppeeci1etisavneodlfye,X2w,2 thhaenernde each pair of copies has traveled through all the edges of one

of the cycles, respectively. Assuming there are no additional

copies of X2 received by v along e1 and no additional copies

of X1 received by v along e2 at iteration k, the monomials

received at iteration k by

X and X . N2vk;e1,e2
2

N2vk;e1 ,e2 1

v

along

e1

and

e2

are

respectively

We note that in addition to copies of X2 which are received

by node v along e1 at iteration k, v may also receive copies of

X1 along e1 at iteration k. These correspond to closed walks

of length 2k which start and end at edge e1 (and are thus

the nature of the algorithm and the domain in which the
messages are presented. In the algorithm developed in this
paper, however, all the nodes perform the same type of op-
eration. The messages are all monomials and the operation is
multiplication. An example can be seen in Fig. 1. In this work,
a monomial is the product of integer powers of variables. For example, a message m = X1iX2jX3k is a monomial with variables X1, X2 and X3. We say m contains i copies of X1, j copies of X2 and k copies of X3. If the variables are ordered, we may use a simpler representation of m as a vector: m = (i, j, k). Using the vector representation of messages, the multiplication of monomials is reduced to the addition of the
corresponding vectors.

with tails, and clearly not cycles). To eliminate these structures

in the counting process of N2vk;e1,e2 , one should consider the

power of received variables along e1 and e2 excluding the initial message. To describe this, we use the notation m(Ek,)v← e1 to denote the incoming message to node v along e1 at iteration

k, excluding the variable of the initial message passed by v

along

e1.

In

the

above

scenario,

we

have

mE(k,)v← e1

=

X , N2vk;e1,e2
2

and

mE(k,)v← e2

=

X . N2vk;e1,e2
1

This

results

in

N2vk;e1,e2 = {ex(mE(k,)v← e1 ) + ex(m(Ek,)v← e2 )}/2,

(1)

where ex(·) is the exponent of the monomial, defined as the

sum of the powers of all its variables.

B. Algorithm Development

There is also a possibility that node v receives additional copies of X2 along e1 and additional copies of X1 along e2

Consider an extrinsic message-passing algorithm in a graph at iteration k. These additional copies travel either through

with messages as monomials and node operations as monomial the same cycle multiple times or through non-cycle tbc walks

multiplication. In the following, we explain how such an of length 2k which start and end at e1 and e2, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI and BANIHASHEMI: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS FOR COUNTING SHORT CYCLES IN A GRAPH

489

Fig. 4. Bipartite graph of the example in Section III.C: a) G, b) G unwound from node u1.

Fig. 3. Three problematic structures for which the incoming extrinsic messages do not represent cycles.

over the same cycle or cases such as those in Fig 3.) Let us now focus on the problem of counting all the cycles
of a certain length 2k, k < g/2, which pass through a certain

Examples of the latter structures are given in Fig. 3, where the

message X is initiated at node v1. In Fig. 3(a), 2k is in fact

the sum of the lengths of the two cycles C1 and C2, while in

Fig. 3(b), it is the sum of the lengths of the two cycles plus

twice the length of the path between vi and vj. In Fig. 3(c), message X travels from v1 to vi first, and then from vi to vj through vk. It then travels back from vj to vi through vl

followed by a trip from vi to vj through vk for the second time. The journey finally ends when X is passed back from

vj to v1. In this case, the total length of the walk is 2k.

A careful inspection of the problematic structures, as de-

scribed above, reveals that they all include at least two cycles.

This implies that the shortest length of such structures is 2g,

where g is the girth of the graph. We thus have the following

results.

Lemma 2: Every tbc walk of length less than 2g in a graph

of girth g is a (simple) cycle.

Lemma 3: Consider a bipartite graph G = (V, E) with girth

g. Select a node v ∈ V with two adjacent edges e1 and e2. Assume that the message-passing algorithm is initiated at t =

0 by passing 1 along every edge in E, except e1 and e2. For

e1 and e2 the initial messages are set to monomials X1 and

X2, respectively. Then, at iteration k, k < g/2, node v will

only receive 1 along all its edges including e1 and e2. At

iteration k, g/2 ≤ k ≤ g − 1, node v will receive monomials

X X i N2vk;e1,e2
12

and

X X N2vk;e1,e2

j

1

2

along e1

and e2,

respectively,

where i and j are non-negative integers. Equation (1) is thus

valid for k ≤ g − 1.

Proof: Node v will receive messages other than 1 only if

a copy of X1 or X2 is passed back to it. Due to the extrinsic

nature of message-passing, such a copy must travel through

a backtrackless closed walk with both ends at v. Since the

length of a backtrackless closed walk is at least g, no messages

other than 1 will be received by v at iterations k, k < g/2.

At iterations k, g/2 ≤ k ≤ g − 1, node v can receive copies

of X1 and X2 that have traveled through backtrackless closed walks with both ends at v. In particular, the number of copies

node v in a bipartite graph G = (U ∪ W, E). Without loss of generality, we assume v ∈ U . One approach to count all the 2k-cycles containing v is to use Lemma 2 and count the cycles involving different adjacent edges, two at a time, and then add
up the results. The following lemma however suggests a more
efficient approach. Lemma 4: Consider a bipartite graph G = (U ∪ W, E)
with girth g, and a node v ∈ U . Initiate the messagepassing algorithm by passing 1 on all the edges connected to nodes u ∈ U, u = v, while passing dv different monomials, say X1, X2, . . . , Xdv , along the edges connected to v : e1, . . . , edv , respectively. For k ≤ g − 1, we then have

dv

N2vk = j=1 ex(mE(k,)v← ej )/2 ,

(2)

where N2vk is the number of 2k-cycles containing v. Proof: At iteration k ≤ g − 1, consider the message

received by v along ej, j = 1, . . . , dv, excluding the variable

Xj . Xi,

In i=

this extrinsic j, is N2vk;ei,ej

message mE(k,)v← ej , the . We therefore have

power

of

variable

dv

ex(m(Ek,)v← ej ) =

N2vk;ei,ej .

i=1

i=j

This combined with

N2vk

=

1 2

dv

dv
N2vk;ei,ej ,

j=1 i=1

i=j

completes the proof. In Lemma 4, at iteration k, k < g/2, node v will only
receive 1 along all its edges, indicating there are no cycles of length g − 2 or smaller containing v.
It is worth noting that the message-passing algorithm can be simplified by allowing node v to always pass 1 after the first iteration. This is demonstrated in the following example.

of X1 and X2 that v receives at iteration k ≥ g/2, along e2 and e1, respectively, is equal to the number of tbc walks of length 2k that start and end at e1 and e2. For k in the range g/2 ≤ k ≤ g − 1, based on Lemma 2, such tbc walks are

C. A Simple Example
Here, we illustrate the proposed method by a simple example. Consider the bipartite graph G shown in Fig. 4(a),

limited to cycles of length 2k that include e1 and e2. (For where the nodes in U and W are represented by hollow and k ≥ g, in addition to cycles, they can include multiple trips full circles, respectively. Suppose that we are interested in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

iteration, node u1 receives non-one messages, an indication
that it belongs to at least one 6-cycle. Using (2), we have N6u1 = (2 + 1 + 1)/2 = 2.

IV. PROPOSED MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHM

A. Pseudo Code

To count the short cycles of a certain length 2k in the whole graph G = (U ∪ W, E), one can apply the proposed algorithm described in the previous section to every node in one of the node partitions, U or W , and then add up the results for each cycle length. In this case, for each cycle length, the result should be divided by k as every cycle is counted k times:

N2k = ( N2uk)/k = (

N2wk )/k

,

g 2

≤

k

≤

g

−

1

.

(3)

u∈U

w∈W

Fig. 5. Message passing of the proposed algorithm for three iterations in the graph of Fig. 4.
counting short cycles containing node u1. For the simplicity of presentation, as shown in Fig. 4(b), we can unwind the graph G from node u1. It is easy to see from Fig. 4(b) that the girth of G is 4. Using the proposed method, we can thus count cycles of length up to 2g − 2 = 6. The message-passing algorithm is illustrated in Figures 5(a)-(f):
(a) At t = 0, the algorithm is initiated by node u1 passing messages X1, X2, and X3 along its 3 edges. All the other messages sent by nodes u2, u3 and u4 along their edges are equal to 1, and not shown. [Equivalently, in the vector representation, the initial messages of node u1 are vectors (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0) and(0, 0, 1), while all the other messages are (0, 0, 0).]
(b) At t = 1, only the nodes in W are active. The corresponding (non-one) messages are shown in Fig. 5(b). Note that in this iteration ( = 1), all the incoming messages to node u1 are equal to one.
(c) At t = 2, nodes in U are active. They all pass extrinsic messages using multiplication. For example, mu(23)→w4 = mw(11)→u3 × mw(12)→u3 = X1X2. [In the vector representation, m(u23)→w4 = (1, 0, 0) + (0, 1, 0) = (1, 1, 0).]
(d) At t = 3 ( = 2), for the first time node u1 receives non-one messages, an indication that there is at least one cycle of length 2 = 4 containing u1. Using (2), we obtain N4u1 = (1 + 2 + 1)/2 = 2.
(e) At t = 4, the nodes in U are active and pass messages. (f) At t = 5 ( = 3), nodes in W are active. Again in this

To simplify the algorithm and to avoid the k-fold counting repetition, we can deactivate a node as soon as its cycles are counted. This would be equivalent to removing the node and all its adjacent edges from the graph. Moreover, the algorithm can be further simplified by only activating nodes that have at least one non-one incoming message. Based on these simplifications, the proposed algorithm has the pseudo code provided in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 is initiated from U . Similarly, it can be initiated from W . Nodes in U are indexed by i = 1, . . . , n, and notation mE,(wj→ui) is used to denote the incoming message from node wj to node ui excluding the initial variable passed from ui to wj. Notation N (u) is used for the nodes adjacent to u (neighbors of u).
Here we have implicitly assumed that the girth g of the graph is known. In the following subsection, we discuss a modification of the algorithm that can compute g and Ng.
B. Parallel Implementation
The algorithm presented in the previous subsection is based on sequentially going through the nodes in one of the two partitions in the graph. To speed up the counting process and at the expense of larger memory usage, one can run a parallel version of the algorithm in which all the nodes in one partition are initialized simultaneously. This is explained in Fig. 6(a) for the graph of Fig. 4.
The parallel implementation, just described, can also be used to compute g and Ng. To see this, note that in the parallel implementation, none of the nodes in the initiating partition will receive a copy of its initial messages before iteration g/2. At iteration g/2, the nodes which are contained in the shortest cycles will receive copies of their initial messages and all such copies are received along the edges whose initial messages differ from the received messages. This means that all the received copies represent true g-cycles. Therefore to compute g and Ng, one does not need to distinguish among the initial messages of a node. The initialization in this case is explained in Fig. 6(b) for the graph of Fig. 4. In this setup, if the first iteration in which at least one of the nodes receives a nonone message is iteration k, then g = 2k, and the number of g-cycles is equal to the total number of received non-one messages by all the nodes divided by 2k.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI and BANIHASHEMI: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS FOR COUNTING SHORT CYCLES IN A GRAPH

491

Algorithm 1 Proposed Message-Passing Algorithm for Counting Short Cycles
for k = 1 : g − 1 do counter(k) = 0
end for for i = 1 : n do
Initialization l=1 for wj ∈ N (ui) do
m(u0i)→wj = Xl l = l+1 end for for i = i + 1 : n do for wj ∈ N (ui ) do
m(u0i)→wj = 1 end for end for
for k = 1 : g − 1 do Message Passing from W for j = 1 : m do for ui ∈ N (wj ) do mw(2jk→−u1)i = uh∈N (wj ), h≥i, h=i mu(2hk→−w2)j end for end for
Counting Cycles local-counter(k) = wj∈N(ui) ex(m(E2,k(−wj1→ ) ui))
Message Passing from U for i = i + 1 : n do
for wj ∈ N (ui ) do mu(2ik→ ) wj = wh∈N (ui ), h=j m(w2hk→−1u)i
end for end for
end for
for k = 1 : g − 1 do counter(k) = counter(k) + local-counter(k)/2
end for end for
Fig. 6. Initial message-passing in parallel implementations: a) counting short cycles of length 2k, g/2 ≤ k ≤ g − 1, b) calculating g and Ng.

implementation, where the nodes in U are processed one at a time. We also consider the vector representation of messages and first derive the complexity for a regular graph. We then generalize the results to irregular graphs. For a regular graph G = (U ∪ W, E), starting from a node u ∈ U , there are du initial messages, each represented by a unit vector of length du. All the subsequent messages are also vectors of length du. To calculate the messages at an active node w ∈ W , we first add all the incoming vectors to w, and then subtract from this, the incoming message along each adjacent edge to obtain the outgoing message along that edge. This requires (2dw − 1)du integer additions and subtractions. Similarly, for each active node u ∈ U , we need (2du−1)du integer additions and subtractions to obtain the outgoing messages. Considering that in even and odd time instances, the number of active nodes are upper bounded by n and m, respectively, the number of operations per iteration is O(nd2u + mdudv) = O(|E|du). Since the algorithm needs to perform g − 1 iterations, the complexity of the algorithm for each node u ∈ U is O(gndu2 + gmdudv) = O(g|E|du). The total complexity is thus
O(gn2du2 + gnmdudv) = O(gn2d2u) = O(g|E|2) .
It is easy to see that the same complexity order also applies to irregular bipartite graphs.
In the above discussions, it is implicitly assumed that the girth of the graph is known a priori. Since the computational complexity of finding the girth is at most O(n2), e.g., based on the algorithm of [21],2 the extra complexity for computing the girth is negligible compared to the rest of the computations.
B. Memory Requirements
For each edge of the bipartite graph, we need two memory locations to store the message vectors in both directions. For a regular graph, since each vector has du elements, the total number of memory locations, each storing an integer number, is 2du|E| or O(du|E|) = O(nd2u). For an irregular graph, the storage complexity is O(dmax|E|), where dmax is the maximum node degree in U or W , depending on which side initiates the algorithm.
VI. COMPARISON WITH EXISTING LITERATURE
A. Comparison with the Algorithm of [12]
First, it is important to note that while the algorithm of [12] is limited to bipartite graphs, the proposed algorithm is capable of counting short cycles in a general (non-bipartite) graph. For bipartite graphs, the algorithm of [12] counts cycles of length g, g + 2, g + 4, while the proposed algorithm counts cycles of length g, g + 2, . . . , 2g − 2. The coverage of the proposed algorithm is thus at least as much as the algorithm of [12] for graphs with g ≥ 6. It should be noted that the Tanner graphs of almost all good LDPC codes have g ≥ 6.
The computational complexity of the algorithm of [12] is O(gn3), where n = max(|U |, |W |). The complexity of the proposed algorithm is O(g|E|2). One can thus see that

V. COMPLEXITY OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM

2It is easy to see that if we use the algorithm proposed in Section IV.B to compute g, the complexity is O(gn2du), which is in general larger than

A. Computational Complexity

that of [21]. The algorithm of [21] however only finds g, while the proposed

In

the

folAlouwthoirnizge,d

algorithm also computes
wliceensaerdbuitsrealrimiliytedatsos:uYmoneseti hUantiv.tDhoewanllogaodreidthonmJune 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC

Ng . from

IEEE

Xplore.

Restrictions apply.

is initiated from the node set U . We consider a sequential

492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

for sparse graphs with |E| growing slower than n3/2, the complexity of the proposed algorithm is less than that of the algorithm in [12]. Moreover the computations in the algorithm presented here are simple integer additions and subtractions, while in [12] the operations are mainly highprecision multiplications.
In terms of memory requirements, the algorithm of [12] requires at most 11(n2 + m2) + 21nm high bit-width (64bit integer) storage locations, which is of order O(n2). The proposed algorithm on the other hand requires 2du|E| memory locations, i.e., O(dmax|E|), which for sparse graphs can be much smaller than what is needed for the algorithm of [12]. Moreover, the maximum size of memory locations for the proposed algorithm, which is proportional to the number of cycles, is usually much less than 64 bits.

[8] which has an asymptotic complexity of O(N 2.376). This algorithm however, cannot utilize the sparsity (even if any or both of the two matrices is sparse), and its complexity remains unchanged even if the multiplied matrices are extremely sparse [36]. Moreover, in the Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm, the complexity O(N 2.376) is only achieved when the size of the matrices tends to infinity. More recently, Yuster and Zwick [36] presented a method for fast sparse matrix multiplication with the asymptotic complexity of O(M 0.7N 1.2 + N 2+o(1)), where M is the number of nonzero elements in the less sparse matrix among the two. This complexity result not only is asymptotic and applies only to very large matrices, but also requires both matrices to be sparse. One however should note that even the product of two very sparse matrices can be very dense, and thus the algorithm of [36] would not be applicable to the case of finding the k-th power of a sparse matrix.

B. Relationship and Comparison with Matrix Multiplication For the case where only one of A or B is sparse, one can

Techniques

A natural approach to counting the number of k-cycles in a
graph G is to use the k-th power of the directed edge matrix Ae of G. In general, tr(Aek) is equal to the total number of tbc walks of length k in G. Now considering that each tbc walk of
length k appears k times in the counting process (equivalent
tbc walks are counted multiple times), and that each tbc walk
is counted twice for the two directions, one can see that the
total number of undirected non-equivalent tbc walks of length k is tr(Aek)/2k. Based on Lemma 2, all the tbc walks of length k < 2g are cycles. We thus have

Nk = tr(Aek)/2k , for k < 2g .

(4)

use the straightforward method of calculating the product C =

A × B through: cij =

N k=1

aik

bkj

.

It

is

easy

to

show

that

in this case, the complexity of multiplication is bounded by

O(M N ), where M is the number of nonzero elements in the

sparser matrix between A and B. Applying this result to the

calculation of Ake by the iterative method, one can see that the computational complexity is O(kM N ). For the Tanner graph of regular LDPC codes, this reduces to O(k|E|2(du + dw)),

which implies that the complexity of counting the cycles of
length k, g ≤ k ≤ 2g − 2, using (4) is O(g|E|2(du + dw)) or O(gn2du3 + gn2du2 dw)). It is worth noting that since all
the nonzero elements of Ae are ones, all the operations in computing Aek are simple additions. The storage complexity

1) Complexity of calculating Aek: There are a number of methods for calculating the powers of a matrix. These methods
have different complexities and their relative performance may

of this method is dominated by the required memory to store Ake−1. Since Aek−1 can be dense, the storage complexity of the method is of O(|E|2) or O(n2d2u).

depend on the sparsity level of the matrix. For the Tanner The comparison of the computational complexity and

graph of LDPC codes, for example, the matrix Ae has only

n i=1

d2ui

+

m i=1

dw2 i

−

2|E|

nonzero

(one)

elements.

For

the

case of a regular LDPC code, this simplifies to |E|(du+dw−2)

nonzero elements. This implies that for the Tanner graph of

memory requirements of the proposed algorithm, which are O(g|E|2) and O(dmax|E|), respectively, with those of the
above matrix multiplication method (naive approach), which are O(g|E|2(dv + dw)) and O(|E|2), respectively, shows the

LDPC codes, the matrix Ae is sparse. To compute Ake , one can use the iterative method: Aek =
Ake−1Ae. Another approach is to use successive squares method: Ake = l A2el , where l 2l represents the binary expansion of k. While the successive squares method is gen-
erally more efficient than the iterative method, the latter can be more efficient in the case that Ae is sparse. The reason is that the powers of a sparse matrix may not be sparse, and thus
the general complexity of the successive squares method is
determined by the complexity of dense matrix multiplication.

superiority of the proposed method.
2) Efficient calculation of Nk using matrix multiplication: Consider the directed edge matrix Ae corresponding to a graph G = (V, E). We construct a |V | × 2|E| matrix B from Ae by adding the rows of Ae that correspond to the edges emanating from each node v of G for every v ∈ V , and removing all the other rows. Note that these rows have no overlap in the nonzero locations. We then multiply B by Ae from the right k − 1 times to obtain

This is while, in the case of the iterative method, in each

B = (· · · ((B × Ae) × Ae) × · · · × Ae) .

(5)

iteration, at least one of the matrices (i.e., Ae) is sparse. This property can be used to reduce the computational complexity
of the matrix multiplication. Consider two integer N × N matrices A and B. The
complexity of the straightforward calculation of C = A × B is O(N 3). One of the first algorithms proposed for faster
matrix multiplication is by Strassen [31] and has a complexity of O(N 2.81). Currently, the fastest known algorithm for

We then derive a |V | × |V | matrix B from B by adding up the columns of B that correspond to the edges emanating from each node v of G for every v ∈ V (and removing all the other columns), and then dividing the ith diagonal element of the resulting matrix by di − 1, where di is the degree of the ith node in G. The complexity of obtaining B from B is O(|V ||E|). Based on (4), it is then easy to see that

matrix multiplication is the Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm

Nk = tr(B )/2k , for k < 2g .

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI and BANIHASHEMI: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS FOR COUNTING SHORT CYCLES IN A GRAPH

493

The complexity of calculating Nk using (5) and (6) is O(k|V |M ), where M is the number of nonzero elements in

TABLE I
NUMBER OF SHORT CYCLES IN THE TANNER GRAPHS OF FOUR RATE-1/2 LDPC CODES

Ae. For the Tanner graph of regular LDPC codes, this reduces to O(k|E|2(du + dw)2/(dudw)), which implies that the complexity of counting the cycles of length k, g ≤ k ≤ 2g − 2,
for the Tanner graph of a regular LDPC code of a given rate r = 1 − du/dw using (6) is O(g|E|2), which is similar to
that of the proposed message-passing algorithm. However, it
should be noted that the memory requirement of the matrix multiplication approach is O(|V ||E|), which for example for a regular LDPC code reduces to O(|E|2/du) which is larger than that of the proposed algorithm.
3) Message-passing interpretation of matrix multiplication

Code A Code B Code C Code D

N6

11538

0

N8 408657

2

N10 13110235 11238

N12

-

91101

N14

-

748343

179 1218 9989
-

161 1260 10051
-

TABLE II CPU TIME AND MEMORY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROPOSED
ALGORITHM

algorithms: Consider a bipartite graph representation of Ae, where one set of nodes, say, those on the left, represent the rows of Ae, and the other set of nodes (those on the right) represent the columns of Ae. An edge is connected between node i on the left and node j on the right iff the ijth element of Ae is nonzero. Suppose that we connect k such graphs together in sequence, such that the right nodes of the ith graph

Code A Code B Code C Code D

CPU Time (S)
5.3 3 155 1127

Max Memory (MB)
0.36 0.36 13 13

Max Swap (MB)
3.3 2.8 157 157

coincides with the left nodes of the (i + 1)th graph, for i = 1, . . . , k − 1. We call the resulting graph a trellis diagram, or a trellis in brief, following the nomenclature used in coding.

TABLE III CPU TIME AND MEMORY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ALGORITHM
OF [12]

Both the naive and the efficient calculations of Nk can be described by a message-passing algorithm over this trellis.
The message-passing algorithm is started by assigning ini-

CPU Time Max Memory Max Swap

(S)

(MB)

(MB)

tial values to the left-most nodes of the trellis. These nodes

Code A 10.3

1.5

35

then pass their initial messages along their outgoing edges to

Code B

16.6

1.5

35

the adjacent set of nodes. The algorithm is then continued by

Code C 4965

7839

14195

the messages being passed forward (left to right) in the trellis,

Code D

-

-

-

one trellis section at a time, with each node adding up the

messages it receives along its incoming edges on the left and

passing the result along all its outgoing edges on the right. P EGReg504x1008, respectively. Both codes are constructed

The algorithm will end by all the right-most nodes receiving using the Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) method of [14],

messages along their incoming edges and passing out the sum and have n = 1008 and m = 504. Code A is irregular

of those messages as their output.
If the message-passing algorithm is initiated by zero values
on all the left-most nodes in the trellis except for node i,
which is assigned the value 1, then the set of outputs will be the ith row of matrix Aek. If the values of the input trellis nodes corresponding to the rows of Ae that represent the outgoing edges of node v of G are set to one with the rest of the input

while Code B is regular. Codes C and D are MacKay’s codes 8000.4000.3.483 and 10000.10000.3.631, respectively. They are both regular with du = 3 and dw = 6. For Code C, n = 8000 and m = 4000, while these parameters for Code D are 20, 000 and 10, 000, respectively. The number of short
cycles in the Tanner graphs of these codes is listed in Table I. Codes A, C and D have girth 6 and the proposed algorithm,

values equal to zero, then the set of outputs will be equal to the row of B in (5) which corresponds to v.
As a final note, one should realize that although the message-passing algorithms over the trellis diagram and the original graph (for counting the short cycles) have both essentially the same complexity, the graph representation of the latter (original graph) is simpler than that of the former (a trellis section). (Note that for example, for a regular (du, dw) LDPC code, one section of the trellis diagram has |E|(du + dw − 2) edges, while the original Tanner graph has only |E| edges.)

similar to the algorithm of [12], can compute N6, N8 and N10. Code B however has girth 8, and while the algorithm of [12] can only compute N8, N10 and N12, the proposed algorithm can also compute N14.
Tables II and III show the running time and memory requirements of the proposed algorithm and the algorithm of [12],3 respectively. Both algorithms were run on the same
machine with a 2.2-GHz CPU and 8 GB of RAM. As can be seen, the proposed algorithm is consistently faster than the
algorithm of [12] and requires significantly less memory for larger graphs. In fact, for Code D, the algorithm of [12] ran

VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS

out of memory and was not able to find the results. As another experiment, we randomly generate six parity-

In this section, we present numerical results obtained by check matrices for each of the following three rate-1/2

applying the proposed algorithm to Tanner graphs of LDPC LDPC code ensembles: (du, dw) = (3, 6), (4, 8), (5, 10). codes. We consider four rate-1/2 codes from [37]. Codes

A and B are listed in [37] as P EGirReg504x1008 and 3To implement the algorithm of [12], we used the authors’ code in [38].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

TABLE IV DISTRIBUTION OF SHORT CYCLES IN THE TANNER GRAPHS OF RATE-1/2 RANDOM REGULAR LDPC CODES WITH DIFFERENT DEGREE
DISTRIBUTIONS AND DIFFERENT BLOCK LENGTHS

Degree Distribution (3, 6)
(4, 8) (5, 10)

Short Cycle
Distribution
N6 N8 N10 N6 N8 N10 N6 N8 N10

200
171 1265 10069 1636 25005 409335 8626 213639 6052158

500
167 1239 10110 1611 24419 409373 8064 212484 6054661

Code Lengths

1000

5000

181 1226 9939 1584 24379 408595 8055 210767 6049148

156 1235 9982 1562 24363 407958 7978 210153 6043400

10000
166 1253 9858 1537 24529 408246 7858 209614 6049583

20000
148 1285 9974 1572 24557 409051 7926 210159 6043704

The lengths for each degree distribution are: n = forward message-passing algorithm and the one proposed in

200, 500, 1000, 5000, 10, 000 and 20, 000. In the generation of this paper in fact count the tailless backtrackless closed (tbc)

the parity-check matrices, 4-cycles are avoided. The proposed walks in the graph, which happen to coincide with the simple

algorithm is then used to count the short cycles of each parity- cycles as long as their length is less than twice the girth of

check matrix. The results, which are reported in Table IV, the graph. The difference however is that to limit the closed

show that while there is a large difference between the short walks to tbc walks, the former operates on a properly defined

cycle distribution of different degree distributions, the changes graph (matrix), i.e., the trellis associated with the directed edge

with respect to the block length for the same degree distribu- matrix, while the latter employs the extrinsic property of the

tion are negligible. This would imply that the complexity of message-passing over the original graph.

the algorithms which are based on the enumeration of short While in this paper, our main focus was on counting

cycles in a Tanner graph is rather independent of the block short simple cycles, there may be applications where one is

length.4

interested in counting the tbc walks in a graph. One example is

the characterization of pseudo-codewords of iterative coding

VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a distributed message-passing algorithm to count short cycles in a graph. For bipartite

schemes [19]. In such applications, the proposed messagepassing algorithm can be applied with no limitation on the length of the closed walks.

graphs, the proposed algorithm counts short cycles of length g, g + 2, . . . , 2g − 2, where g is the girth of the graph. For

IX. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

non-bipartite graphs, the algorithm counts cycles of length The authors wish to thank Pascal Vontobel for his comments g, g+1, . . . , 2g−1. The operations performed by the algorithm on the first version of this paper which significantly improved

are integer additions and subtractions, and the computational and storage complexities of the algorithm are O(g|E|2) and O(dmax|E|), respectively, where |E| and dmax are the number
of edges and the maximum node degree in the graph, respec-

the presentation and the scope of this work. In particular, the material on the matrix multiplication approach was added to the paper as a result of such comments.

tively. For sparse graphs, the proposed algorithm is significantly faster and requires substantially less memory compared to the existing algorithms, such as that of [12], which are tailored for counting short cycles. This is particularly the case for larger graphs.
Interestingly, the more generic and basic approach of matrix multiplication, when properly implemented, has a complexity similar to the proposed message-passing algorithm, and is thus less complex than the approaches specifically tailored for counting short cycles, in particular for large sparse graphs. We demonstrated that the efficient implementation of matrix multiplication approach can also be described as a forward message-passing algorithm over a trellis diagram. Both the
4It is worth mentioning that it is proved in [22] that for random regular bipartite graphs with du = dw = d, as the number of nodes tends to infinity, the distribution of short cycles of different length ci tends to independent Poisson distributions with average µi = (d − 1)ci /ci. To the best of our knowledge, however, no generalization of this result is available for bipartite graphs with du = dw.

REFERENCES
[1] N. Alon, R. Yuster, and U. Zwick, “Finding and counting given length cycles,” Algorithmica, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 209–223, 1997.
[2] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[3] E. T. Bax, “Algorithms to count paths and cycles,” Inf. Process. Lett., vol. 52, pp. 249–252, 1994.
[4] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit errorcorrecting coding and decoding: turbo-codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., pp. 1064-1070.
[5] G. G. Cash, “The number of n-cycles in a graph,” Applied Mathematics and Computation, vol. 184, pp. 1080–1083, 2007.
[6] Y. C. Chang and H. L. Fu, “The number of 6-cycles in a graph,” Bull. Inst. Combin. Appl., vol. 39, pp. 27–30, 2003.
[7] R. Chen, H. Huang, and G. Xiao, “Relation between parity-check matrices and cycles of associated Tanner graphs,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 674–676, Aug. 2007.
[8] D. Coppersmith and S. Winograd, “Matrix multiplication via arithmetic progressions,” J. Symbolic Comput., vol. 9, pp. 251–280, 1990.
[9] J. Fan and Y. Xiao, “A method of counting the number of cycles in LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2006 Int. Conf. Signal Procss., vol. 3, pp. 2183– 2186.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI and BANIHASHEMI: MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS FOR COUNTING SHORT CYCLES IN A GRAPH

495

[10] J. Flum and M. Grohe, “The parameterized complexity of counting problems,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Symp. Foundations Comput. Science, pp. 538–547.
[11] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[12] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “An algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 287– 292, Jan. 2006.
[13] M. Horton, “Ihara zeta functions of irregular graphs,” Ph.D. thesis, U.C.S.D., 2006.
[14] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[15] D. B. Johnson, “Find all the elementary circuits of a directed graph,” J. SIAM, vol. 4, pp. 77–84, 1975.
[16] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “An efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2010 International Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process.
[17] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “An efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2011 IEEE ISIT.
[18] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “An efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” to appear in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory. Available: CoRR,arxiv.org/abs/1108.4478.
[19] R. Koetter, W. C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. L. Walker, “Characterizations of pseudo-codewords of (low-density) parity-check codes,” Adv. Mathematics, vol. 213, no. l, pp. 205–229, 2007.
[20] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[21] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 1, pp. 41–44.
[22] B. D. McKay, N. C. Wormald, and B. Wysocka, “Short cycles in random regular graphs,” Electron. J. Combinatorics, vol. 11, no. R66, 2004.
[23] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[24] G. S. Staples, “A new adjacency matrix for finite graphs,” in Proc. 2005 International Conf. Cliord Algebras Their Appl.
[25] R. Schott and G. S. Staples, “Nilpotent adjacency matrices, random graphs, and quantum random variables,” J. Phys. A: Math. Theor., vol. 41, pp. 155–205, 2008.
[26] R. Schott and G. S. Staples, “On the complexity of counting cycles in sparse graphs using nilpotent adjacency matrices,” in Proc. 2010 Midwest Conf. Combinatorics, Cryptography, Comput.
[27] R. Schott and G. S. Staples, “On the complexity of cycle enumeration using zeons,” in Proc. 2010 Appl. Geometric Algebras Comput. Science Eng.
[28] R. Schott and G. S. Staples, “Cycle enumeration using nilpotent adjacency matrices with algorithm runtime comparisons.” Available: www.loria.fr/~schott/CVRENE3html.html.
[29] H. M. Stark and A. A. Terras, “Zeta functions of finite graphs and coverings,” Adv. Math., vol. 121, pp. 124–165, 1996.
[30] C. Storm, “Some properties of graphs determined by edge zeta functions,” Linear Algebra Appl., vol. 434, no. 5, pp. 1285–1294, Mar. 2011.
[31] S. Huss-Lederman, E. M. Jacobson, A. Tsao, T. Turnbull, and J. R. Johnson, “Implementation of Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication,” in Proc. 1996 ACM/IEEE Conf. Supercomput., pp. 32.
[32] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533–547, 1981.

[33] R. Tarjan, “Enumeration of the elementary circuits of a directed graph,” J. SIAM, vol. 2, pp. 211–216, 1973.
[34] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Graph-based message-passing schedules for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2098–2105, Dec. 2004.
[35] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels using cycle enumeration,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1550–1555, June 2009.
[36] R. Yuster and U. Zwick, “Fast sparse matrix multiplication,” ACM Trans. Algorithms, vol. 1, pp. 2–13, 2004.
[37] Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/ data.html [38] Available: http://csi.usc.edu/chugg/tools
Mehdi Karimi (S’10) received the B.A.Sc. degree and M.A.Sc degrees both in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan,Iran in 2003 and 2005, respectively. From 2005 to 2008, he was with the Information and Communication Technology Institute, Isfahan University of Technology. Since 2008, he has been pursuing his Ph.D at Carleton University, Canada. His research interests include graphical modeling, iterative coding, statistical signal processing and wireless communications.
Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90-A’98-M’03-SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. During 1994-1997, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, for his Ph.D. degree. He held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students during this period. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he worked as a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University in 1998, where at present he is a Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communication algorithms, and compressed sensing and sampling. He has published more than 150 papers in refereed journals and conferences. Dr. Banihashemi served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009. He is the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University. He has been involved in many international conferences as chair, member of technical program committee, and member of organizing committee. These include co-chair for the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom’07, TPC co-chair of the Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, member of the organizing committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and co-chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. Dr. Banihashemi is a recipient of Carleton’s Research Achievement Award in 2006 and 2012, and Faculty Graduate Mentoring Award in 2011. He is also awarded one of the NSERC’s one hundred 2008 Discovery Accelerator Supplements (DAS).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

