Efficient Memory Optimization And High Throughput Decoding Architecture Based on
LDPC Codes
Leevaston Ngangom 1M.E.(VLSI DESIGN),leevaston@gmail.com Manikandan.V 2M.E. (VLSI DESIGN), reachkandan@gmail.com Vel tech Multitech Dr. Rangaragan Dr. Sakunthala Engineering college,Chennai, India

Abstract- Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) code is one kind of prominent error correcting codes (ECC) being considered in next generation industry standards. Here, the memory bandwidth is the key performance limiting factor. And the decoding throughput of a LDPC decoder is limited by this memory bandwidth requirement. The decoder implementation complexity has been the bottleneck of its application. This paper present a specific optimization called vectorization to take advantage of the configurable data-width and depth of embedded memory in an FPGA to improve the throughput of a decoder for quasicyclic LDPC codes. It is shown that this presented hardware structure will be highly competent in high throughput and low decoding latency applications.
Key words—Alignment, field programmable logic array (FPGA), folding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder, memory system optimization, normalized minsum algorithm, quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
IN LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, memory bandwidth is the key performance limiting factor. And the decoding throughput of a LDPC decoder is limited by this memory bandwidth requirement. Modern FPGAs from Xilinx and Altera have a large number of embedded memory blocks, typically in the range of a few hundreds. RAM is configurable—i.e., both the word size and the number of locations in the memory or depth of the memory can be selected by the designer. For example, each 18 Kb block RAM in a Virtex-4 FPGA can be configured to operate as a 512x36, 1Kx18, 2Kx9, 4Kx4, 8Kx2, or 16Kx1 memory block. Most FPGA implementations store one message per Block RAM word. So, typically they utilize 8/36 or roughly 22% of the available memory bandwidth, or in other words, roughly 78% of the available memory bandwidth is not being used. We propose two architectural techniques to increase the throughput of an FPGA-based implementation of a LDPC decoder. The first technique, called vectorization, exploits the

configurable width of the block RAM; and the second, called folding, takes advantage of the configurable depth of the block RAM.
II. LOW DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES A binary LDPC code of length is given by the null space of an sparse parity-check matrix over GF(2). If each column has constant weight and each row has constant weight, then the LDPC code C is referred to as a regular LDPC code. If the columns and/or rows of the parity-check matrix have multiple weights, then the null space of gives an irregular LDPC code. If is an array of sparse circulants of the same size over GF(2), then the null space of gives a quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC codes. In terms of encoding and decoding implementation, the most advantageous structure of an LDPC code is the QC structure. Commonly, in most of the proposed constructions of QC-LDPC codes, the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code is given as an array of circulants or circulant permutation matrices (CPMs) as
Then is a matrix over GF(2). Many standard codes for communication systems are QC-LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig.1. Parity check Matrix for a (3,6)-regular QC-LDPC code.
Fig. 1(a) shows the code structure of a (3,6) regular QC-LDPC codes. The matrix has 3 block rows and 6 block columns for a total of 18 circulant permutation matrices. Each circulant permutation matrix (CPM) is 256*256 with a certain offset, which denotes the position of the nonzero entry in the first row of the matrix. Details of a CPM with offset equal to 3 is shown in Fig. 1(b).

III. VECTOR DECODER ARCHITECTURE FOR QC-LDPC CODES
Vector decoder architecture overcomes the limitation of the scalar decoder (described in the previous section) by packing multiple messages in the same memory word. As noted before,this is possible because, block RAMs can be configured into different aspect rations. For the NMSA, the intrinsic and the extrinsic messages are usually 6–8 bit wide, thus up to six 6-bit messages can be packed in one memory word in the 512x36 block RAM configuration. We define the number of messages packed into one memory word as K.
The vector decoder for a (γ,ρ) -regular code requires Kγ CNUs,Kρ VNUs, and (γ+1)×ρ block RAMs for intrinsic and extrinsic memories. Fig. 3 shows a vector decoder for the code C1 when K=2 . Potentially, the throughput of a vector decoder can be times that of a scalar decoder, given that there are times more functional units operating simultaneously. However, without proper data packing scheme, memory access conflicts will be caused since multiple messages are accesses per cycle. Besides, efficient message alignment units are required so that the additional logic incurred would be reduced.

Fig. 2. Partially parallel decoder architecture for (3,6)-regular QCLDPC codes
The partially parallel architecture proposed by Chen and Parhi is an elegant method to realize quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. For (γ,ρ)-regular QCLDPC code, this approach uses γ ρ-input CNUs (check node units), γ ρ-input VNUs (variable node units), ρ intrinsic message memories (IMEM) with each storing m intrinsic messages, and γ ρ extrinsic message memories (EMEM) with each storing m extrinsic messages and m hard decision bits. The partially parallel decoder for C1 is shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 3 shows a vector decoder for the previous code Potentially, the throughput of a vector decoder can be k times that of a scalar decoder, given that there are k times more functional units operating simultaneously.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. FOLDING: A TECHNIQUE TO VIRTUALIZE BLOCK RAMS FOR QC-LDPC
DECODER IMPLEMENTATION We need to map messages corresponding to multiple circulants to the same physical block RAM. We propose a simple (greedy) heuristic to fold multiple circulant permutation matrices to the same block RAM. The goal of our heuristic is to reduce the hardware complexity, which includes resources required to route the data from the memory to the CNUs and VNUs and the complexity of the VNUs and CNUs themselves, especially in the case of an irregular code. For simplicity, we make the following additional assumptions. Each message will occupy a single memory word, i.e., we will not attempt to vectorize the decoder in the current exposition; vectorization is orthogonal to folding, so a folded architecture can always be vectorized by using the techniques proposed in Section III. We also assume that CNU and VNU processing is not overlapped. Given that multiple CPMs will be mapped to the same block RAM, and the number of ports to the memory are fixed, VNU and CNU processing will require multiple clock Cycles respectively. Fig.4 shows how folding can be combined with vectorization described in the previous section. Both folding and vectorization exploit the unused depth of the block RAMs—given that most CPMs are much smaller than the number of locations in a Block RAM. Vectorization uses the block RAM depth for double buffering as explained in the previous section, while folding uses the block RAM depth to map multiple CPMs into the same block RAM. So, the folding factor will be constrained by the available depth of the block RAM

Fig.5. FPGA-based simulation platform for QC-LDPC codes decoder.
V. RESULT AND DISCUSSION
Our FPGA-based simulation platform shown in Fig.5 is based on the DN8000K10PSX board from Dini Group, which has two Xilinx Virtex-4 LX16010’s and is hosted in a 64-bit PCI slot (66MHz). The Main Bus, PCI/Main Bus Bridge, PCI Interface are provided by the vendor, the rest of the modules were developed by us. The main components include the AWGN generator, based on the Wallace method that generates the erroneous all-zero codeword for the decoder, a FIFO to synchronize data across different clock boundaries, the data sink which gathers the decoder statistics such as iteration count, status of the codeword, etc., and the PC software that initializes the AWGN generator and interfaces with the user.

Fig.4. Vectorized folded decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 6. Module 1 Code Simulation.
A module 1 code simulation is shown above . We address this challenge with a combination of three techniques or modules that are described next. First, we use double buffering, i.e., the messages are replicated for CNU and VNU access, so that they are stored in different ways to match the access pattern of the CNU and VNU processing. Though it doubles the amount of memory needed for the storage, it does not increase the number of block RAMs necessary, because we use the same block RAM to store both CNU and VNU memory. This works because typically the CPM sizes are much smaller than the depth of the block RAMs in an FPGA.
Second, we develop a new packing strategy that not only uses the block RAMs efficiently but also reduces the potential for conflicts. Third we propose a sequential alignment unit and its implementation to demonstrate that the alignment task can be achieved with relatively low complexity, which makes the scheme scalable. An FPGA decoder for this code is also reported before, which packs two messages per memory word. Hence, by mapping messages in this way, it is very efficient to implement highly flexible decoder for multiple standards. And, there is further scope to improve and, therefore, research work has been carrying still.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,”IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431,

Mar. 1999.

[3] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced

complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes

based

on

belief

propagation,”IEEETrans.Commun.,vol.47,no.5,pp.673–

680,May1999.

[4] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit

quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 52,no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.

[5] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient

encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE

Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 11, p. 1973, Nov. 2005

.[6] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and

M.Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-

density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. IEEE

Global Telecommun. Conf., Dec. 2006, pp. 1–6.

[7] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High

throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in

Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., 2001,.

[8] Y. Dai, Z. Yan, and N. Chen, “Optimal overlapped message

passing decoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans.Very

Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 565–578, May

2008.

[9] Y. Chen and K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-

cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.

I, Reg. Papers,n vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.

[10] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3,6)-regular FPGA

LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst.,

Oct. 2002, pp. 127–132.

[11] T. Zhang, “Efficient VLSI Architectures for Error-Correcting

Coding,” Ph.D., Univ. Minnesota, Minneapolis, 2002.

[12] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder

design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large

Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.

[13] M. Gomes, G. Falcao, V. Silva, V. Ferreira, A. Sengo, and M.

Falcao, “Flexible parallel architecture for DVB-S2 LDPC

decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2007,

pp. 3265–3269.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

