IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

829

Improved Decoding Algorithm of Serial Belief Propagation With a Stop Updating Criterion for LDPC Codes and Applications in Patterned Media Storage
Xingcheng Liu, Jinlong Cai, and Longbo Wu
School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510006, China National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210096, China The Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Sensor Networks Sun Yat-sen University, Ministry of Education, China
In high density patterned media storage system, the “multiple islands per read head” model is taken into account for inter-track interference (ITI) in bit-patterned media (BPM). It has been proposed that low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes could improve the symbol error rate (SER) performance significantly when only considering AWGN noise alone over the storage channel. LDPC decoding algorithm could be applied in LDPC joint decoder of patterned media storage system. In this paper, we proposed a decoding algorithm of serial belief propagation (SBP) with a stop updating criterion for LDPC decoder. Simulation results show that the proposed decoding algorithm could reduce the times of generating and propagating the message in decoding with negligible error rate performance loss over AWGN channels when appropriately choosing the parameter that determines which variable node has been converged. By taking advantage of extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, it is demonstrated that the proposed decoding algorithm could maintain superior SER performance and convergence rate compared with the traditional SBP decoding algorithm. To further explore the performance of the proposed decoding algorithm in “multiple islands per read head” model, we performed a large number of simulations over this channel model with different distribution percentages between the AWGN and the island position jitter noise. Simulation results show that the LDPC codes could improve the SER performance when considering jitter noise while the proposed decoding algorithm behaves excellently over the patterned media storage channel and over the AWGN channel.
Index Terms—Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, patterned media, stopping criterion, transition-jitter noise (TJN).

I. INTRODUCTION
P ATTERNED media storage is promising for high-density magnetic recording system. In order to achieve high efficiency of read head, the dimension of read head is made several times larger than an island. The read head reads from several islands, and the output of read head is a function of these islands. The “multiple islands per read head” model was proposed by Karakulak et al. [1]. This model considered not only inter-track interference (ITI), but also AWGN electronics noise and island position jitter noise. The island position jitter is one of the error sources in magnetic recording systems, especially in future ultrahigh-density storage system incorporating patterned media [2], [3].
In order to achieve excellent performance, i.e., low symbol error rate (SER), for this type of patterned media, the channel coding scheme was investigated [4], where the joint iterative decoding/detection algorithm was proposed. The reported result is that the SER performance is significantly improved when considering the AWGN noise alone over the patterned media. However, when considering the jitter noise over the patterned media storage, whether the suggested algorithm [4] could improve the SER performance or not remains open. On the other hand, the
Manuscript received January 11, 2012; revised March 28, 2012 and May 30, 2012; accepted July 05, 2012. Date of publication July 12, 2012; date of current version January 22, 2013. Corresponding author: X. Liu (e-mail: isslxc@mail. sysu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2012.2208468

traditional LDPC decoding algorithm is to be improved to speed up the decoding process, which was also an issue to be solved for the joint iterative decoding scheme [4]. In this paper, we investigated the performance of the improved decoding algorithm of serial belief propagation (SBP) when considering the AWGN and the jitter noises separately and jointly for the “multiple islands per read head” model.
In our previously-proposed algorithm [4] the low-density parity-check (LDPC) code decoder and the Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) detector were employed to shape the iterative decoding/detection algorithm. In order to reduce the complexity of the BCJR detector, a reduced-state BCJR detector was proposed to reduce the detector complexity while the performance loss was not large [5]. To go further, the LDPC decoding algorithm could be explored as well in order to improve the joint iterative decoding/detection algorithm.
As is well known, LDPC codes can reach excellent performance with the soft-decision belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [6]. Nonbinary LDPC codes have even better performance compared with the binary counterparts although the decoding complexity of the former is higher [7]. Numerous efforts have been given to the improvement of the LDPC BP decoding algorithms with a goal of improving the error rate performance. Among them is the serial belief propagation (SBP) schedule. It has been proved that the convergence rate of the SBP decoding is twice as fast as that of the flooding decoding schedule [8], [9]. The property of faster convergence rate of SBP is further confirmed in the application of bit patterned media system with media noise [10].
There are two types of serial decoding algorithms. The first is the Serial-V schedule which is based on a serial update of variable nodes’ messages. Based on such a schedule, the shuffled

0018-9464/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:14:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

830

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

BP decoding algorithm and the “lazy schedule” were taken in In a sparse bipartite undirected graph, is denoted as the vari-

to shape [11], [12]. In this paper, the proposed stop criterion for able node index and is denoted as the check node index. Let

the LDPC decoding also works with the Serial-V schedule. The

be the set of variable nodes that par-

other is the Serial-C schedule which is based on a serial update ticipate in check equation . Let

of check node’s messages [8]. As an example, the layered de- be the set of check equations that depend on the variable node

coding algorithm is the case [13].

. is the message passing from variable node to check

In addition to achieving better error rate performance, re- node at the th iteration, where

. is meant

ducing decoding complexity is also a focus in the coding field. to be the probability that symbol is , obtained information

To this end, some improved decoding algorithms were proposed from check nodes other than check node . is the message

to reduce the number of iterations for convergence, such as the passing from check node to variable node at the th iter-

serial schedule decoding algorithm, the residual belief propaga- ation. is meant to be the probability of check equation

tion (RBP) decoding algorithm [14] and the dynamic decoding being satisfied if symbol is considered to be the element

schedule [15]. Some algorithms were proposed to reduce the and the other symbols contaminated by noises have a separable

complexity in each iterative decoding such as the lazy schedule distribution [7].

[12]. Some other algorithms with early stopping criteria were In the BP algorithm [7] the following is adopted as the com-

employed to end up decoding earlier than normal, such as the putation procedures to decode:

stopping criterion based on the convergence of the mean magni- 1) Updating

tude (CMM) [16], and the criterion based on the change of the

variance of variable node’s extrinsic information over

(2)

[17]. These proposed decoding algorithms tried to maintain the

error rate performance while reducing decoding complexity. In this paper, the proposed decoding algorithm tried to maintain the SER performance of the SBP algorithm and meanwhile, to reduce the decoding complexity cost.
To further explore the performance of the proposed algo-

where

if the value of

check equation ; otherwise,

2) Updating

For each , and

:

satisfied the .

rithm, the EXIT chart was employed [18]. The chart is a pow-

(3)

erful analysis tool for iterative decoding codes such as Turbo

codes and LDPC codes [19]. Besides the case of binary LDPC codes [19], the one of nonbinary LDPC codes was also analyzed with the EXIT chart [20]. In order to compare the convergence rate between SBP and the proposed decoding algorithms for nonbinary LDPC codes, the method suggested in [20] is em-

where is computed with

. is the

likelihood that the noise symbol is equal to . is

considered as the initialization probability in decoding.

3) Tentative decoding result

ployed to construct EXIT chart in this paper. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The pro-

(4)

posed decoding algorithm will be introduced in Section II. In

Section III, how to simulate island position jitter noise in the “multiple islands per read head” model will be investigated. In Section IV, simulation results will be presented including the decoding performance and EXIT chart analyses of the proposed decoding algorithm over AWGN channel, and over the

where is the probability that

. The tentative

decoding result is obtained according to the rule

.

B. Serial-V Schedule

pattern media storage channel with different noise distribution percentages between AWGN and position jitter noises. Finally, conclusions will be drawn.

In flooding schedule, all the messages from variable nodes to check nodes and from check nodes to variable nodes are transmitted. In Serial-V schedule [8], a serial update of variable

II. UPDATE STOPPING CRITERION FOR SBP DECODING

node’s message is processed. For each variable node , the following procedures are to be performed:

A. Belief Propagation Decoding Over GF(q)

LDPC codes could be defined in terms of low-density parity-

check matrix

. Elements of are selected over the Ga-

lois field,

. Here, the notations used in the BP algorithm

[7] are adopted since the SBP decoding algorithm is derived

from it.

Let a row vector be referred to as noise-contaminated infor-

1) For each check equation

, all messages are

sent to variable node .

2) For each check equation

, all messages

from variable node are sent.

By processing messages with Serial-V schedule, the process

of decoding could converge faster and achieve better error rate

performance [8].

mation symbols. Over is composed of
a codeword from . The

, where

, each noise symbol

. The aim of decoding is to find

is considered as a codeword, if

C. Proposed Stop Updating Criterion for SBP Decoding
To reduce complexity of LDPC code decoding, some early stopping criteria about how to detect the convergence of a frame

(1) in decoding were proposed [16], [17], [21]. Once a convergence frame is detected, the iterative decoding is forced to be ended.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:14:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: IMPROVED DECODING ALGORITHM OF SERIAL BELIEF PROPAGATION

831

In addition to considering the convergence in terms of a whole

frame, the convergence could be also reckoned in terms of a

bit or a symbol. In Turbo codes decoding, a bit-level stopping

was proposed [22]. The advantage of the bit-level stopping cri-

terion [22] is that it prevents generating and propagating mes-

sages in decoding for those bits that have converged. Besides

Turbo codes, some decoding algorithms of LDPC codes were

also proposed based on the convergence in terms of bit level.

In RBP decoding algorithm, the bits were ordered by the corre-

sponding residual values in decoding [14]. Larger residual value Fig. 1. Read head channel model with

.

means that the bit is drifting further away from the status of con-

vergence.

Based on the above-mentioned ideas, a stop updating crite- If a larger value of is taken, there might be more variable

rion for Serial-V BP decoding over

is proposed. In this nodes to be considered as convergent, less normalized number

scheme every variable node’s message is processed in a way of of iterations to be required, and worse SER performance to be

serial updating as Serial-V BP decoding. Here, we need to de- brought about. Based on the time domain analysis of control

termine whether the variable node has converged. If a variable systems in automatic control theory, the settling time, , is

node has converged at the th iteration, the followed updates defined as the time required for a system response to decrease

will not be processed at the

th iteration. Otherwise, the fol- and stay within a specified region (i.e., within a tolerance band)

lowed updates will be processed the same as that in Serial-V BP [23]. Normally, the tolerance band is defined by the system

decoding. Stopping updating messages of variable nodes that output settling down within 2% or 5% of its final value [23].

have converged could reduce decoding complexity no matter Generally, the system output is considered to be converged if it

whether a frame is decodable free of errors or with errors. Par- settles into the tolerance band. With this idea of tolerance band,

tial iterative updating is performed when there is part of vari- the value of is accordingly chosen to be 2 and 5 in our simula-

able nodes that have converged. As in the lazy schedule, the de- tions. Considering the specific case in communication systems

coding complexity is measured by the total number of messages that a higher requirement on SER performance is needed, a that are computed and updated until converging [12]. Here we smaller value of , 1, is additionally taken in our simulations.

propose a concept of normalized number of iterations to com- On the other hand, a greater value of is expected for the

pare the decoding complexity among the proposed decoding al- sake of decreased computation complexity. Therefore, further

gorithm and the original Serial-V BP decoding algorithm.

investigations were performed in our simulations. Experiment

Definition: One normalized iteration means that the number results given later show that in some cases the value of can

of variable nodes that process updating of messages equals to be chosen up to 20 while the SER performance of the proposed

the number of variable nodes in Serial-V BP decoding.

decoding algorithm still approaches that of the SBP algorithm

For example, if there are 60% of variable nodes processing over the AWGN channel.

updating and the others do not perform updating in one iteration,

the normalized number of iterations is 0.6. The message of variable node is determined to be con-

III. ISLAND POSITION JITTER IN PATTERNED MEDIA STORAGE

verged at the th iteration in the proposed decoding algorithm,

if both conditions described below are satisfied:

1) The tentative decoding result, denoted by , of variable

node at the th iteration equals to that at the

th

iteration:

“Multiple islands per read head” channel model is proposed for patterned media storage. The output of the read head is a function of several independently written tracks of islands. The head response matrix could characterize the input-output relationship between the read head and the islands. As is the

same case [1], [4], we consider the “three islands per read head”

(5) model, where the number of tracks

. The input symbol

is composed of 3 bits denoted by

, where

2) The probability, denoted by , that the th symbol to

, , and are the coded bits. The head response ma-

be decoded equals the tentative decoding result at the trix is denoted by

. The output is

th iteration, is both larger than

and less

. The “three islands per read

than

, i.e.,

head” model is illustrated in Fig. 1. “Jitter noise” arises from the randomness of the island loca-

(6) tions, which is called island position jitter in “multiple islands per read head” channel model. The ideal location of an island

where is a parameter employed to determine whether the mes- is the one without island position jitter noises. Actually, an is-

sage of a variable node is converged or not.

land may shift from its ideal location in both the down-track

The value of affects error rate performance and the number and across-track directions as shown in Fig. 2 [1]. The island

of iterative updating in the proposed decoding algorithm. position jitter could be modeled with the Taylor series expan-

Hence, the parameter is so chosen that a trade-off between the sion [1]. Among the mathematical model, the position shifts,

SER performance and the decoding complexity can be reached. and , appear independently with the Gaussian distributions of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:14:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

832 Fig. 2. Shifted island in the down-track and cross-track directions.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

partial derivatives (1) and (2) in [1] could be avoided, which is very beneficial to simplified simulations.
In “three islands per read head” channel model, the readback voltage induced by an island at could be expressed by the product of coded bits

and elements of read head response matrix

. As shown in Fig. 3, the

value of

could be calculated by

.

The readback voltages in other positions are shown in Fig. 3

as well. The difference expressions of the first order partial

derivatives

and

could be given as follows,

respectively:

(10)

(11)

The difference expressions of the second order partial deriva-

tives,

,

, and

, are expressed based

on first order partial derivatives

. For example,

could be expressed by

(12)

Fig. 3 “Three islands per read head” model.

zero-mean and variances, and , respectively. The read-

back voltage induced by an island at position,

,

is expressed by

In “three islands per read head” model, the readback voltages

at positions, (1, 0) and ( 1, 0), are expressed by

,

. The calculations of

and

are performed similarly.

For the proposed difference expression of jitter-induced read-

back voltage , the statistics with probability density function

can be obtained in normalized histograms [1]. Fig. 4 is the nor-

malized histogram of the jitter-induced readback voltage that

is calculated with difference expressions. The head response

matrix is , which is

(13)

(7)

The probability density function of voltage , denoted by , in the proposed difference expression as shown in Fig. 4

where

is the modeling error due to approximation. The is similar to the case of [1] (see [1, Fig. 9]).

jitter-induced readback voltage is defined as [1]

In the previous algorithm, the scheme of joint channel detec-

tion and LDPC decoding [4] was applied to improve the SER

(8) performance when considering AWGN noise alone over the pat-

Excluding the modeling error back voltage can be given by

terned media storage channel. In that scheme, the symbol-based , the jitter-induced read- BCJR algorithm [24] was adopted for channel detection while
decoding of LDPC codes is oriented to the decoder. The joint

scheme of channel detection and decoding has been proved to

be efficient for “multiple islands per read head” model when

(9) considering the AWGN noise alone. When considering a different type of noise, the jitter noise, whether the scheme is also

Calculating the value of partial derivative , , , , and valid remains open. For this case, the scheme of joint channel

is essential for simulation of island position jitter. Here, the detection and decoding is plotted in Fig. 5. As the second itera-

values of these partial derivatives are calculated in such a way tive scheme (scheme II) has been proved that it has better SER

of difference expressions that complicated calculations of the performance [4], it is adopted here for further investigation. In

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:14:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: IMPROVED DECODING ALGORITHM OF SERIAL BELIEF PROPAGATION

833

Fig. 4. Probability density function of in proposed difference expression.

Fig. 6. BER performance of V-SBP decoding, CSVP [21], and the proposed algorithm with PEG (1008, 504) binary LDPC code over AWGN channel.

Fig. 5. Joint channel detection and decoding.

LDPC decoders, the proposed decoding algorithm mentioned above and the existed LDPC decoding algorithms could be applied in order to improve decoding performance.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSES

To examine the efficiency of the proposed decoding algo-

rithm, we have performed simulations in order to make a com-

parison among the schemes with and without the stopping cri-

terion for LDPC codes. The LDPC codes in simulations here

are denoted with

, where is the length of codes and is

the number of information symbols in the codes. So, the code

rate is

. In simulation, LDPC codes of rate 1/2, length

Fig. 7. Normalized number of iterations of V-SBP decoding, CSVP [21], and the proposed algorithm with PEG (1008, 504) binary LDPC code over AWGN channel.

1008, are constructed with the PEG algorithm [25], and trans-

mitted with BPSK modulation over the AWGN channel. The

maximum number of iterations is set to be 100.

area. It is also shown that even in the higher SNR region such

When considering the case of binary LDPC codes, a unified as the points

and 2.5 dB, the proposed algorithm

early stopping criterion based on check-sum variation patterns could still reduce decoding complexity while CSVP could not.

(CSVP) is employed [21]. In CSVP, the check-sum is defined as When considering the case of nonbinary LDPC codes, the ex-

the number of unsatisfied checks at each iteration. The param- trinsic message reliability oscillation number criterion (EMRC)

eter denotes the number of consecutive iterations, where, is employed [17]. In EMRC, the parameter is the threshold

the check-sum keeps constant [21]. The CSVP

is referred provided by the counter that counts the oscillation times of the

to as the CSVP criterion with parameter . The simulation re- variable node’s extrinsic message reliability. The simulation re-

sults of the proposed algorithm and CSVP are shown in Figs. 6 sults of the proposed algorithm and EMRC with LDPC codes

and 7.

over GF(8) are shown in Figs. 8 and 9.

Fig. 6 shows that, when the value of parameter is chosen Fig. 8 shows that, for nonbinary LDPC codes, the proposed

to be 1 and 2, the proposed decoding algorithm provides no decoding algorithm provides no SER performance loss while

BER performance loss while it provides a little performance the EMRC provides a little performance loss. Fig. 9 shows that,

loss when is chosen to be 5, all compared with SBP. CSVP when comparing the normalized number of iterations, the pro-

also provides almost no BER performance loss. However, Fig. 7 posed decoding algorithm again provides more reductions in

shows that, when comparing the normalized number of itera- complexity than the EMRC, especially in the low

area,

tions, the proposed decoding algorithm provides more reduc- because less updating is needed for the proposed decoding al-

tions in complexity than the CSVP, especially in the low

gorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:14:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

834

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

Fig. 8. SER performance of V-SBP decoding, EMRC [17], and the proposed Fig. 10. Changes of mutual information among V-SBP and the proposed algo-

algorithm with PEG (1008, 504) code over AWGN channel.

rithm with different values of .

Fig. 9. Normalized number of iterations of V-SBP decoding, EMRC [17], and the proposed algorithm with PEG (1008, 504) code over AWGN channel.

Fig. 11. SER performance of the V-SBP algorithm and the proposed decoding algorithm with PEG (1008, 504) code and Index QC (252, 168) code over the patterned media storage with 50% AWGN and 50% TJN.

To further investigate the convergence of iterative decoding algorithms, the EXIT chart, which is a powerful tool for iterative decoding analyses, is adopted. Here, the method of computing mutual information [20] was employed. The code generated here is PEG (1008, 504) over GF(8) and it is transmitted over the AGWN channel. The changing processes of mutual information among V-SBP and the proposed decoding algorithm with different values of are shown in Fig. 10. It shows that the proposed decoding algorithm has the same convergence rate as the V-SBP.
The proposed algorithm could stop processing message updating and propagation node by node under conditions that a

parameter is 3. Therefore, the proposed decoding algorithm could reduce decoding complexity earlier than the CSVP.
To explore the adaptivity over the magnetic recording channel rather than just over the AWGN channel, the proposed decoding algorithm is applied to the patterned media storage system, where different distribution percentages of the transition-jitter noise (TJN) combined with the AWGN noise are considered. The different scenarios to be explored are 100% AWGN, 90% AWGN 10% TJN, 50% AWGN 50% TJN, 10% AWGN 90% TJN, and 100% TJN. Abide by the definition [26], the total noise power is given by

variable node is considered to be converged, while CMM [16],

(14)

CSVP [21] and EMRC [17] judge the convergence status in a

whole frame. This difference breeds the result that the proposed algorithm could reduce decoding complexity within a frame no matter whether it is decodable or not. Through algorithm analyses we know that, the proposed algorithm could reduce decoding complexity from the beginning of the 3rd iteration, while

where is the jitter noise power, and is the additive white Gaussian noise power. The jitter noise power is composed of the variances of the position shifts of and , which is given by

the CSVP takes into effect from at least the 4th iteration on when

(15)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:14:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: IMPROVED DECODING ALGORITHM OF SERIAL BELIEF PROPAGATION

835

TABLE I COMPARISON OF THE NORMALIZED NUMBER OF ITERATIONS BETWEEN THE SBP AND THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
WITH DIFFERENT PARAMETER OVER THE PATTERNED MEDIA STORAGE WITH DIFFERENT NOISE DISTRIBUTIONS

Here, the variance of the position shift in down-track direction, , is considered to be the same as that in cross-track direc-
tion, . The percentage of jitter noise power, , and the percentage of white Gaussian noise power, , is calculated, respectively, by
(16)
(17)
Here, the definition of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as [4]

The LDPC codes [27] constructed with length 252, rate 2/3,

which is called Index QC (252, 168), and the PEG (1008, 504)

are simulated here. Scheme II for iterative decoding in [4] is

adopted.

Fig. 11 shows that the coding gain is more than 6 dB

at

over the patterned media storage with

50%AWGN and 50%TJN when the LDPC PEG (1008, 504)

code and iterative scheme II are employed. Jointly considering

Fig. 11 and Table I, we know that the proposed decoding

algorithm could reduce the normalized number of iterations

without SER performance loss when the value of is chosen

appropriately. Especially in the low

region, the reduc-

tion of computation complexity is very obvious.

(18) V. CONCLUSION

where is the user bit energy,

is the coded bit The island position jitter is one of the error sources in future

energy, and is the overall coding rate [4], calculated by

ultrahigh-density storage systems. In this paper, the jitter’s ef-

fects on performance were investigated for the “multiple islands

(19) per read head” model after discussing the simulation of the is-

land position jitter noises with differential expressions. The pro-

where

is the code rate of LDPC code,

is the posed method of calculating jitter noise is simple and effective

code rate of the mapping preformed by BCJR detector, and for simulations. With this method employed in our simulations,

is the information rate of the read head. As the case we obtained experiment results. It is show that the nonbinary

of three-bit symbols is considered, which is similar to [4], a nor- LDPC codes can be employed to improve the SER performance

malized SNR is also accordingly defined as

efficiently even if the island position jitter noise is included over

the patterned media storage, the case of which has not previ-

(20) ously been considered in literatures. To further reduce the de-

coding complexity of the SBP algorithm employed in the paper,

The head response matrix employed in simulations here is , which is given in (21) and has 6 distinguishable symbols of three bits [1]. The method of joint decoding without mapping is applied in the joint iterative decoding/detection algorithm [4]:

we proposed a stopping criterion for LDPC decoding. Different from many existing LDPC decoding stopping criteria that stop processing iteration from the perspective of a whole frame [16], [17], [21], the proposed algorithm could stop the processing updates node by node. This characteristic of the proposed decoding

algorithm makes it possible to reduce the decoding complexity

(21) no matter how a frame is decoded. Simulations show that the

decoding algorithm with the proposed stopping criterion could

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:14:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

836

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

reduce the total amount of computation and message updating in iterative decoding when the value of is chosen appropriately, while maintaining the SER performance of the SBP. The investigations also show that the proposed decoding algorithm is efficient not only over the AWGN noise but also over the patterned media storage with different distribution percentages of jitter noises.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive opinions in improving this paper. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 60970041 and 61173018), the open research fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University (Grant 2011D09), and the Science and Technology Plan Project of Guangzhou City of China (2012J4300032).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Karakulak, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, and H. N. Bertram, “A new read channel model for patterned media storage,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 193–197, Jan. 2008.
[2] P. W. Nutter, S. Yuanjing, B. D. Belle, and J. J. Miles, “Understanding sources of errors in BPM to improve read channel performance,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 3797–3800, Nov. 2008.
[3] H. Saga, K. Shirahata, K. Mitsuzuka, T. Shimatsu, H. Aoi, and H. Muraoka, “Impact of multidomain dots on write margin in bit patterned media recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 3745–3748, Oct. 2011.
[4] X. Liu, C. Shi, M. Teng, and X. Ma, “Error correction coding with LDPC codes for patterned media storage,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3745–3748, Oct. 2009.
[5] J. Yao, K. C. Teh, and K. H. Li, “Reduced-state Bahl-Cocke-JalinekRaviv detector for patterned media storage,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 4108–4110, Dec. 2010.
[6] D. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Elect. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[7] M. C. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low-density parity check codes over ,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[8] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4097, Nov. 2007.
[9] J. Goldberger and H. Kfir, “Serial schedules for belief propagation: Analysis of convergence time,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1316–1319, Mar. 2008.
[10] W. Phakphisut, P. Supnithi, T. Sopon, and L. Myint, “Serial belief propagation for the high-rate LDPC decoders and performances in the bit patterned media systems with media noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 3562–3565, Oct. 2011.
[11] J. T. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[12] D. Levin, E. Sharon, and S. Litsyn, “Lazy scheduling for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 70–72, Jan. 2007.
[13] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Processing and Systems (SIPS.04), Austin, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[14] A. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun, Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[15] G. Han and X. Liu, “An efficient dynamic schedule for layered beliefpropagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 950–952, Dec. 2009.

[16] J. Li, X. H. You, and J. Li, “Early stopping for LDPC decoding: Con-

vergence of mean magnitude (CMM),” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 10, no.

9, pp. 667–669, Sep. 2006.

[17] X. Chen, A. Men, and W. Zhou, “A stopping criterion for nonbi-

nary LDPC codes over

,” in Proc. 11th IEEE Singapore Int.

Conf. Communication Systems (ICCS), Guangzhou, China, 2008, pp.

1312–1315.

[18] S. T. Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” IEEE Electron. Lett.,

vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806–808, May 1999.

[19] S. T. Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-den-

sity parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.

[20] A. Bennatan and D. Burshtein, “Design and analysis of nonbinary

LDPC codes for arbitrary discrete-memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 549–583, Feb. 2006.

[21] G. Han and X. Liu, “A unified early stopping criterion for binary and

nonbinary LDPC codes based on check-sum variation patterns,” IEEE

Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 1053–1055, Nov. 2010.

[22] H. K. Dong and S. W. Kim, “Bit-level stopping of turbo decoding,”

IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 183–185, Mar. 2006.

[23] V. U. Bakshi and U. A. Bakshi, Automatic Control System. Pune, Ma-

harashtra, India: Technical Publications Pune, 2008, ch. 7, pp. 39–43.

[24] M. K. Cheng, J. Campello, and P. H. Siegel, “Soft-decision

Reed-Solomon decoding on partial response channels,” in Proc.

IEEE GlobeCom, Taipei, Taiwan, Nov. 2002, pp. 1026–1030.

[25] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular

progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.

51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

[26] Y. Okamoto, N. Masunari, H. Yamamoto, H. Osawa, H. Saito, H.

Muraoka, and Y. Nakamura, “Jitter-like noise cancellation using AR

model of PR channel in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE

Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2349–2351, Sep. 2002.

[27] X. Liu, W. Zhang, and Z. Fan, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC

codes and the performance on the PR4-equalized MRC channel,” IEEE

Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3699–3702, Oct. 2009.

Xingcheng Liu was born in Jiangxi Province, China. He received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, and the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU), Guangzhou, China, all in electrical engineering.
He was awarded the Royal Society KC Wong Fellowship of the U.K. to do postdoctoral research at University of Southampton (SOTON), U.K., during May 2002–May 2003. He was a Visiting Scientist at Oregon State University, Corvallis, from September 2004 to September 2005. He is a Full Professor with the Department of Electronic and Communications Engineering, School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University. His main research interests include information theory, coding techniques, and mobile communications. He has published over 50 papers in journals and conferences. He is now the primary investigator of several projects on wireless communications
and networking. Dr. Liu is a Senior Member of the China Institute of Communications.

Jinlong Cai was born in Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, China, in 1986. He received the bachelor’s degree in automation from South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2009. He was a graduate student in circuit and system at Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. He received the
master’s degree in June 2012. His main research interests include channel coding and wireless communica-
tions. Now, he is an Engineer in Guangzhou YangChengTong Company.

Longbo Wu was born in Maoming City, Guangdong Province, China, in 1987. He received the B.E. degree in electronic science and technology from South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2009, and the M.S. degree in circuit and system from Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China, in
June 2012. His research area is channel coding and wireless communications. Now, he
is an Engineer in Guangzhou Air Traffic Management Bureau.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:14:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

