IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

675

Joint Message-Passing Decoding of LDPC Codes and 2-D ISI Channels
Jun Yao, Kah Chan Teh, and Kwok Hung Li
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
Two-dimensional (2-D) intersymbol-interference (ISI) channels represent an important class of next-generation data-storage systems. In order to mitigate the 2-D ISI and improve system performance, a joint message-passing decoding algorithm is proposed in this paper. The proposed algorithm conducts an iterative decoding of low-density parity-check code and a 2-D ISI channel, which can be implemented in a fully parallel manner. An extrinsic information transfer chart is also introduced to analyze the performance and convergence behavior of the proposed message-passing decoding system. Simulation results show that the proposed joint message-passing decoding algorithm outperforms some existing joint decoding algorithms.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, message-passing algorithm, 2-D intersymbol interference (ISI).

I. INTRODUCTION
C ONVENTIONAL magnetic recording systems are expected to reach their recording density limits in the near future due to physical and engineering limits. Some alternative technologies have been proposed to further increase the recording density for the next-generation data-storage systems, such as 2-D magnetic recording (TDMR) [1], 2-D optical storage (TwoDOS) [2], heat-assisted magnetic recording (HAMR) [3], and patterned media storage (PMS) [4]. In these systems, the recording density is so high that the intertrack interference (ITI) cannot be ignored. Together, with the conventional intersymbol interference (ISI) in the downtrack direction, these systems suffer from 2-D ISI, which is very harmful to system error performance [5].
The optimal maximum-likelihood sequence detection (MLSD) for 2-D ISI channels has been proved to be NP complete [6], which is impossible to be implemented in practice. The performance bound of MLSD over 2-D ISI channels was analyzed in [7]. Much research has been conducted in searching for the suboptimal detection algorithm [8]–[15]. Specifically, in [12] and [13], the authors proposed an iterative row-column soft decision feedback algorithm which is a concatenation of two soft-input/soft-output (SISO) detectors. In [14], a joint iterative detection/decoding scheme (JIDDS) was proposed, which was also a concatenation of two SISO detectors. However, unlike the IRCSDFA where two parallel-concatenated detectors exchange weighted soft information, the two detectors in JIDDS are serially concatenated and the soft information exchanged between the two detectors is not weighted. In [15], a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)-based algorithm was proposed and shown to exhibit better performance than some existing detection algorithms.
A class of error-correcting codes (ECCs), called low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, has exhibited superior error performance [16]. The application of LDPC codes to magnetic
Manuscript received July 16, 2012; accepted September 05, 2012. Date of current version January 22, 2013. Corresponding author: J. Yao (e-mail: YAOJ0003@e.ntu.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2012.2219299

recording systems holds promise for improving error performances and increasing recording densities. An appealing practical aspect of the decoding of LDPC codes is that it consists of many small, independent decoding functions (i.e., the variable nodes and check nodes). Thus, in practical implementation, the hardware can operate in parallel, leading to a very-high-speed decoder. This aspect is very important in magnetic recording systems, where data rates should be high and decoding delays must be low. If the channel detector cannot be implemented in parallel in conjunction with the decoder of LDPC codes, the LDPC codes’ advantage of low decoding delay will be degraded significantly. In [17], the authors proposed a joint detector/decoder for an LDPC-coded partial-response channel that can operate in a completely parallel manner.
In order to effectively mitigate the 2-D ISI while, at the same time, making use of the low-delay advantage of LDPC codes, in this paper, inspired by the work in [17], we propose a joint message-passing decoding algorithm of LDPC codes and 2-D ISI channels. The channel detector consists of many state-processing nodes which can be implemented in a completely parallel manner in conjunction with the decoding of LDPC codes. The extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart is a powerful tool to visualize and analyze the trajectory of iterative decoding systems [18], [19]. Different from the density evolution (DE) technique in which infinite code length must be assumed [20], the EXIT chart can be used to analyze the iterative decoding system with finite code length. We introduce the EXIT chart to analyze the performance and convergence behavior of the proposed message-passing decoding system in this paper. Simulation results are presented to compare the performance of the proposed algorithm and the LDPC-coded MCMC-based algorithm.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

A data-source generates a sequence of independent and iden-

tically distributed binary variables

. This sequence is passed to the LDPC encoder to obtain

a sequence of LDPC coded bits

. Here, we assume the original data length is , and the

LDPC-coded sequence length is . Thus, the code rate of the

LDPC code is

. The sequence is bipolar mod-

ulated to

and then distributed to obtain a 2-D array

0018-9464/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

676

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

ac-

cording to a certain 1-D sequence to 2-D array mapping scheme.

The values and represent the number of columns and

rows of the 2-D array , respectively. Note that

.

The 2-D array is written on the surface of the recording media.

We assume that the 2-D array is surrounded by s.

Let

denote

the channel response matrix of the 2-D ISI channel, where

and represent the channel memory length in the crosstrack

and downtrack direction, respectively. The desired signal is in-

terfered by tracks in the crosstrack direction and sym-

bols in the downtrack direction, which can be expressed as

Fig. 1. Read-channel model of an LDPC coded 2-D ISI channel.

(1)

where represents a 2-D convolution operation. Let the th

column-wise vector of the channel response matrix be denoted

as

and let the crosstrack direc-

tion

-tuple bits at the coordinates

be denoted

as a symbol

, (1) can be

rewritten as

(2)

The readback signal is therefore equal to the 2-D interfered signal plus additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), given by

(3)

where represents the AWGN with zero mean and variance

. We define

as [15]

(4)

Fig. 2. Message-passing diagram of a state-processing node.
The downtrack state information and crosstrack state information are processed in the state-processing node and transferred in the downtrack direction and crosstrack direction, respectively. Fig. 2 shows the message-passing diagram of a stateprocessing node at the coordinates . The triangle represents a state-processing node which sends and receives four types of messages. Firstly, the state-processing node communicates the downtrack state information with its two neighboring state-processing nodes in the downtrack direction. Second, the crosstrack state information communicates with the two neighboring state-processing nodes in the crosstrack direction. Another type of message communicating with the state-processing node is the binary information corresponding to bit . Finally, the state-processing node processes the readback signal
from which we can obtain

III. JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES

AND 2-D ISI CHANNELS

(5)

It has been pointed out in [17] that the key to achieving good

performance in the channel detection is to pass state informa- Let the quantities

and

be the state information

tion. In the 2-D ISI channels, the interferences come from two in the th iteration that are passed forward and backward in the

orthogonal directions. There is no simply way to incorporate downtrack direction, respectively,

. The

the channel memories to the states in a trellis as in 1D ISI log-domain update of

and

can be implemented

channels. Thus, here we define two types of states that take as

into account the memories from the downtrack direction and

crosstrack direction, respectively. In the downtrack direction, a

downtrack state at the coordinates

is defined as the pre-

vious

symbols that interfere with the current symbol (i.e., ). In the cross-track

(6)

direction, a crosstrack state at the coordinates

is defined and

as the previous bits that interfere with the current bit (i.e.,

). Thus, the numbers of

downtrack states and crosstrack states are

and ,

respectively.

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YAO et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND 2-D ISI CHANNELS

677

where the function

is defined as [21]

(8)

For more than two variables, we have

(9)

The notation

represents the set of states such

that

is a valid transition. The notation

is

similarly defined. The quantity

represents the a priori

log probability of the symbol in the th iteration. The a

posteriori log probability of the symbol in the th iteration

can be calculated via

(10)

Fig. 3. Message-flow diagram of the joint message-passing decoding algorithm.

where

represents the set of state pairs and corre-

sponding to the symbol .

Similarly, let the quantities

and

be the state

information in the th iteration that are passed up and down in

the crosstrack direction, respectively, for

. The

update of

and

can be implemented as

log-domain sum-product algorithm, the LLR value of each bit

is generated simultaneously and passed from the

variable node back to the state-processing node which can be

used to further update the a priori information

and

. The quantities

and

have a relation-

ship of

(11)

(15)

and The message-flow diagram of the joint message-passing

decoding algorithm is shown in Fig. 3. In this figure, the

(12) circles represent the variable nodes, and the squares represent

the check nodes. Each state-processing node corresponds to

The a priori symbol message

can be updated as

a bit and is therefore connected to a variable node. The joint

message-passing decoding algorithm can be summarized as (13) follows.

where the pair of states and and the symbol

Step 1) Initialization are

one-to-one mapping and can be mutually determined. The

binary information passed from the state-processing node to the variable node of LDPC codes is in the form of logarithmic likelihood ratio (LLR) which can be obtained via

; Calculate according to (5); 0. Step 2) Joint message-passing decoding:

a) For all state-processing nodes, execute

(6)–(13) simultaneously for

times, let

for each execution.

b) Pass the LLR information from the state-pro-

cessing nodes to the variable nodes.

c) For all bits, simultaneously execute variable

(14)

node updates and check node updates for

times according to the sum-product algorithm.

where the notation

represents the set of state pairs and

d) Use the refreshed probabilities to update

corresponding to

, and

is similarly defined.

and

.

Note that the LLR values

of all bits are Step 3) Repeat Step 2) for times. After each execution

generated simultaneously. Given the LLR information of each

of Step 2), tentative decoding takes place according

bit, a parallel LDPC decoding algorithm is executed. The al-

to the a posteriori information of the LDPC codes.

gorithm consists of many independent variable-node updates

If the estimated codeword corresponds to a valid

and check-node updates [22]. After times execution of the

codeword, end the algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

678

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

TABLE I LLR VALUES DURING THE ITERATIONS

B. Computation of the Mutual Information
For an array of binary bits whose LLR values approximate Gaussian distribution with mean and variance , the probability density function (pdf) of the LLR values satisfies

(18)

which has the condition

(19)

Note that for a fix number of iterations in the state-pro-

cessing node update, a bit is detected based on the adjacent bits

which form a window of size

. When

is increased, more information is used to detect one bit; thus,

the reliability becomes higher but the corresponding delay and

computational cost also increase.

IV. EXIT CHART OF THE ITERATIVE DECODING SYSTEM
In this section, we introduce the EXIT chart which is a useful tool to trace the asymptotic convergence behavior of iterative decoding systems [18], [19]. The proposed iterative decoding system consists of two constituent parts, namely, the state-processing nodes and the variable-check nodes of the LDPC codes. The relationships of the input and output mutual information of each constituent part are produced independently. Thus, an EXIT chart consists of two curves based on which a trajectory of the iterative decoding system can be drawn and the asymptotic convergence behavior of the system can be observed.

For each constituent part, the mutual information between the recorded data and their input LLR values passed during the iterative decoding is defined as

(20)

With (18) and (19), (20) becomes

(21)

Note that

is monotonically increasing with and, thus, is

reversible. The mutual information between the recorded data

and output LLR values of each constituent part are calculated

by

A. Validation of Gaussian Approximation
In order to apply the EXIT chart method, a very important assumption needs to be first validated. The input LLR values to each constituent part during the iterations should maintain a Gaussian distribution [18] with

(22)

where

is the pdf of the extrinsic LLRs obtained by

Monte Carlo simulation.

(16) C. EXIT Chart-Generating Algorithm

where is the recorded bit, is a Gaussian-distributed variable

with zero mean and variance .

Let the LLR values passing from state-processing nodes to

variable nodes be denoted as

and let the LLR values

passing from variable nodes to state-processing nodes be de-

noted as

.

and

can be observed to well ap-

proximate the Gaussian distribution. Table I shows the average

means and variances of

and

at

3 dB. The values are averaged over a large number of samples,

and the numbers of iterations are set to

3 and

3. The

2-D ISI channel used here is [15]

The EXIT chart can be used to visualize the exchange of information during the iterative decoding. In the EXIT chart, there are two curves representing the relationships of the mutual information between the input and output for the state-processing nodes and variable-check nodes, respectively. The algorithm of generating the EXIT chart is summarized as follows.
• For the state-processing nodes: Step a) Randomly choose an array . For a given value, generate an array of AWGN . For a fixed channel response matrix, the readback array can be obtained from and via (3). Step b) For given input mutual information , compute

the mean value . Randomly generate an array of

(17)

Gaussian variables with zero mean and variance .

The input LLR values

can be obtained via

(16).

We adopt the LDPC code

[23]. It can be observed

Step c) Based on the readback signal and input LLR

that the mean values are approximately equal to half of the vari-

values

, execute the state-processing detec-

ance values. These results validate the assumption that the LLR

tion algorithm (6)–(13) for times, and collect the

values satisfy the Gaussian approximation as (16).

generated values

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YAO et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND 2-D ISI CHANNELS

679

Step d) Repeat Steps a)–c) for a sufficient number of times.

Obtain the pdf

of the LLR values

and

calculate the output mutual information according

to (22).

Step e) For different input mutual information

,

repeat Steps a)–d) to obtain the corresponding output

mutual information . The mutual information curve

for state-processing nodes is plotted by putting input

on the abscissa and output on the ordinate.

• For the variable-check nodes:

The mutual information curve for variable-check nodes of

the LDPC code can be obtained similarly. Note that there

are two differences. First, the variable-check node updates

in the LDPC code are only dependent on the input LLR

values from the state-processing nodes. Thus, the

value of the channel does not serve as a parameter of the Fig. 4. EXIT chart and trajectory of the joint message-passing decoding curve. Second, for the EXIT curve of variable-check nodes, system.

the axes are swapped (i.e., the input and output mutual in-

formation is put on the ordinate and abscissa, respectively).

Initially, the state-processing nodes work with zero a priori

information

and produce

purely based on the

readback signal. The output

of state-processing nodes

is passed to the variable nodes and serves as an input to the

variable-check node updates. The generated output

of

variable-check nodes is further fed back to the state-processing

nodes and serve as a priori information in the next iteration. This

process is repeated until the number of iterations exceeds or

no mutual information is further updated, which corresponds to

an intersection of the two EXIT curves in the EXIT chart.

Using the previous introduced algorithm, an example of the

EXIT chart is generated and plotted in Fig. 4. For the EXIT

curve of the state-processing nodes, we let

3.5 dB,

3 and adopt the channel . The EXIT curve of the vari-

able-check nodes is based on the LDPC code

with

8. A trajectory of the iterative decoding system is also

plotted in Fig. 4. The trajectory is obtained by free-running the

simulation and tracking the mutual information during each it-

eration according to (22). It can be observed in Fig. 4 that the

trajectory matches well with the EXIT curves. This confirms the

validity of the EXIT chart in analyzing the behavior of the pro-

1 but nowhere else. This requires that the EXIT curve of

the state-processing nodes lies higher and the EXIT curve of the

variable-check nodes lies flatter and lower in the EXIT chart.

In the following text, we analyze the effects of parameters on

the individual EXIT curves which determine the convergence

behavior and performance of the iterative decoding system.

There are three parameters that can affect the EXIT curve of

the state-processing nodes, namely, the number of iterations

and the channel-response matrix. The effects of these

three parameters are demonstrated in Fig. 5. First, in Fig. 5, we

adopt channel and fix

3 dB to analyze the effect

of . It can be observed that the EXIT curves for different

are generally in parallel. When is increased, the EXIT curve

moves up. But when

, increasing can hardly change

the EXIT curve. Some EXIT curves with channel and

3, but different

are plotted in Fig. 5. It can be observed

that the EXIT curves for different

are in parallel, and

equal differences in

result in almost equal intervals in

the EXIT curves. Finally, we fix

3 dB and

3

and compare the EXIT curve of channel and that of another

channel [15]

posed iterative decoding system. Note that the EXIT curves of

state-processing nodes and variable-check nodes are generated independently. Thus, in the following text, we can investigate

(23)

the convergence behavior of the proposed iterative decoding

system by analyzing the individual EXIT curves independently. It can be observed that as the interference level of becomes

smaller, the corresponding EXIT curve lies upper.

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

There are two parameters that can affect the EXIT curve of the variable-check nodes of the LDPC codes. The first one is the

In this section, we use the EXIT chart to analyze the conver- code structure, including code rate, code length, column-weight,

gence behavior of the joint message-passing decoding system. row-weight, etc., which are predetermined at the encoding part

Simulation results are also presented for the optimization of the and cannot be controlled at the decoding side. The other param-

iteration scheme and performance comparisons.

eter is the number of iterations which can be controlled at the

A. Effects of Parameters on the EXIT Curves

decoding part. Fig. 6 shows the effects of the two parameters on the EXIT curve of the variable-check nodes. Here, we adopt two

In the EXIT chart, a larger value of the mutual information LDPC codes, namely, (1008, 504) and (1998, 222), with a code

means the bits become known with higher confidence. Thus, rate of 0.5 and 0.89, respectively [23]. It can be observed that as

the iterative decoding system will produce correct decisions of the LDPC code (1998, 222) has a higher code rate, it lies higher

the recorded bits if and only if the two EXIT curves intersect at in the EXIT chart. It has been proved in [24] that the area under

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013

Fig. 5. Effects of parameters on the EXIT curve of state-processing nodes.

Fig. 7. Simulation results for different combinations of the number of iterations.

and that can be combined to produce the best perfor-

mance. Since is the number of outer iterations in which the

state-processing iterations and variable-check iterations are ex-

ecuted for and times, respectively, we fix

to

50 and optimize the number of iterations by simulation. Fig. 7

shows some bit-error rate (BER) results for different combina-

tions of

, and and we denote the number of iterations

as

in the figure. It can be observed that for the LDPC

code

, the best performance is achieved by setting

8,

2, and

5. The combination of 7/3/5 per-

forms slightly worse than 8/2/5 and the combination of 3/2/10

performs more than 1 dB worse than the other two iteration

Fig. 6. Effects of parameters on the EXIT curve of variable-check nodes.

schemes. For the LDPC code (1998, 222), the three different iteration schemes perform very closely. Among the three itera-

tion schemes, 7/3/5 has the best BER performance but the per-

the EXIT curve of an ECC is roughly equal to the code rate of the

ECC. Thus, if we combine an LDPC code of a higher code rate

with the state-processing nodes, a higher value of

is re-

quired in order to make the iterative decoding system converge

to the correct result. It can also be observed that a larger number

of iterations in the decoding of the LDPC code can make the

EXIT curve flatter. But the difference becomes smaller as

increases. Moreover, the number of iterations has a bigger

impact on the EXIT curve for LDPC code (1008, 504) than that

for LDPC code (1998, 222).

formance gain is very marginal compared with the other two. The reason why the LDPC codes (1008, 504) and (1998, 222) perform so differently is because the decoding of LDPC code (1008, 504) is very sensitive to the number of iterations as shown in Fig. 6. Thus, different values of can result in big performance differences for LDPC code (1008, 504). On the other hand, the number of iterations does not affect the decoding of LDPC code (1998, 222) much and, thus, different iteration schemes perform closely for the LDPC code (1998, 222).
Next, we compare the BER performance of the proposed joint message-passing decoding algorithm with the MCMC-based

algorithm. For a fair comparison, in both systems, the LDPC

B. Performance Comparisons

code

is adopted with 50 decoding iterations, and

the number of outer iterations between channel detector and

There are three types of iterations introduced in the proposed LDPC decoder is set to 5. Fig. 8 shows the BER performance

joint message-passing decoding algorithm, namely, the itera- comparisons of the two systems based on both channels

tions between the state-processing nodes, the iterations between and . It can be observed that as the interference level is

the variable and check nodes, and the iterations between the smaller for channel , both systems perform better with

state-processing nodes and variable-check nodes. As shown in channel than with channel . For both channels and

the previous results, system performance can generally improve

, our proposed iterative decoding algorithm achieves about

as the number of iterations increases. But we are further in- 0.3 dB performance gain over the MCMC-based algorithm at a

terested in the relationship between the numbers of iterations BER of . This demonstrates the superior performance of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YAO et al.: JOINT MESSAGE-PASSING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND 2-D ISI CHANNELS

681

Fig. 8. Performance comparisons of the proposed joint message-passing decoding algorithm with the MCMC-based algorithm.
our proposed joint message-passing decoding algorithm over 2-D ISI channels.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a joint message-passing decoding algorithm to decode LDPC codes over 2-D ISI channels. The iterative decoding algorithm mainly consists of two types of nodes, namely, state-processing nodes and variable-check nodes. In the state-processing node update, two types of state information are passed in the downtrack direction and crosstrack direction, respectively. All state-processing nodes generate the soft information of the corresponding bits and pass them to the variable nodes simultaneously. A parallel LDPC decoding algorithm is executed which generates extrinsic information and feeds back the information to the state-processing nodes. An advantage of the joint message-passing decoding algorithm is that the algorithm can be implemented in a fully parallel manner, leading to a high-speed decoder. The EXIT chart is also introduced in this paper to analyze the convergence behavior of the proposed decoding algorithm. In the EXIT chart, two EXIT curves corresponding to the state-processing nodes and variable-check nodes are obtained independently. The effects of parameters to the decoding system have been investigated by analyzing the individual EXIT curves. Finally, simulation results have been presented for the optimization of the iteration scheme and performance comparisons. It has been shown that the proposed joint message-passing decoding algorithm outperforms the MCMC-based algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Wood, M. Williams, A. Kavcic, and J. Miles, “The feasibility of magnetic recording at 10 Terabits per square inch on conventional media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 917–923, Feb. 2009.

[2] A. H. J. Immink, W. M. J. Coene, A. M. van der Lee, C. Busch, A. P. Hekstra, J. W. M. Bergmans, J. Riani, S. J. L. V. Beneden, and T. Conway, “Signal processing and coding for two-dimensional optical storage,” in Proc. IEEE GlobComm., Dec. 2003, pp. 3904–3908.
[3] R. E. Rottmayer, S. Batra, D. Buechel, W. A. Challener, J. Hohlfeld, Y. Kubota, L. Li, B. Lu, C. Mihalcea, K. Mountfield, K. Pelhos, C. Peng, T. Rausch, M. A. Seigler, D. Weller, and X. Yang, “Heat-assisted magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2417–2421, Oct. 2006.
[4] R. L. White, R. M. H. New, and R. F. W. Pease, “Patterned media: A viable route to 50 Gbit/in and up for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 990–995, Jan. 1997.
[5] P. W. Nutter, I. T. Ntokas, and B. K. Middleton, “An investigation of the effects of media characteristics on read channel performance for patterned media storage,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4327–4334, Nov. 2005.
[6] E. Ordentlich and R. M. Roth, “On the computational complexity of 2D maximum-likelihood sequence detection” HP Labs, Tech. Rep. HPL2006-69, 2006.
[7] J. Yao, K. C. Teh, and K. H. Li, “Performance evaluation of maximumlikelihood page detection for 2D interference channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 48, no. 7, pp. 2239–2242, Jul. 2012.
[8] M. Keskinoz, “Two-dimensional equalization/detection for patterned media storage,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 533–539, Apr. 2008.
[9] S. Nabavi, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and J. G. Zhu, “Modifying Viterbi algorithm to mitigate intertrack interference in bit-patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2274–2276, Jun. 2007.
[10] S. Karakulak, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, and H. N. Bertram, “Joint-track equalization and detection for bit patterned media recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 3639–3647, Sep. 2010.
[11] Y. Wu, J. A. O’Sullivan, N. Singla, and R. S. Indeck, “Iterative detection and decoding for separable two-dimensional intersymbol interference,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 2115–2120, Jul. 2003.
[12] T. Cheng, B. J. Belzer, and K. Sivakumar, “Row-column soft-decision feedback algorithm for two-dimensional intersymbol interference,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 433–436, Jul. 2007.
[13] Y. Zhu, T. Cheng, K. Sivakumar, and B. J. Belzer, “Markov random field detection on two-dimensional intersymbol interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 2639–2648, Jul. 2008.
[14] J. Yao, K. C. Teh, and K. H. Li, “Joint iterative detection/decoding scheme for discrete two-dimensional interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3548–3555, Dec. 2012.
[15] M. Shaghaghi, K. Cai, Y. L. Guan, and Z. L. Qin, “Markov chain Monte Carlo based detection for two-dimensional intersymbol interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 471–478, Feb. 2011.
[16] D. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[17] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[18] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[19] P. Tan and J. Li, “Finite-length extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) analysis for coded and precoded ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 648–655, May 2008.
[20] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[21] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and suboptimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[22] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftherious, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 1036–1036E.
[23] D. Mackay, Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes. [Online]. Available: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[24] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. Ten Brink, “Code rate and the area under extrinsic information transfer curves,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2002, p. 115.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:15:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

