62

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 2, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2013

Distributed Network-Channel Codes Design with Short Cycles Removal
Kun Pang, Zihuai Lin, Yonghui Li and Branka Vucetic

Abstract—In this paper, we address short cycle effects in the distributed low density generator matrix (LDGM) codes. As a codeword is formed from various nodes, the decentralized code construction makes it difficult to eliminate short cycles, resulting in a degraded code performance. To mitigate this effect, we propose a distributed algorithm which can eliminate short cycles within the network. The complexity of the proposed algorithm is a linear function of the number of relay nodes in the network. The simulation results show that the code performance can lower the error floor of irregular LDGM codes significantly, when all short cycles have been removed.
Index Terms—distributed network-channel coding (DNCC), LDGM codes, short cycles removal, WSN.
I. INTRODUCTION
A GRAPH code based adaptive network coded cooperation (ANCC) scheme was proposed in [1], to match real-time network topology to low-density parity-check (LDPC) and other graph codes. The performance of LDPC codes depends on a number of graph properties. One key property is short cycles, which are described by two parameters, the length and the number of short cycles. A cycle is a closed path along edges in the code graph. In LDPC codes, the length of the shortest cycle is 4. When there are short cycles in a code graph, iterative decoder inputs become correlated after two iterations, leading to a degradation of the performance of the sumproduct algorithm (SPA) [2]. It is well known that 4-cycles dominate the code performance, so most existing LDPC codes are constructed by avoiding 4-cycles [3]. Some approaches have been proposed for constructing finite-length LDPC codes to mitigate the effect of short cycles [4], [5] and [6]. As an example, the progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm builds up an LDPC code on an edge-by-edge basis by progressively establishing edges between variable and check nodes.
While the PEG approach is effective for conventional LDPC codes, it is, however, very difficult to remove short cycles during the generation of distributed network-channel coding (DNCC), due to the de-centralized nature of the code construction. In this paper, we propose a distributed algorithm for removing short cycles. It consists of optimizing degree distributions of source nodes, subject to a fixed degree condition at relay nodes [7], [8], [9]. The designed code degree distribution is Λ(x) = 0.23x + 0.4573x4 + 0.3127x19, and P (x) = x8 [7], where Λ(x) and P (x) of source and relay
Manuscript received August 28, 2012. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was A. Conti.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia (e-mail: {kpang, zihuai, lyh, branka}@ee.usyd.edu.au).
This research work is supported by Australian Research Council under Grant No. DP 120100405, LP 110100110 and the University of Sydney bridging support grant.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/WCL.2012.102512.120626

nodes in a network are defined to be the fraction of nodes in the network with degree x. Source and relay nodes in the network correspond to the variable and check nodes in the code graph. We focus only on removing 4-cycles in the code design. Codes are constructed in such a way that no 4-cycles are introduced, by selecting source nodes which participate in the check equations at a relay node. Furthermore, the selection of source nodes satisfies a predetermined degree distribution. This removal process provides a significant performance gain, compared with the DNCC codes with 4-cycles. The source node’s degree is assigned in a distributed way, in which each node selects a degree based on the designed code degree distribution function Λ(x). The fractions of source nodes with certain degree will follow the distribution function P (x).
II. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider a large wireless sensor network (WSN) with N terminals communicating with a common destination. We assume that the network consists of M source nodes and N − M relay nodes and all the source-to-destination, sourceto-relay and relay-to-destination channels are subject to a frequency-flat quasi-static Rayleigh fading. We further assume that all the transmission channels are spatially independent and the channel state information is known to the respective receiver but unknown to the transmitter. Let si and rj represent the ith source node and the jth relay node, respectively. In addition, we model all the terminals’ noise signals as complex Gaussian random variables with variance per real dimension of N0/2. The transmit SNR, from si to rj, is defined as γi,j = Es/N0, where Es is the energy per transmitted symbol. For simplicity, we use a BPSK modulation scheme. The transmitted signal is xi = (−1)c ∈ {±1}, where c ∈ {0, 1} is the transmitted binary symbol. In each round, the overall transmission is carried out in time division manner in a two time phases, broadcast and cooperative phases.
In the broadcast phase, each source node si, i ∈ {1, · · · , M }, broadcasts sequentially its packets to the destination and relay nodes. Each relay node receives packets from the source nodes, and checks the correctness of the decoded packets by using cycle redundance check (CRC) codes. The relay node rj stores the eligible source nodes’ index into its retrieval-set Fj. Since the number of source nodes in the system is much larger than the number drj of source nodes being selected by the relay node rj, it is always possible that Fj ≥ drj , where |Fj| represents the size of the retrieval-set Fj . For each relay node, the connectivity and retrieval-set are fixed within one packet and change packet by packet.
In the cooperative phase, each relay node selects a number of source packets from its retrieval-set. The selection of source nodes at each relay node is determined by their predetermined

2162-2337/13$31.00 c 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PANG et al.: DISTRIBUTED NETWORK-CHANNEL CODES DESIGN WITH SHORT CYCLES REMOVAL

63

Fig. 1. A Tanner graph derived from the system model, which consists of M systematic bits si, i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , M }, corresponding to the M source nodes and N − M coded bits. {cN−M } are the check nodes associated with the syndromes. All the coded bits have degree 1 and are associated with their
corresponding check nodes.

Fig. 2. An example of 6 source nodes, 6 relay nodes with a final length-
12 LDGM code formed at the sink, where nodes r0, r4, s1 and s2 form an intercluster 4-cycle in the graph; and nodes r1, r2, s0 and s3 form an intracluster 4-cycle in the graph, respectively.

degree distribution polynomials Λ(x) and P (x), obtained from the code design procedure based on extrinsic information B. Algorithm Description

transfer charts. A hard decision is made according to the In the proposed decentralized code construction, each relay

selected source packets. Then each relay node performs binary summation in the field of GF(2) to form a networkcoded packet. When each relay node forwards data, a small header, which contains the index and degree distribution of the selected source nodes, will be included in each packet, so that the destination knows how the checks are formed and can correspondingly replicate the code graph and perform message-passing decoding. The number of selected source nodes depends on the relay node degree distribution dr, which is a quite small number irrespective of the formed matrix size.

node selects source nodes in order to form a graph code. To simplify the code construction, the network is partitioned into several clusters. Within a cluster when a relay node is forwarding a check-sum packet to the destination, the remaining relay nodes listen to what it sends and decode the header information from the transmitting relay node. By doing this the network topology knowledge (NTK), which is also referred to as a signalling, can be spread among the nodes. The NTK contains the available degrees and the index of the selected source node. We assume the relay nodes transmit in a

At the destination, an irregular systematic low density time division multiple access manner and follow the assigned

generator matrix (LDGM) code is obtained by combining the time slots. For simplicity, we only consider the case that the

received information packets from the broadcast phase and the partitioned cluster is fixed. According to the concept of the

network-coded packets from the cooperative phase. Based on cluster, two 4-cycle definitions are given.

the header’s information, the destination can correspondingly An intercluster 4-cycle: a sequence of connections between

form the code graph and perform SPA to decode the formed codeword. Due to the time-varying fading channels in the wireless network, within each transmission round, the formed LDGM code is generated on-the-fly to match the instantaneous

source and relay nodes (i.e. sa, sb, rm and rn) in the network, which starts and ends at the relay node rm. In the formed links, these two relay nodes (rm and rn) are in different clusters.
An intracluster 4-cycle: a sequence of connections between

network topology. Thus, an ensemble of codes is obtained after source and relay nodes (i.e. sa, sb, rm and rn) in the network,

the whole transmission is finished. The designed code is based which starts and ends at the relay node rm. In the formed links,

on the “ensemble average” performance.

these two relay nodes (rm and rn) are within a cluster.

We consider two kinds of NTKs, which deal with the in-

tercluster 4-cycle and intracluster 4-cycle problems. A partial

III. DISTRIBUTED 4-CYCLE REMOVAL ALGORITHM

NTK contains the available degree information on the selected

source nodes within and across clusters and connection infor-

A. Notations
A link between an eligible source node si and relay node rj corresponds to a non-zero entry hj,i = 0 at the jth row and the ith column in the parity-check matrix H. Matrix H

mation of the connected source and relay nodes within the cluster. When the relay node rj outside the cluster tries to establish a connection with the source nodes inside the cluster, the new connection may introduce an intercluster 4-cycle. On the other hand, a complete NTK contains the available degree

can be represented by a Tanner graph, where the left part information on the selected source nodes and connection in-

of the graph consists of source nodes, which correspond to formation of the connected source and relay nodes within and

information packets of the code, and the right part of the graph, across clusters. With this type of NTK, selecting an eligible

which consists of relay nodes corresponding to network-coded source node at rj will not introduce any intercluster and

packets, as shown in Fig. 1. We denote by Ψj a set of rj’s intracluster 4-cycle into the whole network. In the proposed

connected links with source nodes and (rj , si) ∈ Ψj. All the algorithm, two strategies are considered respectively for the

source nodes in Ψj, which are adjacent to rj , are called rj’s different NTK scenarios:

neighbors. For a given relay node rj, define its neighborhood

within depth l, Nrlj , as the set consisting of all the eligible

source nodes reached by a tree spreading from relay node rj

within

depth

l

in

the

cluster

[4].

Furthermore,

we

let

N

l rj

represent

the

complementary

set

of

Nrlj ,

N

l rj

Nrlj = Fj .

• Strategy 1 focuses on removing intracluster 4-cycle only if the partial NTK is available.
• Strategy 2 focuses on removing intercluster 4-cycle and intracluster 4-cycle if the complete NTK is accessible.
We also provide some explanations on the selection of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

64

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 2, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2013

source nodes. The connection between relay and source nodes
has to follow their designed degree distributions. The source node si with a particular degree, i.e. d(si) = t, cannot be selected more than t times by relay nodes. To avoid si being over-selected, a counter variable, du(si), is introduced, to

TABLE I THE SUMMARY OF COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY.

Irregular codes decoding Proposed algorithm of Strategy 1 Proposed algorithm of Strategy 2

O(n) O(|C|(ds − 1)d2r + n) O(n(ds − 1)d2r + n)

count the number of connections to si, during the selection

procedure. In the proposed algorithm, the selection procedure

between the relay and source nodes always chooses a can-

didate

source

node

in

the

set

of

N

l rj

,

which

is

the

comple-

mentary set of all the eligible source nodes. The relay node

selects the source node si, i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , M } subsequently

according to its index in the network. It happens that some

source nodes have no available degrees left after a certain

number of selection procedures. In this situation, the relay

node

picks

up

the

next

available

source

node

si+1

from

N

l rj

.

The distributed algorithm describes the code construction

procedure to remove 4-cycles. By setting the essential pa-

rameters of the network, such as the source nodes degree

N

l+1 rj

=

φ.

2.1.3 Check si to avoid any intracluster 4-cycle and

du(si) = 0. If either of the conditions fails, increase

the index of si by 1 and pick up another si+1 from

N

l rj

.

Otherwise,

select

an

eligible

si

from

N

l rj

.

2.1.4 Form the kth connected link Ψjk with the chosen

source node from step 2.1.3. The selection will stop

when k reaches the designed relay node degree drj . Reduce du(si) by 1.
2.2 Repeat step 2.1 until j = |C|.

3. Repeat step 2. until IC = Cn.

distribution ds(i), i ∈ {2, · · · , M }, the number of clusters in a network with a uniform size |C|, Cn = (N − M )/|C| and a counter variable du(si) = ds(i), the first connection between relay and source nodes, denoted by Ψ1j , is established by selecting an eligible source node si from the relay node rj’s retrieval-set Fj. After that, the available degree du(si)

is reduced by 1 and this updated counter information will

be broadcast to other relay nodes. Based on the relay node

rj, the graph grows by expanding the connections as the tree

branches, up to depth l under the cluster setting, such that

the cardinality of Nrlj stops increasing but is less than j, or

N

l rj

=

φ

but

N

l+1 rj

=

φ.

During the graph construction, the selection of any source

nodes has to meet two conditions simultaneously. 1) The

connection with a source node si will not introduce any intracluster 4-cycles in the code graph. Otherwise, si will be

discarded and the selection keeps going until an eligible source

C. Signalling Overhead
As each relay node connects to dr source nodes, the amount of the signalling overhead shared among the relay nodes within the network, can be calculated as Ls = drlog2M bits, where M is the number of source nodes. Compared with the information message, Ls is much smaller. Therefore, the throughput loss due to the signalling overhead can be neglected. The total amount of signalling overhead within the network is Lns = ndrlog2M , n = N − M . The more powerful LDGM codes are constructed in terms of the BER performance especially at medium to high SNR region if the dr increases, but the complexity of exchanging such signalling information is also linearly increased. When the number of source nodes M is fixed, the amount of signaling Ls only depends on dr.

node si+1 has been connected. 2) The degree of any source

node si needs to be checked before the selection. If there are

no available degrees left for this source node si, the relay node

rj

picks

up

another

source

node

si+1

from

N

l rj

,

such

that

the

kth connected link Ψjk is formed with the chosen source node.

The selection will stop when k reaches the specified relay node

degree drj . Then, the available degree du(si) is reduced by 1.

The latest NTK will be updated, and the procedure continues

with the selection of the next link between all the eligible source nodes and subsequent relay nodes in the cluster. The

underlying graph grows by optimizing each 4-cycle inside the cluster in a relay-by-relay method.

Summary of the Distributed 4-Cycle Removal Algorithm

1. Set initial parameters of the network ds(i), du(si) = ds(i), Cn = (N − M )/|C|.

2. Increase the index of a cluster IC by 1;

D. Computational Complexity
The computational complexity of the proposed 4-cycle
removal algorithm for Strategy 1 scheme can be approximated as O(|C|(ds − 1)dr2 + n), where |C| is the number of check nodes in the cluster, 2 ≤ |C| ≤ n, ds is the average degree distribution of the source node. The complexity of the irregular
codes (correspond to the optimized LDGM codes with 4cycle) decoding without removing 4-cycle is O(n) [10], which comes from the belief propagation decoding procedure. As the obtained degree distribution dr and ds are small numbers irrespective of n, e.g. dr = 9 and ds = 9, |C| is a predetermined value of cluster size. In the worst case, which corresponds to
the Strategy 2 scheme, the overall complexity to carry out the proposed algorithm is O(n(ds − 1)dr2 + n). Thus, the proposed algorithm only introduces complexity which is a linear function of the number of relay nodes n. Table III-D

2.1 Inside the cluster CIC , increase the index of rj by 1; gives a summary of the computational complexity for the

2.1.1 Select an eligible si from rj’s Fj to form the first proposed 4-cycles removal algorithm.

connected link Ψ1j . Reduce du(si) by 1.

2.1.2 Expand a tree from rj up to depth l under the

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

cluster setting, such that the cardinality of Nrlj stops In the simulation, there are 1000 source nodes and 1000

increasing,

but

is

less

than

j,

or

N

l rj

=

φ but

relay nodes in a WSN. The code rate is 1/2 and the length of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PANG et al.: DISTRIBUTED NETWORK-CHANNEL CODES DESIGN WITH SHORT CYCLES REMOVAL

65

Cluster size |C| 100 200 500 1000 Average number 40 140 405 1225
TABLE II THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF 4-CYCLES REMOVED INSIDE A CLUSTER

10−1 irregular codes with 4−cycles Strategy 2 result
10−2
10−3

BER BER

10−1 irregular codes with 4−cycles

Strategy 1 result with cluster size 100

Strategy 1 result with cluster size 200

10−2

Strategy 1 result with cluster size 500

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−4
10−5
10−6
10−7 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 Eb/No (dB)
Fig. 4. The performance comparison of the irregular codes with and without local 4-cycles in a network. The results of Strategy 2 are shown the improved result when a complete network topology exchange scheme is implemented.

10−6

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 3. The performance comparison of the irregular codes with and without local 4-cycles in a cluster. The results of Strategy 1 are shown the improved performance when the cluster size is increased with more partial network topology exchange.

the formed codeword at the sink is 2000. The formed network can be partitioned into a number of clusters. The number of relay nodes within each cluster is allocated from 100 to 1000.
Figs. 3 and 4 show the performance comparison of two strategies used in the proposed distributed 4-cycle removal algorithm. Please note that the curve of “irregular codes with 4-cycles” corresponds to the case that the cluster size is equal to 1 in strategy 1. In such a case, no intracluster 4-cycles can be removed. It can be seen that the performance of both strategies of removing 4-cycles gets improved. Both strategies are able to lower the error floor region.
We found that the achievements by adopting Strategy 1 (corresponding to intracluster 4-cycles removal) depend on the size of the cluster. In Fig. 3, we provide the simulation results for various sizes of a cluster, from 100 to 500. It can be easily seen from Table II that the bigger the size of a cluster is, the more intracluster 4-cycles can be removed and a better code performance can be achieved. The best result is obtained by setting a cluster size to 500. For Strategy 2, (corresponding to both intracluster and intercluster 4-cycles removal), since a full network topology can be shared within the network, all 4cycles can be removed. As shown in Fig. 4, at SN R = 5dB, Strategy 2 lowers the error floor from 3×10−5 of the irregular codes with 4-cycles to 6×10−6. The significance of this result should not be underestimated, considering that the LDGM codes have an intrinsic error floor.

4-cycles have been removed from the network, the designed codes can lower the error floor from 3 × 10−5 to 6 × 10−6 compared with the codes having 4-cycles. Please note that the benefits of the proposed techniques are dependent on the size of the cluster of relay nodes under the assumption that relay nodes can perfectly hear each other. In real applications, the feasible size of the cluster depends on the number of nodes which are actually able to hear all the others in the cluster.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Bao and J. Li, “Adaptive network coded cooperation (ANCC) for wireless relay networks: matching code-on-graph with network-on-graph,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 574–583, Feb. 2008.
[2] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[3] D. Mackay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[5] L. Lan, Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A trellis-based method for removing cycles from bipartite graphs and construction of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 443–445, July 2004.
[6] S. Bandi, V. Tralli, A. Conti, and M. Nonato, “On girth conditioning for low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 357–362, Feb. 2011.
[7] K. Pang, Z. Lin, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic, “Design of distributed networkchannel codes for wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. 2011 IEEE ICC, pp. 1–5.
[8] K. Pang, Z. Lin, B. F. Uchoa-Filho, and B. Vucetic, “Distributed network coding for wireless sensor networks based on rateless LT codes,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., Issue 99, Aug. 2012, pp. 1–4.
[9] K. Pang, Z. Lin, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic, “Joint network-channel code design for real wireless relay networks,” in Proc. 2010 International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing, pp. 429– 433.
[10] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error Control Coding Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd edition. Prentice Hall, 2004.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a distributed short cycle removal algorithm for the design of DNCC, based on a code network graph matching principle. Both the quality and availability of selected source nodes are considered during the code construction procedure, based on eliminating 4-cycles in the code graph. The simulation results show that the code performance gets improved when the cluster size increases. When all the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:16:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

