IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

6779

Design and Performance Evaluation for BILCM-ID System With Improved Stopping Criterion
Xuhui Ding , Member, IEEE, Yuchen Xu , Gaoyang Li , Kai Yang , Member, IEEE, Jinhong Yuan , Fellow, IEEE,
and Jianping An , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes characterize both a relatively low decoding complexity and a performance nearing the Shannon limit. The integration of channel coding with modulation, known as bitinterleaved coded modulation (BICM), is widely utilized in communication and broadcasting systems. In particular, iterative message passing processes between soft demapper and decoder have proven effective in improving the bit error rate (BER) performance in the bit-interleaved LDPC coded modulation with iterative decoding (BILCM-ID) systems. This study proposes a novel approach for representing the iterative state in the probability domain for high-order modulation within the BILCM-ID process. Additionally, our methods introduce an improved stopping criterion based on the normalized belief evolution pattern (NBEP). Simulation analyses demonstrate that, compared to conventional hard-decision methods, the proposed algorithm can reduce ineffective iteration delay by approximately 88% with negligible degradation in BER performance.
Index Terms—BILCM-ID, channel coding, LDPC, factor graphs (FGs), stopping criterion.
I. INTRODUCTION
The escalating demand for high spectrum efficiency has led to a surge in research on high-order modulation techniques [1], which, in turn, has led to challenges in maintaining low bit error rate (BER) performance. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have garnered significant attention due to their capability to approach the Shannon limit, making them a popular choice among various advanced channel coding methods. The integration of high-order modulation techniques and robust channel coding through bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) systems has become a prominent area of research.
Wireless communication systems fundamentally necessitate high spectrum efficiency; consequently, advanced modulation schemes are
Received 4 March 2024; revised 8 September 2024; accepted 10 December 2024. Date of publication 23 December 2024; date of current version 18 April 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFC3305904, in part by the National Natural Scientific Foundation of China under Grant U23B2005, Grant 62301049, Grant 62371047, and Grant 62401044, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province of China under Grant ZR2024QF028, in part by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant JQ23015, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant KG16315501. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof. Rui Dinis. (Corresponding authors: Kai Yang; Gaoyang Li.)
Xuhui Ding is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China, and also with the Advanced Technology Research Institute, Beijing Institute of Technology, Jinan 250101, China (e-mail: dingxuhui@bit.edu.cn).
Yuchen Xu and Jianping An are with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: xuyuchen@bit.edu.cn; an@bit.edu.cn).
Gaoyang Li is with the School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: ligaoyang@buaa.edu.cn).
Kai Yang is with the School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: yangkai@ieee.org).
Jinhong Yuan is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia (e-mail: j.yuan@unsw.edu.au).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3519540

typically employed to enhance spectrum utilization. The BICM system

can obtain high performance while improving bandwidth efficiency, so

it is of profound significance. In 1998, G. Caire conducted a metic-

ulous theoretical examination of the design methodology of BICM

systems [2]. Originally proposed by X. Li and J. A. Ritcey, the BICM

with iterative decoding (BICM-ID) system introduces a feedback loop

to facilitate information renewal [3]. Xie et al. [4] proposed two

simplified demappers based on amplitude phase shift keying (APSK)

constellations. Cheng et al. [5] introduced a three-stage full-parallel

receiver architecture in which each component decoder is separately

but simultaneously iteratively decoded. This structure can make full

use of computational resources to enhance system performance with-

out sacrificing throughput. In [6], D. Kekrt presented a new design

approach of low-complexity soft-output demodulation and demapping

for multi-level iterative decoding and high-order hierarchical quadra-

ture amplitude modulation (HQAM) schemes. This proposed solution

exploited two types of self-interference cancellation techniques that can

be efficiently implemented in mobile and wireless networks, achieving

lower BER across a wider signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) range. A novel

collaborative design framework for the differential chaotic BICM sys-

tem over multipath Rayleigh channels was proposed in [7]. In [8], A.

Chindapol and J. A. Ritcey have proposed, analyzed, and evaluated

a novel approach to the design of BICM-ID that validates robust

performance over both AWGN and Rayleigh fading channel with a

properly designed 16QAM modulation type. Therefore, the research on

graphical modeling and belief propagation (BP) algorithms for BICM is

of great value. In this study, we explore the bit-interleaved LDPC coded

modulation with iterative decoding (BILCM-ID) system to replace the

traditional convolutional code with LDPC code, so as to improve the

iterative receiver performance.

Conventional iterative convergence analysis methodologies encom-

pass well-established techniques such as extrinsic information transfer

(EXIT) charts [9], density evolution [10], and Gaussian approximation

methods [11], etc. In response to the increasing adoption of real-time

online iterative processing architectures, researchers have endeavored

to investigate iterative decoding stopping criteria for a range of channel

codes [12], [13], [14]. While the stopping criteria for LDPC codes

have been extensively studied with a focus on variable nodes, the

research on probability domain convergence detection methods and

stopping criterion algorithms for the BILCM-ID system remains largely

underdeveloped, particularly considering its intricate iterative process.

TrheAmn aiminpcroonvterdibouptieonn-sloaorpe

summarized factor graph

as follows. with “detection

nodes”

for

the BILCM-ID system is proposed, and a specialized message

r

passing algorithm in the probability domain is given on this basis. In the BILCM-ID system, we establish a unified representation

form of normalized belief evolution pattern (NBEP), through

whose evolution patterns we can directly map states of the iterative

r

processor and optimize the steps of iteration. Based on the probability domain NBEP, we

propose

an

im-

proved stopping criterion (ISC) based BILCM-ID algorithm.

The proposed algorithm evaluates the iteration process through

joint threshold judgment and convergence monitoring from both

“inner” and “external” iteration processes. The proposed method

can reduce the average processing delay by up to 88% with almost

no performance loss.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II introduces

the system model of the BILCM-ID system. Section III investigates

0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

and the k-th constellation mapping point. The LDPC decoder in the BILCM system is the same as the conventional BP decoder.
The decision rule that optimally minimizes the average bit error probability is delineated in [15] as

Fig. 1. BILCM-ID system model.

the manifest representation method of iterative states in the probability domain. Section IV introduces an improved stopping criterion for the BILCM-ID system, accompanied by a comprehensive algorithm design and simulation validation. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL
The proposed system model, depicted in Fig. 1, incorporates an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel as the channel model. Moreover, log-likelihood ratios (LLR) are adopted for explaining the system model, whereas probability representations are utilized for algorithm design. Throughout the iterative process, LM,a denotes the soft prior information fed back to the demodulator, while LD,a represents the input to the decoder. The decoder’s output LD,p is integrated with the prior information, followed by a bit interleaving process to form LM,a once again. Thus, the soft output information from the demapper can be described as

p xit = b = Kipa xit = b

⎛

⎞

·

⎜⎝p (yt = ϕk)

m−1

p xtj = bj ⎠⎟, (1)

ϕk ∈χib

j=0,j=i,ϕkj =bj

where xit represents the i-th bit of the t-th symbol with b ∈ {0, 1}, yt represents the t-th receiver noisy symbol, m represents the modulation
order, χbi represents the set of constellation points ϕk on the constellation mapping chart χ, where the i-th bit of the constellation point is

b, and Ki is the normalization factor ensuring the completeness of the

probability space. Initial bits can be viewed as uniform distribution,

i.e.,

p(xti

=

0)

=

p(xit

=

1)

=

1 2

.

In [2], it is stated that Gray labeling has been considered to be

optimal for traditional BICM. This paper also adopts the Gray mapping

approach. Since the channel is a complex AWGN channel, the noise n

follows a Gaussian distribution N (0, σn2 ), so z = y + n. According to the probability density function of Gaussian distribution, the initial

symbolic probability is expressed as

p (zt

|ϕk )

=

1 2πσn2

exp

−

|zt

− ϕk 2σn2

|2

,

(2)

p(yt = ϕk) =

p (zt|ϕk)

2m −1 j=0

p

(zt|ϕj

)

,

(3)

where zt denotes the t-th symbol received, m is the modulation order, and |zt − ϕk| represents the Euclidean distance between this symbol

mˆ i = arg max p (mi|z) ,

(4)

mi

where p(mi|z) represents the a posteriori probability mass function (PMF) for the i-th information bit mi conditioned on the received symbol vector z. Let p(m|z) denote the joint posterior probability distribution function of the information bits m given z. To extract the desired p(mi|z), one must perform marginalization over p(m|z) excluding the variable mi, which is formalized in (5). Typically, one can achieve low-complexity approximation through the employment of
the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) applied on the factor graph of the probability function p(m|z), demonstrated as

p (mi|z) =

p (m|z).

(5)

m\mi

The posterior probability in (5) can be factored as

p (m|z) =

p (z|m) p (m) p (z)

∝

p (z|m) p (m)

= I [c = q (m)] p (z|c) p (m)

= I [x = π (c)] I [c = q (m)] p (z|x) p (m)

= I [y = φ (x)] I [x = π (c)] I [c = q (m)] p (z|y) p (m) , (6)

where I[·] denotes the Dirac function, φ(·) denotes mapping rules, π(·) denotes the bit interleaving algorithm, and q(·) denotes LDPC encoding constraints. Since p(m) is a constant value, the joint posterior probability can be expressed as

p (m|z) ∝ I [y = φ (x)] I [x = π (c)] I [c = q (m)] p (z|y) . (7)

III. NORMALIZED BELIEF EVOLUTION PATTERN IN THE BILCM SYSTEM
In this section, we first propose the concept of NBEP in the BILCM systems, and then analyze evolutionary behavior in the iterative process through numerical simulation.

A. NBEP Representation of BILCM System

We aim to establish a unified representation of certain parameters in the iterative process to reflect the convergence state. Referring to our previous work on iterative receiver [16], [17], belief characterization is able to indicate the state of an iterative process.
Specifically, we introduce a set of nodes GN s representing the syndrome that satisfies probability concerning the BILCM system as depicted in Fig. 2, in which GN s = {g1, g2, . . . , gm}. Accordingly, the open-form factor graph presents a one-to-one topology architecture connecting detection nodes GN s and check nodes CN s, where we adopt the probability mass function (PMF) p(gi) to characterize the i-th syndrome satisfied probability.

p (Gsum)

=

1 m

m

phi→gi (gi = 0)

i=1

⎛

⎞

=1 m m

⎝fi (x)

pVj →Ci (xi)⎠.

(8)

i=1 ∼{gi}

Vj ∈N (Ci)\gi

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

6781

Fig. 2. Open-form factor graph for BILCM-ID system.
Taking into account complexity, performance, as well as universality, NBEP representation is chosen as the iterative indicator function, which means sum-normalization for all p(gi = 0) concerning detection nodes. To fully utilize the node information, the normalized addition operation is adopted as shown in (8), which ensures the smoothness and stability of evolutionary patterns. As in (8), Σ∼{gi} depicts the summation over all variable nodes except gi. N (Ci)\gi represents the set of all variable nodes connected to the check node Ci. fi(x) is an indicator function, denoted by IC (Ci) = δ(·), which equals 1 when the modulo-2 sum of all variable nodes connected to the check node equals 0. Finally, Σ represents the summation operation of overall detection nodes.
B. Evolution Patterns of NBEP Regarding BILCM-ID Process
We analyze the evolutionary patterns of NBEP through Monte Carlo simulation. Without loss of the generality, a CCSDS standard LDPC code with length of 240 and rate of 1/2 is adopted for observation [18]. According to the protocol, its check matrix is shown in (9), shown at the bottom of this page, where IM and 0M represent the identity matrix and zero matrix of order M respectively, and Πx is the x-th permutation matrix specified in the protocol. In the process of channel transmission, we punch the information sequence corresponding to the fourth column submatrix to meet the information rate of 1/2. As for modulation, 8PSK is achieved, and analysis results can also be applied to other high-order modulation schemes such as 16QAM, 32QAM, etc. Meanwhile, the BP decoding algorithm is chosen with the maximum number of 30 for “inner” iteration, and 3 for “external” iteration in this scenario. In BILCM-ID systems, iterative feedback operation taking place between the decoder and demodulator is deemed as the external iteration, while the original LDPC decoding process is designated as the inner iteration. Accordingly, the maximum numbers of inner and external iterations are set to 30 and 3, so that the total iteration number equals 90.
Evolutionary patterns of NBEP under different SNR are shown in Fig. 3. The subgraphs in Fig. 3 delineate the NBEP over the course of inner and external iterative processes related to LDPC decoding. Specifically, the left sub-graph exhibits the three-dimensional (3-D)

Fig. 3. The relationship between NBEP and the number of inner and external iterations over the AWGN channel. Rate-1/2 punctured code, 8PSK modulation. (a) Eb/N0 = 1 dB. (b) Eb/N0 = 4.5 dB.
progression of NBEP, where a gradient from dark blue to lighter shades such as green and yellow signifies an improvement in NBEP. On the other hand, the right sub-graph presents a two-dimensional (2-D) projection of the LDPC decoding progression. This projection derives from the 3-D diagram on the left, enabling a clearer and more intuitive visualization of belief updated patterns during inner iterations. The variation in curve colors within this 2-D representation correlates with the quantity of external iterations conducted. This method enhances the visual comprehension of the iterative influence on decoding confidence. In medium SNR regions (4.5 dB) as illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the NBEP converges to a position far below the probability of 1 when the frame undergoes the first external iteration. By reintroducing channel symbol information, the NBEP shows a significant increase. Similarly, evolutionary patterns in medium-to-low SNR region (0 dB ∼ 2 dB) are plotted in Fig. 3(a). In this case, the SNR is excessively low and renders nearly all received symbols erroneous. Therefore, external iteration does not generate a gain in this region.
IV. ENHANCED BILCM-ID PROCESS BASED ON STOPPING CRITERION
In this section, we analyze the iterative processing status corresponding to NBEP. An ISC-based BILCM-ID algorithm is proposed.
A. ISC-BILCM-ID Algorithm
As shown in Fig. 3, the NBEP characterizes the state of the iterative processor to some extent. Simulation results depicted in Fig. 3 identify three distinct iterative behaviors: (1) convergence to a correct codeword, (2) chaotic oscillation, and (3) convergence to an incorrect codeword. Contrary to traditional hard decision methodologies, which rely on syndrome judgment [19], our approach is characterized by detecting convergence patterns related to the BILCM-ID process. To ascertain the effectiveness, an extensive dataset of frames is analyzed to calculate

⎡ 0M

0M

0M

IM

IM ⊕ Π1 ⎤

H1/2 = ⎣⎢IM ⊕ Π8 IM ⊕ Π7 ⊕ Π6

0M

0M

IM

⎥⎦ .

(9)

0M

IM

IM ⊕ Π5 0M Π4 ⊕ Π3 ⊕ Π2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6782

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Algorithm 1: ISC-BILCM-ID Algorithm.

Fig. 4. Proportion of different BILCM frame types in iteration. (a) Converging to an incorrect codeword. (b) Converging to a correct codeword.

the proportion of invalid iterations, the results of which are illustrated in Fig. 4. It is observed that the majority of frames reach a state of convergence following a specific number of inner and external iterations. Meanwhile, iteration between the demapper and decoder has little impact on the NBEP convergence trend. Thus, a joint threshold judgment and convergence detection method is proposed along with the BILCM-ID process.
Inherently, we need to reduce the average number of decoding iterations (ANDI) through the proper algorithm by detecting the “convergence” behaviors. Inspired by the channel coding stopping criteria [17], the convergence behavior of NBEP can be performed by “front-back numerical differential threshold detection” methods. Therefore, we set three threshold parameters to accomplish convergence detection: differential amplitude fluctuation threshold (μ), continuous convergence count threshold (λ), and belief threshold (L). Among them, μ and λ are used to jointly detect the inner iteration state, and L is adopted to judge the success of external iteration. Additionally, if the iterative decoding process exceeds the predetermined number of iterations, the decoder breaks and starts the next iteration.
The proposed ISC-BILCM-ID process is shown in Algorithm 1, where ϕk represents the k-th mapping point in the constellation mapping space, yˆm denotes the estimated value of the m-th transmitted symbol and zm signifies the m-th symbol embedded in the received symbol sequence. The set R(Cj)\{Vi} encompasses the variable nodes connected to the j-th check node in the parity-check matrix, barring the i-th variable node. Meanwhile, the cluster represented by C(Vi)\{Cj} corresponds to the check nodes liaising with the i-th variable node in the matrix, excluding the j-th check node. K stands for the normalization factor. The variable f represents the sequence number of the current decoding frame, the variable r represents the number of external iterations, and the variable t represents the number of inner iterations. Parameters fmax, rmax, and tmax represent the preset maximum number of frames, maximum number of external iterations, and maximum number of inner

iterations, respectively.

⎛

⎞

μCj →Vi =

⎝⎜fi(x) ·

μV →Cj ⎟⎠.

∼{Vi }

V ∈R(Cj }\{Vi}

μVi→Cj = KμCh→Vi ·

μC →Vi .

C ∈C(Vi)\{Cj }

(10) (11)

B. Performance Evaluation
We conduct a comprehensive series of simulations employing 8PSK, 16QAM, and 32QAM modulation schemes to evaluate the BER and ANDI performance with respect to the Eb/N0. The calibration of optimal algorithm parameters is achieved by examining the evolutionary patterns of the NBEP in conjunction with Monte Carlo simulations. Initial estimations involved identifying candidate ranges for each parameter, influenced by observed evolutionary trends. Optimal parameter settings are then determined through a comparative analysis with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

6783

Fig. 5. Simulation results of ISC-BILCM-ID with different parameters. Fig. 6. Simulation results of BER and ANDI. (a) 8PSK modulation.

(a) 8PSK modulation. (b) 16QAM modulation. (c) 32QAM modulation.

(b) 16QAM modulation. (c) 32QAM modulation.

theoretical BER simulations. Parameters demonstrating superior performance are detailed and discussed in Fig. 5, where parameter values of L = 0.83, μ = 0.01, and λ = 2 are identified as optimal under specific modulation conditions. The BER and ANDI simulation results under various modulation schemes (8PSK, 16QAM, 32QAM) are presented in Fig. 6. The traditional hard decision algorithm (HDA) of BILCM and BILCM-ID are chosen as comparisons [19]. Additionally, two advanced stopping criteria for LDPC codes are included in the comparative analysis, as documented in [20] and [21].
Fig. 6 reveals a discernible enhancement in coding gain in high SNR regions as the modulation order increases. Additionally, a comparative assessment between the BILCM and BILCM-ID systems indicates that the latter achieves an approximate gain of 0.3 dB within the mid to high SNR range. As for BER performance, the ISC-based method does not have a significant impact on the results of BER. In terms of ANDI, it can be reduced by up to 88% in low-medium SNR regions compared to the traditional hard-decision method [19], thereby greatly reducing the complexity of the whole system. In high SNR regions, the ANDI of the ISC-based algorithm is just a little more than traditional HDA methods. Due to the lack of relevant research on the stopping criteria for BILCM-ID, we choose two advanced stopping criteria for LDPC codes [20], [21] to further evaluate the proposed method. By replacing the inner iterative stopping criterion, comparison results show that our ISC-based algorithm obtains the optimal performance with almost the least processing delay (ANDI).

Above all, the ISC-based algorithm is able to reduce algorithm complexity in full SNR regions with almost no BER performance loss. What’s more, the improved stopping criterion is also applicable to other high-order modulated BILCM-ID systems without any channel state information. In this case, the ISC-based method makes it possible to adaptively judge the state of the iterative processor without any prior channel state information. Moreover, this method only necessitates a single hard decision process after decoding completion, reducing the need for numerous matrix multiplications H · xˆT, which makes it easier to be implemented.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we have proposed an improved stopping criterion for the BILCM-ID algorithm. Utilizing a probability domain representation, we employ the NBEP for in-depth analysis of the state of BILCM-ID systems. Our approach suggests a joint threshold judgment and convergence monitoring strategy to alleviate complexity. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed ISC-BILCM-ID algorithm provides an approximate 0.3 dB improvement in BER for high-order instances and a reduction of up to 88% of the ANDI compared to traditional methods. Importantly, the proposed algorithm is independent of channel parameters, making it universally applicable and easily implementable across diverse application scenarios.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

REFERENCES
[1] H. M. Navazi and M. J. Hossain, “A novel symbol mapping method for BICM-ID systems for higher order signal constellations,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1323–1326, Aug. 2014.
[2] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, May 1998.
[3] X. Li and J. A. Ritcey, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 169–171, Nov. 1997.
[4] Q. Xie, Z. Wang, and Z. Yang, “Simplified soft demapper for APSK with product constellation labeling,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 2649–2657, Jul. 2012.
[5] T. Cheng, K. Peng, Z. Liu, and Z. Yang, “Efficient receiver architecture for LDPC coded BICM-ID system,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 1089–1092, Jul. 2015.
[6] D. Kekrt and Z. Becvar, “Low-complexity iterative soft-output demodulation for hierarchical quadrature amplitude modulation,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., Dec. 2020, pp. 1–7.
[7] Z. Xu, L. Wang, and G. Chen, “Joint coding/decoding optimization for DC-BICM system: Collaborative design,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 2487–2491, Aug. 2021.
[8] A. Chindapol and J. A. Ritcey, “Design, analysis, and performance evaluation for BICM-ID with square QAM constellations in Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 944–957, May 2001.
[9] I.-W. Kang, H.-N. Kim, and L. H. Hanzo, “EXIT-chart aided design of rowpermutation assisted twin-interleaver BICM-ID,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 85–95, Mar. 2018.
[10] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[11] S.-Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.

[12] W. Zhanji, P. Mugen, and W. Wenbo, “A new parity-check stopping criterion for turbo decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 304–306, Apr. 2008.
[13] D. Kim and I.-C. Park, “A fast successive cancellation list decoder for polar codes with an early stopping criterion,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 66, no. 18, pp. 4971–4979, Sep. 2018.
[14] C. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Wang, and Q. Zeng, “An ultra-low complexity early stopping criterion for belief propagation polar code decoder,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 723–727, Apr. 2022.
[15] G. Colavolpe, A. Barbieri, and G. Caire, “Algorithms for iterative decoding in the presence of strong phase noise,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1748–1757, Sep. 2005.
[16] X. Ding, J. An, Z. Zhao, X. Bu, and K. Yang, “Low-density paritycheck coded direct sequence spread spectrum receiver based on analog probabilistic processing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 7, pp. 6355–6370, Jul. 2021.
[17] X. Ding et al., “Customized joint blind frame synchronization and decoding methods for analog LDPC Decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 756–770, Feb. 2024.
[18] Low Density Parity Check codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep Space Applications, Experimental Specification, Standard CCSDS 131.11-O-1, Aug. 2006.
[19] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[20] G. Han and X. Liu, “A unified early stopping criterion for binary and nonbinary LDPC codes based on check-sum variation patterns,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 1053–1055, Nov. 2010.
[21] T. Xia, H.-C. Wu, and H. Jiang, “New stopping criterion for fast lowdensity parity-check decoders,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1679–1682, Oct. 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

