IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

759

Finite-Length Puncturing Pattern Design for LDPC Codes With Hadamard Constraints
Junyi Du , Peng Kang , and Lei Xiao

Abstract— In this letter, we propose a two-stage method to design finite-length puncturing patterns for LDPC codes with Hadamard constraints. At the first stage, we propose the distribution of puncturing patterns and develop extrinsic information transfer functions for distribution optimization in terms of the lowest decoding threshold. At the second stage, we analyze the iterative update process of a Hadamard check node (HCN) and find that the Euclidean distance determines the reliability of its output extrinsic information. Based on this, we propose a greedy algorithm to design puncturing patterns to maximize the number of punctured variable nodes with reliable input information. Simulations verify the good performance of the Hadamard-LDPC code with our designed puncturing patterns, compared to the 5G new radio LDPC code and the same Hadamard-LDPC code with other puncturing patterns.
Index Terms— Hadamard-LDPC code, puncture, extrinsic information transfer functions.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] and polar codes [2], [3] have been adopted as practical solutions for many emerging applications, such as the fifth-generation (5G) mobile communications and satellite communications, for their excellent error correction capability. An LDPC code can be represented by a bipartite Tanner graph, where variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs) are connected by single parity check (SPC) constraints. Since the SPC constraint is a weak constraint, the variants of LDPC codes, e.g., [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], and [9], have been further developed to improve their error correction ability.
Among these works, the Hadamard-LDPC codes are proved to approach the ultimate Shannon limit by replacing the SPC constraint with more powerful Hadamard constraints. More specifically, a construction method of Hadamard-LDPC codes was proposed in [4] by using extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) functions and the progressive edge growth algorithm. To utilize the implementation advantage of the structured code, a protograph-based construction method was further proposed in [5] to design quasi-cyclic (QC) Hadamard-LDPC codes. Several puncturing schemes were introduced in [5] based on the degrees of the VNs. Furthermore, the construction of spatially coupled protograph-based Hadamard-LDPC code
Received 24 December 2024; revised 30 January 2025; accepted 14 February 2025. Date of publication 17 February 2025; date of current version 11 April 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants 62401150. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was R. Asvadi. (Corresponding author: Peng Kang.)
Junyi Du and Lei Xiao are with the National Key Laboratory of Complex Aviation System Simulation, Southwest China Institute of Electronic Technology, Chengdu 610000, China.
Peng Kang is with the School of Physics and Information Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, China (e-mail: peng_kang@fzu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2025.3543011

was introduced in [6] with an efficient decoding algorithm. However, the Hadamard-LDPC codes usually have low code rates to operate in low SNR regions. At the high SNR region, the curves of EXIT functions at Hadamard CNs (HCNs) will change from concave to convex. This makes the design of Hadamard-LDPC codes with high code rates become difficult via EXIT chart due to the convexity of the HCN curves. For the emerging applications, e.g., the satellite-terrestrial integrated communications [10], rate compatibility is preferable to satisfy both ultra-reliable and high-efficient transmission. Therefore, it is significant to extend the existing Hadamard-LDPC codes to support multiple code rates through a single HadamardLDPC encoder/decoder in the future.
In this letter, we target to extend the design of HadamardLDPC codes to various code rates and moderate block lengths for a wider range of application scenarios. To this end, we develop a two-stage method to design puncturing patterns for finite-length Hadamard-LDPC codes. At the first stage, we categorize the VNs of Hadamard-LDPC codes into two types: normal VNs (NVNs) and Hadamard VNs (HVNs). Compared to the prior work [5], we propose a more general framework that accounts for the possible puncturing of both NVNs and HVNs. Moreover, we derive the EXIT functions of decoding Hadamard-LDPC codes based on the puncturing framework, and optimize the puncturing distributions of these two types of VNs to achieve the lowest decoding threshold. At the second stage, we design the specific puncturing patterns based on the optimized puncturing distributions. Specifically, we propose a greedy algorithm to maximize the number of punctured NVNs with HCNs connected for passing reliable information. We further compare the proposed HadamardLDPC coding scheme to other benchmarks, i.e., the 5G LDPC codes and the Hadamard-LDPC codes with different puncturing patterns. Numerical results validate the good error performances of our proposed Hadamard-LDPC coding schemes.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this part, we first present a brief introduction of Hadamard-LDPC codes and show their differences to the conventional LDPC codes. We then propose the puncturing distributions and derive the EXIT functions.
A. Hadamard-LDPC Codes
A Hadamard-LDPC code can be constructed by replacing the check node (CN) constraints of a standard LDPC code with a special form of Hadamard coding constraints [4]. Denote the order of the Hadamard code by r. Fig. 1 demonstrates the Tanner graph of a Hadamard-LDPC code, where one HCN

1558-2558 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

760

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 1. The tanner graph of a Hadamard-LDPC code.

is connected to 2r variable nodes (VNs). These VNs can be classified into two types, i.e., NVNs and HVNs. There are r+2 NVNs (hollow circles) and 2r − r − 2 HVNs (solid circles) connecting to each HCN. Denote c = (c0, c1, . . . , c2r−1) as a length-2r Hadamard codeword. In this letter, we consider the systematic Hadamard-LDPC codes with an even order r.
According to the Theorem 4.2 in [4], the NVNs correspond to the r + 1 information bits at the positions of {c0, c2t−1 , t = 1, 2, . . . , r} and one parity bit at the position c2r−1. Note that the parity bit indicates the SPC constraint of the information
bits. The HVNs are all of degree 1 and associated with the rest of the code bit positions in the codeword c. Define NV and NH as the number of NVNs and HCNs, respectively. For a Hadamard-LDPC code, we have the codeword lengths N = NV + NH × (2r − r − 2).

B. Puncturing Distributions

In a Hadamard-LDPC code, both NVNs and HVNs can

be punctured. In the following part of this letter, we adopt

two puncturing distributions to describe the fractions of the

punctured NVNs and HVNs, respectively.

Denote the degree of an NVN by di. Define the degree

distribution vector of NVNs by (l1, l2, . . . , lV ), where li refers

to the fraction of degree-di (i = 1, 2, . . . , V ) NVNs among all

NVNs in the Hadamard-LDPC code ensemble. Let a length-V

vector P = {p1, p2, . . . , pV } be the puncturing distribution

of NVNs, where pi represents the percentage of punctured

degree-di NVNs among all NVNs, and we have 0 ≤ pi ≤ li,

∀i = 1, 2, . . . , V .

Since each HVN is of degree 1, a more convenient way to

characterize the puncturing distribution of HVNs is through

the fractions of HCNs that are connected to the punctured

HVNs. Define an HCN as a type-j HCN if it is connected

to j punctured HVNs. Let a length-(2r − r − 1) vector Q =

{q0, q1, . . . , q2r−r−2} be the type distribution of HCNs, where

qj denotes the percentage of the type-j HCNs among all HCNs

in the Hadamard-LDPC code ensemble. Note that the total

number of punctured HVNs is

2r −r−2 j=0

qj

·j

· NH .

Therefore,

the elements in Q need to satisfy the following constraints, i.e.,

 2r−r−2



  

qj = 1, 0 ≤ qj ≤ 1,





j=0 2r −r−2

V

(1)



  

qj · j · NH = Npunc − pi · NV ,



 j=0

i=0

where Npunc is the total number of punctured VNs.

C. EXIT Analysis
As shown in [11], during the decoding of a HadamardLDPC code, the extrinsic information is exchanged between HCNs and NVNs iteratively while HVNs only provide with fixed a prior information. In [5], the protograph-based EXIT analysis is conducted to evaluate the decoding performance of a Hadamard-LDPC code ensemble via the so-called decoding threshold. Different from that method, in this letter, the EXIT functions for NVN decoder (NVND) and HCN decoder (HCND) is developed based on the puncturing distributions P and Q, respectively. The derived EXIT functions are described as follows.
1) NVND EXIT Function: With the puncturing distribution P, the NVND EXIT function of the Hadamard-LDPC code is similar to that of the conventional LDPC code, which can be written as

IE,VND

V
=

pidi J

i=1 j lj dj

(di − 1) [J −1 (IA,VND)]2

+ (li − pi)di J j lj dj

(di − 1) [J −1 (IA,VND)]2 + σch2 ,

(2)

where IA,VND denotes the a priori information from HCNs and σch2 is the equivalent channel noise variance. Note that J(·) and J−1(·) are the transfer functions given in [12] to compute the mutual information between the coded bit and its associated log-likelihood ratio (LLR).
2) HCND EXIT Function: The output extrinsic information of the HCND is the weighted combination of all extrinsic information transferred from HCNs of different types. According to the type distribution Q of HCNs, the HCND EXIT function is written as

IE,HCND =

2r −r−2 j=0

qj

IEj,HCND(IA,HCND,

σch),

(3)

where IEj,HCND is the extrinsic information of the type-j HCN. Note that the calculation of IEj,HCND can be realized by MonteCarlo simulations since there is no close-form formulation for
the HCND EXIT function [4].

III. TWO-STAGE DESIGN OF FINITE-LENGTH HADAMARD-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES
In this section, we aim to improve the code rate of the Hadamard-LDPC codes and propose an optimization method to design the finite-length punctured Hadamard-LDPC codes in two stages. More specifically, in the first stage, we optimize the ratio of punctured NVNs among all NVNs based on the target code rate and generate the optimal puncturing distributions P∗ and Q∗ with respect to the decoding threshold. In the second stage, we focus on a specific puncturing pattern design and propose a Euclidean distance-based metric to evaluate its decoding performance. Based on the metric and the optimized puncturing distributions, we introduce an efficient greedy algorithm to search the desirable puncturing pattern.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: FINITE-LENGTH PUNCTURING PATTERN DESIGN FOR LDPC CODES WITH HADAMARD CONSTRAINTS

761

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF DIFFERENTIAL EVOLUTION

Fig. 2. The extrinsic information of HCND with an order r = 4 and different types.

A. Stage 1: Optimization of Puncturing Distributions
As investigated in the pioneer work [4], the design of Hadamard-LDPC codes becomes challenging at the high SNR region since the extrinsic information curve of HCND will lose concavity. In Fig. 2(a), we observe the same result of concavity loss as in [4] for the extrinsic information curve of the type-0 HCNs when the SNR increases from −12 dB to −3 dB. However, in Fig. 2(b), we reveal an interesting phenomenon: through the puncturing of HVNs, the extrinsic information of these HCNs can change from convex to concave in the high SNR region. This observation motivates the design of Hadamard-LDPC codes to higher code rates and at higher SNR region by considering the optimization of the puncturing distributions via EXIT chart.
Define Iapp as a posterior information of the NVN by considering all di input IA, VND in (2). The decoding threshold of a specific Hadamard-LDPC code can be expressed as

(Es/N0)th = inf {Es/N0 : Iapp = 1|P, Q} .

(4)

Define (Es/N0)upper and (Es/N0)lower as the upper and lower bound of SNR in dB, respectively. To calculate the decoding threshold for specific P and Q, a binary search algorithm is conducted as follows:
1. Set Es/N0 = [(Es/N0)upper + (Es/N0)lower]/2. 2. Compute IE,VND according to (2); Let IA,HCND = IE,VND;
Compute IE,HCND according to (3); Let IA,VND = IE,HCND; Repeat until the maximum iteration number is reached. 3. If IAPP = 1, let (Es/N0)upper = Es/N0; otherwise let (Es/N0)lower = Es/N0. 4. Repeat Step 2 and Step 3 until (Es/N0)upper − (Es/N0)lower ≤ 0.01. Let (Es/N0)th = (Es/N0)upper. Define the ratio of punctured NVNs among all NVNs as α. The optimal ratio of α is denoted by α∗, which can achieve the smallest decoding threshold (Es/N0)∗th. In this letter, α∗ and the optimal puncturing distributions P∗ and Q∗
are determined by the following steps. First, we enumerate all possible values of α from 0 to 1 in intervals of 0.1. For a fixed α value, we adopt the differential evolution
algorithm [13] to search the candidate puncturing distributions P and Q in terms of the decoding threshold. Table I lists
the parameters of the differential evolution algorithm. At each
generation, we utilize the above binary search algorithm to calculate the decoding threshold of each candidate P and Q. Among all α values, the optimal α∗ is selected to achieve (Es/N0)∗th. The corresponding puncturing distributions output as P∗ and Q∗.

Fig. 3. Decoding thresholds of Hadamard-LDPC codes with an order r = 4 and different ratios.

As illustrated in Fig. 3, α∗ may vary with target code rates. For the target code rate of 1/6, the decoding threshold decreases with the increase of α, where α∗ = 1. This means that all NVNs are punctured to achieve the optimal decoding threshold. Different from that, we have α∗ ranging from 0.8 to 0.9 for the target code rate of 1/4. Note that when α = 0, i.e., the case that only the HVNs are punctured, leads to the worst decoding performance since the decoding thresholds in both code rates are the highest.

B. Stage 2: Design of Puncturing Patterns
For a Hadamard code, different puncturing patterns with the same number of puncturing nodes would lead to various decoding performances [14]. For a finite-length HadamardLDPC code, different puncturing patterns with the same distributions P∗ and Q∗ may also lead to large difference in error performance. In this subsection, we propose the second stage method to design finite-length puncturing patterns yielding a desirable performance. In particular, we first analyze the influence of the puncture pattern to the extrinsic information of HCNs and then design finite-length puncturing patterns.
1) Euclidean Distance-Based Evaluation: Denote a vector η = {η1, η2, . . . , ηK } as the puncturing pattern for an HCN, where K denotes the number of punctured nodes and ηi ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 2r − 1} denotes their specific positions. Define χi+1 and χi−1 as the set of Hadamard codewords with the i-th bit equal to +1 and −1, respectively. The extrinsic information of the HCN at its i-th edge is calculated in LLR form by [11]

exp LE(i) = log h∈χ+ i 1
exp
h∈χi−1

⟨h, LA⟩ 2
⟨h, LA⟩ 2

− LA(i),

≈

max
h∈χi+1

⟨h, LA⟩ 2

−

max
h∈χ− i 1

⟨h, LA⟩ 2

−

LA(i),

=

hi+1, LA 2

−

hi−1, LA 2

− LA(i),

=

hi+1 − h−i 1, LA 2

− LA(i),

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

762

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

TABLE II
MINIMUM EUCLIDEAN DISTANCES FOR DIFFERENT EDGES CONNECTED TO HCNs WITH VARIOUS PUNCTURING PATTERNS

TABLE III THE DESIGNED BASE MATRIX OF THE QC-HADAMARD-LDPC CODE

Fig. 4. The output extrinsic information of HCNs with an order r = 4 and different puncturing patterns when IA,HCND = 0.

where ⟨a · b⟩ denotes the inner product of vectors a and b. Here h+i 1 and h−i 1 denote the Hadamard codes achieving the maximum correlation value among all Hadamard codewords
with the i-th bit equal to +1 and −1, respectively.
From (5), it can be seen that the extrinsic information
emanated from an HCN over its i-th edge depends on the minimum Euclidean distance between the codeword sets χ+i 1 and χi−1. To evaluate the reliability of the extrinsic information, we define a metric, i.e.,

2r −1

disi(η) = min

|hj(l) − hk(l)|, (6)

j∈χi+1,k∈χ− i 1 l=0,l≠ i,l∈/η

where hj(l) and hk(l) take values from {+1, −1}. Since only NVNs participate in the iterative decoding process, we only consider the positions of NVNs at i ∈ {0, 20, 21, . . . , 2r−1, 2r − 1}.
As presented in Table II, HCNs with various η lead to different minimum Euclidean distances. Fig. 4 presents the extrinsic information of the HCN for its connected NVNs at the first iteration with IA,HCND equal to 0. It shows an unequal error protection phenomenon, related to the minimum Euclidean distances of each edge. Besides, if the minimum Euclidean distance disi(η) is zero, the extrinsic information provided for the corresponding i-th NVN is zero. This means that the NVN with disi(η) = 0 cannot obtain any useful information via the i-th edge at the first iteration.
2) Puncturing Pattern Design: Let a length-N vector φ = {φ0, φ1, . . . , φN−1} be the puncturing pattern of a HadamardLDPC code, where φi = 1 indicates that the i-th code bit is punctured. Since NVNs in the Hadamard-LDPC code convey communication information, we aim to optimize the puncturing pattern φ∗ to recover all NVNs at a minimum SNR. Our idea is based on two facts:
• The distributions of the puncturing pattern φ∗ should be identical to P∗ and Q∗.
• The punctured NVNs have no channel information and should be recovered by reliable messages from HCNs.
Definition 1: For an HCN with r + 2 connected edges to NVNs, its i-th edge is called reliable if its Euclidean distance disi(η) is larger than 0.

For a punctured NVN, it relies on the extrinsic information transferred from HCNs. If all its connected edges are unreliable, the punctured NVN cannot receive any useful information in the initial iterations. This leads to an obvious decoding degradation and a slow process of decoding convergence.
Definition 2: For a punctured NVN, it is called a reliable punctured NVN if it has at least one reliable edge.
Our goal is to find the optimal pattern φ∗ with the largest number of reliable punctured NVNs. The algorithm is conducted as follows.
1. Initialize a random pattern φ satisfying P∗ and Q∗. 2. For each HCN, calculate the Euclidean distances for its
connected NVNs based on (6). 3. Calculate the number of reliable punctured NVNs as ϕ. 4. Set the maximum number of searching rounds as T . 5. For t = 0 to T − 1, do Steps 6-7. 6. For each unreliable punctured NVN vi with degree di,
visit all unpunctured NVNs with the same degree and find the NVN vj with reliable edges. Let φi = 0 and φj = 1. Set ϕ = ϕ + 1. 7. For each HCN ck connected with both punctured NVNs and HVNs, visit at most 100 possible puncturing positions for its punctured HVNs. Find the one with the largest number ϕ∗ of reliable punctured NVNs. Update φ and set ϕ = ϕ∗. 8. Output φ as the optimal puncturing pattern φ∗. Note that, Step 6 and Step 7 aim to find the optimal positions for the punctured NVNs and HVNs, respectively.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the decoding thresholds and BER performances of our designed puncturing patterns and make comparisons with other schemes. According to [4], we design a rate-0.09 QC-Hadamard-LDPC code with the order r = 4 as the mother code, where its corresponding base matrix is presented in Table III. The base matrix has a size of 9 × 19 and its lifting factor is set to 104. When designing a punctured Hadamard-LDPC code of rate larger than 1/2, a significant portion of the HVNs may be punctured. In this case, the error-correcting capability of the Hadamard constraints will be severely degraded. Therefore, we still use the conventional LDPC codes for code rate equal to or larger than 1/2. We optimize the puncturing distributions for different code rates, as listed in Table IV. We set the number of searching rounds T = 10 for designing the puncturing patterns.
We consider the 5G LDPC code generated by the matrix BG2 as a benchmark. The lifting factor is set to 104, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DU et al.: FINITE-LENGTH PUNCTURING PATTERN DESIGN FOR LDPC CODES WITH HADAMARD CONSTRAINTS

763

TABLE IV
PUNCTURING DISTRIBUTION AND DECODING THRESHOLDS Es/N0 (dB) OF DIFFERENT RATES

comparison of decoding performance between the three puncturing strategies in [5] and the designed puncturing patterns. We can see that the optimized puncturing patterns can also achieve about 0.1 dB, 0.2 dB, and 0.25 dB improvement, respectively. Note that the only-HVNs puncturing strategy has the worst decoding performance. This is consistent with the observations in Fig. 3 since this puncturing strategy leads to the largest decoding threshold.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we proposed a two-stage method to design puncturing patterns for Hadamard-LDPC codes. For the first stage, we proposed puncturing distributions of NVNs and HVNs and derived their EXIT functions for distribution optimization. For the second stage, we introduced a Euclidean distance-based metric to evaluate the reliability of the extrinsic information and proposed a greedy algorithm to design finite length puncturing patterns. Simulations verified the outperforming performances of the designed patterns, compared to the 5G LDPC codes and other puncturing schemes.

Fig. 5. The decoding performance of various coding schemes.
Fig. 6. The decoding performance of QC-Hadamard-LDPC codes with various puncturing patterns.
is the same as that of the Hadamard-LDPC codeword. The code rates of 5G LDPC code range from 1/5 to 1/3. For a fair comparison, the lengths of information bit are set to 1040, for both Hadamard-LDPC codes and the 5G LDPC code. The number of decoding iterations is set to 100. The Shannon limits corresponding to the specific channel capacities of code rates 1/5, 1/4, and 1/3 are presented in Fig. 5. Compared to the 5G LDPC code, our designed Hadamard-LDPC codes have a slightly better decoding performance, e.g., about 0.1 dB improvement, as presented in Fig. 5. We also make comparisons with other puncturing strategies proposed in [5], i.e., the largest-NVN-puncturing strategy, the lowest-NVN-puncturing strategy and the only-HVNs puncturing strategy. Our designed puncturing patterns can achieve at most 0.4 dB, 0.5 dB and 0.7 dB improvement, respectively.
For code rates ranging from 1/8 to 1/6, all NVNs should be punctured, as presented in Table IV. Fig. 6 illustrates the

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[3] T. Wang, D. Qu, and T. Jiang, “Parity-check-concatenated polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2342–2345, Dec. 2016.
[4] G. Yue, L. Ping, and X. Wang, “Generalized low-density parity-check codes based on Hadamard constraints,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1058–1079, Mar. 2007.
[5] P.-W. Zhang, F. C. M. Lau, and C.-W. Sham, “Protograph-based LDPC Hadamard codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 4998–5013, Aug. 2021.
[6] P.-W. Zhang, F. C. M. Lau, and C.-W. Sham, “Spatially coupled PLDPCHadamard convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 5724–5741, Sep. 2022.
[7] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[8] Y. Xie, L. Yang, P. Kang, and J. Yuan, “Euclidean geometry-based spatially coupled LDPC codes for storage,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2498–2509, Sep. 2016.
[9] Z. Roostaie, M. Gholami, and F. Parvaresh, “Four-cycle free spatially coupled LDPC codes with an explicit construction,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 1479–1483, Jul. 2024.
[10] Y. Liu, L. Xiao, W. Liu, Z. Feng, and T. Jiang, “Channel coding for satellite-terrestrial integrated communication: Classic applications, key technologies, and challenges,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 348–354, Jun. 2024.
[11] L. Ping and S. Chan, “Iterative decoding of concatenated Hadamard codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), vol. 1, Jun. 1998, pp. 136–140.
[12] S. T. Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[13] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optim., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 341–359, 1997.
[14] S. Jiang, F. C. M. Lau, W. M. Tam, and Chiu-W. Sham, “Design and error performance of punctured Hadamard codes,” in Proc. 23rd Asia– Pacific Conf. Commun. (APCC), Dec. 2017, pp. 1–5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:12:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

