IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

1103

Source-Constrained Hierarchical Modulation Systems With Protograph LDPC Codes: A Promising Transceiver Design for Future
6G-Enabled IoT
Zhaojie Yang , Yunye Li, Yong Liang Guan , Senior Member, IEEE, and Yi Fang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— This work studies the transceiver design and convergence performance analysis for the hierarchical modulation (HM) systems with protograph-based low-density parity-check (P-LDPC) codes. Specifically, we first conceive new sourceconstrained (SC) coding scheme and inter-layer-cascaded (ILC) decoding scheme tailored for the HM-based transmitter and receiver, respectively. Both the proposed SC coding and ILC decoding schemes form an enhanced version of bit-interleavedcoded HM (BIC-HM) systems, namely source-constrained HM (SC-HM) systems, providing a more reliable and flexible multi-data transmission solution. Moreover, according to the SC coding principle, we conceive a novel variable-node-degree-based (VND) multiplexing scheme to further improve the performance of the proposed SC-HM systems. Additionally, based on the ILC decoding framework, we devise a novel mutual information (MI) analysis tool, namely ILC-based extrinsic-information-transfer (ILC-EXIT) algorithm, to predict the decoding thresholds of the proposed P-LDPC-coded SC-HM systems. Theoretical and simulation results demonstrate that the proposed SC-HM systems significantly outperform the existing benchmarks in terms of error performance, decoding latency, and transmission-rate adaptation.
Index Terms— Internet of Things, hierarchical modulation, bit-interleaved-coded modulation, low-density parity-check codes, transmission-rate adaptation.
I. INTRODUCTION
WITH the growing need for Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications, a lot of research activities have been sparked off to develop advanced technologies enabling diverse Quality-of-Service (QoS) requirements. Among these technologies, the hierarchical modulation (HM) [1] can simultaneously support multiple data streams and provide unequal error protection (UEP) for them based on their different
Received 13 March 2024; revised 4 September 2024; accepted 7 November 2024. Date of publication 20 January 2025; date of current version 19 March 2025. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore and Infocomm Media Development Authority under its Future Communications Research & Development Programme under Grant FCP-NTU-RG-2022-020; and by the NSF of China under Grant 62322106 and Grant 62071131. (Corresponding author: Yi Fang.)
Zhaojie Yang, Yunye Li, and Yong Liang Guan are with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: zhaojie.yang@ntu.edu.sg; yunye.li@ntu.edu.sg; eylguan@ntu.edu.sg).
Yi Fang is with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: fangyi@gdut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3531540

priorities. Due to its full compatibility and high flexibility, the HM technique has exhibited great potentials for various wireless applications, including relay communications [2], [3], cooperative communications [4], digital broadcast communications [5], and multiclass data transmissions [6].
According to the HM principle, one can exploit the distribution property of the labels within a constellation, and then perform the bit-mapping operations to achieve the UEP for different data streams [7]. Therefore, the HM technique can be seamlessly combined with the high-order modulation to formulate the bit-interleaved-coded HM (BIC-HM) systems, which possess both UEP and spectral-efficiency advantages. Inspired by the appealing superiorities, a flurry of research works related to the constellation design for BIC-HM systems have been conducted. For instance, by optimizing the minimum-Euclidean distance (MED) between different labels, novel non-uniform constellations [8] and dynamic constellations [9] have been proposed for the particular channel configuration and varying channel configurations, respectively. Also, based on the amplitude and phase-shift keying (APSK) and quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM), the corresponding hierarchical APSK (HAPSK) [10] and hierarchical QAM (HQAM) [11] constellation designs have been explored. The authors in [7] have devised a type of QAM-based structural quadrant (SQ) constellations, and achieved a performance tradeoff between different data streams by adjusting the MED between labels within the SQ constellations. Meanwhile, a type of hierarchical bandwidth modulation (HBM) constellations [12] has been introduced into the BIC-HM systems used for ultrabroadband terahertz (THz) communications. The protection-level-exchanging-based BIC-HM systems have also been investigated tailored for the cooperative networks [13], in which two different constellations are employed respectively for the source node and the relay node in order to process the data stream.
In addition to the HM constellations, error-correction codes (ECCs) can be incorporated with the BIC-HM systems to further enhance the data-transmission reliability. Therefore, a great deal of research effort has been invested to promote the theoretical and practical applications of ECCs in BIC-HM systems. To be specific, turbo-coded and turbo-trellis-coded HM systems have been investigated in [2] and [14], respectively.

1558-0008 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1104

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 1. Block diagram of a traditional BIC-HM system over an AWGN channel.

Meanwhile, the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with capacity-approaching performance have been considered for HM systems [10], [15]. Particularly, a degree-distribution optimization algorithm has been proposed for constructing the LDPC codes with UEP characteristics [16] in BIC-HM systems. Also, new complexity-reduced decoding algorithms have been presented for the LDPC-coded BIC-HM systems [17], [18]. However, these LDPC codes are a type of un-structured ECCs and have a quadratic encoding complexity with the codeword lengths [19]. To facilitate the implementation of BIC-HM systems, a type of structured LDPC codes, called protograph-based LDPC (P-LDPC) codes [7], have been introduced. The P-LDPC codes can be represented by a small base matrix (or protograph). According to [20], the circulant lifting operation can be seamlessly combined with the protographs to generate the quasi-cyclic (QC) P-LDPC codes, which facilitate the linear-complexity encoding. Furthermore, some low-complexity decoders have been developed for P-LDPC codes to simplify their hardware implementation. Besides, P-LDPC codes have an attractive advantage, i.e., rate-compatible characteristic. The rate-compatible P-LDPC codes have a nested structure to vary their code rates in a relatively wide range using a common encoder/decoder infrastructure [21]. Thanks to the above advantages, a myriad of excellent ECCs have been constructed via protographs, including the 5G LDPC codes [22] and spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes [23]. It should be noticed that the BIC-HM is not the optimal framework because it adopts an independent demapping and decoding to process the soft information at the receiver. As known, the performance of BIC-HM systems can be significantly improved by introducing an iterative decoding (ID) procedure between the demodulator and the decoder. Consequently, an enhanced BIC-HM system, namely BIC-HM with ID (BIC-HM-ID) [7] system, has been investigated.
Although a lot of research works have considered the design and optimization in both constellations and ECCs for HM scenarios, the traditional HM systems can only achieve a performance tradeoff among different data streams. In other words, the performance of the low-priority data streams can only be improved by sacrificing that of the high-priority data streams (and vice versa).1 Obviously, the traditional HM systems can only provide QoS service for a group of data
1The performance tradeoff between different data streams is realized by adjusting the MED between different labels within a constellation. Interested readers are referred to [7] for more details about the principle of this performance tradeoff in the HM scenarios.

streams, but not for a single data stream. Inspired from this fundamental problem, we put forward a new transceiver design and conceive the corresponding mutual information (MI) analysis. The main contributions of this paper are summarized in the following.
1) We design novel source-constrained (SC) coding scheme and inter-layer-cascaded (ILC) decoding scheme for the HM-based transmitter and receiver, respectively. Both the proposed SC coding and ILC decoding schemes constitute an enhanced version of BIC-HM systems, namely source-constrained HM (SC-HM) systems. Unlike the traditional BIC-HM systems, in which the data streams are independent of one another during the decoding procedure. In SC-HM systems, the proposed SC coding scheme introduces an SC relationship for the data streams. With the aid of the proposed ILC decoding scheme, (i) a tradeoff between the performance and transmission rate can be achieved for a low-priority data stream (i.e., achieve QoS requests for a single data stream) without sacrificing the performance of the high-priority data streams; (ii) the decoding complexity for data streams is significantly reduced, especially when the early-stopping criterion is taken into account; (iii) the performance of the high-priority data streams can be enhanced by exploiting partial soft information extracted from the low-priority data streams iteratively.
2) Based on the proposed SC coding principle, we design a VND multiplexing scheme to further improve the performance of the proposed SC-HM systems. With the aid of the proposed VND multiplexing scheme, the information bits of the highest-priority data stream are not only multiplexed in the remaining low-priority data streams, but also mapped to the lowest-degree variable nodes (VNs) within a given P-LDPC code. This helps significantly improve the convergence performance of the low-priority data streams.
3) Inspired by the proposed ILC decoding framework, we conceive a novel MI analysis tool, namely ILC-based EXIT (ILC-EXIT) algorithm, to predict the convergence performance of the proposed P-LDPC coded SC-HM systems. This ILC-EXIT algorithm can accurately calculate the decoding thresholds for different data streams, and enable low computational overhead by incorporating the early-stopping criterion.
4) We present various numerical results to verify that the proposed SC-HM systems significantly outperform the state-of-the-art BIC-HM systems in terms of error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: SC-HM SYSTEMS WITH PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES: A PROMISING TRANSCEIVER DESIGN

1105

Fig. 2. A Gray-based 16-QAM constellation used for traditional BIC-HM systems.

performance, decoding latency, and transmission-rate adaptation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sect. II introduces the traditional BIC-HM systems. Sect. III depicts the proposed P-LDPC-coded SC-HM systems and VND multiplexing scheme. Sect. IV describes the proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm and presents the convergence-performance analysis. Sect. V provides error-rate simulation results. Finally, Sect. VI concludes this paper.

II. TRADITIONAL BIC-HM SYSTEMS

The block diagram of a traditional BIC-HM system over

an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [7], [8]

is depicted in Fig. 1. Particularly, an M -ary QAM hier-

archical modulator and its corresponding demodulator are

considered. In this figure, there exist L = (log2M )/2 different information-bit streams (i.e., the layer-1, layer-2, · · · , layer-

L information-bit streams). These information-bit streams are

first encoded by their corresponding encoders to L different

coded-bit streams, which are then randomly permuted by

their individual bit-level interleavers. It is worth noting that

the L data streams output from the L different interleavers

are assumed to have different priorities. Specifically, the

data streams output from the layer-1, layer-2, · · · , layer-L

interleavers are considered as the highest priority, second

highest priority, · · · , lowest priority data streams, respectively.

During the bit-mapping process, every m = log2M coded bits extracted from the L different interleavers are grouped

together and then mapped to an M -ary modulation symbol

by means of an M -ary hierarchical modulator. To provide

UEP for the L different data streams according to their

different priorities, the M -ary hierarchical modulator assigns

the coded bits belonging to the highest priority, second high-

est priority, · · · , lowest priority data streams into the most

significant bit (MSB), second MSB, · · · , least significant

bit (LSB) positions in an M -ary constellation, respectively.

Note that for an M -ary constellation, there are M different

labels xl (l = 1, 2, · · · , M ), and each one consists of m labeling bits (i.e., xl ≜ {xlb1 , xlb2 , · · · , xlbm }). Any one of these labeling-bit sequences can be divided into m/2 groups

sequentially, while the i-th group includes mi labeling bits,

where i = 1, 2, · · · , m/2 and m =

m/2 i=1

mi

.

Also,

the

labeling bits within the 1-st, 2-nd, · · · , (m/2)-th groups are the MSB, second MSB, · · · , LSB positions, respectively.2 To make the bit-mapping process clearer, Fig. 2 depicts the Gray-based 16-QAM constellation used for traditional BICHM systems. Referring to this figure, the first (resp. last) two labeling bits within these labels correspond to the MSB (resp. LSB) positions. By adjusting the MEDs d1 and d2, one can achieve a performance tradeoff between the layer-1 and layer2 data streams, which are assigned into the MSB and LSB positions in the bit-mapping process, respectively. After above procedure, the M -ary QAM hierarchical modulator transforms L different coded-bit streams into one M -ary modulation symbol stream, which is transmitted over AWGN channels. Assume that the L different coded-bit streams have the same codeword length n, the length of the modulation symbol stream equals n/2. The relationship between the j-th M ary modulation symbol xj chosen from a given M -ary QAM constellation and the j-th channel output yj is shown as

yj = xj + bj ,

(1)

where bj (j = 1, 2, · · · , n/2) denotes the complex Gaussian noise with zero mean and variance σ2 = N0/2 for each dimension. The transmission energy for each modulation symbol is normalized to unit Es = E[|xl|2] = 1 (l = 1, 2, · · · , M ). Particularly, E[·] represents an expectation function.
At the receiver, a serial-parallel concatenated architecture,
consisting of a single-input multiple-output (SIMO) hierarchical demodulator and L single-input single-output (SISO)
decoders, is exploited to process the channel outputs. Specif-
ically, the hierarchical demodulator is implemented by the
max-sum approximation of log-domain maximum a-posteriori
probability (Max-Log-Map) algorithm [24]. After the hierar-
chical demodulation, a soft information stream composed of L different log-likelihood ratio (LLR) sequences LDk em(k = 1, 2, · · · , L) is generated. Through a serial-parallel operation, the L different LLR sequences LkDem are sent to their corresponding layer-k deinterleavers and then processed by
a specific deinterleaving procedure. Subsequently, the LLR lDk em(j) ∈ LDk em for j = 1, 2, · · · , n is viewed as the a-priori LLR lAk ,Dec(j) used in the layer-k decoder, which is implemented by the log-domain belief-propagation (Log-
BP) algorithm [23], [25]. With the aid of Log-BP decoding, the a-posteriori LLR lPk,Dec(j) corresponding to the k-th data stream is computed and used to make a soft decision for the
decoded bit. Remark 1: As proved in [19] and [26], LDPC codes
(including the P-LDPC codes), which have excellent perfor-
mance over AWGN channels, can also perform well over other
memoryless channels. For this reason, although an AWGN
channel is assumed in this paper, our proposed designs are
applicable to other types of ergodic channels, such as fast
fading channels [27].

2In this work, we focus on the M -ary constellation with a constraint that m is an even number, such as the 16-QAM (m = 4) and 64-QAM (m = 6) constellations. We remark that most existing BIC-HM-related research works have also assumed an even number m for the system models. Based on this assumption, the numbers of labeling bits within the m/2 groups can be set to be identical and equal to 2 for simplicity (i.e., m1 = m2 = · · · = mm/2 = 2).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1106

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

III. PROPOSED P-LDPC-CODED SC-HM SYSTEMS AND VND MULTIPLEXING SCHEME
A. P-LDPC Codes
The P-LDPC codes, which were first proposed in [28], are a type of structural ECCs and correspond to small Tanner graphs (i.e., protographs). A protograph G = (V, C, E) is formulated by three different sets, including the variable node (VN) set V = {v1, v2, · · · , vnv }, the check node (CN) set C = {c1, c2, · · · , cnc }, and their associated edge set E = {ei,j}, where ei,j denotes an edge connection between the i-th CN ci (i = 1, 2, · · · , nc) and the j-th VN vj (j = 1, 2, · · · , nv). Meanwhile, a protograph can be described by a base matrix B = (bi,j). The i-th CN ci, j-th VN vj, and edge ei,j within a protograph correspond to the i-th row, j-th column, and number of edges connecting ci to vj (i.e., bi,j) in a base matrix, respectively. Based on a protograph, one can use a lifting procedure to yield its derived graph, which serves to generate the corresponding P-LDPC codeword with a code rate Rp = (nv − nc)/(nv − np), where np is the number of punctured VNs. If a length-n P-LDPC codeword is generated from a protograph with nv VNs, the lifting factor equals f = n/nv. In this work, the lifting procedure is realized through a modified progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [29].
B. Proposed P-LDPC-Coded SC-HM Systems
Different from the traditional BIC-HM systems which can only provide the different QoS services among a group of data streams, we propose an enhanced HM version, namely SC-HM systems. The proposed SC-HM systems are capable of enabling the QoS tradeoff (i.e., the error performance and transmission-rate tradeoff) for every data stream. The block diagram of the proposed SC-HM system is depicted in Fig. 3, while the novel SC coding and ILC decoding schemes are illustrated as follows.
1) Proposed SC coding: For the HM-based transmitter, we assume that there exist L different information-bit streams (i.e., the layer-1, layer-2, · · · , layer-L information-bit streams). Moreover, these information-bit streams are re-ranked sequentially according to their priorities. In other words, the i-th information-bit stream has higher priority than the (i + 1)-th one, where i = 1, 2, · · · , L − 1. Based on the above preliminaries, the layer-1 information-bit stream is passed to its corresponding layer-1 encoder and encoded to a rate-R1p P-LDPC codeword. Particularly, the layer1 encoding is exactly the same as the encoding in the traditional BIC-HM systems. Nonetheless, for the remaining L − 1 information-bit streams, they have a new encoding procedure, which is different from that of the layer-1 information-bit stream. To be specific, before encoding the remaining L − 1 information-bit streams, the layer-1 information-bit stream is first divided into L − 1 information groups sequentially. The number of information bits (i.e., pi) within the i-th information group is determined based on the QoS requirement of the (i + 1)-th data stream. For example, one can enlarge (resp. decrease) pi to improve the performance

(resp. spectral efficiency) of the (i + 1)-th data stream.

Assuming the length of the layer-1 information-bit stream is l1inf , the range of the value pi is given by {0, 1, 2, · · · , l1inf }. After the above process, the i-th information group (also called multiplexed information

bits for simplicity in this work) will be merged into

the (i + 1)-th information-bit stream, which leads to

a new one. The new information-bit stream is passed

to its corresponding layer-(i + 1) encoder and encoded to a rate-R(pi+1) multiplexed P-LDPC codeword, whose multiplexed information bits belonging to the i-th infor-

mation group of the layer-1 information-bit stream are

punctured (i.e., will not be transmitted). Consequently,

one can obtain a non-multiplexed P-LDPC codeword,

L − 1 multiplexed P-LDPC codewords, and a look-up

table describing the bit-mapping relationship between

the layer-1 P-LDPC codeword and the layer-(i + 1) P-

LDPC codeword, where i = 1, 2, · · · , L−1. An example

is illustrated in Fig. 4 to facilitate understanding the

look-up table, where the squares with a cross denote

the parity-check bits. Also, for the layer-1 P-LDPC

codeword, the empty squares denote information bits.

For the layer-(i + 1) P-LDPC codeword, the squares

with a number “0” denote the original information bits,

while the squares with a number “j ̸= 0” indicate the

information bits at the j-th position in the layer-1 P-

LDPC codeword. From the above discussion, there is

no restriction on the code rate and puncturing-bit length np1

R1p, of

codeword length n1, the layer-1 P-LDPC

codeword. For the remaining layer-(i + 1) P-LDPC

codeword (i = 1, 2, · · · , L − 1), it has the same code rate as the layer-1 counterpart (i.e., R(pi+1) = R1p) since
we adopt the same protograph for all layers. However,

due to the introduction of pi multiplexed bits, the code-
word length of the layer-(i + 1) P-LDPC codeword is n(i+1) = n1 −n1p +np(i+1) +pi, where np(i+1) = (n1p/n1) × n(i+1) is the corresponding puncturing-bit length.
Consequently, the layer-1 transmission rate is equal to

the code rate of the layer-1 P-LDPC codeword (i.e., R1 = R1p), while the layer-(i + 1) transmission rate ranges from R1p to (R1p)2 as pi changes from 0 to l1inf .
2) Proposed ILC decoding: In the HM-based receiver,

we assume that there are an initial indicator ϕ = 0,

a pre-set LLR threshold lpre, and a maximum number of BP iterations TBP. When the hierarchical demodulator separately sends the L LLR sequences to the L

different decoders (i.e., the layer-1, layer-2, · · · , layer-

L decoders), through a serial-to-parallel operation, the

layer-1 decoder used to process the highest-priority data

stream will first decode the layer-1 LLR sequence by

means of the BP algorithm. To reduce the number of

iterations required for the BP decoding (i.e., reduce the

decoding complexity), we introduce an early-stopping

criterion. Specifically, once the a-posteriori LLR-based

decoding fails, we calculate the means of absolute values

of a-posteriori LLRs for the information bits multi-

plexed by the other L − 1 decoders. The corresponding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: SC-HM SYSTEMS WITH PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES: A PROMISING TRANSCEIVER DESIGN

1107

Fig. 3. Block diagram of the proposed SC-HM system over an AWGN channel.

Fig. 4. A look-up table of the proposed SC coding scheme.

calculation is given as

la1v,te = ||l1m,ut l||1/(p1 + p2 + · · · + pL−1),

(2)

where ||·||1 and lm1,ut l denote an L1-norm and an LLR vector composed of all multiplexed information bits,

respectively, and t is the number of BP iterations. Subsequently, we calculate the LLR difference (i.e., DB1,Pt = |la1v,te − la1v,(et−1)|) between two adjacent BP iterations. If the condition DB1,Pt ≥ lpre is satisfied, the BP decoding
continues; Otherwise, the current decoding process is

terminated. When the BP decoding is terminated: (i) the

decoding is successful, while the indicator is set to

ϕ = 1; (ii) the decoding is failed and TBP is reached; (iii) the decoding is failed due to DB1,Pt < lpre. The extrinsic LLRs of these multiplexed information bits will

be computed and then used as the a-priori LLRs of the

punctured bits in their corresponding layer-i decoder

based on the look-up table, where i = 2, 3, · · · , L.

Afterwards, the L−1 decoders perform the BP decoding

at the same time. Similarly, to reduce the decoding

complexity, the early-stopping criterion for the layer-i

decoder is also considered after the failure of each BP

decoding. The means of absolute values of a-posteriori

LLRs of the multiplexed information bits in the layer-i

(i = 2, 3, · · · , L) decoder is given as

lai,vte = ||lim,tul||1/pi,

(3)

where lim,tul is an LLR vector composed of pi multiplexed information bits used in the layer-i decoder. The decision to continue or terminate the BP decoding is made by comparing the LLR difference DBi,tP = |lai,vte − lai,v(et−1)| with lpre. When all decoders terminate their decoding procedures, they will output their decoded bits if ϕ = 1; Otherwise, an outer iteration process is executed. Specifically, the layer-i (i = 2, 3, · · · , L) decoder will also compute the extrinsic LLRs of the punctured bits and then send them to the layer-1 decoder. These extrinsic LLRs (i.e., feedback LLRs) and their corresponding initial LLRs output from the hierarchical demodulator are added together, which are treated as the updated a-priori LLRs for the layer-1 decoder in next iterative decoding. Note that for the information bits multiplexed in more than one decoder, only the extrinsic LLRs output from the highest-priority decoder among them are fed back to the layer-1 decoder. To make the above discussion for ILC decoding clearer, the corresponding pseudo-code is given in Algorithm 1.
Remark 2:
• During outer iterations, the soft information is exchanged between the hierarchical demodulator and L decoders in the traditional BIC-HM system. However, in the proposed SC-HM system, only partial soft information is exchanged between the highest-priority decoder and the other L − 1 low-priority decoders (i.e., do not include the hierarchical demodulator). Therefore, the proposed SC-HM system can enjoy lower computational complexity.
• In the proposed SC-HM system, the non-multiplexed codeword and the other L − 1 multiplexed codewords used for the 1-st layer and the i-th layer (i = 2, 3, · · · , L), respectively, must possess the same transmitted codeword length. This is to ensure that all codewords are fully mapped to a modulation symbol sequence by the hierarchical modulator.
• By merging partial information bits extracted from the layer-1 information-bit stream and the entire layer-i (i = 2, 3, · · · , L) information-bit stream into a new information-bit stream used for the layer-i encoding, a parity-check constraint for both two different types of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1108

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Algorithm 1 Proposed ILC Decoding

1 Parameter Initialization: Initialize an indicator ϕ = 0,

a pre-set LLR threshold lpre, an iteration factor Fiter, and

a maximum number of BP iterations TBP.

while ϕ = 0 do

2 Fiter = 0; for t = 1, 2, · · · , TBP do

3

if ϕ = 0 and Fiter = 0 then

4

Execute a BP decoding for layer-1 LLR

sequence;

if decoding is successful then

5

ϕ = 1.

6

else

7

Calculate la1v,te by (2) and DB1,Pt .

if DB1,Pt ≥ lpre then

8

Fiter = 0.

9

else

10

Fiter = 1.

11 Send the extrinsic LLRs of multiplexed information

bits from the layer-1 decoder to the other L −

1 decoders based on the look-up table.

12 for i = 2, 3, · · · , L do

13

Fiter = 0;

for t = 1, 2, · · · , TBP do

14

if Fiter = 0 then

15

Execute a BP decoding for layer-i LLR

sequence;

if decoding is successful then

16

Fiter = 1.

17

else

18

Calculate lai,vte by (3) and DBi,tP.

if DBi,tP ≥ lpre then

19

Fiter = 0.

20

else

21

Fiter = 1.

22 Send the extrinsic LLRs of multiplexed information bits from the L − 1 decoders to the layer-1 decoder based on the look-up table.

information bits can be generated. The layer-1 codeword has the highest reliability among all codewords, and then the soft information of multiplexed information bits extracted from the layer-1 codeword can enhance the convergence performance of the layer-i codeword in the layer-i decoding procedure. • During the outer iterations, one can enhance the error performance of the layer-1 codeword (i.e., the highest-priority data stream) by iteratively improving the soft information of these multiplexed information bits between the layer-1 decoder and the layer-i (i = 2, 3, · · · , L) decoder.

• Once the layer-1 information bits are successfully decoded (i.e., ϕ = 1), the reliability of the multiplexed information bits is high enough. Additional outer iterations between the layer-1 decoder and the layer-i (i = 2, 3, · · · , L) decoder cannot bring any performance gain to the layer-i codeword, but increasing the decoding complexity.

C. Proposed VND Multiplexing Scheme

In the proposed SC-HM systems, the information bits of

the layer-1 P-LDPC codeword can be multiplexed in the

remaining layer-2, layer-3, · · · , layer-L P-LDPC codewords

to strike a tradeoff between the error performance and the

transmission rate. Assume that irregular P-LDPC codes, which

always exhibit better performance than their regular counter-

parts [30], are considered in the SC-HM systems, the VNs with

different degrees have different convergence performances.

There is room to optimize the multiplexing method to further

improve the performance of the SC-HM systems. Accordingly,

we design a new VND multiplexing scheme, which can modify

the mapping relationship between the multiplexed information

bits of the layer-1 P-LDPC codeword and the VNs in a given

irregular P-LDPC code corresponding to the layer-i (i =

2, 3, · · · , L) P-LDPC codeword, and this is beneficial to help

the layer-i P-LDPC codeword achieve excellent performance.

Details related to the proposed VND multiplexing scheme are

shown as follows.

1) Generating the Layer-i Multiplexed Information-Bit

Stream: Given the layer-1 coded-bit stream, we assume that

the number of information bits within the corresponding

layer-1 information-bit stream is ninf,1. According to the QoS requirements of the remaining L − 1 coded-bit streams,

one first determines the number of multiplexed information

bits required for the layer-i coded-bit stream (i.e., bQoS,i and i ∈ {2, 3, · · · , L}). Then, based on the order of the

layer indices, one can extract bQoS,i information bits from the layer-1 information-bit stream to generate the layer-i

multiplexed information-bit stream. It is worth noting that

(i) if

L i=2

bQoS,i

≤

ninf ,1 ,

these

multiplexed

information-bit

streams are generated by extracting information bits from

the layer-1 information-bit stream sequentially; (ii) Otherwise

(i.e.,

L i=2

bQoS,i

>

ninf,1),

a

tail-biting

approach

is

used

to

extract the information bits from the layer-1 information-bit

stream. Case (ii) implies that the information bits extracted

from the layer-1 information-bit stream can be multiplexed in

either one or more of the remaining L − 1 coded-bit streams.

2) Constructing the Layer-i P-LDPC Codeword: For an

irregular P-LDPC code, one can first perform a column permu-

tation on its basic matrix according to the descending order of

VN degrees. The corresponding parity-check matrix Hp can be generated by the PEG algorithm. Also, through the systematic

procedure, one can attain the systematic parity-check matrix H′p = [IH|A], where IH is an np × np identity matrix, A is an np × nk non-low-density matrix, and np + nk = n. In particular, if the np × np matrix Hr composed of the first np columns of Hp is a full-rank matrix, IH and A

correspond to the high-degree VNs and low-degree VNs,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: SC-HM SYSTEMS WITH PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES: A PROMISING TRANSCEIVER DESIGN

1109

Fig. 5. An example of the proposed VND multiplexing scheme for the RJA P-LDPC code.

respectively, since the descending order of VN degrees is considered in the basic matrix. Based on Hp′ , one can attain its corresponding generating matrix G = [AT|IG], where T denotes a transpose operation and IG is an nk × nk identity matrix. Using G and the layer-i information-bit stream consisting of both the original and multiplexed information bits, one can generate a systematic layer-i P-LDPC codeword, whose parity-check bits and information bits correspond to IH and A of Hp′ , respectively. Based on above discussion, the multiplexed information bits are mapped to the lowest-degree VNs of the irregular P-LDPC code. Particularly, once Hr is not a full-rank matrix, one can perform a column permutation on Hp to generate its interleaved version HIpnt., whose first np columns can constitute a full-rank matrix. Meanwhile, the interleaving relationship between HpInt. and Hp (i.e., a look-up table) is determined. Based on HpInt., one can also generate a P-LDPC codeword for low-priority layers, and make the multiplexed information bits be successfully mapped to the lowest-degree VNs. Therefore, the proposed SC-HM system does not limit the range of available protographs.
3) Benefits of the Proposed VND Multiplexing Scheme: As is well known, different VNs within an irregular P-LDPC code have different convergence performance. Moreover, the convergence performance of the high-degree VNs is superior to that of the low-degree counterparts. Based on the proposed VND multiplexing scheme, one not only can multiplex the layer-1 information bits in the remaining L − 1 codedbit streams, but also map them to the low-degree VNs. Although the multiplexed information bits within the layeri (i = 2, 3, · · · , L) coded-bit stream are punctured during transmission, the layer-1 decoder can send the corresponding soft information to the layer-i decoder prior to performing the layer-i BP decoding. Furthermore, the soft information of the multiplexed information bits is more reliable than that of other transmitted bits in the layer-i decoder. In other words, the low-degree VNs of the irregular P-LDPC code will have relatively reliable initial soft information, which is beneficial to achieve a significant performance gain.
Fig. 5 gives a specific example to further illustrate the VND multiplexing principle. In this figure, the repeat-jaggedaccumulate (RJA) [19] P-LDPC code is considered in the SC-HM system with three layers.

Remark 3:
• For a traditional irregular P-LDPC code, even if its Hr is not a full-rank matrix, one can also map the multiplexed information bits to the lowest-degree VNs based on its look-up table. A specific example based on the accumulate-repeat-by-4-jagged-accumulate (AR4JA) [19] P-LDPC code can be found in Table II and Fig. 16.
IV. PROPOSED ILC-EXIT ALGORITHM AND CONVERGENCE PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
A. Proposed ILC-EXIT Algorithm
The EXIT algorithm is a popular theoretical-analysis tool for the design, optimization, and analysis of P-LDPC codes [31]. This algorithm can trace the MI convergence trajectories of a P-LDPC ensemble and calculate its decoding threshold, which is considered as the minimum signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) required for the error-free transmission under iterative decoding. However, the traditional EXIT algorithm [32] is not developed for the multi-data-stream-based transmission scenarios. It can be only used to process a single data stream (i.e., calculate one decoding threshold). For this reason, we propose an ILC-EXIT algorithm to predict the convergence performance of the P-LDPC-coded SC-HM systems, while the block diagram is shown in Fig. 6. As seen, there are several different types of MIs used in the MI calculation process.
• IEzd(j) denotes the extrinsic MI output from the hierarchical demodulator;
• IA1 d(j) denotes the a-priori MI for the layer-2, layer-3, · · · , layer-L VN decoders;
• IEzv(i, j) and IEzc(i, j) denote the extrinsic MIs sent from vj to ci and ci to vj, respectively;
• IAz PP(j) denotes the a-posteriori MI of vj; • Iazv,te denotes the average MI of VNs corresponding to the
multiplexed information bits;
where z ∈ {1, 2, · · · , L} denotes the index of the z-th layer, t ∈ {1, 2, · · · , TEXIT} denotes the t-th EXIT iteration, i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nc}, and j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nv}. We also define L iteration factors Fi1ter, Fi2ter, · · · , FiLter used to decide whether performing the next EXIT iteration or not. Moreover, during each EXIT iteration, there is an MI exchange between the VN decoder and the CN decoder. The detailed steps of the proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm is shown as below.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1110

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 6. Block diagram of the proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm.

1) Initialization: Set an initial SNR, a pre-set MI threshold Ipre, and L iteration factors Fizter = 0 (z ∈ {1, 2, · · · , L}) as the input parameters of the ILC-EXIT
algorithm. 2) Computing L different types of extrinsic MIs output
from the hierarchical demodulator: Based on the
Monte-Carlo simulation, the hierarchical demodulator
outputs an extrinsic LLR sequence, and then divides it
into L sub-sequences by a serial-to-parallel operation. Afterwards, the extrinsic MI IEzd(j) (z ∈ {1, 2, · · · , L}) output from the hierarchical demodulator is computed by


   

IEz d (j )

= =

1 1

− −

E 1
f

[log2 (1 + exp (−skz lkz))] , log2 (1 + exp (−skz lkz))

,

 

k

 

k

=

(j

−

1)f

+

1,

(j

−

1)f

+

2,

·

·

·

,

(j

−

1)f

+

f,

(4)

where szk = (−1)ckz ∈ {+1, −1} and lkz are the k-th converted binary symbol and the corresponding extrinsic LLR, respectively, while ckz ∈ {0, 1} is the k-th coded bit belonging to the z-th P-LDPC codeword. After the
above process, the hierarchical demodulator sends the extrinsic MI IEzd(j) (j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nv}) to the layer-z VN decoder.
3) Setting initial MIs for the layer-1 VN decoder:
The initial MIs for the layer-1 VN decoder are set to Ii1ni(j) = IE1d(j) (j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nv}). For a special case that vj is a punctured VN in a protograph, its initial MI is Ii1ni(j) = 0. 4) Updating the extrinsic MIs in both the layer-1 VN and CN decoders if Fi1ter = 0: Based on the initial MI Ii1ni(j) and a-priori MI IA1 v(i, j), the corresponding extrinsic MI IE1v(i, j) can be computed by (5), as shown

at the bottom of the next page, when bi,j ̸= 0. Especially,
the protograph parameters are z = 1, i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nc}, and j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nv}. As a special case, IE1v(i, j) = 0 when bi,j = 0. Afterwards, the extrinsic MI IE1v(i, j) output from the layer-1 VN decoder is viewed as the a-priori MI IA1 c(i, j) for the layer-1 CN decoder, and used to compute the corresponding extrinsic MI IE1c(i, j) by (6), as shown at the bottom of the next page, when bi,j ≠ 0. Similarly, IE1c(i, j) = 0 if bi,j = 0. Also, IE1c(i, j) will be viewed as the a-priori MI IA1 v(i, j) for next iteration.
5) Updating the a-posteriori MIs in the layer-1 VN decoder: Based on the a-priori MI IA1 v(i, j) and the initial MI Ii1ni(j), one can compute the a-posteriori MI IA1 PP(j) exploiting (7), as shown at the bottom of the next page. (i) If IA1 PP(j) = 1 for all j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nv}, the decoder can converge successfully. The a-priori MI IA1 d(j) is then computed as

IA1 d(j) = J

nc
bi,j J −1 IA1 v(i, j)
i=1

2 1/2
. (8)

(ii) If the decoder cannot converge successfully and
TEXIT is not reached, one can calculate the average MI Iazv,te (only for z = 1) at the t-th iteration, as

Iazv,te = E [IAz PP(j) × Fmz ul(j)] ,

(9)

where Fmz ul(j) denotes the multiplexing factor. Once

the coded bits corresponding to the VN vj are used in

the multiplexing procedure, Fmz ul(j) = 1; Otherwise,

Fmz ul(j) between

= 0. two

Then, one can compute adjacent iterations (i.e.,

the MI DEz,Xt IT

difference = |Iazv,te −

Iazv,(et−1)|). If DEz,Xt IT ≥ Ipre, Fizter = 0 and return to

Step 4); Otherwise, Fizter = 1 and calculate the a-priori

MI IA1 d(j) by (8).

(iii) If the convergence is not successful and TEXIT is

reached, set Fizter = 1 and calculate the a-priori MI IA1 d(j) by (8).

6) Setting initial MIs for the remaining L − 1 VN

decoders: According to the extrinsic MI IEzd(j) and a-priori MI IA1 d(j), the initial MI of the layer-z VN

decoder for z = 2, 3, · · · , L is computed as

Iizni(j)

=

IEz d (j )

×

f1z (j ) f

+

IA1 d(j)

×

Fmz ul(j)

×

f2z(j) , f

(10)

where f1z(j) (resp. f2z(j)) is the number of nonmultiplexed (resp. multiplexed) bits corresponding to the VN vj in the layer-z coded-bit stream, while f1z(j) + f2z(j) = f . 7) Updating the extrinsic MIs in the remaining L−1 VN and CN decoders if Fizter = 0: Similar to Step 4), one can use the initial MI Iizni(j) and a-priori MI IAz v(i, j) to compute the corresponding extrinsic MI IEzv(i, j) by (5), and then use the a-priori MI IAz c(i, j) to compute the corresponding extrinsic MI IEzc(i, j) by (6), where z = 2, 3, · · · , L.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: SC-HM SYSTEMS WITH PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES: A PROMISING TRANSCEIVER DESIGN

1111

8) Updating the a-posteriori MIs in the remaining L − 1 VN decoders: Similar to Step 5), given the a-priori MI IAz v(i, j) and initial MI Iizni(j), the a-posteriori MI IAz PP(j) can be computed by (7) for z = 2, 3, · · · , L. (i) If IAz PP(j) = 1 for all VNs (i.e., j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nv}), the layer-z decoder can converge successfully. (ii) If the layer-z decoder cannot converge successfully and TEXIT is not reached, one can compute the average MI Iazv,te at the t-th iteration by (9), and then compute DEz,Xt IT. When DEz,Xt IT ≥ Ipre, Fizter = 0 and return to Step 7); Otherwise, Fizter = 1. (iii) If the layer-z decoder cannot converge successfully and TEXIT is reached, one can set Fizter = 1.
9) Finalization: The MI analysis should be performed based on an ascending order of the layer indices because the L different coded-bit streams have different convergence performance. Specifically, the MI analysis for the k-th layer should be executed prior to that for the (k + 1)-th layer, where k = 1, 2, · · · , L − 1. Thus, the ILC-EXIT algorithm is terminated if IALPP(j) = 1 (j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , nv}) or the corresponding maximum number of iterations TEXIT is reached; Otherwise, return to Step 1) and restart with a larger SNR.
Remark 4:
• The density-evolution [33], [34] and EXIT [31] algorithms have been considered as the two most popular techniques for analysis and optimization of LDPC codes under iterative decoding. However, the EXIT algorithm has gained a larger attention because it provides comparable accuracy as the density evolution in decoding-threshold analysis with a relatively lower complexity [19], [32]. Particularly, several EXIT-aided analytical methods have been proposed to facilitate the design of LDPC coded-modulation systems [7], [15], [23], [30], [35]. Due to the appealing advantages of the EXIT principle, we employ it to analyze the convergence performance of the proposed SC-HM system.
• The proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm can simultaneously process L different data streams (i.e., calculate L different decoding thresholds). Therefore, in the MI iteration process, L different groups of extrinsic MIs (e.g., IEzd, IEzv, IEzc), initial MI Iizni, and a-posteriori MI IAz PP (z = 1, 2, · · · , L) should be calculated for L different data streams, respectively.
• The proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm, which is designed for analyzing the convergence performance of SC-HM

system, takes the SC coding characteristic into account. For this reason, the calculation of the initial MI Iikni for the k-th (k = 2, 3, · · · , L) VN decoder depends on the a-priori MI IA1 d output from the 1-st VN decoder. In other words, the initial MI calculation (i.e., Step 6) in this algorithm is different from that in existing counterparts [23], [32], [35]. • The proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm introduces the early-stopping criterion (i.e., Steps 5 and 8). The MI iteration process can be early terminated once the MI difference between two adjacent iterations is less than the pre-set MI threshold (i.e., DEz,Xt IT < Ipre). Consequently, it is beneficial to reduce the computational overhead while maintaining the accuracy in the MI analysis.
B. Convergence-Performance Analysis
To verify the superiority of the proposed design, we analyze the convergence performance of the P-LDPC-coded SC-HM system, while the traditional BIC-HM system is used as a benchmark. Moreover, a Gray-based 16-QAM constellation is used to implement the modulation method based on two data streams.3 Also, a rate-1/2 regular-(3, 6) [23] P-LDPC code is adopted as the channel coding scheme for both the 1-st and 2nd layers in the proposed SC-HM system, while a multiplexing scheme is used to modify the transmission rate of the layer2 data stream. For the BIC-HM system, a rate-1/2 regular(3, 6) P-LDPC code is adopted as the channel coding scheme for the 1-st layer, while a terminated spatially-coupled (TESC) (3, 6) [23], [36] P-LDPC code with different coupling lengths is adopted as the channel coding scheme for the 2nd layer. This is because the TE-SC-(3, 6) P-LDPC code has an almost identical degree distribution as the regular-(3, 6) PLDPC code. Also, one can change the transmission rate of the layer-2 data stream by modifying the number of the coupling length of the TE-SC-(3, 6) P-LDPC code.
In Table I, for the layer-2 data stream, it is obvious that the proposed SC-HM system can achieve a wide range of transmission rates based on the multiplexing scheme, and perform better than the BIC-HM system. To be specific, the proposed SC-HM system achieves the decoding threshold gains of about 0.19 dB and 0.16 dB for R2 = 0.4 and R2 = 0.3, respectively, over the BIC-HM system. Meanwhile, we investigate the
3In subsequent simulations, the Gray-based 16-QAM constellation is also used as the modulation method based on two data streams unless otherwise stated.

2

2

2 1/2

IEzv(i, j) = J

bs,j J −1 IAz v(s, j) + bi,j − 1 J −1 IAz v(i, j) + J −1 Iizni(j)

(5)

s̸=i

2

2 1/2

IEzc(i, j) = 1 − J

bi,s J −1 1 − IAz c(i, s) + bi,j − 1 J −1 1 − IAz c(i, j)

(6)

s≠ j

nc

2

2 1/2

IAz PP(j) = J

bi,j J −1 IAz v(i, j) + J −1 Iizni(j)

(7)

i=1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1112

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

TABLE I
THE LAYER-2 DECODING THRESHOLDS (τthr ) OF TRADITIONAL BIC-HM SYSTEM WITH THE TE-SC-(3, 6) P-LDPC CODE AND PROPOSED SC-HM SYSTEM WITH THE REGULAR-(3, 6) P-LDPC CODE

TABLE II
THE LAYER-2 DECODING THRESHOLDS (τthr ) OF PROPOSED SC-HM SYSTEM WITH THE AR4JA P-LDPC CODE. THE LAYER-2 TRANSMISSION RATE IS SET TO R2 = 0.4. DIFFERENT MULTIPLEXING SCHEMES ARE CONSIDERED AND THE GAPS TO SHANNON LIMITS ARE GIVEN

TABLE III
THE LAYER-2 DECODING THRESHOLDS (τthr ) OF PROPOSED SC-HM SYSTEM WITH THE TE-SC-(3, 6) CODE. THE LAYER-2 TRANSMISSION RATE IS SET TO R2 = 0.3. DIFFERENT MULTIPLEXING SCHEMES ARE CONSIDERED AND THE GAPS TO SHANNON LIMITS ARE GIVEN

Fig. 7. EXIT iterations in the decoding-threshold analysis for the layer-2 data stream using two different EXIT (i.e., traditional EXIT and proposed ILC-EXIT) algorithms, where layer-2 transmission rate is set to R2 = 0.3. To achieve this goal, the TE-SC-(3, 6) and regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC codes are adopted as the channel coding schemes for the traditional BIC-HM system and proposed SC-HM system, respectively.
number of EXIT iterations required in the decoding threshold analysis for the layer-2 data stream with a transmission rate R2 = 0.3. The traditional EXIT and proposed ILC-EXIT algorithms are considered for the traditional BIC-HM and proposed SC-HM systems, respectively. In particular, the maximum number of EXIT iterations is set to TEXIT = 100, while the MI threshold is set to Ipre = 1.0 × 10−7. As depicted in Fig. 7, one can find that (i) the proposed SC-HM system achieves a lower decoding threshold than the traditional BIC-HM system; (ii) the proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm significantly reduces the iterations required for convergence. Specifically, different from the traditional EXIT algorithm (i.e., the dash line), which requires at least 100 (the maximum value) EXIT iterations at any SNR < 3.154 dB (i.e., decoding threshold), the proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm (i.e., the solid line with circles) requires less iterations (i.e., stop early) with the aid of the earlystopping principle. Additionally, the MI threshold can be set to Ipre = 0, which implies the proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm without early stopping (i.e., the solid line). Therefore, the proposed ILC-EXIT algorithm enjoys the low-complexity benefit, without sacrificing the accuracy in the decoding threshold estimation.
Furthermore, we adopt the irregular AR4JA P-LDPC code as the channel coding scheme in the proposed SC-HM system. The layer-1 transmission rate is R1 = 0.5, while the layer2 transmission rate is adjusted to R2 = 0.4 by different multiplexing schemes. Referring to Table II, one can notice that mapping the layer-1 information bits to the layer-2

protograph VNs with different degrees (i.e., degrees 3, 2, and 1) results in different decoding thresholds. Furthermore, the proposed VND multiplexing scheme, which establishes the mapping relationship between the layer-1 information bits and the layer-2 protograph VN with the lowest degree (i.e., degree1 VN), can yield the lowest decoding threshold. Therefore, the proposed VND multiplexing scheme is preferable for the proposed SC-HM system.
We also analyze the performance of spatially coupled P-LDPC codes with the proposed VND multiplexing scheme. Specifically, the rate-1/2 regular-(3, 6) and rate-2/5 TE-SC(3, 6) P-LDPC codes are adopted as the channel coding schemes for the layer-1 and layer-2 data streams, respectively. The layer-2 transmission rate can be adjusted to 3/10 by a multiplexing scheme (instead of modifying the number of the coupling lengths). In Table III, it can be observed that mapping the layer-1 information bits to the VNs at the middle positions of the layer-2 TE-SC protograph can yield a lower layer-2 decoding threshold. This is because for the TE-SC-(3, 6) PLDPC code, the convergence performance of the VNs at the middle positions is inherently worse than that of the VNs at both end positions. Hence, by mapping the layer-1 information bits to the layer-2 VNs with the worst convergence performance in the multiplexing procedure, the decoding threshold of the layer-2 data stream can be significantly improved.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
We perform bit-error-rate (BER) simulations over AWGN channels to validate the superiorities of the proposed SC-HM system, while the traditional BIC-HM system is adopted as the benchmark. Unless otherwise specified, we assume that both HM systems do not include outer iterations, and the lengths of both layer-1 and layer-2 data streams are 2400. The transmission rate of the layer-1 data stream is R1 = 0.5, while that of the layer-2 data stream can be varied according to the QoS requirements. Besides, the Gray-based 16-QAM modulation is considered, and the maximum number of BP iterations is set to TBP = 100.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: SC-HM SYSTEMS WITH PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES: A PROMISING TRANSCEIVER DESIGN

1113

Fig. 8. BER performance of the traditional BIC-HM system and proposed SC-HM system. The regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC code is considered, while the layer-2 transmission rate is set to R2 ∈ {0.3, 0.35, 0.4, 0.45, 0.5}.

Fig. 9. BER performance of the layer-2 data stream with a transmission rate R2 ∈ {0.3, 0.4}. To achieve this goal, the TE-SC-(3, 6) and regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC codes are adopted as the channel coding schemes for the traditional BIC-HM system and proposed SC-HM system, respectively.
A. Proposed SC-HM Systems With Regular P-LDPC Codes
Referring to Fig. 8, a rate-1/2 regular-(3, 6) [37] P-LDPC code is considered. It is obvious that there is a large BER performance gap between the layer-1 and layer-2 data streams in the traditional BIC-HM system. Specifically, at a BER of 2 × 10−5, a BER performance gap of about 4.2 dB can be obtained. Different from the traditional BIC-HM system, the proposed SC-HM system can achieve a flexible tradeoff between the performance and the transmission rate for the layer-2 data stream, without deteriorating the performance of the layer-1 data stream. In other words, the proposed SC-HM system is capable of providing different QoS services for a single data stream. More importantly, the proposed SC-HM system can enable a flexible variation in the layer2 transmission rate based on a given P-LDPC code, which significantly saves the memory space. This is because the traditional communication system needs to store multiple P-LDPC codes or a rate-compatible (RC) P-LDPC code with a larger parity-check matrix to realize different transmission rates. Although we only perform analyses on the proposed SC-HM system with the Gray constellation in this section, the proposed SC-HM system with other constellations (e.g.,

Fig. 10. (a) BP iterations and (b) BER performance of the layer-2 data stream with a transmission rate R2 = 0.3. To achieve this goal, the TE-SC-(3, 6) and regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC codes are adopted as the channel coding schemes for the traditional BIC-HM system and proposed SC-HM system, respectively.
the structural-quadrant (SQ) constellation [7]) is also able to provide diverse QoS services for a single data stream.
Fig. 9 presents the layer-2 performance comparison between the traditional BIC-HM system with TE-SC-(3, 6) P-LDPC codes and the proposed SC-HM system with a regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC code. In particular, to realize the layer-2 transmission rates R2 = 0.3 and 0.4, the coupling lengths for the TESC-(3, 6) P-LDPC code are set to 5 and 10, respectively. Referring to this figure, at a BER of 1 × 10−5, the proposed SC-HM system exhibits a gain of around 0.4 dB over the traditional BIC-HM system in both two different cases (i.e., R2 = 0.3 and 0.4). This implies that the proposed SC-HM system can achieve a desirable tradeoff between the error performance and the transmission rate.
In Fig. 10 (a), we analyze the average number of BP iterations required for the layer-2 data stream to achieve convergence at different SNRs. Particularly, the layer-2 transmission rate is set to R2 = 0.3, while the TE-SC-(3, 6) and regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC codes are used in the traditional BIC-HM and proposed SC-HM systems, respectively. Obviously, the proposed SC-HM system requires less BP iterations than the traditional BIC-HM system, especially when the value of the pre-set LLR threshold lpre is increased. Meanwhile, the BER performance of these above two HM systems are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1114

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 11. Comparison for the average numbers of calculations in different operations under the proposed SC-HM system with two different pre-set LLR thresholds lpre = 0 and lpre = 0.2: (a) Addition; (b) Multiplication; and (c) tanh. The regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC code is adopted as the channel coding scheme, while the transmission rates for the two different layers are set to R1 = 0.5 and R2 = 0.3.

Fig. 12. BER performance of the layer-1 data stream in the traditional BIC-HM system and proposed SC-HM system. The regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC code is considered, while the transmission rate is set to R1 = 0.5. The numbers of outer iterations are assumed to Tout = 1 and 6.

Fig. 13. BER performance of the layer-2 data stream in the traditional BIC-HM system and proposed SC-HM system. The AR4JA P-LDPC code is considered, while the layer-2 transmission rate is set to R2 ∈ {0.3, 0.35, 0.4, 0.45, 0.5}.

shown in Fig. 10 (b). The proposed SC-HM system can enjoy the low computational overhead without sacrificing the BER performance. Based on the early-stopping criterion, the proposed SC-HM system can exhibit a significant improvement in the decoding complexity (i.e., in the number of calculations). As observed from Fig. 11, we compare the average numbers of calculations in different operations, including addition, multiplication, and tanh, required by the regular-(3, 6) PLDPC code to achieve convergence in two different layers at different SNRs. Particularly, the pre-set LLR thresholds lpre = 0 and lpre = 0.2 (i.e., without and with early stopping) are considered. In this figure, one can notice that the numbers of calculations in the three different operations under lpre = 0.2 are obviously less than those under lpre = 0, especially in the low-to-medium SNR region (i.e., SNR ≤ 3.2 dB).
Fig. 12 studies the BER performance of the layer-1 data stream in the traditional BIC-HM and proposed SC-HM systems with two different numbers of outer iterations. To realize R1 = 0.5 and R2 = 0.3, the traditional BIC-HM system adopts the regular-(3, 6) and TE-SC-(3, 6) P-LDPC codes as the channel coding schemes for the layer-1 and layer-2 data streams, respectively, while the proposed SC-HM system only uses the regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC code as the channel

coding scheme for both two layers. As descried in this figure, by increasing outer iterations, the layer-1 BER performance of the traditional BIC-HM system cannot be improved, while that of the proposed SC-HM system can be significantly enhanced. This is because the layer-1 data stream (i.e., the high-priority data stream) can benefit from the exchange of soft information of its corresponding multiplexed information bits in the proposed ILC decoding procedure. For instance, at a BER of 2 × 10−6, an additional BER performance gain of about 0.2 dB can be achieved by increasing the outer iterations from Tout = 1 to Tout = 6.
B. Proposed SC-HM Systems With Irregular P-LDPC Codes
We also investigate the BER performance of the traditional BIC-HM and proposed SC-HM systems with irregular PLDPC codes. As shown in Fig. 13, the proposed SC-HM system with the AR4JA [19] P-LDPC code achieves a desirable tradeoff between the error performance and the transmission rate for the layer-2 data stream. Moreover, for different layer-2 transmission rates, the proposed SC-HM system with the AR4JA P-LDPC code exhibits both lower decoding threshold and better performance than that with the regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC code (see Table I and Fig. 8).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: SC-HM SYSTEMS WITH PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES: A PROMISING TRANSCEIVER DESIGN

1115

Fig. 14. BER performance of the layer-1 data stream in the proposed SC-HM system with regular-(3, 6) and AR4JA P-LDPC codes. The transmission rate is assumed to R1 = 0.5.
As a further insight, Fig. 14 studies the BER performance of the layer-1 data stream in the proposed SC-HM system with the regular-(3, 6) and AR4JA P-LDPC codes. One can observe that the proposed SC-HM system with the AR4JA P-LDPC code significantly outperforms that with the regular(3, 6) P-LDPC code. Meanwhile, we analyze the layer-1 BER performance in two different decoding scenarios, i.e., (i) TBP = 600 and Tout = 1, and (ii) TBP = 100 and Tout = 6. For both regular-(3, 6) and AR4JA P-LDPC-coded SC-HM systems, the BER performance shown in decoding scenario (ii) is much better than that shown in decoding scenario (i). It is because that the layer-1 data stream (i.e., the high-priority data stream) benefits from the soft-information exchange between two different data streams in the proposed ILC decoding, rather than from an increase in BP iterations.
Fig. 15 compares the BER performance of the layer-2 data stream in the traditional BIC-HM system with state-ofthe-art RC P-LDPC codes and the proposed SC-HM system with AR4JA P-LDPC code. In particular, we initialize the transmission rate R2 ∈ {0.333, 0.375, 0.4, 0.428}, and adopt six different RC P-LDPC codes as benchmarks, including the RC I [21], RC II [38], RC III [21], protograph-based raptorlike (PBRL) [39], accumulate-repeat-by-jagged-accumulate (ARJA) [40] and accumulate-repeat-3-accumulate (AR3A) [41] P-LDPC codes. Referring to this figure, the proposed SC-HM system with the rate-1/2 AR4JA P-LDPC code not only can realize four different layer-2 transmission rates (i.e., R2 = 0.333, 0.375, 0.4, and 0.428), but also exhibit excellent BER performance, which is close to (even better than) that of the traditional BIC-HM system with well-designed RC P-LDPC codes in the high-SNR region.
C. Further Verification of Proposed Design
We further perform simulations on the SC-HM system with the irregular AR4JA P-LDPC code. In particular, the transmission rate R2 = 0.4 is considered, and three different multiplexing methods are used, i.e., mapping the layer-1 information bits to the layer-2 VNs with degrees 1, 2, and 3. Also, the traditional BIC-HM system is adopted as the benchmark. As shown in Fig. 16, one can observe that the

Fig. 15. BER performance of the layer-2 data stream with a transmission rate R2 ∈ {0.333, 0.375, 0.4, 0.428}. To achieve this goal, six different state-of-the-art RC P-LDPC codes (i.e., RC I, RC II, RC III, PBRL, ARJA, and AR3A P-LDPC codes) and the AR4JA P-LDPC code are adopted as the channel coding schemes for the traditional BIC-HM system and the proposed SC-HM system, respectively.
Fig. 16. BER performance of the layer-2 data stream with a transmission rate R2 ∈ {0.4, 0.5}. The AR4JA P-LDPC code is adopted as the channel coding scheme in the traditional BIC-HM system and the proposed SC-HM system with different multiplexing schemes.
SC-HM system strikes a tradeoff between the performance and transmission rate for the layer-2 data stream. However, different multiplexing methods will lead to different performance. It is obvious that mapping the layer-1 information bits to the layer-2 VN with degree 1, which is the lowest reliable VN, can produce the best performance. This verifies the rationality of the proposed VND multiplexing scheme introduced in the SC-HM systems.
As a further insight, Fig. 17 presents the simulations of the proposed SC-HM system with the regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC code. In particular, the Gray-based 64-QAM modulation is considered, while three different transmission rates corresponding to three different layers (i.e., R1 = 0.5, R2 = R3 = 0.3) are assumed. Meanwhile, the traditional BIC-HM system is adopted as the benchmark. One can notice that the proposed SC-HM system is also applicable to a higher-order (i.e., 64-ary) modulation. Furthermore, the layer-2 and layer-3 data streams (i.e., the low-priority data streams) can achieve a desirable tradeoff between their performance and transmission rates. We then conclude that the proposed SC-HM system can provide diverse QoS services for different data streams based on their individual requirements.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1116

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 17. BER performance of the traditional BIC-HM system and proposed SC-HM system. The regular-(3, 6) P-LDPC code and Gray-based 64-QAM modulation are considered, while the transmission rates for the three different layers are set to R1 = 0.5, R2 = R3 ∈ {0.3, 0.5}.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper has proposed a design of an enhanced version of BIC-HM systems, referred to as source-constrained (SC)-HM systems. We have first put forward a novel SC coding scheme tailored for the HM-based transmitter. The SC coding scheme can introduce an SC mapping relationship among all data streams, and thus make them dependent on one another. Based on the SC characteristic, we have further conceived a novel ILC decoding scheme tailored for the HM-based receiver. By using the ILC decoding scheme, (i) any low-priority data stream can strike a tradeoff between the performance and the transmission rate without sacrificing the performance of other data streams; (ii) all data streams can enjoy the benefit of low decoding complexity (i.e., low computational overhead); (iii) the highest-priority data stream can achieve performance gains from the exchange of soft information of its corresponding multiplexed information bits. Moreover, we have designed a VND multiplexing scheme to optimize the mapping relationship between the highest-priority data stream and the low-priority data streams, and this helps significantly improve the performance of the low-priority data streams. Furthermore, inspired by the ILC decoding framework, we have conceived a modified ILC-EXIT algorithm to evaluate the convergence performance of the P-LDPC-coded SC-HM systems. Numerical results have validated the superior error performance, low decoding latency, and strong transmission-rate adaptation of the proposed P-LDPC-coded SC-HM systems. Thanks to the above benefits, the proposed P-LDPC-coded SC-HM systems can be treated as a promising candidate for use in future 6Genabled IoT applications with diverse QoS requirements.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Sun, C. Dong, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Five decades of hierarchical modulation and its benefits in relay-aided networking,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 2891–2921, 2015.
[2] C. Hausl and J. Hagenauer, “Relay communication with hierarchical modulation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 64–66, Jan. 2007.
[3] J. M. Park, S.-L. Kim, and J. Choi, “Hierarchically modulated network coding for asymmetric two-way relay systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 2179–2184, Jun. 2010.

[4] M.-k. Chang and S.-y. Lee, “Performance analysis of cooperative communication system with hierarchical modulation over Rayleigh fading channel,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2848–2852, Jun. 2009.
[5] H. Jiang and P. A. Wilford, “A hierarchical modulation for upgrading digital broadcast systems,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 223–229, Jun. 2005.
[6] M. J. Hossain, P. K. Vitthaladevuni, M. S. Alouini, V. K. Bhargava, and A. J. Goldsmith, “Adaptive hierarchical modulation for simultaneous voice and multiclass data transmission over fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1181–1194, Jul. 2006.
[7] Z. Yang, Y. Fang, G. Han, and K. M. S. Huq, “Spatially coupled protograph LDPC-coded hierarchical modulated BICM-ID systems: A promising transmission technique for 6G-enabled Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 5149–5163, Apr. 2021.
[8] J. Wu, “Non-uniform and large distance constellation design for hierarchical modulation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., May 2010, pp. 1–5.
[9] M. Gangadharappa, R. Kapoor, and H. Dixit, “An efficient hierarchical 16-QAM dynamic constellation to obtain high PSNR reconstructed images under varying channel conditions,” IET Commun., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 139–147, Jan. 2016.
[10] H. Méric, J. Lacan, F. Arnal, G. Lesthievent, and M.-L. Boucheret, “Combining adaptive coding and modulation with hierarchical modulation in Satcom systems,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 627–637, Dec. 2013.
[11] H. Alasti and S. Gazor, “Vectored implementation of hierarchical 22n QAM,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 11, pp. 1103–1107, Nov. 2015.
[12] Z. Hossain and J. M. Jornet, “Hierarchical bandwidth modulation for ultra-broadband terahertz communications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–7.
[13] H.-Y. Huang and Y.-R. Tsai, “Protection-level-exchanging hierarchical modulation for multiresolution services under decode-and-forward cooperative networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 6742–6753, Aug. 2017.
[14] H. Sun, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Turbo trellis-coded hierarchicalmodulation assisted decode-and-forward cooperation,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 3971–3981, Sep. 2015.
[15] B. Xiao, K. Xiao, Z. Chen, B. Xia, and H. Liu, “Joint design for modulation and constellation labels in multiuser superposition transmission,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 245–259, Jun. 2019.
[16] S. Sandberg and N. Von Deetzen, “Design of bandwidth-efficient unequal error protection LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 802–811, Mar. 2010.
[17] Z. Hu and H. Liu, “A low-complexity LDPC decoding algorithm for hierarchical broadcasting: Design and implementation,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1843–1849, May 2013.
[18] Z. Hu, H. Jiang, H. Li, Z. Chen, and H. Liu, “A low-complexity decoding algorithm for coded hierarchical modulation in single frequency networks,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 302–312, Jun. 2014.
[19] Y. Fang, G. Bi, Y. L. Guan, and F. C. M. Lau, “A survey on protograph LDPC codes and their applications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1989–2016, 4th Quart., 2015.
[20] N. Bonello, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Construction of regular quasi-cyclic protograph LDPC codes based on Vandermonde matrices,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2583–2588, Jul. 2008.
[21] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of rate-compatible protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. 48th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[22] B. A. Jayawickrama and Y. He, “Improved layered normalized min-sum algorithm for 5G NR LDPC,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 2015–2018, Sep. 2022.
[23] Z. Yang, Y. Fang, G. Zhang, F. C. M. Lau, S. Mumtaz, and D. B. da Costa, “Analysis and optimization of tail-biting spatially coupled protograph LDPC codes for BICM-ID systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 390–404, Jan. 2020.
[24] J. Tan, Q. Wang, C. Qian, Z. Wang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “A reducedcomplexity demapping algorithm for BICM-ID systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 4350–4356, Sep. 2015.
[25] H. Pan, S. C. Liew, J. Liang, V. C. M. Leung, and J. Li, “Coding of multi-source information streams with age of information requirements,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1427–1440, May 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: SC-HM SYSTEMS WITH PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES: A PROMISING TRANSCEIVER DESIGN

1117

[26] M. Franceschini, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “Does the performance of LDPC codes depend on the channel?” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2129–2132, Dec. 2006.
[27] Q. Chen, F. C. M. Lau, H. Wu, and C. Chen, “Analysis and improvement of error-floor performance for JSCC scheme based on double protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 14316–14329, Dec. 2020.
[28] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” in Proc. IPN Progr. Rep., Aug. 2003, pp. 1–7.
[29] V. Nguyen, “Design of capacity-approaching protograph-based LDPC coding systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng., Univ. Texas Dallas, Richardson, TX, USA, Dec. 2012.
[30] F. Steiner, G. Böcherer, and G. Liva, “Protograph-based LDPC code design for shaped bit-metric decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 397–407, Feb. 2016.
[31] J. Dai et al., “Learning to decode protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983–1999, Jul. 2021.
[32] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[33] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[34] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[35] Z. Yang, Y. Fang, Y. Cheng, P. Chen, and D. J. Almakhles, “Protograph LDPC-coded BICM-ID with irregular mapping: An emerging transmission technique for massive Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1051–1065, Sep. 2021.
[36] M. Stinner and P. M. Olmos, “On the waterfall performance of finitelength SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 345–361, Feb. 2016.
[37] D. Lin, F. Yi, G. Yongliang, and M. Guizani, “Design of protograph LDPC-coded MIMO-VLC systems with generalized spatial modulation,” China Commun., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 118–136, Mar. 2024.
[38] T. V, N. Yen, H. N, and D. Hieu T, “Delay-limited rate-compatible protograph LDPC codes,” Int. J. Eng. Trends Technol., vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 115–123, Jul. 2019.
[39] X. Wu, M. Jiang, C. Zhao, L. Ma, and Y. Wei, “Low-rate PBRL-LDPC codes for URLLC in 5G,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 800–803, Oct. 2018.
[40] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. GLOBECOM IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2005, pp. 1152–1156.
[41] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Low-rate LDPC codes with simple protograph structure,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Sep. 2005, pp. 1622–1626.
Zhaojie Yang received the B.Sc. degree in electronic engineering from Lingnan Normal University, China, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from Guangdong University of Technology, China, in 2021. From November 2020 to October 2021, he was a Visiting Student with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. He is currently a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include channel coding, high-order modulations, and spatial modulations.

Yunye Li received the B.Sc. degree in communication engineering from Sun Yat-sen University, China, in 2019, and the M.Sc. degree in information and communication engineering from Guangdong University of Technology, China, in 2023. From 2023 to 2024, he was a Research Associate with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His current research interests include protograph LDPC codes and SCMA systems.
Yong Liang Guan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree (Hons.) from the National University of Singapore, Singapore, and the Ph.D. degree from Imperial College London, London, U.K. He is currently a Professor of communication engineering with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, where he leads the Continental-NTU Corporate Laboratory and the successful deployment of the campus-wide NTU-NXP V2X test bed. He is also an Associate Vice President of NTU. His current research interests include coding and signal processing for communication systems and data storage systems. He is an Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY. He is a Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society.
Yi Fang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from Xiamen University, China, in 2013. From May 2012 to July 2012, he was a Research Assistant in electronic and information engineering with The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. From September 2012 to September 2013, he was a Visiting Scholar in electronic and electrical engineering with University College London, U.K. From February 2014 to February 2015, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a Full Professor and the Vice Dean of the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, China. His current research interests include information and coding theory, spread-spectrum modulation, and cooperative communications. He served as the Publicity Co-Chair for the International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:16:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

