2452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Performance Bounds and Degree-Distribution Optimization of Finite-Length BATS Codes
Mingyang Zhu , Member, IEEE, Shenghao Yang , Member, IEEE, Ming Jiang , Member, IEEE, and Chunming Zhao , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Batched sparse (BATS) codes were proposed as a reliable communication solution for networks with packet loss. In the finite-length regime, the error probability of BATS codes under belief propagation (BP) decoding has been studied in the literature and can be analyzed by recursive formulae. However, all existing analyses have not considered precoding or have treated the BATS code and the precode as two separate entities. In this paper, we analyze the word-wise error probability of finite-length BATS codes with a precode under joint decoding, including BP decoding and maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. The joint BP decoder performs peeling decoding on a joint Tanner graph constructed from both the BATS and the precode Tanner graphs, and the joint ML decoder solves a single linear system with all linear constraints implied by the BATS code and the precode. We derive closed-form upper bounds on the error probability for both decoders. Specifically, low-density parity-check (LDPC) precodes are used for BP decoding, and any generic precode can be used for ML decoding. Even for BATS codes without a precode, the derived upper bound for BP decoding is more accurate than the approximate recursive formula, and easier to compute than the exact recursive formula. The accuracy of the two upper bounds has been verified by many simulation results. Based on the two upper bounds, we formulate an optimization problem to optimize the degree distribution of LDPC-precoded BATS codes, which improves BP performance, ML performance, or both. In our experiments, to transmit 128 packets over a line network with packet loss, the optimized LDPC-precoded BATS codes reduce the transmission overhead to less than 50% of that of standard BATS codes under comparable decoding complexity constraints.
Received 2 March 2024; revised 22 November 2024; accepted 16 January 2025. Date of publication 29 January 2025; date of current version 19 March 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62331002, Grant 62171399, and Grant 62171238; in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFA1005000; in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China under Grant NKU 050-63233070; and in part by the Fellowship Award from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, under Grant CUHK SRFS2223-4S03. (Corresponding author: Shenghao Yang.)
Mingyang Zhu was with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. He is now with the Institute of Network Coding, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China (e-mail: mingyangzhu@cuhk.edu.hk).
Shenghao Yang is with the School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518172, China (e-mail: shyang@cuhk.edu.cn).
Ming Jiang and Chunming Zhao are with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China, and also with Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China (e-mail: jiang_ming@seu.edu.cn; cmzhao@seu.edu.cn).
Communicated by D. Napp, Associate Editor for Coding and Decoding. Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2025.3536295. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2025.3536295

Index Terms— Batched sparse codes, finite-length analysis, upper bounds, belief propagation, maximum likelihood, error probability.
I. INTRODUCTION
BATCHED sparse (BATS) codes are an efficient solution for network communications with packet loss [1], [2]. BATS codes can be regarded as concatenated codes over a finite field Fq, where the outer code is a generalized fountain code using the matrix-form Luby Transform (LT) [3] and the inner code is a random linear network code (RLNC). More precisely, the outer code generates a sequence of batches, each of which consists of M linear combinations of specific input symbols, and M is called the batch size. Then, the inner code operates at the intermediate network nodes, generating linear combinations of the symbols belonging to the same batch.
BATS codes share some similarities with many low-complexity linear network coding schemes, such as L-chunked codes [4], [5], overlapped chunked codes [6], [7], [8], [9], and Gamma codes [10]. A common feature of these low-complexity network coding schemes is the utilization of additional check constraints to couple chunked network codes, improving the achievable rate by sharing information through global or local check constraints. Compared to the aforementioned low-complexity schemes, BATS codes generally achieve higher rate in the asymptotic regime and have the ability to generate unlimited batches. Numerical results of the achievable rates of these schemes can be found in [5].
The asymptotic performance of BATS codes under belief propagation (BP) decoding1 has been analyzed in [1] and [11]. Both works provided a sufficient condition such that the BP decoder can recover a given fraction of the input symbols with high probability when the number of input symbols tends to infinity. The proof of this sufficient condition in [1] is based on a differential equation approach, while the proof in [11] uses a tree-based approach similar to the density evolution for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [12].
The degree distribution of BATS codes plays a crucial role in their decoding performance. In [1], some optimization problems based on the asymptotic analysis were raised
1The BP decoding of BATS codes still involves Gaussian eliminations. However, the Gaussian eliminations only apply to relatively small linear systems, each of which is associated to a batch.

0018-9448 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2453

to design asymptotically optimal degree distributions, which can be approximately solved by linear programming. In [2], an exact and an approximate recursive formulae on the error probability of BP decoding of finite-length BATS codes have been derived. Using one of these recursive formulae as the objective function, a general framework [13], [14] to numerically optimize the degree distribution for fountain codes can be adopted to optimize the degree distribution for BATS codes. Some heuristic methods to design the degree distribution of finite-length BATS codes have been studied in [15] and [16]. The numerical results in [2], [15], and [16] demonstrate that reasonable degree-distribution designs in the finite-length regime can lead to significant performance gains compared to using asymptotically optimal degree distributions.
However, to date, there has been no analysis of the error probability for BATS codes with a precode in the finitelength regime, either for BP decoding or maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. As a generalization of fountain codes, we can empirically infer that the precode is significant for BATS codes. Therefore, we need theoretical guidance to optimize precoded BATS codes. The main contributions of this paper are the establishment of performance upper bounds for precoded BATS codes in the finite-length regime and a method for optimizing the degree distribution based on these bounds, as summarized in Sec. I-B. Before presenting our results, we review some existing results on the finite-length analyses of fountain codes, LDPC codes, and BATS codes.
A. Related Works
There are several existing studies on the finite-length performance of BP decoding for fountain codes, LDPC codes, and BATS codes. Karp et al. developed a recursive formula to compute the error probability of LT codes based on a finite-state machine model [17]. Shokrollahi provided an analysis on the error probability of Raptor codes, utilizing the finite-length analyses of LT codes and a class of variable-regular LDPC codes [13], [18]. His analysis is based on a cascade of an LT decoder and an LDPC decoder, which neglects the joint iteration between the two parts, and so becomes an upper bound on the overall error probability. Moreover, several methods for finite-length analysis of regular LDPC codes on the erasure channel presented in [19], [20], and [21] can also be directly applied to improve Shokrollahi’s upper bound for Raptor codes with more general LDPC precodes. Yang et al. provided two recursive formulae to compute the error probability of BATS codes for a given number of received batches [2]. These two recursive formulae also follow the model of a finite-state machine, but in comparison to the recursive formula for LT codes, they are more computationally complex. Note that the precode of BATS codes are not taken into account in these two recursive formulae.
A few works have addressed the error probability of LT and Raptor codes under ML decoding [14], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26]. In [22], Rahnavard et al. derived upper and lower bounds on the bit error probability for binary LT and Raptor codes, where all entries of the parity-check matrix of the precode are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)

Bernoulli random variables. In [23], Schotsch et al. provided the upper and lower bounds on the error probability of LT codes on word as well as on symbol level, where the upper bound on the symbol-wise error probability is a generalization of [22]. Wang et al. provided upper and lower bounds on error probability of binary Raptor codes with a systematic low-density generator-matrix precode [24]. This work was elegantly extended in [25], where q-ary Raptor codes are considered. Both [24] and [25] consider very short Raptor codes (the number of input symbols ≤ 100). Furthermore, upper and lower bounds for q-ary Raptor codes with generic q-ary linear precodes were derived in [26].
Inactivation decoding is an efficient ML decoding for sparse linear systems, and its complexity is typically measured by the number of inactive symbols (see [14], [27], [28] for inactivation decoding and inactive symbols). In [2], Yang et al. developed a recursive formula to compute the expected number of inactive symbols for BATS codes (the inactivation decoding of BATS codes is similar to that of fountain codes, which is introduced in Sec. II-C). This recursive formula becomes essentially the same as the recursive formula for fountain codes presented in [14] when the batch size is one. However, there has been no analysis on the error probability of BATS codes under ML decoding, even without a precode.
B. Summary of Results
We derive two upper bounds on the error probability2 of precoded BATS codes under BP decoding and ML decoding, and both bounds result from application of the union bound. For both BP decoding and ML decoding, joint decoders that simultaneously decode the BATS code and the precode are considered. A degree-distribution optimization method based on the derived performance bounds is developed.
For BP decoding, the precode needs to be sparse so that it can effectively participate in the decoding process. Thus, we consider the precode to be an LDPC code. To facilitate the analysis, we do not focus on particular LDPC codes, but rather consider randomly selecting the precode from a q-ary regular LDPC ensemble (this technique is widely used in the analysis of LDPC codes). The derived upper bound reveals the graph structures (in the graphs of precoded BATS codes) that lead to BP decoding failures. When the number of input symbols is relatively small, e.g., 128, this upper bound is generally tight at the error probability below 0.01. The accuracy of this upper bound is independent of q, i.e., the order of the finite field from which the code is constructed. Even when considering BATS codes without a precode, this upper bound (with a trivial precode of rate 1) still has some advantages compared to the two recursive formulae in [2]. On one hand, this upper bound is easier to compute than the exact recursive formula [2, Theorem 1]. On the other hand, this upper bound is more accurate than the approximate recursive formula [2, Theorem 16]. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first work which analyzes the BP performance of precoded BATS codes in the finite-length regime.
2In this paper, the error probability stands for word-wise error probability, i.e., the probability that the decoder cannot recover all input symbols.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

For ML decoding, the derived upper bound is applicable for BATS codes with any generic precode as long as the weight enumerator, i.e., the number of codewords having a certain Hamming weight, of the precode is known. While there have been previous studies on the performance of joint ML decoding of fountain codes [24], [25], [26], these bounds cannot be easily extended to our case due to the matrix generalization of LT codes and the RLNCs used in BATS codes. This upper bound is a function of the number n of transmitted batches, and clearly reveals how the error probability of ML decoding decreases exponentially with n. Although the upper bound we provide for ML decoding has certain limitations, such as its applicability to BATS codes with a relatively small number of input symbols and low-order finite fields (unlike the upper bound for BP decoding, this upper bound becomes looser as q increases), it represents the first analytical result on the error probability of BATS codes under ML decoding.
Using the two upper bounds to design the objective function, we formulate an optimization problem to optimize the degree distribution of LDPC-precoded BATS (LDPC-BATS) codes. This optimization problem aims to find the degree distribution that minimizes the BP performance upper bound under the constraint that the ML performance upper bound remains below a certain threshold ϵ∗. For ϵ∗ = 1, the resulting degree distribution is near optimal for BP decoding. For ϵ∗ < 1 and is chosen appropriately, the resulting degree distribution ensures that inactivation decoding has guaranteed performance and low decoding complexity, with the latter achieved through the joint BP and ML decoding property of inactivation decoding. Similar to [2], this optimization problem can be numerically solved by iterative optimization. In our experience, this approach converges to a degree distribution that is significantly better than the initial one after very few iterations (e.g., 1 ∼ 5). The optimized LDPC-BATS codes outperform the conventional BATS codes (optimized by the existing methods) under BP decoding, ML decoding, or both. For example, when transmitting 128 packets over a network with packet loss, the optimized LDPC-BATS codes can reduce the transmission overhead to below 50% of that of the standard BATS codes optimized by [2]. Furthermore, the optimized LDPC-BATS codes can achieve low complexity in inactivation decoding, even with a relatively low-rate precode.
C. Paper Organization
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the fundamentals of BATS codes. Section III presents two upper bounds on the error probability of BP decoding and ML decoding, respectively, and provides numerical results as validation. The proofs of the bounds in Section III are provided in appendices. Section IV presents how to use the two upper bounds to optimize the degree distribution of LDPC-BATS codes. At last, Section V summarizes the paper.
D. Notations
1) Set and Field Notations: The integer set is denoted by Z and the positive integer set is denoted by Z+. The ordered integer set from i to j (j ≥ i ≥ 0) is represented by [i : j], i.e.,

[i : j] = {k ∈ Z : i ≤ k ≤ j}. The set difference of A and B is denoted by A\B, which is the set of all elements belonging to A but not B. Let Fq denote the finite field consisting of q elements.
2) Vectors and Matrix Notations: The indices of vectors and matrices start from 1. For a vector a, denote by a[i : j] the subvector formed by the components with indices in [i : j]. For an m × n matrix A, A[i1 : i2, j1 : j2] is the (i2 − i1 + 1) × (j2 − j1 + 1) submatrix formed by the components with the row indices in [i1 : i2] and column indices in [j1 : j2]. Define two shorthand notations [i] and [:] related to [i : j], where [i] ≜ [i : i] and [:] is the universal set of row indices or column indices. Therefore, we can write a[i], A[i, j], A[:, j1 : j2], A[i1 : i2, :], etc. The rank of a matrix A is denoted by rk(A), and the transpose of a matrix A is denoted by AT.
II. PRELIMINARIES
As a starting point, Sec. II-A, II-B, and II-C review the encoding, the Tanner graph representation, and the decoding of BATS codes, respectively. Then, Sec. II-D provides a natural extension of the three aforementioned aspects for LDPC-BATS codes. In Sec. II-E, we define the ensembles for LDPC-BATS codes, which are useful for the proofs of the performance bounds.

A. BATS Codes

Following [1], we first introduce BATS codes without a
precode, referred to as standard BATS codes. Fix a finite
field Fq, referred to as the base field. K input symbols B = (B1, B2, . . . , BK ) ∈ FqK are going to be transmitted through a network with erasure channels. Consider a BATS code with K input symbols3 of the base field and n batches.4
Fix an integer M ≥ 1 called the batch size. The outer
code of a BATS code generates a sequence of n batches X1, X2, . . . , Xn:

Xi = BiGi,

(1)

where Bi is a row vector consisting of dgi distinct input symbols chosen from B, and Gi is a dgi × M totally random matrix over the base field (i.e., all components are
independently and uniformly chosen from Fq at random), called the generator matrix.5 dgi is called the degree of the i-th batch. The degrees dgi, i = 1, 2, . . ., are i.i.d. random variable following a given distribution Ψ = (Ψ1, . . . , ΨK ),
i.e., Pr{dgi = d} = Ψd. Ψ is called the degree distribution of the BATS code. Let Ii ⊂ [1 : K] be the index set containing
the indices of dgi input symbols in Bi. The outer encoding equation (1) is a matrix generalization of fountain codes.

3In general, we may consider K input packets, each of which is a vector over the base field. However, considering K input symbols does not affect the performance analysis in this paper.
4In practice, BATS codes can be rateless, that is, continuous batches can be transmitted until the decoder declares a decoding success. Here, we consider a fixed number of batches merely for theoretical analysis.
5The concept of a “generator matrix” can sometimes be confused with the generator matrix of a precode. In this paper, unless explicitly specified as the “generator matrix of a precode”, the term “generator matrix” refers to Gi defined here.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2455

Fig. 1. Tanner graphs of a standard BATS code. (a) Encoding perspective. (b) Decoding perspective.

Then, the batches are transmitted through a network, where each node performs RLNC to linearly combine symbols belonging to the same batch. At a destination node, the received row vector of the i-th batch can be written as

Yi = XiHi = BiGiHi,

(2)

where Hi is an M -row random matrix over the base field called the transfer matrix. Each column of Hi is a coefficient vector of a linear combination of the M outer-encoded symbols, i.e., Xi. Thus, the RLNC is also called the inner code of a BATS code. Eq. (2) is referred to as the batch equation in this paper.
Assume that the ranks of transfer matrices are i.i.d., and define hk = Pr{rk(Hi) = k}. We call h = (h0, h1, . . . , hM ) the empirical rank distribution, which is determined by the network and the RLNC scheme. Define the rate of a standard BATS code as K/n. The capacity of a destination node with empirical rank distribution h, i.e., the maximum rate at which error-free transmission can be achieved, is [29]:

M

h¯ ≜ ihi.

(3)

i=1

We may consider h as a part of the code. Then,
a standard BATS code is specified by a 6-tuple (K, n, M, Ψ, h, q), denoted by Cs(tqd)(K, n, M, Ψ, h). Note that Cs(tqd)(K, n, M, Ψ, h) is a random code.

B. Tanner Graph Representation of BATS Codes
An instance of a BATS code can be uniquely represented by a Tanner graph. Here, “instance” means that in a Tanner graph, Ii, Gi, and Hi are fixed for all i ∈ [1 : n]. The Tanner graph of a standard BATS code defined from the encoding perspective is shown in Fig. 1(a), where a circle represents a variable node (VN), corresponding to an input symbol over Fq; a square represents an outer code constraint Xi = BiGi; and a triangle represents an inner code constraint Yi = XiHi. From the decoding perspective, solving a batch equation is equivalent to solving the combination of a square and the corresponding triangle in Fig. 1(a). Thus, we can regard the combination of a square and the corresponding triangle as a single check node (CN), referred to as a BATS CN (B-CN). The Tanner graph defined from the decoding perspective in shown in Fig. 1(b), where a square with × is a B-CN (i.e., a batch equation).

C. BP Decoding and ML Decoding of BATS Codes
We first introduce BP decoding of BATS codes. In this paper, since erasure channels are considered, a BP decoder is equivalent to a peeling decoder, which is commonly used to analyze the performance of BP decoding, and which operates based on the Tanner graph defined as Fig. 1(b). The peeling decoder progressively removes nodes and edges from the graph. We describe the K-step BP decoding for a given number n of batches. At each step t, we will remove one decodable input symbol and the edges connected to it. Meanwhile, the generator matrix G(it), the index set Ii(t), and the received vector Yi(t) for each batch i will be updated. Initially, let G(i0) = Gi and Yi(0) = Yi for all i. We say a batch is decodable at step t if rk(Gi(t)Hi) = |Ii(t)|. We say the j-th symbol Bj is decodable at step t if there exists a decodable batch i such that j ∈ Ii(t). At each step t, the BP decoder operates:
i) Randomly choose a decodable input symbol Bj and remove symbol Bj (i.e., the VN).
ii) For each batch i, if j ∈ Ii(t), then Ii(t+1) = Ii(t)\{j}, G(it+1) is formed by removing the row g corresponding to the j-th symbol Bj in Gi(t), and Yi(t+1) = Yi(t) − Bj gHi; else Ii(t+1) = Ii(t), G(it+1) = G(it), and Yi(t+1) = Yi(t).
iii) For each batch i, if |Ii(t+1)| = 0, then remove the batch i (i.e., the B-CN).
The BP decoding process stops when there is no decodable input symbol. If the BP decoding stops before the stepK, there remain undecoded input symbols. In this case, the remaining input symbols are still possible to be recovered by the ML decoding using Gaussian elimination, which combines all remaining batches to form a single linear system and solves the linear equations. However, the computational complexity of Gaussian elimination is quite high, proportional to the cube of the number of remaining input symbols. Alternatively, inactivation decoding is an efficient ML erasure decoding for sparse linear systems [27], [28].
The decoding process of inactivation decoding is the same as the BP decoding until there is no decodable input symbol in the residual graph. When BP decoding stops at a non-empty residual graph, the inactivation decoder tries to resume the BP decoding process by “inactivating” a certain undecoded input symbol. The inactive symbol is marked as “decoded” and then removed from the graph. The decoder continuously inactivate undecoded input symbols until decodable input symbols

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2456

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

appear. Then the BP decoding continues. The above process repeats until the graph is empty. Let Iina denote the number of inactive symbols after decoding, and b1, b2, . . . , bIina denote the inactive symbols. If Iina = 0, inactivation decoding is the same as BP decoding without inactivation and all input symbols are successfully decoded. Otherwise, each input symbol Bi can be expressed as

Iina

Bi = ci,0 + ci,j bj ,

(4)

j=1

where ci,j ∈ Fq is the coefficient determined by the decoding process. After decoding, the batches with inactive symbols (i.e., the batch has an input symbol Bi expressed with at least one non-zero coefficient ci,j, j ≥ 1) impose linear constraints on inactive symbols. This linear system of inactive symbols is usually solved by Gaussian elimination. If the inactive symbols can be uniquely solved, all input symbols can be recovered by substituting the inactive symbols back into (4) for all i.

D. LDPC-BATS Codes: Encoding, Decoding, and Tanner Graphs

LDPC codes are commonly used as a precode for fountain codes, e.g., they have been adopted as one of the precodes6 in

standardized R10 and RaptorQ codes [28]. For the theoretical

analysis in this paper, we only consider regular LDPC codes as

the precode. However, when it comes to encoding and decod-

ing algorithms, we can easily provide a unified description for

LDPC-BATS codes, whether regular or irregular LDPC codes

are used as the precode.

Consider a (K, K′) LDPC code over the same base field

Fq

with

dimension

K′

and

code

rate

R′

=

K′ K

.

In

the

rest

of

this paper, we use input symbols and intermediate symbols to

respectively represent the symbols before and after precoding,

avoiding any confusion on the coding efficiency. The encoding

process of an LDPC-BATS code includes the following steps: i) Encode K′ input symbols using the (K, K′) LDPC code

to K LDPC-coded symbols (i.e., intermediate symbols).

ii) Encode the K LDPC-coded symbols into n batches using

the encoding process described in Sec. II-A.

Considering the overhead of the precode, the rate of an LDPC-BATS code is defined as R = R′K/n = K′/n. For

an (l, r)-regular LDPC code (i.e., the parity-check matrix of

the LDPC code has the same column weight l and the same row weight r), the rate satisfies R′ ≥ 1 − l/r. This bound for R′ is generally tight, and we can easily construct a regular

LDPC code exactly with rate 1 − l/r. When a regular LDPC

code is used as precode, the LDPC-BATS code is denoted by C˜p(rqe)(K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r).

There is an equivalence between a batch equation and

an LDPC parity-check equation. This equivalence implies

that the BP decoder for any LDPC-BATS codes operates

in the same way as that for standard BATS codes. Let

Q = [qi,j ]1≤i≤K′−K,1≤j≤K′ be the parity-check matrix of

the LDPC code, where qi,j ∈ Fq. Let ri =

K j=1

1{qi,j ̸=0}

be

Fig. 2. The Tanner graph of an LDPC-BATS code with a (2, 5)-regular LDPC precode.
the weight of the i-th row of Q, where 1{E} is the indicator function, which equals one if the event E is true and otherwise zero. The i-th parity-check equation is equivalent to the batch equation Bi′ G′iH′i = Yi′, where Bi′ is the row vector of ri associated intermediate symbols, G′i is a column vector consisting of ri non-zero elements of the i-th row of Q, Hi′ is the constant integer 1, and Yi′ is the constant integer 0. Hence, concatenating an LDPC precode is equivalent to adding K − K′ extra “batches” of size one into the original BATS code.
By setting Bi+n = Bi′ , Gi+n = Gi′ , Hi+n = H′i, and Yi+n = Yi′ for i ∈ [1 : K − K′], we have the Tanner graph of an LDPC-BATS code, shown in Fig. 2. In the Tanner graph of an LDPC-BATS code, the extra K − K′ “batches equations”, which are essentially LDPC parity-check equations, are referred to as LDPC CNs (L-CNs). Based on such a Tanner graph, the BP decoding introduced in Sec. II-C can jointly decode K − K′ + n “batches”, but one should note that the concept of input symbols in Sec. II-C needs to be replaced by intermediate symbols. If BP decoding fails, inactivation decoding of an LDPC-BATS code also has the same process as the decoding process described in Sec. II-C.
E. Ensembles
Following [1], the previous Sec. II-A introduces BATS codes from the perspective of random codes, i.e., following a probability model. So, a decoder observes an instance of the BATS code (i.e., a specific Tanner graph) with a certain probability. Equivalently, we can define a set consisting of specific Tanner graphs, called the ensemble [19], [30], [31], [32], and then a realization of a random code becomes a sampling from the ensemble.7 Although there is no essential difference between the probability model-based analysis and the ensemble-based analysis of a random code, the latter facilitates a clear expression of the finite-length analysis in this paper.
The (K, n, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble equivalent to the standard BATS code Cs(tqd)(K, n, M, Ψ, h) is defined as follows.
Definition 1 (BATS Ensemble): The (K, n, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble is a set of Tanner graphs of the form shown in Fig. 1(b). Each Tanner graph in this ensemble has K VNs and n B-CNs. The (K, 0, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble contains a single element: a trivial graph consisting only of

6Note that R10 and RaptorQ codes adopt both an LDPC precode and a high-density parity-check precode, and thus the actual precode is a serial concatenation of the two precodes.

7Probability distribution may be assigned to the elements in an ensemble, so the sampling is not necessarily uniform. But for the ensembles defined in this paper, uniform distribution for the elements in the ensemble is preserved.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2457

K VNs. To sample an element T from the (K, n, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble, first sample an element T ′ from the

(K, n − 1, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble. Next, sample an
integer dg from [1 : K] with Pr{dg = d} = Ψd, and add a B-CN to T ′ to connect dg distinct VNs that are chosen

uniformly at random. Then, sample a dg × M matrix G from

Fdqg×M uniformly at random. Subsequently, sample an M -row

matrix H from

∞ i=0

FqM

×i

with

Pr{rk(H)

=

k}

=

hk .

Finally, associate G and H with the newly added B-CN.

For a practical LDPC-BATS code, usually the LDPC pre-

code is fixed, which may be specifically constructed to avoid

small weaknesses in the graph. However, the finite-length

analysis for a fixed LDPC code is difficult. Instead, we analyze

the finite-length performance of a random LDPC-BATS code

whose LDPC precode is chosen from a q-ary regular LDPC

ensemble uniformly at random. Here, the q-ary regular LDPC

ensemble is the same as the well-known binary regular LDPC

ensemble [30, Sec. II-A] except that each edge is labeled by

an element uniformly chosen from Fq \ {0}. To be specific, the q-ary regular LDPC ensemble with K VNs, VN degree l,

and CN degree r is called the (K, l, r)q LDPC ensemble. Furthermore, we can expurgate the (K, l, r)q LDPC ensem-
ble to eliminate all stopping sets (see [19] for the definition of

stopping sets) of size in the range [1 : νmin − 1] by declaring some bits in the stopping set to be “dummy” bits [31].8 This

ensemble is denoted by the (K, l, r, νmin)q expurgated LDPC ensemble.

We define the (K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r, νmin)q LDPC-BATS

ensemble as follows. The random LDPC-BATS code equivalent to this ensemble is denoted by Cp(rqe)(K, n, M, Ψ, h,
l, r, νmin).
Definition 2 (LDPC-BATS Ensemble): The (K, n, M, Ψ,

h, l, r, νmin)q LDPC-BATS ensemble is a set of Tanner

graphs of the form shown in Fig. 2. Each Tanner graph in

this ensemble has K VNs, n B-CNs, and Kl/r L-CNs. To sample an element T˜ from this ensemble, first sample

a Tanner graph G from the (K, l, r, νmin)q expurgated
LDPC ensemble. Then, sample a Tanner graph T from the (K, n, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble. Finally, T˜ is obtained by
sharing the K VNs in G and T .

At the end of this subsection, we briefly discuss reasonable

choices of the expurgation parameter νmin. The following

lemma gives the expected stopping set distribution for the

regular LDPC ensemble.

Lemma 1 [31]: Consider a graph G in the (K, l, r)q LDPC ensemble. Let Ass(G, w) be the number of stopping sets of size w in the code defined by G. Then,

K coef ((1 + x)r − rx)Kl/r , xwl

E [Ass(G, w)] = w

nl

.

wl

(5)

8Note that expurgation can be realized by different methods. In [21]
and [33], expurgation is the direct removal of some specific Tanner graphs in the original ensemble, so the cardinality of the expurgated ensemble is smaller than the original ensemble. In [31], expurgation is accomplished by introducing “dummy” bits. If a randomly chosen bit in a stopping set of size s is declared to be “dummy”, this stopping set of size s disappears. The expurgated ensemble constructed by the latter method has the same cardinality as the original ensemble.

Note that the original version of the above lemma is for

the (K, l, r)2 binary LDPC ensemble, but changing binary to q-ary does not affect this result.9 As pointed out in [20,

p. 138], there exist graphs in the (K, l, r)q LDPC ensemble

which do not contain stopping sets of size smaller than ν if

ν−1 w=1

E [Ass(G, w)]

<

1.

Therefore,

the

maximum

expurga-

tion parameter we may choose is

ν−1
νm∗ in ≜ sup ν ∈ Z+ : E [Ass(G, w)] < 1 . (6)
w=1

III. PERFORMANCE BOUNDS FOR BP AND ML DECODING

This section presents two upper bounds on the error probability of LDPC-BATS codes: Theorem 1 about a bound for the error probability of random LDPC-BATS codes under BP decoding, and Theorem 2 about a bound for the error probability of random LDPC-BATS codes under ML decoding. When the regular LDPC precode has rate 1, i.e., set l = 0, the aforementioned bounds reduce to the bounds for standard BATS codes. Furthermore, Theorem 2 can, in fact, be applied to BATS codes with any precode as long as the precode’s weight enumerator is known, because the precode does not play a role in the proof of Theorem 2 except for its weight enumerator.
The numerical results to verify these bounds are provided in Sec. III-B–III-D. Subsequently, in Sec. IV, we present a practical application of these two upper bounds: Optimizing the degree distribution Ψ for LDPC-BATS codes.

A. Upper Bounds

Before presenting the performance upper bounds, we introduce some useful functions and symbols. Recalling that Ψ = (Ψ1, Ψ2, . . . , ΨK ) is the degree distribution of BATS codes, let Dmin be the smallest degree d with Ψd > 0. Recall that h = (h0, h1, . . . , hM ) is the empirical rank distribution of the transfer matrix, i.e., Pr{rk(Hi) = r} = hr, and assume h is known. Define

ζrm =

(1 − q−m)(1 − q−m+1) · · · (1 − q−m+r−1) 1

if r > 0, if r = 0,

(7)

and

ℏ′k =

M s=k

ζkshs

0

if k ∈ [0 : M ], if k > M.

(8)

According to [1] and [2], ζrm is the probability that r vectors independently picked from Fm q are linearly independent, and ℏk′ is the probability that a batch with degree k is decodable.
The p.m.f. of the hypergeometric distribution is denoted by

hyge(k; n, i, j)

 

( )( ) i n−i k j−k

≜

(nj )

0

if max{0, i + j − n} ≤ k ≤ min{i, j}, otherwise.

Let coef f (x), xi denote the coefficient of xi in f (x), e.g., coef 2x2 + x, x2 = 2.

9This modification is equivalent to multiplying both the numerator and denominator in (5) by a factor of (q − 1)wl.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2458

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Theorem 1: Let PEBP(Cpre) denote the error probability of BP decoding of the random LDPC-BATS code Cp(rqe)(K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r, νmin). PEBP(Cpre) can be bounded by



Kn
 PEBP(Cpre) ≤ min 1,
 a=1 b=0

K a

n b

K

n−b  K

min{a,d}

b

·

φd,K−a

 Ψd

ξd,k 

d=1

d=1

k=1

 smax(a)

·

L(a, j; K, l, r)

j=0



 · U (K −a−j; K −a, n−b, Φ(K−a)) . (9)



Here, smax(a) =

(K −a)l r

. For d ∈ [1 : K], k ∈ [0 : K],

k

φd,k = Ψd

d K

,

(10)

d

ξd,k =(1 − ℏ′k)hyge(k; K, a, d).

(11)

For k ∈ [0 : K],

Φ(k) = (Φ0(k), Φ1(k), Φ(2k), . . . , Φk(k)),

(12)

where for d ∈ [0 : K],

 φd,k



Φ(dk)

=

 1

k d′ =1

φd′ ,k

if d ≥ 1 and k ≥ Dmin, if d = 0 and k < Dmin,

(13)



0

otherwise.

For j ∈ [0 : m], m, s ∈ Z,

U (j; m, s, Φ(m))

m =

j
(−1)j−k

j

j

k

k=0

k

ks

Φ(dm)

d m

.

d=0

d

(14)

For j ∈ [0 : smax(a)],

L(a, j; K, l, r)
K l/r
= min
c=0
where

K l/r pˆ(a, 0, c),
c

K l/r pˆ(a, j, c)
j+c

, (15)

pˆ(a, a′, c)

 coef{((1+x)r−1−rx)c,xal}

  

( ) Kl al

   ·  

( ) a′

t(c+t)r

(Kl/r−a′ +t−1)r−(a+t−1)l l−1

(l)!

t=1

l−1 i=0

(K

l−(a+t−1)l−i)





=







  

coef

{((1+x)r

−1−rx)c

,xal

}

   

( ) Kl al





0

if a ≥ νmin and a′ ≥ 1,
if a ≥ νmin and a′ = 0, if a < νmin.
(16)

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix A. Here is the

sketch. First of all, we need to understand what kind of graph

structures lead to BP decoding failures. Assume that A is

the set containing the remaining VNs after BP (i.e., peeling)

decoding. On one hand, we immediately know that A is a

stopping set [19] of the LDPC precode; otherwise, some VNs

in A can be decoded by the LDPC precode. On the other

hand, A does not have neighboring B-CNs that are decodable.

Informally, we say that A is also a “stopping set of the

BATS code”. Assume that Y = BGH is the original batch

equation of a certain B-CN that is a neighbor of A. After

peeling all VNs except for those in A, this batch equation becomes Y − B(Ac)G(Ac)H = B(A)G(A)H, where Sc is the complement set of S, and B(S) (resp. G(S)) is the submatrix

formed by the columns (resp. rows) of B (resp. G) that have

corresponding VNs in S. To ensure that the modified batch equation is undecodable, we need rk(G(A)H) < s, where s is the number of rows of G(A). Thus, each B-CN that is the

neighbor of A needs to satisfy this constraint on the rank.

At this point, we have comprehended the graph structures that

lead to BP decoding failures.

Subsequently, we can bound the probability that a randomly

chosen A is a stopping set of both the LDPC code and the

BATS code. Considering all choices of A, we can obtain a

union bound. However, such an upper bound may be loose,

because the graph structure associated with VNs outside of

A is not considered at all. To tighten the bound, we impose

certain constraints on the graph structure outside of A to

increase the likelihood that A is the “maximal stopping set”

of the Tanner graph, thereby reducing the double counting in

the union bound.

□

Remark 1: Unless otherwise specified, we use the conven-

tion l=

n k
0,

= we

0 for k > adopt the

n, k < 0, or convention

n < 0.

l−1 i=0

xi

To cover = 1 if l

the case ≤ 0 for

pˆ(a, a′, c).

Theorem 2: Let PEML(Cpre) denote the error probabil-

ity of ML decoding of the random LDPC-BATS code

Cp(rqe)(K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r, νmin = 1). PEML(Cpre) can be

bounded by

PEML(Cpre) ≤ min

K
1,

Al

q−1

l=1

π˜ln −

K

n

φd,K−l

d=1

+ min Al , K q−1 l

K

n

φd,K−l

,

d=1

(17)

where
K
π˜l = Ψd
d=1

K−l

d K

+

d

K −l

1−

d K

d

M
hkq−k ,
k=0
(18)

and Al is the expected weight enumerator for the (K, l, r, 1)q LDPC ensemble, given below

coef K Al = l

(1+(q−1)x)r+(q−1)(1−x)r q

K

l r

, xll

Kl ll

(q − 1)(l−1)l

. (19)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2459

Proof: The proof is given in Appendix B. Here is the sketch. Let G˜ i′ be the K × M matrix obtained by adding K − dgi all-zero rows to Gi such that the dgi rows of G˜ ′i indexed by Ii form Gi, where Ii contains the indices of B-CN i’s neighboring VNs, and dgi = |Ii|. Thus, the
batch equation for the batch i can be written as Yi = vG˜ i′ Hi, where v = (v1, v2, . . . , vK ) is a codeword in C , and C is the codebook of the precode. Without loss of

generality, assume the zero codeword is transmitted. We then

see that the necessary and sufficient condition such that the ML decoding fails is ∃v ∈ C \ {0}, vG˜ ′iHi = 0, ∀i ∈
[1 : n]. Given v, noting that this probability only depends

on as

the Hamming Pr{vG˜ ′iHi =

weight 0 | wH

wH (v)

(v) of
n
= l}

v, ≜

it can be computed π˜ln. Utilizing some

properties of random matrices, π˜l can be derived. Then,

we can obtain a union bound of the form like

K l=1

Alπ˜ln.

By eliminating some double counting in the union bound,

Theorem 2 follows.

□

Remark 2: Since Theorem 2 considers randomly choosing a

precode from the LDPC ensemble, Al is the expected weight enumerator. If the precode is fixed, Al becomes the weight

enumerator for the fixed precode.

Remark 3: According to the proof of Theorem 2, the spe-

cific choice of the precode does not play a role in the proof

except for its weight enumerator. Thus, Theorem 2 can, in fact,

be applied to BATS codes with any precode as long as Al is

known.

Remark 4: In our experiments, we observed that the min-

imum of the ML performance upper bound with respect to

the degree distribution Ψ is always attained when ΨK = 1.

Although this fact is not readily apparent from (17), we can

consider a slightly relaxed upper bound to support it to some

extent. By replacing the term min

Al q−1

,

K l

on the right

hand

side

of

(17)

with

Al q−1

,

we

obtain

a

relaxed

upper

bound

PEML(Cpre) ≤ min 1,

K l=1

Al q−1

π˜ln

. Since

M k=0

hk q −k

is a constant in [0, 1], it is straightforward to see that the

minimum of π˜l is achieved when ΨK = 1 for all l. Corollary 1: Let PEBP(Cstd) denote the error probability of
BP decoding of the standard BATS code Cs(tqd)(K, n, M, Ψ, h). PEBP(Cstd) can be bounded by



Kn
 PEBP(Cstd) ≤ min 1,
 a=1 b=0

K a

n b

K

n−b  K

b
min{a,d}

·

φd,K−a

 Ψd

ξd,k 

d=1

d=1

k=1



 · U (K − a; K − a, n − b, Φ(K−a)) . (20)



Proof: If l = 0, the random LDPC-BATS code reduces

to the standard BATS code. By noting that the summation in

the third and fourth lines of (9) is equal to U (K − a; K −

a, n − b, Φ(K−a)) for l = 0, this corollary follows.

□

Corollary 2: Let PEML(Cstd) denote the error probability of ML decoding of the standard BATS code Cs(tqd)(K, n, M ,

Ψ, h). PEML(Cstd) can be bounded by

PEML(Cpre)

≤ min

K
1,
l=1

K (q − 1)l−1 l

π˜ln −

K

n

φd,K−l

d=1

K +
l

K

n

φd,K−l

, (21)

d=1

Proof: Applying Theorem 2 with l = 0, the expected

weight enumerator given by (19) reduces to Al =

K l

(q −1)l,

and then this corollary follows.

□

B. Numerical Results: BP Performance of Standard BATS Codes
The purpose of this subsection is to verify the tightness of the BP performance bound (Theorem 1) for standard BATS codes, that is, LDPC-BATS codes with a trivial precode of rate 1. As mentioned before, BP performance of standard BATS codes can be analyzed by the two recursive formulae in [2], which provide the exact and the approximate BP performance, respectively. Therefore, we make a comparison among Theorem 1 and the two recursive formulae in [2]. Note that for standard BATS codes, Theorem 1 can be written in a more concise form, see Corollary 1.
In numerical evaluation, we consider a length-2 line network with packet loss rate 0.2, and employ the RLNC at the intermediate node as the scheme provided in [1, Sec. VIIA]. All used degree distributions Ψi and empirical rank distributions hi are given in Appendix F.
Example 1: This example considers the standard BATS code Cs(t2d56)(128, n, 16, Ψ1, h1) under BP decoding. The numerical results are given in Fig. 3, where the three error probability curves are computed by the exact recursive formula [2, Theorem 1], the approximate recursive formula [2, Theorem 16], and the upper bound in Theorem 1, respectively.
In the relatively-low error probability region (e.g., below 10−1), the approximate recursive formula overestimates the error probability, and the estimation bias increases as n increases or error probability decreases. In Fig. 3, at the error probability of 10−6, the approximate recursive formula overestimates the error probability by about one order of magnitude. While, the upper bound provides an excellent match to the actual error probability (i.e., the exact recursive formula) for error probability below 10−1.
Moreover, we can expect that the upper bound is more efficient to compute than the exact recursive formula for large n, because the computational complexity of the upper bound is Θ(n) while that of the exact recursive formula is Θ(n2). In Table I, we provide the CPU time for computing the two recursive formulae and the upper bound in MATLAB, utilizing an i9-12900K CPU. We observe that the computation of the approximate recursive formula has the fastest execution speed, with a computational complexity independent of n. The CPU time for the upper bound follows closely behind the CPU time for the approximate recursive formula with only a small gap. The computation of the exact recursive formula, on the other hand, is the slowest, requiring several times the CPU time for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2460

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 3. The error probabilities of the standard BATS code Cs(t2d56)(128, n, 16, Ψ1, h1) under BP decoding. The error probabilities are computed by the two recursive formulae in [2] and Theorem 1.
Fig. 4. The error probabilities of the standard BATS code Cs(t2d56)(256, n, 16, Ψ2, h1) under BP decoding. The error probabilities are computed by the two recursive formulae in [2] and Theorem 1.
the other two algorithms. As a conclusion, the upper bound for standard BATS codes achieves a good tradeoff between accuracy and computational complexity.
Example 2: This example verifies the BP performance bound for the standard BATS code Cs(t2d56)(256, n, 16, Ψ2, h1). The numerical results are shown in Fig. 4, where the three error probability curves are obtained in the same ways as Example 1.
In Fig. 4, we can observe a phenomenon similar to that in Example 1. When the error probability is below 10−1, the upper bound is much closer to the accurate result compared to the approximate recursive formula. However, as K increases, the upper bound aligns with the exact recursive formula only when the error probability is below 10−2, while in Example 1 the upper bound is sufficiently accurate for the error probability below 10−1. It is a common phenomenon for the union bound to become looser as the code length increases.
C. Numerical Results: BP Performance of LDPC-BATS Codes
The goal of this subsection is to verify the BP performance bound (Theorem 1) for LDPC-BATS codes. The network is the same as that in Sec. III-B and the empirical rank distributions

hi can be found in Appendix F. The degree distributions used

in this subsection are optimized using the method presented in

Sec. IV and the details of them can be found in Appendix F.

Due to the absence of any analytical formulae for

LDPC-BATS codes at the time of writing this paper,

we employ Monte Carlo simulations in the following two

examples to validate the accuracy of Theorem 1. The sim-

ulation settings merit some discussion. To verify the bound,

we perform simulation for random LDPC-BATS codes, where

more than 10, 000 LDPC codes in the (K, l, r, νmin)q LDPC

ensemble are pre-generated and each transmission randomly

choose one to be the precode. In addition, noting that practi-

cal communication systems usually employ well-constructed

LDPC codes rather than randomly choosing codes from the

ensemble, we also consider LDPC-BATS codes with a regular

LDPC precode constructed by the PEG algorithm [34]. With some abuse of notation, let C˜p(rqe)(K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r) denote
an LDPC-BATS code with a fixed (l, r)-regular LDPC pre-

code constructed by the PEG algorithm. The simulations for

such codes are denoted as simulation for PEG-LDPC-BATS in

the legends of Fig. 5 and Fig. 6.

However, Theorem 1 is only an upper bound for
Cp(rqe)(K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r, νmin), but may not necessarily apply as an upper bound for C˜p(rqe)(K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r). As illustrated

in the following two examples, we can adjust the expurgation

parameter νmin in the upper bound to estimate the performance of C˜p(rqe)(K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r). Eq. (6) offers a conservative way to determine νmin.10
Example 3: This example considers LDPC-BATS

codes with K = 128, M = 16, and (3, 6)-regular

precoding (including random LDPC precoding and

PEG-LDPC precoding). More precisely, the codes

are

Cp(r2e56)(128, n, 16, Ψ3/Ψ17, h1, 3, 6, 1/4)

and

C˜p(r2e56)(128, n, 16, Ψ3, h1, 3, 6) (here, a/b stands for a

or b). For these codes, the number of input symbols is

approximately K′ = 64.

The upper bounds and simulation results are shown in

Fig. 5. We see that the accuracy of the upper bound

may vary with the degree distribution. For Ψ3, the upper
bounds are tight compared to the simulation results when the error probability is below 10−1. However, for Ψ17, not-

ing that the error probability of this code decreases more

rapidly, the upper bound is tight below the error prob-

ability of 0.003. As mentioned before, the upper bound

with νmin = 4 may be regarded as an approximation for C˜p(r2e56)(128, n, 16, Ψ3, h1, 3, 6). We see that this approximation well matches the actual performance for Ψ3.
Example 4: This example verifies the accuracy of the BP

performance bound for LDPC-BATS codes with K = 256,

M = 16, and (3, 6)-regular precoding (including random

LDPC precoding and PEG-LDPC precoding). The codes in this example are Cp(r2e56)(256, n, 16, Ψ4/Ψ5, h1, 3, 6, 1/7) and C˜p(r2e56)(256, n, 16, Ψ4/Ψ5, h1, 3, 6) (here, a/b stands for a
or b).

10Empirically speaking, the size of the minimum stopping set in a PEG-LDPC code is likely to be larger than νm∗ in by (6).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2461

TABLE I
CPU TIME FOR COMPUTING THE UPPER BOUND, THE EXACT RECURSIVE FORMULA, AND THE APPROXIMATE RECURSIVE FORMULA FOR Cs(t2d56)(128, n, 16, Ψ1, h1) BATS CODE IN MATLAB

Fig. 5. The simulation results and the upper bounds (Theorem 1) for the LDPC-BATS codes Cp(r2e56)(128, n, 16, Ψ3/Ψ17, h1, 3, 6, 1/4) and C˜p(r2e56)(128, n, 16, Ψ3, h1, 3, 6) under BP decoding.

Fig. 6. The simulation results and the upper bounds (Theorem 1) for the LDPC-BATS codes Cp(r2e56)(256, n, 16, Ψ4/Ψ5, h1, 3, 6, 1/7) and C˜p(r2e56)(256, n, 16, Ψ4/Ψ5, h1, 3, 6) under BP decoding.

The simulation results and the upper bounds are shown in Fig. 6. For Ψ4, when the error probability is below 0.03, the upper bound is fairly accurate for the random LDPC-BATS code regardless of whether νmin = 1 or νmin = 7. When νmin = 7, the upper bound also aligns well with the performance of the LDPC-BATS code with a PEG-LDPC precode. However, for Ψ5, the upper bound does not become tight until the error probability is below 10−4. This may be because in this case, the error probability of the code decreases extremely rapidly (on the other hand, the gap measured by n is not large).
Additionally, we observe that when νmin is set according to (6), Theorem 1 may not always be an accurate approximation for PEG-LDPC-precoded BATS codes. For Ψ5, the upper bound excessively overestimates the error probability of C˜p(r2e56)(256, n, 16, Ψ5, h1, 3, 6) even when the error probability is low to 10−6. Although we can continue to increase νmin to make the upper bound a better approximation, it does not have much theoretical significance.
D. Numerical Results: ML Performance of LDPC-BATS Codes
This subsection aims to verify the tightness of the ML performance bound (Theorem 2) for LDPC-BATS codes. The network is the same as that in Sec. III-B and the empirical rank distributions hi can be found in Appendix F. The details of all degree distributions used in this subsection are given in

Appendix F and most of them are optimized using the method introduced in Sec. IV.
Similar to Sec. III-C, we verify the bound by Monte Carlo simulation. In the simulation, the LDPC precode is randomly chosen from more than 10000 pre-generated codes in the (K, l, r)q LDPC ensemble. Here we only consider the standard LDPC ensemble, because the weight enumerator for expurgated LDPC ensembles is unknown.
Example 5: In this example, we consider two random LDPC-BATS codes based on F4 and with batch size M = 8. In this case, the empirical rank distribution is h2, which is provided in Table III. Both codes have K′ = 64, but their procodes are (3, 6)-regular and (3, 15)-regular, respectively. The simulation results and the upper bounds are shown in Fig. 7. We see that for both codes with different precodes, the upper bounds are tight when error probability is below 10−2.
Example 6: This example considers two binary random LDPC-BATS codes with K′ = 128 and batch size M = 32. The precodes of the two codes are different: one is (3, 6)regular and the other is (3, 15)-regular. The empirical rank distribution h3 is provided in Table IV. In Fig. 8, it is evident that the upper bound by Theorem 2 is very tight at error probabilities below 10−2. In addition, the simulation results in this figure illustrate that the binary random LDPC-BATS codes still perform well under ML decoding, when the batch size M is relatively big. For the rank distribution h3 used in this figure, the capacity is h¯ = 24.04 and so the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 7. The simulation results and the upper bounds (Theorem 2) for Cp(r4e)(128, n, 8, Ψ7, h2, 3, 6, 1) and Cp(r4e)(80, n, 8, Ψ8, h2, 3, 15, 1) under ML decoding. Both codes have the number of input symbols K′ = 64.

the ML performance upper bound, as this results in a trivial degree distribution ΨK = 1 in all the cases we evaluated (see Remark 4 for some discussion). A BATS code with ΨK = 1 is a trivial dense code with the outer code being a random linear code. If each packet consists of T finite-field symbols, such a dense code requires O(K2 + T K) finite-field operations per packet to decode with Gaussian elimination, thus losing the low complexity property of BATS codes. When optimizing ML performance, low decoding complexity should be preserved. As an efficient ML decoding algorithm, inactivation decoding significantly reduces the dimension of Gaussian elimination by incorporating BP decoding. Empirically speaking, good BP performance is a prerequisite for inactivation decoding to achieve low complexity. Based on this experience, we still need to consider the BP performance when optimizing the performance of inactivation decoding.
In the optimization, the code parameters q, K, M , h, l, and r are fixed. Let fBP(n, Ψ, νmin) and fML(n, Ψ, νmin) denote the upper bounds in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, respectively, where the fixed parameters are omitted. Based on the earlier mention that inactivation decoding possesses the property of joint BP and ML decoding, we can formulate the following optimization problem to address both BP decoding and inactivation decoding.

min s.t.

fBP(n1, Ψ, νmin) + 1{fML(n2,Ψ,1)>ϵ∗}
K
Ψd = 1
d=1
Ψd ≥ 0, ∀d

(P1)

Fig. 8. The simulation results and the upper bounds (Theorem 2) for Cp(r2e)(256, n, 32, Ψ14, h3, 3, 6, 1) and Cp(r2e)(160, n, 32, Ψ10, h3, 3, 15, 1) under ML decoding. Both codes have the number of input symbols K′ = 128.
least number of batches required for error-free transmission is K′/h¯ = 5.32.
IV. OPTIMIZATION OF THE DEGREE DISTRIBUTION As a practical application of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2, we introduce how to optimize the degree distribution of LDPC-BATS codes with the proposed performance bounds.
A. Optimization Problem Our goal is to optimize the degree distribution of
LDPC-BATS codes for BP decoding and ML decoding, respectively. For BP decoding, we can naturally use the BP performance upper bound as the objective function, ensuring good BP performance by minimizing this upper bound. However, for ML decoding, it is improper to directly minimize

Here, 1{·} is the indicator function, and the parameters n1, n2, νmin ∈ Z and 0 < ϵ∗ ≤ 1 need to be properly set. In the second term of the objective function, νmin is fixed to 1. This is because the weight enumerator for the expurgated
LDPC ensemble is unknown to date. When optimizing the degree distribution for BP decoding, ϵ∗ = 1 is chosen. In this case, the second term in the objective function equals 0 and
can be ignored, so the optimization problem finds the degree
distribution possibly with the optimal BP performance. When
optimizing the degree distribution for inactivation decoding,
the BP performance bound is still considered into the objective
function to ensure low decoding complexity, and additionally, ϵ∗ < 1 needs to be appropriately chosen to guarantee that the
ML performance does not fall below a certain threshold. There
may be other objective functions for inactivation decoding or
other ML decoding algorithms that differ from the one we
provide, but the core principle remains the same, that is, they
must include considerations of ML decoding complexity. Next, we provide some heuristics for selecting n1, n2, νmin,
and ϵ∗. Selecting n1 and n2: Both n1 and n2 should be larger than
nh¯ ≜ K(1 − l/r)/h¯, where K(1−l/r) is the number of input symbols, and h¯ is the capacity of the linear operation channel specified by h, see (3). Since finite-length BP performance generally has a gap to nh¯ , n1 can not be set very close to nh¯ . Empirically speaking, n1 ∈ [1.5nh¯ : 3nh¯ ] is a good choice for short LDPC-BATS codes. If the LDPC-BATS code is expected to have a low error floor, a larger n1 is better for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2463

the optimization. n2 needs to be set close to nh¯ because we want the ML decoding to be capacity approaching. Usually, we set n2 ≈ 1.5nh¯ .
Selecting νmin and ϵ∗: νmin = νm∗ in is a good setting for fBP(·, ·, ·), see (6) for νm∗ in. ϵ∗ is useful only for low-order base field, e.g., q = 2, 4, 8, 16, because the upper bound for ML decoding becomes looser as q increases. For q > 16, we set ϵ∗ = 1 to ignore the second term in the objective function. For q ≤ 16, ϵ∗ should not be set to a very small value such as 10−8. This is because νmin = 1 is used for fML(·, ·, ·) and so the ML decoding may have an error floor, see Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. We observe that 0.001 ≤ ϵ∗ ≤ 0.1 is suitable.
To solve the optimization problem (P1), we follow the iterative optimization approach presented in [2, Sec. V]. At the beginning of the iterative optimization, we choose an initial degree distribution Ψ(0), which can be chosen according to asymptotic analysis or heuristic methods. For example, we can solve the optimization problem [1, (P1)] to obtain an asymptotically optimal degree distribution Ψ(0), where the recovery rate η¯ used in [1, (P1)] can be set to min{0.99, 1 − l/r} empirically. In each iteration ℓ, a potential new degree distribution is updated by
Ψ(ℓ+1) = Ψ(ℓ) + δed , 1+δ
where d ∈ [1 : K] is the selection of a degree, δ ∈ [−Ψ(ℓ)[d], δmax] is the adjustment for the selected degree, and ed is the all-zero vector except that the d-th component is one. Here, δmax is an empirical value, e.g., 1. In each iteration, we try to find the optimal δ and d such that Ψ(ℓ+1) reduces the objective function by the largest amount. We use the brute-force search as follows.
Assuming that the adjustment step of δ is s, the following candidate δ will be generated for each degree d in iteration ℓ:

For each ed : − Ψ(ℓ)[d],−Ψ(ℓ)[d]+s, . . . , −Ψ(ℓ)[d] + δmax + Ψ(ℓ)[d] s.
s

Based on d ∈ [1 : K] and the corresponding candidate δ, we have a lot of candidate degree distributions Ψ(ℓ+1).

Then, compute the objective function for each candidate degree distribution and find the optimal Ψ(ℓ+1). When a new

degree distribution that reduces the objective function cannot

be found or the maximum number of iterations is reached,

the optimization is terminated. Obviously, the above iterative

optimization can only result in a sub-optimal solution.

Remark 5: In order to efficiently compute

fBP(n1, Ψ, νmin) in the iterative optimization, a total of

K×

(K −1)l r

+1

values of L(a, j; K, l, r) (a ∈ [1 : K],

j ∈ [0 : ⌊(K − 1)l/r⌋]) can be pre-generated and stored.

B. Numerical Results
We provide two examples of the degree-distribution optimization. To be specific, we consider the precode rate R′ = 1 (i.e., without precode) and R′ = 0.5. For R′ = 0.5, we use

the q-ary (3, 6)-regular LDPC precode, which is constructed by the PEG algorithm [34] and the non-zero elements on the edges are randomly chosen. Therefore, in the following examples, the LDPC-BATS codes have a fixed precode rather than a random precode, which is more practical. All examples consider the line network of length 2 (i.e., 2 links and 3 nodes). Unless otherwise stated, the links have the same erasure probability. The degree distributions used in this subsection can be found in Appendix F.
Example 7: Consider q = 256, K′ = 128, K = 128 (standard BATS) or 256 (LDPC-BATS), and M = 16. In this case, the empirical rank distribution is h1, see Table II. In the optimization, we set ϵ∗ = 1, i.e., only consider the BP decoding performance. This is because, as mentioned before, the upper bound for ML decoding is very loose for q = 256.
First, let us see the BP performance improvement produced by the proposed optimization method. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 9. In this figure, the three curves without a precode are computed by the exact recursive formula [2, Theorem 1], and the remaining curves are obtained via Monte Carlo simulation. It is worthy noting that “finite (n1 = n)” in the legend represents that the code is optimized by the approximate recursive formula [2, Theorem 16] at n.
For the standard BATS codes, we optimize the degree distribution at the operating point n1 = 30. In Sec. III-B, we see that the approximate recursive formula overestimates the error probability noticeably, and the upper bound is more accurate when n is relatively large. Thus, in Fig. 9, we observe that the degree distribution optimized by (P1) leads to a smaller error probability when n ≥ n1.
For LDPC-BATS codes with R′ = 0.5, both the asymptotic optimization method [1] and the finite-length optimization method [2] show that the LDPC-BATS codes (with Ψ6 and Ψ2) perform worse than the standard BATS codes (with Ψ1 and Ψ12). Does this mean that using a low-rate precode is detrimental to BP decoding? The answer is no. The reason is that the existing degree optimization methods do not provide a proper degree distribution for the LDPC-BATS code with R′ = 0.5. Using (P1), the LDPC-BATS code with Ψ5 has the best performance among all the codes in Fig. 9. The performance improvement at low error probability region is significant. Define n − K′/h¯ as the transmission overhead. To achieve an error probability below 0.001, the standard BATS code and the optimized LDPC-BATS code need n = 32 and n = 21, respectively. Thus, for BP decoding, the optimized LDPC-BATS code lowers the transmission overhead to 48.2% of that of the standard BATS code.
Then, we discuss the impact of the parameter selections in the optimization. Since this example only involves BP decoding, we will focus on n1 and νmin. Recall that the (3, 6)regular LDPC code of length 256 is used as the precode. For the corresponding LDPC ensemble, we have νm∗ in = 7, see (6). Changing the selections of n1 and νmin with n1 ∈ {21, 26} and νmin ∈ {1, 7}, we construct four LDPC-BATS codes. The simulation results of these codes are shown in Fig. 10. All the codes perform well when the error probability is above 0.05. Below this error probability, the two codes with n1 = 26 have a lower error floor, and the one with νmin = 7 performs

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Fig. 9. The BP decoding performance of several standard BATS and LDPC-BATS codes with q = 256, K′ = 128, and M = 16.

Fig. 10. The BP decoding performance of four LDPC-BATS codes with q = 256, K′ = 128, and M = 16, which are optimized at different n1 and
νmin .

better. The reason behind this phenomenon is quite simple: When the LDPC-BATS code uses a PEG-LDPC precode, the error probability decreases rapidly with n. When the error probability is not low enough, the upper bound overestimates the error probability, see Fig. 6. Selecting a larger n1 can avoid this issue. Choosing a larger νmin ensures that the upper bound for the ensemble is closer to the performance of the LDPC-BATS code with a PEG-LDPC precode.
Finally, we briefly discuss the impact of the erasure probability of the links on BP decoding performance. The LDPC-BATS code with Ψ5 is considered, which is optimized for erasure probability of 0.2. By varying the erasure probability of the links, we present the simulation results in Fig. 11. We see that the LDPC-BATS code exhibits a certain level of robustness to small-scale variations in the erasure probability, but it is not a universal code. At the erasure probability of 0.2, this code performs best (measured by the gap between error probability of 0.005 and K′/h¯). How to design a quasi-universal LDPC-BATS code requires further research. A potentially feasible way is to follow the optimization framework with multiple h in [15], but the formulation of the optimization problem in [15] needs some refinements based on the theorems in this paper.
Example 8: Consider q = 2, K′ = 128, K = 128 (standard BATS) or 256 (LDPC-BATS), and M = 32. In this case, the empirical rank distribution is h3, see Table IV. For q = 2, the upper bound for ML decoding is relatively tight, so we can optimize the degree distribution for both BP decoding and ML decoding. Here, we fix n1 = 15, νmin = 7, and n2 = 8 in the optimization. Two settings of ϵ∗, 0.05 and 1, will be compared.
The simulation results of decoding performance are shown in Fig. 12. For BP decoding, both the ML-optimized (i.e., ϵ∗ = 0.05) and the BP-optimized (i.e., ϵ∗ = 1) LDPC-BATS codes significantly outperform the asymptotically optimal LDPC-BATS code obtained by [1]. For achieving an error probability below 0.001, the BP-optimized LDPC-BATS code reduces the transmission overhead to 37.8% of that of the standard BATS code optimized by [2].

Fig. 11. The BP decoding performance of the LDPC-BATS code with q = 256, K′ = 128, and M = 16 through the line networks with different erasure probabilities. (This code is optimized for erasure probability 0.2.)
Now consider the performance of ML decoding. To be specific, inactivation decoding [14], [27] is used. By accounting for the performance of ML decoding, the ML-optimized LDPC-BATS code achieves a gap of 1.5 batches than the BP-optimized one. It is not surprising that the asymptotically optimal LDPC-BATS code has the best ML decoding performance among three LDPC-BATS codes, since its average degree (about 31.1) is larger than the other two LDPC-BATS codes (about 28.2 and 23.7). However, later we will see that the asymptotically optimal LDPC-BATS code has much higher ML decoding complexity. For achieving an error probability below 0.001, the ML-optimized LDPC-BATS code reduces the transmission overhead to 22.0% of that of the standard BATS code optimized by [2].
Next, we discuss the decoding complexity of inactivation decoding, which is measured in terms of the average number

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2465

plexity of inactivation decoding.12 Interestingly, we observe that the intersection points marked in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 are quite close, which somewhat supports the empirical view that improving BP performance helps reduce the complexity of inactivation decoding.

Fig. 12. The BP decoding performance and the ML (i.e., inactivation) decoding performance of several standard BATS and LDPC-BATS codes with q = 2, K′ = 128, and M = 32.
Fig. 13. The inactivation decoding complexity of several standard BATS and LDPC-BATS codes with q = 2, K′ = 128, and M = 32. (Inactive symbols are chosen uniformly at random.)
of inactive symbols. In our simulation, the inactive symbols are chosen uniformly at random from the active symbols.11 Empirically speaking, worse BP performance tends to result in a larger average number of inactive symbols. In Fig. 13, as expected, the complexity of the asymptotically optimal LDPC-BATS code is significantly higher than the other three codes. Due to the finite-length optimization for BP decoding, the average number of inactive symbols for the two LDPC-BATS codes optimized by (P1) is less than 10 when n ≥ 8 and can even be fewer than that for the standard BATS code. This suggests a somewhat counterintuitive conclusion: As long as the degree distribution is appropriate, using a low-rate LDPC precode does not necessarily increase the com-

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we derive two performance upper bounds for precoded BATS codes under BP decoding and ML decoding, respectively, and utilize the bounds to optimize the degree distribution of the codes. When a non-trivial precode is used, i.e., the precode rate is less than 1, our work presents the first analytical results on both BP decoding and ML decoding of precoded BATS codes in the finite-length regime.
For BP decoding, the upper bound is applicable to LDPCBATS codes, where the precode is an (l, r)-regular LDPC code chosen from the regular LDPC ensemble uniformly at random. We provide a necessary and sufficient condition such that the BP decoder for LDPC-BATS codes fails. This condition is based on a stopping-set-like structure in the Tanner graph, which is proposed in this paper. The accuracy of this upper bound is independent of q, i.e., the order of the finite field from which the code is constructed. The numerical results indicate that this upper bound is generally tight for relatively low error probability, e.g., 10−2 in general and 10−4 in some special cases.
For ML decoding, the upper bound is suitable for precoded BATS codes with any generic code as long as the precode’s weight enumerator is known. This upper bound is a function of the number n of transmitted batches, and clearly reveals how the error probability of ML decoding decreases exponentially with n. Although this upper bound is tight only for precoded BATS codes with a relatively small number of input symbols and low-order base fields, it represents the first analytical result on the error probability of precoded BATS codes (even with the precode rate 1) under ML decoding. Tighter bounds for ML decoding of BATS codes with high-order base fields (e.g., F256) may deserve further research.
Degree-distribution optimization is a practical application of the derived upper bounds. We formulate an optimization problem based on the two upper bounds, and show how to numerically solve it by iterative optimization. The optimized LDPC-BATS codes outperform the conventional BATS codes that are optimized by the existing methods under BP decoding, inactivation decoding, or both. Even with a relatively low-rate precode, the optimized LDPC-BATS codes still achieve low complexity in inactivation decoding (i.e., have a small number of inactive symbols).
APPENDIX A DERIVATION OF THE BOUND ON THE ERROR PROBABILITY
OF BATS CODES UNDER BP DECODING
This appendix proves Theorem 1. For clarity, we divide the proof into three subsections. As a starting point, we first

11This strategy is sometimes referred to as “random inactivation” in the literature [2], [14]. This is certainly not the only feasible inactivation strategy, nor is it the one that results in the fewest inactive symbols. For more sophisticated inactivation strategies, we refer readers to [27] and [35].

12In contrast, when using a high-density parity-check precode, the complexity of inactivation decoding increases significantly with the number of parity-check symbols of the precode, regardless of how the degree distribution of the BATS code is optimized.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2466

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

discuss how a BP decoding failure of standard BATS codes occurs and derive an upper bound for standard BATS codes in Appendix A-A (Corollary 1 can be proved independently by this subsection). Then, we derive two upper bounds on the probability that a subgraph of the LDPC precode is an extended stopping set (Definition 5) in Appendix A-B. Finally, in Appendix A-C, we prove Theorem 1 based on the bounding techniques for the aforementioned two parts.
The following notations for Tanner graphs will be used: For a node o in the Tanner graph, given an edge set E′ ⊂ E, where E is the set consisting of all edges in the Tanner graph, let NeibE′ (o) be the set of neighbors of o which can be reached through the edges in E′. If the edge set is not specified for Neib(·), let Neib(o) be the set of all neighbors of o in the Tanner graph. The degree of a node o is defined as dg(o) = |Neib(o)|.

A. Upper Bound for Standard BATS Codes

Let T = (V, C, E) be a Tanner graph in the
(K, n, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble, where V = {V1, . . . , VK } is the VN set, C = {C1, . . . , Cn} is the B-CN set, and E = {(Vi1 , Cj1 ), (Vi2 , Cj2 ), . . .} is the edge set. Recall that T is a fixed graph and the batch equation BiGiHi = Yi for Ci is also deterministic. We introduce the rank of a B-CN Ci, which is equivalent to the decoding capability of Ci.
Definition 3: For a B-CN Ci whose generator matrix and transfer matrix are Gi and Hi, respectively, fix a subset S of Neib(Ci). The rank of Ci with S is defined as

rk(Ci(S)) ≜ rk(G(iS)Hi),

(22)

where Gi(S) is the submatrix of Gi formed by the |S| rows of Gi corresponding to the VNs in S. If S = Neib(Ci), define
the shorthand notation

rk(Ci) ≜ rk(CiNeib(Ci)).

(23)

In BP decoding, the VNs in S ⊂ Neib(Ci) can be decoded

by Cionly ifrk(Ci(S)) = |S|. ℏk′ defined in (8) is in fact the probability that rk(Ci(S)) = k given |S| = k. Using the

concepts introduced before, we now define a class of stopping

graphs T , which includes at least one non-empty subgraphs

that cannot be removed by the peeling decoder.

Definition 4 (BATS Stopping Graph): A Tanner graph T =

(V, C, E) of the BATS code is a stopping graph if there exist

a non-empty set A ⊂ V and a set (can be empty) B ⊂ C such

that the following constraints hold:

C1: For any V ∈ A, NeibE (V ) ∩ (C\B) = ∅. C2: For any C ∈ B, |Neib(C) ∩ A| > rk(C(Neib(C)∩A)) ≥ 0.

C3: For any V ∈ (V\A), NeibE (V ) ∩ (C\B) ̸= ∅.

For a parameter pair (A, B) in T , we say that (A, B) is

valid for T if (A, B) satisfies the three constraints C1, C2,

and C3.

In fact, the subgraph constructed by the nodes in (A, B)

can be regarded as a generalization of stopping sets of LDPC

codes [19]. The following lemma demonstrates that valid

parameter pairs possess the property of composability, similar

to the property exhibited by stopping sets.

Lemma 2: For a Tanner graph T = (V, C, E), if two parameter pairs (A1, B1) and (A2, B2) are valid for T , then (A1 ∪ A2 ∪ Ae, B1 ∪ B2) is valid for T , where



 Ae ≜ V ∈

(Neib(C) \ (A1 ∪ A2)) :



C ∈(B1 ∪B2 )



 NeibE (V ) ∩ (C\(B1 ∪ B2)) = ∅ .


Proof: See Appendix C.

□

Remark 6: In general, there are more than one parameter

pairs which are valid for a graph T . However, for a fixed B-CN

set B, the valid (A, B) is unique (if it exists) according to

constraint C3. Example 9 shows that different valid parameter

pairs exist for a Tanner graph.

Example 9: Fix a base field F2 and batch size M = 4. Consider a graph T shown in Fig. 14. Assume that this graph

has generator matrices Gi and transfer matrices Hi as follows:

1 G1 = 1
1

1 1 1

1 1 1

0 1 0

,

H1

=

1
1 0
1

1 0 0 1

1 1 0 1

1
0 1
0

0 1 0 0 ⇒ G1H1 = 1 0 1 0 .
0100

0 1 1 1

0 1 0 0

G2

=

1 1

1 1

1 0

1 0

,

H2

=

0 0

0 1

0 1

0 0

1010

1011

1 1 0 1

⇒

G2H2

=

1 0

0 1

0 0

1 0

.

0010

1 1 1 1

G3 =

1 0

0 0

1 0

0 0

,

H3

=

1 0

0 0

0 1

0 1

1001

⇒ G3H3 =

1 0

1 0

0 0

0 0

.

In Fig. 14(a), we have A = {V1, V2, V3} and B = {C1, C2}. In this case, rk(C1Neib(C1)∩A) = rk(G1H1) = 2 and rk(C2Neib(C2)∩A) = rk((G2H2)[1 : 3, :]) = 2.
In Fig. 14(b), we have A = {V5} and B = {C3}. In this case, rk(C3Neib(C3)∩A) = rk((G3H3) [2, :]) = 0. Fig. 14(c) is
an application of Lemma 2, where Ae = {V4} is marked in

green.

Next, we will utilize the graph-related concepts introduced

earlier to analyze the performance of BP decoding. The

following lemma provides a necessary and sufficient condition

such that BP decoding fails for T .

Lemma 3: For a Tanner graph T = (V, C, E) of a BATS

code, T cannot be reduced to an empty graph after BP

(peeling) decoding if and only if T is a stopping graph.

Proof: See Appendix C.

□

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2467

Fig. 14. An example of BATS stopping graphs. The nodes in A or B are marked in yellow, and the node in Ae is marked in green.

We form some subsets of the BATS ensemble, such
that the union of them contains all stopping graphs in the ensemble. Letting A(a)(i1, i2, . . . , ia) = {Vi1 , Vi2 , . . . , Via } and B(b)(j1, j2, . . . , jb) = {Cj1 , Cj2 , . . . , Cjb }, then (A(a)(i1, i2, . . . , ia), B(b)(j1, j2, . . . , jb)) represents a
parameter pair with fixed a VNs and fixed b B-CNs in
T . When the specified indices i1, i2, . . . , ia for VNs and
j1, j2, . . . , jb for B-CNs do not play a role in the context, we write (A(a), B(b)) for short. The set of all stopping graphs, for which (A(a), B(b)) is valid for all graphs in this set,
is formed as

Gstop(A(a), B(b)) ≜ T : (A(a), B(b)) is valid for T . (24)

There are totally

K

n Kn

a=1 b=0 a b

such sets

and their union contains all stopping graphs in

the BATS ensemble. Note that different sets

Gstop(A(a)(i1, i2, . . . , ia), B(b)(j1, j2, . . . , jb))

and

Gstop(A(a)(i1′ , i2′ , . . . , i′a), B(b)(j1′ , j2′ , . . . , jb′ )) may not

be disjoint. For example, the graph shown in Fig. 14 belongs

to three different sets Gstop(A(a), B(b)). Let T ∗ denote

the random variable representing a graph chosen from the

(K, n, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble uniformly at random. The ensemble-average error probability E PEBP(T ) , i.e., the probability that BP decoding for T ∗ fails, can be bounded by

uniformly at random. For p non-negative integers k1, . . . , kp

such that Ψ

p j=1

kj

>

0,

we

have

 

|Neib(C) ∩ V1| = k1,

Pr

...,

dg(C) =

 |Neib(C) ∩ Vp| = kp



p j=1

kj





=

|V1 | k1

|V2 | k2

···

K

|Vp | kp

.

k1 +k2 +···+kp
Proof: This lemma follows from the fact that each B-CN

C independently chooses dg(C) distinct neighbors uniformly

at random.

□

Now, we study the formula for Pr{T ∗ ∈

Gstop(A(a), B(b))}. Let Ei(a, b) denote the event that (A(a), B(b)) in T ∗ satisfies constraint Ci, i ∈ {1, 2, 3}.

First of all, we can see that E2(a, b) is independent of both E1(a, b) and E3(a, b), because C2 restrict the B-CNs in B(b),

while C1 and C3 restrict the other B-CNs. We can develop

Pr{T ∗ ∈ Gstop(A(a), B(b))} as

Pr{T ∗ ∈ Gstop(A(a), B(b))} = Pr{E1(a, b)}

· Pr{E2(a, b)} Pr{E3(a, b)|E1(a, b)}. (26)

Recall (10) and (13) that for d ∈ [1 : K]

k

φd,k = Ψd

d K

,

d





 E PEBP(T ) = Pr T ∗ ∈

 Gstop(A, B)



A≠ ∅,A⊂V,B⊂C









 

Kn

 





≤ min 1,

Pr T ∗ ∈

  
Gstop(A, B)

 

a=1 b=0

 





A⊂V ,B⊂C , |A|=a,|B|=b

  



Kn


K

n

≤ min 1,

 a=1 b=0 a b



 · Pr T ∗ ∈ Gstop(A(a), B(b)) . (25)


The following lemma gives the edge distribution of a B-
CN, and will be used in the computation of the probability Pr T ∗ ∈ Gstop(A(a), B(b)) in the last line of (25).
Lemma 4: Let {V1, V2, . . . , Vp} be a partition of V. Let C be a randomly selected B-CN in T ∗, where T ∗ is a random
graph chosen from the (K, n, M, Ψ, h)q BATS ensemble

and for d ∈ [0 : K]

 φd,k

Φ(dk)

 
=1

k d′ =1

φd′ ,k

 0

if d ≥ 1 and k ≥ Dmin, if d = 0 and k < Dmin, otherwise,

where Dmin is the smallest degree d with Ψd > 0. According

to Lemma 4, φd,k is the probability that a B-CN C is of degree d and all neighbors of C are included in a set V˜k of k

arbitrary but fixed probability that C

VNs. is of

Φd(k), d ∈ [1 : K], is the degree d given Neib(C)

conditional ⊂ V˜k, i.e.,

Pr{dg(C) = d | Neib(C) ⊂ V˜k}. Note that when k < Dmin,

the condition event Neib(C) ⊂ V˜ cannot happen, and then the

Φ(dk) becomes an undefined term. Let Φd(k) = 0, d ∈ [1 : K], for k < Dmin. Further, a degree-zero term Φ0(k) is introduced to ensure Φ(k) defined by (12) is a degree-distribution vector,13

i.e., the sum of all components equals one.

13Adding a degree-zero term simplifies the expression in the subsequent
proof and does not have any impact on the analysis. When the conditional probability Pr{dg(C) = d | Neib(C) ⊂ V˜k} is well defined, Φ(0k) = 0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2468

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Event E1(a, b) is equivalent to the event that all B-CNs ∈/ B(b) do not have neighbors in A(a). Due to the independence
of all B-CNs, one can write that

Pr{E1(a, b)} =

K
φd,K−a
d=1

n−b
.

We now study the probability Pr{E2(a, b)}. For a B-CN Ci ∈ B(b), let Si = Neib(Ci) ∩ A(a). Constraint C2 requires rk(Ci(Si)) = rk(G(iSi)Hi) < |Si|. We first consider a conditional probability Pr |Si| = k, rk(Ci(Si)) < k dg(Ci) = d ≜ ξd,k, where
d ∈ [1 : K] and k ∈ [1 : min{a, d}]. We can write

ξd,k = Pr rk(Ci(Si)) < k |Si| = k, dg(Ci) = d · Pr {|Si| = k | dg(Ci) = d}
= Pr rk(Ci(Si)) < k |Si| = k · Pr {|Si| = k | dg(Ci) = d}
= (1 − ℏk′ )hyge(k; K, a, d).

The last equality merits some explanations. Base on the definition of ℏk′ (see (8)), we can write
Pr rk(Ci(Si)) < k |Si| = k = 1 − ℏk′ .

The event |Si| = k given dg(Ci) = d indicates that Ci has k and d − k neighbors in A(a) and V\A(a), respectively. Since
{A(a), V\A(a)} is a partition of V, with Lemma 4 we have

a K−a

Pr {|Si| = k | dg(Ci) = d} =

k d−k K

= hyge(k; K, a, d).

d

Further, by summing over k ∈ [1 : min{a, d}] and d ∈ [1 : K], we have

Pr rk(Ci(Si)) < |Si|

= Pr{dg(Ci) = d}

d,k

· Pr |Si| = k, rk(Ci(Si)) < k





K

min{a,d}

= Ψd 

ξd,k .

d=1

k=1

dg(Ci) = d

Considering the independence of batches, we can write

Pr{E2(a, b)} = Pr rk(Ci(Si)) < |Si| b


K



b

min{a,d}

=  Ψd 

ξd,k .

d=1

k=1

Next, we proceed with the derivation of
Pr {E3(a, b)|E1(a, b)}. Under the condition E1(a, b), we need to use the “degree distribution” Φ(K−a) = (Φ1(K−a), Φ(2K−a), . . . , ΦK(K−−aa)) for the n − b B-CNs ∈/ B(b), which is conditioned on E1(a, b). Since Φ(dK−a) = 0 for d > K − a, we omit these terms from Φ(K−a). Note that Φ(K−a) is a probability vector when K − a ≥ Dmin and

an all-zero vector otherwise. Pr{E3(a, b)|E1(a, b)} can be

obtained using the following lemma.

Lemma 5: Given a universal set U = {1, 2, . . . , m} and s

independent random subsets Si ⊂ U , i ∈ [1 : s]. For each Si,

we have Pr{|Si| = j} = βj, where β = (β0, β1, . . . , βm) is a

probability distribution. Let S =

s i=1

Si.

The

cardinality

of

S follows the distribution

m Pr{|S| = j} =

j
(−1)j−k

j

j

k

k=0

k

ks

βd

d m

.

d=0

d

(27)

Proof: Two proofs are provided in Appendix D. The first

proof is based on a Markov process with a diagonalizable

transition probability matrix which is essentially the same

as the proof of [2, Lemma 10], and the second proof is

new. The second proof is more direct and concise, but we

still provide the first proof because using some intermediate

results in the first proof instead of directly using (27) may be

more convenient for numerical calculations. More details are

discussed in Remark 8.

□

Using the function

U (j; m, s, Φ(m))

m ≜j

j
(−1)j−k

j

k

k=0

k

ks

Φ(dm)

d m

,

d=0

d

(28)

we can write Pr{E3(a, b)|E1(a, b)} = U (K − a; K − a, n − b, Φ(K−a)).
By substituting Pr{E1(a, b)}, Pr{E2(a, b)}, and Pr{E3(a, b)|E1(a, b)} into (26), we obtain Pr{T ∗ ∈ Gstop(A(a), B(b))}. Subsequently, by substituting Pr{T ∗ ∈ Gstop(A(a), B(b))} into (25), we obtain an
upper bound for standard BATS codes, which is essentially
Corollary 1.

B. Upper Bounds for Regular LDPC Ensemble
In this subsection, we provide two upper bounds on the
probability that a subgraph of a regular LDPC code contains
a specific maximum stopping set. The bounding technique
in this subsection is inspired by the method introduced in
[20, Ch. 3.22]. A stopping set of an LDPC code is defined as the set
Sv of VNs such that all neighbors of Sv are connected to Sv at least twice [19]. For ease of explaining some details in the sequel, we may include the neighbors of Sv into the definition of a stopping set. Assuming that Sv = {V1, . . . , Va}, let Sc = Vi∈Sv Neib(Vi) be the set including all neighbors of Sv. We may use (Sv, Sc) or (|Sv|, |Sc|) to denote a stopping set interchangeably. Then, we define the extended stopping set
as a generalization of the traditional stopping set. Definition 5 (Extended Stopping Set): An extended stop-
ping set is defined as a pair (A, A′) of disjoint VN sets such that A, A ≠ ∅, is the maximal stopping set which can be formed by the VNs in A ∪ A′.
Note that A′ can be empty in an (A, A′) extended stopping
set. In this case, it is identical to a stopping set. When we say an (A, A′) extended stopping set, the selection of the VNs are fixed, i.e., A and A′ are two fixed sets.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2469

The main results of this subsection are the following two
lemmas.
Lemma 6: Consider the (K, l, r, νmin)q LDPC ensemble. Let A and A′ be two disjoint sets of VNs with |A| = a > 0 and |A′| = a′ ≥ 0. The probability p(a, a′) that
in a randomly chosen graph from the (K, l, r, νmin)q LDPC ensemble, the pair (A, A′) is the (A, A′) extended stopping
set can be bounded by

p(a, a′) ≤

K l/r t=0

Kl/r Kl/r

s=0 t+s

Kl (a+a′ )l

((a

A˜(a + a′, + a′)l)!

t,

s;

a)

,

where A˜(v, t, s; a) is determined by the recursion for v ∈ [a + 1 : K] and t, s ∈ [0 : Kl/r]:

l

l−∆s

⌊

l−∆s−σ 2

⌋

l−∆s−σ−2∆t

A˜(v, t, s; a) =

∆s=1 σ=0 ∆t=0

τ =0

A˜(v − 1, t − ∆t − σ, s + σ − ∆s; a)

t + s ∆t + ∆s

· (v − a)(l)!

∆t + ∆s

∆t

· coef (1+x)r−1 − 1 σ ((1 + x)r − 1 − rx)∆t , xl−∆s−τ

· (t − ∆t − σ)r−(v − 1)l + s + σ − ∆s τ
· r∆s ∆s s

s + σ − ∆s σ

with the initial step for v ∈ [1 : K] and t, s ∈ [0 : Kl/r]

A˜(v, t, s; a) = coef{((1 + x)r − 1 − rx)t, xvl}(vl)!

· 1{s=0}1{v=a}1{v≥νmin}. Proof: The proof of this lemma is largely based on [20,

Ch. 3.22]. Noting that this lemma focuses on the fixed VNs,

we first define a subgraph structure for the fixed VNs.

Fix v VNs and order the corresponding vl VN sockets

as well as all Kl L-CN sockets in some fixed but arbitrary

way. A constellation is a particular choice of how to attach

the vl VN sockets to the Kl L-CN sockets. Here, attaching

an edge includes two steps: 1) Place the edge between two

sockets, 2) label an non-zero element on the edge. Let T (v)

denote the number of all such constellations, for which v VNs

are fixed but the neighboring L-CNs are arbitrary. There are

Kl vl

ways to choose L-CN sockets, (vl)! ways to permute

the edges, and (q − 1)vl ways to label non-zero elements on

the edges, resulting in T (v) =

Kl vl

(vl)!(q − 1)vl.

A

Tanner

graph in the (K, l, r, νmin)q LDPC ensemble can be regarded

as a constellation with K VNs, and T (K) = (Kl)!(q − 1)Kl

is consistent with the size of the ensemble. To compute the probability p(a, a′), we need to count how
many constellations are an (A, A′) extended stopping set, denoted by B(a, a′). Then, we have

p(a, a′)

=

B(a, a′) T (a + a′) .

(29)

Based on the fact that the selection of non-zero elements on the edges of a Tanner graph does not essentially affect the BP decoding of this graph, we only need to consider the (K, l, r, νmin)2 LDPC ensemble in the remainder of the proof.

More precisely, when considering the q-ary ensemble, both B(a, a′) and T (a + a′) contain the same factor (q − 1)(a+a′)l,

representing the number of ways to label non-zero elements

on the edges. To bound B(a, a′), we use a method based on the recursion

in [20, Ch. 3.22]. The remainder of the proof is given in

Appendix E.

□

Lemma 6 does not provide an explicit expression for the upper bound on p(a, a′). Then, the following lemma relaxes

this upper bound and provides an explicit expression.

Lemma 7: Consider the (K, l, r, νmin)q LDPC ensemble. The probability p(a, a′) (defined in Lemma 6) can be bounded

by

p(a, a′) ≤ L(a, a′; K, l, r).

Here,

L(a, a′; K, l, r)

K l/r
= min
c=0

Kl/r pˆ(a, 0, c), c

K l/r a′ + c

pˆ(a, a′, c)

,

where

pˆ(a, a′, c)

 coef{((1+x)r−1−rx)c,xal}

      · 
=

( ) Kl al

( ) a′

t(c+t)r

(K l/r−a′ +t−1)r−(a+t−1)l l−1

(l)!

t=1

l−1 i=0

(K

l−(a+t−1)l−i)

if a ≥ νmin and a′ ≥ 1,

 

coef

{((1+x)r

−1−rx)c

,xal

}



  

( ) Kl al





0

if a ≥ νmin and a′ = 0,
if a < νmin.

Proof: Similar to the proof of Lemma 6, we recursively

bound B(a, a′). However, the recursion considered here is

more relaxed, allowing us to obtain the closed-form upper

bound. The proof is given in Appendix E.

□

C. Proof of Theorem 1
We now utilize the bounding techniques in the above two subsections to prove Theorem 1. Let T˜ = (V, C, E, C˜, E˜)
be a Tanner graph in the (K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r, νmin)q LDPCBATS ensemble defined in Definition 2, where V is the VN
set, C is the B-CN set, E is the edge set consisting of the edges connecting V and C, C˜ is the L-CN set, and E˜ is the edge set consisting of the edges connecting V and C˜. Noting
the equivalence between L-CNs and B-CNs, we can combine C and C˜ as well as E and E˜ to be a single set. However,
distinguishing them as different sets is beneficial for the clarity
of the subsequent proof.
Following the proof in Appendix A-A, we define a special
class of LDPC-BATS Tanner graphs called the LDPC-BATS stopping graphs. Then, we prove that BP decoding of T˜ fails if and only if T˜ is an LDPC-BATS stopping graph.
Definition 6 (LDPC-BATS Stopping Graph): A Tanner graph T˜ = (V, C, E, C˜, E˜) in the LDPC-BATS ensemble is a
stopping graph if there exist a non-empty set A ⊂ V and a
set (can be empty) B ⊂ C such that the following constraints
holds:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2470

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

C1: For any V ∈ A, NeibE (V ) ∩ (C\B) = ∅. C2: For any C ∈ B, |Neib(C) ∩ A| > rk(C(Neib(C)∩A)) ≥ 0.

C4: Let X ≜ {V ∈ (V\A) : NeibE (V ) ∩ (C\B) = ∅}.

The cardinality of X satisfies |X | ≤ smax(a), where

smax(a) =

(K −a)l r

. If l > 0, (A, X ) is an extended

stopping set whose maximal stopping set is A.

Remark 7: Compared with Definition 4, only the last con-

straint C3 is replaced by C4. When l = 0, an LDPC-BATS

code is just a standard BATS code. In this case, we have

smax(a) = 0, and so Definition 6 becomes identical to
Definition 4. For a parameter pair (A, B) in T˜ , we say that (A, B) is
valid for T˜ if (A, B) satisfies the three constraints C1, C2,

and C4. Lemma 8: An LDPC-BATS Tanner graph T˜ =
(V, C, E, C˜, E˜) in the LDPC-BATS ensemble cannot be

reduced to an empty graph under BP (peeling) decoding if and only if T˜ is a stopping graph.

Proof: See Appendix C.

□

In light of the above lemma, the method for bounding the

BP performance of standard BATS ensembles can be leveraged

to bound the BP performance of LDPC-BATS ensembles. For each (A(a), B(b)) (recall that A(a) and B(b) represent the sets

of fixed a VNs and fixed b B-CNs, respectively), form a set

of LDPC-BATS stopping graphs as

G˜stop(A(a), B(b)) ≜ T˜ : (A(a), B(b)) is valid for T˜ .

Let T˜ ∗ be a random graph chosen from the (K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r)q LDPC-BATS ensemble uniformly at random. Then, the ensemble-average error probability E PEBP(T˜ ) for the LDPC-BATS ensemble under BP decoding can be bounded by





E PEBP(T˜ ) = Pr T˜ ∗ ∈

G˜stop(A,

 B)



A̸=∅,A⊂V ,B



Kn K ≤ min 1,
a
a=1 b=0

n b

Pr

T˜ ∗ ∈ G˜stop(A(a), B(b))

.

(30)

We now study Pr T˜ ∗ ∈ G˜stop(A(a), B(b)) in the last line
of the above formula. For constraints C1, C2, and C4, let Ei(a, b) be the event that (A(a), B(b)) in T˜ ∗ satisfies constraint Ci, i = 1, 2, 4. Similar to the derivation of (26), we can decompose Pr T˜ ∗ ∈ G˜stop(A(a), B(b)) as

Pr T˜ ∗ ∈ G˜stop(A(a), B(b)) = Pr{E1(a, b)}
· Pr{E2(a, b)} Pr{E4(a, b)|E1(a, b)}. (31)
Note that the first two terms in (31) are only affected by the BATS part of the graph T˜ ∗ and they are exactly the same as the corresponding formulae derived in Appendix A-A. It remains to compute the probability Pr{E4(a, b)|E1(a, b)}. Let X ∗ = {V ∈ (V\A(a)) : NeibE (V )∩(C\B(b)) = ∅} in T˜ ∗. According to Lemma 5, we have the distribution of |X ∗| given E1(a, b)

as Pr{|X ∗| = j | E1(a, b)} = U K − a − j; K − a, n − b, Φ(K−a) . (32)

There is a subtle point: Unlike A(a) and B(b), X ∗ is a random variable rather than a fixed set because T˜ ∗ is a random graph. X ∗ can be any subset of (V\A(a)). To avoid any confusion, let X (j) be an instance of X ∗, which is of size j, i.e., X (j) is a set of j specified VNs in (V\A(a)). Denote by Eˇ(A(a), X (j)) the event that (A(a), X (j)) is the extended stopping set with the maximal stopping set A(a). The probability of this event
can be bounded by Lemma 6 and Lemma 7. To develop a
closed-form expression, using Lemma 7, we have

Pr Eˇ(A(a), X (j)) ≤ L(a, j; K, l, r).

(33)

Using the Total Probability Theorem, we can develop the probability Pr{E4(a, b)|E1(a, b)} as (34), shown at the bottom of the next page. In (34), equality (a), (b), and inequality (c) are explained as follows. Given X ∗ = X (j), the event E4(a, b) is independent of |X ∗| and E1(a, b), thus yielding
Pr E4(a, b) | X ∗ = X (j), |X ∗| = j, E1(a, b)
= Pr E4(a, b) | X ∗ = X (j)
= Pr Eˇ(A(a), X (j)) .

Observing that the value of Pr Eˇ(A(a), X (j)) is independent of the particular selections of j VNs in X (j), we can move this term outside the summation and then equality (a) follows. Equality (b) is obtained by noting that
Pr X ∗ = X (j) | |X ∗| = j, E1(a, b) = 1.
X (j)⊂(V\A)
Inequality (c) is a direct application of (32) and (33). When considering standard BATS codes without pre-
codes, i.e., set l = 0, Pr {E4(a, b) | E1(a, b)} reduces to U K − a; K − a, n − b, Φ(K−a) because smax(a) = 0 and L(a, j = 0; K, l = 0, r) = 1, which is identical to Pr {E3(a, b) | E1(a, b)} derived in Appendix A-A. The proof is completed by substituting Pr {E1(a, b)}, Pr {E2(a, b)}, and Pr {E4(a, b) | E1(a, b)} into (31) and then substituting (31) into (30).

APPENDIX B
DERIVATION OF THE BOUND ON THE ERROR PROBABILITY
OF BATS CODES UNDER ML DECODING
This appendix proves Theorem 2. Consider a precode C with dimension K′ and code length K. Let Gp denote the K′ × K generator matrix of C . Let u = (u1, u2, . . . , uK′ ) be the vector of input symbols and then v = uGp is the vector of intermediate symbols. In the following, a batch stands for a
standard batch (i.e., B-CN), excluding the “extra batches” (i.e.,
L-CN) implied by the parity-check equations of the precode. For each batch i (i.e., B-CN Ci), let G˜ i′ be the K × M matrix obtained by adding K − dgi all-zero rows to Gi, such that the rows of G˜ ′i with indices in Ii form the original generator

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2471

matrix Gi, where Ii is the index set of Ci’s neighbors. Then, the batch equation for the i-th batch can be rewritten as

uGpG˜ ′iHi = Yi.

Recall that the transfer matrix Hi is an M × Ni matrix, where

Ni is the number of received symbols for the i-th batch.

Assume the rank of each transfer matrix independently follows

the empirical rank distribution h = (h0, h1, . . . , hM ). Form a

K ×( a 1×

(

ni=ni1=N1 iN) im) artoriwx

G˜ ≜ [G˜ ′1H1, vector Y =

G˜ 2′ H2, . . [Y1, Y2,

. .

, G˜ n′ Hn] . . , Yn].

and The

linear system of a precoded BATS code be written as

uGpG˜ = Y.

(35)

A unique solution of the linear system (35) can be found if and only if rk(GpG˜ ) = K′. It is clear that the choices of u does not affect the solvability of such a linear system. Without
loss of generality, assume that we transmit the all-zero vector
u = 0 thus leading to the all-zero codeword v = 0. In this
case, Y must be the all-zero vector. An ML decoding failure occurs if and only if there exists u ∈ FqK′ \ {0} such that uGpG˜ = 0. This event is equivalent to the event that there exists v ∈ C \ {0} such that vG˜ = 0.
Let α be a primitive element of the base field and the elements in this field are represented by {0, α0, α1, . . . , αq−2}.
Let wH (v) be the Hamming weight of a vector v, which equals the number of non-zero elements in v. Split the codebook into K + 1 sets Cl = {v ∈ C : wH (v) = l}, l ∈ [0 : K]. Let Al ≜ |Cl|, which is known as the weight enumerator of the code C .14 Recall E PEML(T˜ ) is the ensemble-average

14When no precode is applied to BATS codes, we have Al =

K l

(q − 1)l.

When we consider a precode chosen from the q-ary regular LDPC ensemble,

Al is actually the expected weight enumerator, which can be found in [32].

error probability for the (K, n, M, Ψ, h, l, r, νmin)q LDPCBATS ensemble under ML decoding. We can develop the union bound on E PEML(T˜ ) as





E

PEML(T˜ )

 = Pr

vG˜ = 0 

v∈C \{0}



(a) 1 ≤

Pr vG˜ = 0

q−1

v∈C \{0}

1K =

Pr vG˜ = 0

q−1

l=1 v∈Cl

(=b)

1 q−1

K

Al Pr

vG˜ = 0|wH (v) = l

, (36)

l=1

where

the

factor

1 q−1

in

inequality

(a)

is

due

to

that

for

any

non-zero codeword v





 Pr

 αivG˜ = 0

i∈[0:q−2]



= Pr α0vG˜ = 0 = · · · = Pr αq−2vG˜ = 0 ,

and equality (b) arises from the fact that Pr vG˜ = 0 only
depends on wH (v) since each batch i randomly chooses dgi symbols (i.e., independent of the positions of the l non-zero symbols of v) for linear combination and the elements of Gi that are coefficients for linear combination are totally random (i.e., independent of the values of the l non-zero symbols of v).
Since all batches are independent and equivalent, we only need to consider the event (vG˜ ′iHi = 0 | wH (v) = l) for one batch. In the following discussion, we omit the subscripts

smax (a)

Pr {E4(a, b) | E1(a, b)} =

Pr {|X ∗| = j | E1(a, b)} Pr {E4(a, b) | |X ∗| = j, E1(a, b)}

j=0


smax (a)

=

Pr {|X ∗| = j | E1(a, b)} 

 Pr E4(a, b), X ∗ = X (j) | |X ∗| = j, E1(a, b) 

j=0

X (j)⊂(V\A(a))


smax (a)

=

Pr {|X ∗| = j | E1(a, b)} 

Pr E4(a, b) | X ∗ = X (j), |X ∗| = j, E1(a, b)

j=0

X (j)⊂(V\A(a))



· Pr X ∗ = X (j) | |X ∗| = j, E1(a, b) 



smax (a)

(a)
=

Pr {|X ∗| = j | E1(a, b)} Pr Eˇ(A(a), X (j)) 

 Pr X ∗ = X (j) | |X ∗| = j, E1(a, b) 

j=0

X (j)⊂(V\A(a))

smax (a)

(=b)

Pr {|X ∗| = j | E1(a, b)} Pr Eˇ(A(a), X (j))

j=0

(c) smax(a)

≤

U K − a − j; K − a, n − b, Φ(K−a) · L(a, j; K, l, r),

(34)

j=0

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2472

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

of G˜ i′ , Hi, dgi, and Ii when there is no ambiguity, i.e., we will use G˜ ′, H, dg, and I to represent the random variables

1 − q−k 1 − q−k+1 · · · 1 − q−k+r−1 = (1 − q−r) (1 − q−r+1) · · · (1 − q−1)

corresponding to a randomly chosen batch. Let I denote the

× 1 − q−d 1 − q−d+1 · · · 1 − q−d+r−1

random variable representing the number of non-zero symbols of v with indices in I, which are called the effective non-zero symbols used for linear combination, i.e., calculation of vG˜ ′.
Due to the independence of batches, the unsolved term of (36)
can be computed as

Pr vG˜ = 0|wH (v) = l

n

= Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|wH (v) = l .

(37)

For further developing (37), we provide the following

×q(d−r)(k−r)

=

ζrdζrk

.

ζrr q (d−r)(k−r)

Proof of the equivalence between (38) and (39): There exists

a non-singular square matrix P such that the first k rows of

PHi are full rank and the subsequent M − k rows are all-zero rows. GiP−1 is equivalent to performing elementary column operations on Gi, and so GiP−1 is still a totally random
matrix. It follows that

lemma for the rank distribution of a random matrix.

Lemma 9: For a d × k random matrix A over Fq, rk(A) follows the distribution

ζrd,k

≜

Pr{rk(A)

=

r}

=

ζrr

ζrdζrk q(d−r)(k−r)

,

(38)

Pr{rk(GiHi) = r|dgi = d, rk(Hi) = k} = Pr{rk(GiP−1PHi) = r|dgi = d, rk(Hi) = k}

(a)
=

Pr{rk

(GiP−1)[:, 1

:

k] · (PHi)[1

:

k, :]

= r|dgi = d,

rk(Hi) = k}

where ζrm is defined in (7). Also, ζrd,k is equivalent to the following formula for BATS codes:

ζrd,k = Pr{rk(GiHi) = r|dgi = d, rk(Hi) = k}, (39)

where Gi is a d × M totally random matrix over Fq, and Hi

is an M -row matrix over Fq that has rank k.

Proof: The proof of Lemma 9 includes two part: 1) Proof

of (38). 2) Proof of the equivalence between (38) and (39).

Proof of (38): This part is based on [36, Theorem 25.2]

and [37, Corollary 2.2]. Let Vn(q) denote the vector space of

dimension n over Fq. The number of distinct k-dimensional

subspaces of Vn(q), denoted by

n k

q,

is

n

k−1 qn−i − 1

k

=
q i=0

qk−i − 1 .

(40)

(b)
=

Pr{rk

(GiP−1)[:, 1

:

k]

= r|dgi = d}

= ζrd,k,

where (a) is because the lower M − k rows of (PHi) are all-

zero rows, and (b) is obtained by the fact that right-multiplying

(GiP−1)[:, 1 : k] by a matrix that has full row rank does not

change the rank of (GiP−1)[:, 1 : k].

□

For brevity, let π˜l ≜ Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|wH (v) = l . We now

proceed to develop π˜l as

π˜l = Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|dg = d, I = i, wH (v) = l

d,i

· Pr {dg = d, I = i|wH (v) = l}

(a)
=

Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|dg = d, I = i hyge(i; K, l, d)Ψd

d,i

The quantities

n k

q

are

referred

to

as

Gaussian

numbers

or

Gaussian coefficients. According to [36] and [37], the number

of d × k matrices over Fq that have rank r is

Nq(d, k, r) =

k

r (−1)r−l r qdl+(r−2 l).

r q l=0

lq

Dividing Nq(d, k, r) by the total number qdk of d×k matrices over Fq, the rank distribution for a d × k random matrix over Fq follows. Using the polynomial identity

r−1
(x−ql) =

r
(−1)l

r

q(2l)xr−l = r (−1)r−l r

q

( ) r−l 2

xl,

l=0

l=0

lq

l=0

lq

K
= Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|dg = d, I = 0 hyge(0; K, l, d)Ψd

d=1

K min{d,l}

+

Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|dg = d, I = i

d=1 i=1

· hyge(i; K, l, d)Ψd

K

K −l

(b)
=

Ψd

d K

d=1

d


min{d,l}

K
+ Ψd Pr {gH = 0|I > 0}
d=1


·

hyge(i; K, l, d)

i=1

one can rewrite the expression of the rank distribution with ζrm

K

(=c)

Ψd

K −l

K −l

d K

+ 1−

d K

M
hk q −k

Pr{rk(A) = r}

=

Nq(d, k, r) qdk

d=1

d

d

k=0

(41)

k
= rq

r−1 l=0

(qd

−

ql)

qdk

where (a) is due to Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|dg = d, I = i, wH (v) = l

(qk − 1)(qk−1 − 1) · · · (qk−r+1 − 1) = (qr − 1) (qr−1 − 1) · · · (q − 1)
×(qd − 1)(qd − q) · · · (qd − qr−1)

= Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|dg = d, I = i , Pr {I = i|dg = d, wH (v) = l} = hyge(i; K, l, d),

×qdk

Pr {dg = d|wH (v) = l} = Pr {dg = d} = Ψd,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2473

and (b) and (c) merit more discussions as follows. Noting that Pr vG˜ ′H = 0|dg = d, I = 0 = 1, the first summation
of (b) follows. In the second summation of (b), we define g = vG˜ ′. Under the condition I > 0, we can form a 1 × I
subvector vsub of v with the I effective non-zero symbols, and an I ×M submatrix G˜ s′ub of G˜ ′ with the I rows corresponding to the I effective non-zero symbols. Thus, we can write g = vsubG˜ ′sub. Since vsub is a fixed non-zero vector and G˜ ′sub is a totally random matrix, their product g is a totally random row vector. Observing Pr {gH = 0|dg = d, I = i}
does not depend on d and i when I > 0, we can write
for i > 0

Pr {gH = 0|dg = d, I = i} = Pr {gH = 0|I > 0} . (42)

Next, we can apply Lemma 9 to obtain (c):

M
Pr {gH = 0|I > 0} = Pr {gH = 0, rk(H) = k|I > 0}
k=0 M
= Pr {rk(H) = k|I > 0}
k=0
· Pr {gH = 0|rk(H) = k, I > 0}
M
= hk Pr rk(gH) = 0|rk(H) = k,
k=0
g is a totally random row vector

M

=

hk ζ01,k

k=0

M
= hkq−k.

k=0

By substituting Pr vG˜ = 0|wH (v) = l = π˜ln into (36),
we can obtain an upper bound on E PEML(T˜ ) . Notably, when all batches do not involve the non-zero elements of the codeword v, the error probability of ML decoding is independent of the chosen codeword. Based on this fact, we can further tighten this upper bound, thereby proving Theorem 2. (We observe that this step primarily has an impact on the numerical results of non-binary BATS codes with a relatively high-rate precode.)
Let C (1), . . . , C (Ξ) be all codebooks in the precode ensemble, where Ξ is the number of graphs in the precode ensemble, and each codebook has the same probability to be chosen. In this paper, Ξ = 1 if the precode is fixed (applying no precode can be regarded as applying a rate1 fixed precode), and Ξ = (Kl)!(q − 1)Kl if the precode is randomly chosen from a regular LDPC ensemble. Define Cl(k) = v ∈ C (k) : wH (v) = l and Cl(k)(j1, j2, . . . , jl) =
v ∈ Cl(k) : vji ̸= 0, ∀i ∈ [1 : l] . It is clear that

Cl(k) =

Cl(k)(j1, j2, . . . , jl).

1≤j1 <j2 <···<jl ≤K

For a codeword v ∈ Cl(k)(j1, j2, . . . , jl), we use In(j1, j2, . . . , jl) to represent the random variable that the total

number of non-zero symbols of v that are chosen be encoded

by n batches. For example, In(j1, j2, . . . , jl) = 0 indicates

that no non-zero symbols are encoded by n batches, and so vG˜ = 0 holds for all v ∈ Cl(k)(j1, j2, . . . , jl), ∀k. Note
that Pr{In(j1, j2, . . . , jl) = i} is independent of the specific

choice of j1, j2, . . . , jl.

Now, following the approach used to establish the bound

in (36), we derive a new, tighter bound, as shown in (43),

shown at the bottom of the next page. In (43), we use

k,l,j1,...,jl to represent

Ξ k=1

K l=1

1≤j1<j2<···<jl≤K to

save

notation.

The

factor

1 q−1

in

inequality

(a)

follows

from

the same reason as that in (36), and inequality (b) deserves

further discussion. First, we have for a fixed l

1Ξ Ξ

Cl(k)(j1, . . . , jl) = Al,

k=1 1≤j1<j2<···<jl≤K

which is the excepted weight enumerator. By noting that Pr vG˜ = 0 , In(j1, . . . , jl) > 0 | wH (v) = l is indepen-
dent of specific j1, . . . , jl, we can write

1Ξ K

Cl(k)(j1, . . . , jl)

Ξ
k=1 l=1 1≤j1<j2<···<jl≤K

q−1

· Pr vG˜ = 0 , In(j1, . . . , jl) > 0 | wH (v) = l

K
=

Al Pr

q−1

vG˜ = 0 , In(j1, . . . , jl) > 0 | wH (v) = l

l=1

K
=

Al

Pr

q−1

l=1

vG˜ = 0 | wH (v) = l

− Pr vG˜ = 0 , In(j1, . . . , jl) = 0 | wH (v) = l

K
=

Al

Pr

q−1

l=1

vG˜ = 0 | wH (v) = l

− Pr {In(j1, . . . , jl) = 0} ,

which leads to the term (b) in inequality (b). The term (a) in inequality (b) follows from that for a fixed l

1Ξ

Ξ

1 Cl(k)(j1,...,jl)̸=∅

k=1 1≤j1<j2<···<jl≤K

1Ξ

 

Cl(k)(j1, . . . , jl)

 

=

min

,1

Ξ

q−1

k=1 1≤j1<j2<···<jl≤K





≤ min Al , K . q−1 l

Note that

Cl(k) (j1 ,...,jl ) q−1

must be an integer for a q-ary code.

Substituting

Pr {In(j1, . . . , jl) = 0} =

K

n

φd,K−l ,

d=1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

and

We then can use the same argument to prove that

Pr vG˜ = 0 | wH (v) = l = π˜ln
into (43), the proof of Theorem 2 is completed.
APPENDIX C PROOFS OF SEVERAL PROPERTIES OF STOPPING GRAPHS
Proof of Lemma 2: For constraint C1: For V ∈ Ai, i = 1, 2, |NeibE (V ) ∩ (C\(B1 ∪ B2))| ≤ |NeibE (V ) ∩ (C\Bi)| = 0; and for V ∈ Ae, constraint C1 is satisfied by the definition of the set Ae. Thus, constraint C1 holds for all VNs in A1 ∪ A2∪Ae.
For constraint C2: There is a fact that for any B-CN C, inequality
|Neib(C) ∩ (A1 ∪ A2)| − |Neib(C) ∩ Ai| ≥ rk(C(Neib(C)∩(A1∪A2))) − rk(C(Neib(C)∩Ai))
holds for i = 1, 2. Therefore, we have for C ∈ (B1 ∪ B2) and i = 1, 2
|Neib(C) ∩ (A1 ∪ A2)| ≥ rk(C(Neib(C)∩(A1∪A2))) + |Neib(C) ∩ Ai|
− rk(C(Neib(C)∩Ai)) > rk(C(Neib(C)∩(A1∪A2))).

|Neib(C) ∩ (A1 ∪ A2 ∪ Ae)| ≥ rk(C(Neib(C)∩(A1∪A2∪Ae))) + |Neib(C) ∩ (A1 ∪ A2)|
− rk(C(Neib(C)∩(A1∪A2))) > rk(C(Neib(C)∩(A1∪A2∪Ae))),

which validates that constraint C2 is satisfied.

For constraint C3: If a VN V satisfies NeibE (V )∩(C\(B1 ∪ B2)) = ∅, we know that V ∈ (A1 ∪ A2 ∪ Ae) according to the definition of Ae. Thus, V ∈ (V \ (A1 ∪ A2 ∪ Ae)) is a sufficient condition such that NeibE (V ) ∩ (C\(B1 ∪ B2)) ≠ ∅.

According

to

the

above

arguments,

(A1 ∪ A2 ∪ Ae, B1 ∪ B2) is valid for T . The proof is

completed.

Proof of Lemma 3: We first prove the necessity. Assuming that T ′ = (V′, C′, E′) is a non-empty residual graph after

BP decoding, in which no B-CN is decodable. Consider the reconstruction of T from T ′ by adding |V| − |V′| VNs. Let A = V(0) = V′, B = C(0) = C′, E (0) = E ′, and let T (0) = (V(0), C(0), E(0)) be the initial Tanner graph. T (ℓ) can be reconstructed from T (ℓ−1) by adding one VN, denoted by V +, the edges emitted by V + and the B-CNs Neib(V +)\C(ℓ−1), after which A(ℓ), B(ℓ), V(ℓ), C(ℓ), and E(ℓ) will be updated. We have T ′ = T (0) and T = T (|V|−|V′|).

E PEML(T˜ )





1Ξ 

=

Pr

vG˜ = 0 

Ξ
k=1

v∈C (k)\{0}







1Ξ K ≤

 
Pr

 vG˜ = 0 

Ξ
k=1 l=1 1≤j1<j2<···<jl≤K

v∈Cl(k) (j1 ,...,jl )

 









1 =

  Pr

Ξ



k,l,j1 ,...,jl

 

v∈

Cl(k) (j1 ,...,jl )



vG˜ = 0

  
, In(j1, . . . , jl) = 0 + Pr

 

 

v∈



Cl(k) (j1 ,...,jl )



vG˜ = 0







, In(j1, . . . , jl) > 0

 









1

= Ξ

1 

Cl(k)(j1,...,jl)≠ ∅

k,l,j1 ,...,jl

  Pr {In(j1, . . . , jl) = 0} + Pr
v∈Cl(k) (j1 ,...,jl )



(a) 1

≤ Ξ

1 Cl(k)(j1,...,jl)≠ ∅ Pr {In(j1, . . . , jl) = 0}

k,l,j1 ,...,jl

vG˜ = 0

 

, In(j1, . . . , jl) > 0

 

 

Cl(k)(j1, . . . , jl)

+

Pr

q−1

 vG˜ = 0 , In(j1, . . . , jl) > 0 | wH (v) = l 

(b) K
≤ min

Al , K

q−1 l

l=1

Pr

{In(j1,

.

.

.

,

jl)

=

0}

+

q

Al −

1

Pr

vG˜ = 0 | wH (v) = l

− Pr {In(j1, . . . , jl) = 0}

.

(a)

(b)

(43)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2475

The necessity can be proved by induction. Assume that (A, B) is valid for T (ℓ−1). Since the reconstruction is the

reverse process of BP decoding of a fixed T , the shape of T (ℓ), i.e., V(ℓ), C(ℓ), and E(ℓ), is deterministic. Then, we will demonstrate that constraints (A, B) is still valid for T (ℓ) after

adding one VN. There is a fact that the newly added edges are only connected to V +, which indicates that during the

reconstruction process neither extra edges will be connected

to A nor will existing edges emanating from A be removed. Thus, constraint C1 holds for T (ℓ). Also due to this fact,

we can see that NeibE(ℓ) (C) ∩ A is fixed and independent of ℓ for any C ∈ B, thus ensuring that constraint C2 holds for T (ℓ). Finally for constraint C3, we only need to consider V + because the edges connected to V(ℓ−1) do not change. Constraint C3 holds for the fact that V + is decodable for T (ℓ). It is clear that V + cannot be decoded by any B-CN

in B because of constraint C2. Therefore, we can argue that NeibE(ℓ) (V +) ∩ (C(ℓ)\B) ≠ ∅. The last thing is to verify whether (A, B) is valid for T (0). Constraints C1 and C3 respectively follow from the facts that C(0)\B = ∅ and V(0)\A = ∅, and constraint C2 holds by assumption that

no decodable B-CN is in the Tanner graph. The necessity is

proved.

We now prove the sufficiency. If (A, B) is valid for T , the

nodes in A and B cannot be removed by BP decoding even if

all other nodes have been removed, due to constraints C1 and

C2. The proof is completed.

□

Proof of Lemma 8: For l = 0, this lemma is identical to

Lemma 3. Therefore, we consider l > 0 in the following. Assume that T˜ ′ = (V′, C′, E′, C˜′, E˜′) is the residual graph

after BP decoding, in which no B-CN or L-CN is decodable. Consider the reconstruction of T˜ from T˜ ′ by adding |V|−|V′|
VNs. Let A = V(0) = V′, B = C(0) = C′, E(0) = E′, C˜(0) = C˜′, and E˜(0) = E˜′. Form the initial Tanner graph T˜ (0) = (V(0), C(0), E (0), C˜(0), E˜(0)). T˜ (ℓ) is reconstruct from T˜ (ℓ−1) by adding one VN, denoted by V +, the edges emitted by V +, and its neighbors Neib(V +)\(C(ℓ−1) ∪ C˜(ℓ−1)), after which V(ℓ), C(ℓ), E(ℓ), C˜(ℓ), and E˜(ℓ) will be updated. We have T˜ ′ = T˜ (0) and T˜ = T˜ (|V|−|V′|).

The necessity can be proved by induction. Assume that (A, B) is valid for T˜ (ℓ−1). Due to the fact that adding a VN

and its associated edges and neighbors is the inverse process of the BP decoding of T˜ , the shape of T˜ (ℓ) is determined. There

is a fact that the edges emitted from A do not change because
the newly added edges are only connected to V +. Thus, constraint C1 holds for T˜ (ℓ). Similarly, the set Neib(C) ∩ A,

∀C ∈ B, is fixed from ℓ−1 to ℓ, which indicates that constraint C2 holds for T˜ (ℓ). Only the validity of constraint C4 for T˜ (ℓ)

merits a more detailed discussion.

Recalling that A is the remaining VN set after BP decoding,

so A is a stopping set of the LDPC code. At the beginning, i.e., for T˜ (0), we have X = ∅. From step ℓ − 1 to ℓ, V + will
be added to X if and only if NeibE(ℓ) (V +) ∩ (C(ℓ)\B) = ∅. Then there are two cases: 1) NeibE(ℓ) (V +) ∩ B ≠ ∅; or 2) NeibE(ℓ) (V +) ∩ B = ∅. For case 1), let c be a randomly picked neighbor of V + in B. According to constraint C2,
we have |Neib(c)| = |Neib(c) ∩ A| + |Neib(c) ∩ (V(ℓ)\A)| > rk(c(Neib(c)∩A)) + rk(c(Neib(c)∩(V(ℓ)\A))) ≥ rk(c), which

implies that V + cannot be decoded by any B-CN in B. For case 2), V + is not connected to any B-CN. Therefore, we know that if V + is added to X , there exists at least one L-CNs of degree one in C˜(ℓ)\C˜(ℓ−1), which are the neighbors of V +. It follows that (A, X ) forms an extended stopping set

with the maximal stopping set A.

It remains to show that |X | ≤ smax(a). Assume that we are given |X | = s for T˜ (|V|−|V′|) at the end of the reconstruction.

Observing that A cannot be connected to s peeling L-CNs that

are reserved for X , we need to guarantee that the inequality

al ≤ (Kl/r−s)r holds so that the L-CN side remains enough

sockets for A. Since s is an integer, we have s ≤

(K−a)l r

≜

smax(a). Finally we verify whether (A, B) is valid for T˜ (0). Con-

straint C1 holds for C(0)\B = ∅. Constraint C2 holds by

assumption that no decodable B-CN remains in T˜ (0). To verify

constraint C4, first, we have X = ∅ for T˜ (0). Then, (A, ∅) is

also an extended stopping set. The necessity is proved. We now prove the sufficiency. If (A, B) is valid for T˜ , the

VNs in A cannot be decoded by BP decoding even if all other

VNs and associated edges are removed, due to constraints

C1, C2, and the fact that A is a stopping set. The proof is

completed.

□

APPENDIX D PROOF OF LEMMA 5
We provide two methods to prove Lemma 5. Method 1: The following lemma is used to prove Lemma 5 by the first method.
Lemma 10: For a Markov process with the (m+1)×(m+1) probability transition matrix T with

min{D,j}

T[i, j] =

βdhyge(i + d − j; m, i, d),

d=j−i

where β = (β0, β1, . . . , βD) is a probability distribution. Matrix T is diagonalizable, i.e.,

T = UDU−1,

where D is a diagonal matrix with D[i, i] = T[i, i], U is

an upper-triangular matrix with U[i, j] =

m−i j−i

for i ≤ j,

and U−1 is an upper-triangular matrix with U−1[i, j] =

(−1)j−i

m−i j−i

for i ≤ j.

Proof:

Let

U′[i, j] = (−1)j−i

m−i j−i

for i ≤ j.

m
(UU′)[i, j] = U[i, k]U′[k, j]

k=0 j
= U[i, k]U′[k, j]

k=i

j
=

m − i (−1)j−k

k−i

k=i

m−i =

j
(−1)j−k

j−i

k=i

m−k j−k
j−i k−i

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

=

m−i

j−i
(−1)j−i−k′

j−i

j−i

k′

k′ =0

=

m−i j−i

j−i
(−1)j−i−k′

j−i j − i − k′

.

k′ =0

One can verify that (UU′)[i, i] = 1 and (UU′)[i, j] = 0 for

j > i. Therefore, we obtain U−1 = U′.

The binomial coefficient with negative integers will be used

in the following proof, denoted by

n k

∗,

which

is

defined

as



 n(n−1)···(n−k+1)

n∗

  

k!

=

k

1





0

(k > 0 and n < 0) or if
(0 < k ≤ n and n ≥ 0), if k = 0, otherwise.

where the last equality follows from Chu–Vandermonde identity. Similarly, when d < i, we have

j

j − i −d − 1 ∗

k−i
k=max{d,i}

k−d

j
=
k=i i−1
=
k=d

j−i j−k
j−i j−k

−d − 1 ∗ k−d −d − 1 ∗ j
+ k−d
k=i

j j−i =
j−k
k=d

−d − 1 ∗ k−d

j−i−d−1 ∗

=

,

j−d

j−i j−k

−d − 1 ∗ k−d

We now verify that (UDU−1)[i, j] = T[i, j] for all i and j. Each element in UDU−1 can be computed by

(UDU−1)[i, j]

j
=

m − i T[k, k](−1)j−k m − k

k−i

j−k

k=i

=

m−i j−i

j
(−1)j−k

j−i

k−i

k=i

min{D,k}

k

βd

d m

d=0

d

min{D,j}
=

βd
m

d=0

d

m−i

j

(−1)j−k j − i

j−i

k−i

k=max{d,i}

k d

min{D,j}
=

βd
m

d=0

d

m−i j−i

·

j

(−1)j−k j − i (−1)k−d −d − 1 ∗

k−i

k−d

k=max{d,i}

min{D,j}

=

βd
m

d=0

d

m − i (−1)j−d j−i

j

j−i

·

k−i

k=max{d,i}

−d − 1 ∗ .
k−d

The last summation term in the above equation can be simplified by considering d ≥ i and d < i. When d ≥ i, we have

j

j − i −d − 1 ∗

k−i
k=max{d,i}

k−d

j j−i =
j−k
k=d

−d − 1 ∗ k−d

j−d

j−i

=

j − k′ − d

k′ =0

−d − 1 ∗ k′

j−i−d−1 ∗

=

,

j−d

where the second equality is obtained by

j−i j−k

= 0 for k < i.

Finally, we can check that

(UDU−1)[i, j]

min{D,j}
=

βd
m

d=0

d

m − i (−1)j−d j − i − d − 1 ∗

j−i

j−d

min{D,j}
=

βd
m

d=0

d

m−i j−i

i j−d

min{D,j}

=

βd

d=0

m−i

i

j−i i+d−j

m

d

min{D,j}

=

βdhyge(i + d − j; m, i, d)

d=j−i

= T[i, j].

The proof of Lemma 10 is completed.

□

Using Lemma 10, Ts = UDsU−1. We can write

j
(Ts)[i, j] = U[i, k](T[k, k])sU−1[k, j]

k=i
m−i =
j−i

j
(−1)j−k
k=i

j−i k−i

k

ks

βd

d m

.

d=0

d

(44)

The proof is completed by noting Pr{|S| = j} = Ts[0, j].

Remark 8: In computer simulations, it may be better to compute Ts rather than directly using (44). All values involved

in computing Ts are probabilities, thus avoiding issues of

insufficient computational precision caused by large binomial

coefficients in (44) (although these issues may be addressed

through symbolic computation).

Method 2: Define a set Uj of j elements in U . Let us consider

Uj = {1, 2, . . . , j}. Recalling that S =

s i=1

Si

,

the

event

S = Uj can happen only if each Si, i ∈ [1 : s], is a subset of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2477

Uj. We can write

m

js

Pr {Si ⊂ Uj, ∀i ∈ [1 : s]} =

βd

d m

.

(45)

d=0

d

There are j distinct subsets Uj−1 ⊂ Uj of j − 1 elements, denoted by Uj−1,1, . . . , Uj−1,j. Let Ei denote the event S ⊂ Uj−1,i. To ensure S = Uj, we need to exclude all events Ei, i ∈ [1 : j], from (45). Considering randomly picking k subsets

Uj−1,i1 , . . . , Uj−1,ik , we have |Uj−1,i1 ∩· · ·∩Uj−1,ik | = j −k, which is independent of the selection of k subsets. This can

be verified by

|Uj−1,i1 ∩ · · · ∩ Uj−1,ik | = |Uj \ (Uj \ (Uj−1,i1 ∩ · · · ∩ Uj−1,ik )) | = |Uj \ ((Uj \ Uj−1,i1 ) ∪ · · · ∪ (Uj \ Uj−1,ik )) | = j − k.

Using the fact |Uj−1,i1 ∩ · · · ∩ Uj−1,ik | = j − k, we can write

Pr {E1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ej}


j

(a)
=

(−1)k+1 

 Pr {Ei1 ∩ · · · ∩ Eik }

k=1

1≤i1 <···<ik ≤j

(b)
=

j
(−1)k+1

j

k

k=1

m

j−k s

βd

d m

,

d=0

d

where equality (a) is due to the inclusion–exclusion identity,

and (b) to the fact that there are

j k

ways to choose i1, . . . , ik

and each way has the same probability

Pr {Ei1 ∩ · · · ∩ Eik } = Pr {S ⊂ (Uj−1,i1 ∩ · · · ∩ Uj−1,ik )}

= Pr {Si ⊂ Uj−k, ∀i ∈ [1 : s]}

m

j−k s

=

βd

d m

.

d=0

d

Noting that there are

m j

ways to pick Uj, we have

Pr{|S| = j}

m = j (Pr {Si ⊂ Uj, ∀i ∈ [1 : s]} − Pr {E1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ej})

m =
j

m

j

βd

d m

d=0

d

sj
+ (−1)k

j

k

k=1

m

j−k s

βd

d m

d=0

d



=

m

j
 (−1)k

j

j

k

k=0

j−k

j−k s

βd

d m



d=0

d

=

m j





j

(−1)j−k′

j k′

 k′

k′ s



βd

d m

 ,

k′ =0

d=0

d

where the last equality is obtained by substituting k′ = j − k. The proof is completed.

APPENDIX E PROOFS OF TWO UPPER BOUNDS FOR EXTENDED
STOPPING SETS
Proof of Lemma 6: We first briefly review the recursion in [20, Ch. 3.22], which was proposed for computing

the finite-length performance of the LDPC ensemble. Let A(v, t, s) be the number of the constellations containing nonempty stopping sets, where each constellation is formed by connecting v fixed VNs to t fixed L-CNs of degree at least 2 and s fixed L-CNs of degree 1. Here, v ∈ [1 : K] and t, s ∈ [0 : Kl/r]. Note that for s = 0, A(v, t, s = 0) is the number of (v, t) stopping sets with v fixed VNs and t fixed L-CNs.
Assume that we are given A(v, t, s = 0), v ∈ [1 : K], t ∈ [0 : Kl/r], and set the remaining A(v, t, s) to zero. Then, these remaining A(v, t, s) that are set to zero can be updated by the recursion, which accumulates the number of constellations via adding extra VNs one by one. This recursion is the inverse process of the peeling decoding, so we call this process reconstruction. Recursively determine A(v, t, s), t ∈ [0 : Kl/r], s ∈ [1 : Kl/r − t] for v ∈ [2 : K] by means of the following update rule:

l

l−∆s

⌊

l−∆s−σ 2

⌋

l−∆s−σ−2∆t

A(v, t, s) =

∆s=1 σ=0 ∆t=0

τ =0

A(v − 1, t − ∆t − σ, s + σ − ∆s)v(l)!

· coef (1+x)r−1 − 1 σ ((1 + x)r − 1 − rx)∆t , xl−∆s−τ

· (t − ∆t − σ)r − (v − 1)l + s + σ − ∆s τ

t+s ·

∆t + ∆s r∆s ∆s .

∆t + ∆s

∆t

s

s + σ − ∆s σ
(46)

Please refer to [20, Ch. 3.22] for the details of the above
recursion.
It remains to discuss the initialization of the recursion (46), i.e., obtain A(v, t, s = 0). For the (K, l, r)2 LDPC ensemble, the number of the (v, t) stopping sets is coef{((1 + x)r − 1 − rx)t, xvl}(vl)!. Thus, for v ∈ [1 : K] and t, s ∈ [0 : Kl/r],
we can initialize

A(v, t, s) = coef{((1 + x)r − 1 − rx)t, xvl}(vl)!1{s=0},

where the indicator function 1{s=0} makes all A(v, t, s > 0) = 0. For the (K, l, r, νmin)2 LDPC ensemble with νmin ≥ 2, [20, Ch. 3.22] suggests us to initialize as follows:

A(v, t, s) = coef{((1 + x)r − 1 − rx)t, xvl}(vl)!

· 1{s=0}1{v≥νmin},

(47)

where 1{v≥νmin} expurgates the stopping sets of size less than νmin. However, Johnson [21] pointed out that (47) may count subgraphs that are not the expurgated stopping sets themselves, but contain them as subgraphs. To ensure that these subgraphs are excluded in the initialization, a slightly modified initialization was proposed in [21].
Note that if we still use (47) as initialization when νmin ≥ 2, the value of A(v, t, s) we obtain by the recursion becomes an upper bound on the exact value of A(v, t, s). For brevity, we do not define a new symbol to represent this upper bound on A(v, t, s). However, we should keep in mind that when using the upper bounds as the initialization, all values obtained through recursion are also upper bounds.
Now, we are going to bound B(a, a′), which is the number of (A, A′) extended stopping sets with |A| = a and |A′| = a′.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

Similar to the definition of A(v, t, s), let A˜(v, t, s; a) denote
the number of constellations that are accumulated in A(v, t, s) and the v VNs form the (A, A′) extended stopping set with |A| = a and |A′| = v − a. Thus, we have

v
A(v, t, s) =

v A˜(v, t, s; a),

a

a=1

and

B(a, a′) =

Kl/r A˜(v = a + a′, t, s; a). (48)

t+s

t,s

Note that an (A, A′) extended stopping set can be recursively constructed by adding the VNs in A′ to the stopping set A. This allow us to recursively determine A˜(v, t, s; a). If we are given A˜(v, t, s; a) for v = a, s = 0, and 0 ≤ t ≤ Kl/r,
and set the other terms to zero, we can recursively determine A˜(v, t, s; a) for v ∈ [a + 1 : K] as follows:

l

l−∆s

⌊

l−∆s−σ 2

⌋

l−∆s−σ−2∆t

A˜(v, t, s; a) =

∆s=1 σ=0 ∆t=0

τ =0

A˜(v − 1, t − ∆t − σ, s + σ − ∆s; a)

t+s · (v − a)(l)! ∆t + ∆s
(a)

∆t + ∆s ∆t

· coef (1 + x)r−1 − 1 σ ((1+x)r − 1 − rx)∆t , xl−∆s−τ

· (t − ∆t − σ)r − (v − 1)l + s + σ − ∆s τ
· r∆s ∆s . s

s + σ − ∆s σ
(49)

The modified term (a) is because the position of the maximal
stopping set of size a is specified and only the v − a newly
added VNs can be permuted. Noting that the meanings of A˜(v = a, t, s = 0; a) and
A(v = a, t, s = 0) are identical, we can initialize all A˜(v, t, s; a) as

A˜(v, t, s; a) = coef{((1 + x)r − 1 − rx)t, xvl}(vl)!

· 1{s=0}1{v=a}1{v≥νmin}.

(50)

As mentioned before, the right hand side of (50) is the exact

value when νmin = 1 and may become an upper bound when

νmin ≥ 2.

After finishing the recursion, we can obtain an upper bound

on B(a, a′) using (48). Substituting this upper bound into (29),

Lemma 6 is proved.

□

Proof of Lemma 7: Consider the reconstruction of the

(A, A′) extended stopping set from the maximal stopping set

of size a by adding a′ VNs. Once an extra VN is added, there

must be a newly added degree-1 L-CN connected to this extra

VN. Such an L-CN is called peeling L-CN, which guarantees

that the extra VN can be removed by the peeling decoder. If the

extra VN has more than one degree-1 L-CNs, we randomly

choose one of them to be the peeling L-CN. Therefore, after

the reconstruction, a′ peeling L-CNs will be added. Let B˜(a, a′, c) denote the number of (A, A′) extended
stopping sets in the ensemble, which are with a′ fixed peeling

L-CNs and c fixed L-CNs that are the neighbors of A. According to the definition of B˜(a, a′, c), there may be some
L-CNs which are the neighbors of A∪A′, but are not included
in the fixed a′ + c L-CNs. The relation between B(a, a′) and B˜(a, a′, c) is

B(a, a′) =

K l/r a′ + c

B˜(a, a′, c).

We can recursively bound B˜(a, a′, c) with a′ steps based on the reconstruction process. Let B˜t(a, a′, c) denote the number of constellations after adding t VNs, where t ∈ [0 : a′]. Note that B˜(a, a′, c) = B˜a′ (a, a′, c) and B˜0(a, a′, c) = A(a, c, 0). For t ∈ [1 : a′], we have

B˜t(a, a′, c) ≤B˜t−1(a, a′, c)t(c + t)r

(Kl/r − a′ + t − 1)r − (a + t − 1)l

·

(l)!.

l−1

(51)

If we recursively bound B˜t(a, a′, c) using the above inequality, the initial condition is

B˜0(a, a′, c) = coef{((1 + x)r − 1 − rx)c, xal}(al)!1{a≥νmin}.

Here is the explanation for inequality (51). For brevity, we use

V + and C+ to refer to the newly added VN and the newly

added peeling L-CN in the following, respectively. The factor

t accounts for the fact that V + can be chosen from t VNs

which are not in the maximal stopping set. Likewise, we can

arbitrarily chose one L-CN from c + t L-CNs to be C+ and

then chose a socket of C+ to be connected by V +, which gives

the factor (c + t)r. The remaining l − 1 sockets of V + can be

connected to any l − 1 available sockets. At step t, there are a′−(t−1) L-CNs reserved as the peeling L-CNs for the current

step and the subsequent steps. Therefore, we can choose l −

1 sockets from the (Kl/r−a′ +t−1)r−(a+t−1)l available

sockets, resulting in the term

(K l/r−a′ +t−1)r−(a+t−1)l l−1

. The

term (l)! is given for the fact that we can permute the newly

added l edges. Finally, the inequality follows from the fact

that we may count some constellations more than once.

Recursively applying (51) a′ times, we can obtain the upper bound on B˜(a, a′, c). In fact, we can calculate the upper bound

for p(a, a′) more efficiently, avoiding the issue of excessively

large values of B(a, a′) and T (a + a′). Let p˜t(a, a′, c) =

B˜t (a,a′ ,c) T (a+t)

,

where

T (v)

=

Kl vl

(vl)!

(recall

that

we

consider

the binary ensemble). Noting that

l−1
T (a + t) = T (a + t − 1) (Kl − (a + t − 1)l − i),
i=0
we can, based on (51), write the inequality

p˜t(a, a′, c)

≤

p˜t−1(a,

a′,

t(c c)

+

t)r

(K l/r−a′ +t−1)r−(a+t−1)l l−1

il=−01(Kl − (a + t − 1)l − i)

(l)! ,

(52)

where t ∈ [1, a′]. Here, to cover the case l = 0, we adopt

the convention

l−1 i=0

xi

=

1

if

l

≤

0.

If

we

recursively

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2479

TABLE II EMPIRICAL RANK DISTRIBUTION h1 FOR M = 16 AND q = 256

TABLE V DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR STANDARD BATS CODES

TABLE III EMPIRICAL RANK DISTRIBUTION h2 FOR M = 8 AND q = 4
TABLE IV EMPIRICAL RANK DISTRIBUTION h3 FOR M = 32 AND q = 2

bound p˜t(a, a′, c), the initial condition is p˜0(a, a′, c) = B˜0(a, a′, c)/T (a). Thus, we obtain the upper bound on pa′ (a, a′, c) as follows:
p˜a′ (a, a′, c) ≤ pˆ(a, a′, c),
where pˆ(a, a′, c) is defined in (16) and the equality holds if a′ = 0. Noting that the a′ + c L-CNs involved in p˜a′ (a, a′, c), which are the neighbors of the maximal stopping set or the peeling L-CNs, are fixed, we have

TABLE VI DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR LDPC-BATS CODES WITH K′ = 64

K l/r
p(a, a′) =

K l/r a′ + c

p˜a′ (a, a′, c)

c=0

K l/r
≤

K l/r a′ + c

pˆ(a, a′, c).

(53)

c=0

At this point, we have obtained the upper bound (53). We proceed to tighten the upper bound. Consider the (A, A′) extended stopping set with |Neib(A)| = c. Noting the fact that such an extended stopping set must contain the (a, c) maximal stopping set, we can write

Pr {such an extended stopping set}

= Pr A = stopping set, |Neib(A)| = c

Since probability ≤ 1, we have the inequality

K l/r a′ + c

p˜a′ (a, a′, c) ≤

K l/r pˆ(a, 0, c).
c

Therefore, we can give a tighter upper bound as

× Pr (S ∪ S′) ̸= stopping set, ∀S ⊂ A, S′ ⊂ A′, S′ ̸= ∅ A = stopping set, |Neib(A)| = c . (54)

Here, the position of c L-CNs in Neib(A) are not specified.

The left hand side of (54) equals

K l/r a′ +c

p˜a′ (a, a′, c)

and

the

first term in the right hand side of (54) equals

Kl/r c

pˆ(a, 0, c).

K l/r
p(a, a′) ≤ min
c=0

K l/r c

≜ L(a, a′; K, l, r),

pˆ(a, 0, c),

K l/r a′ + c

pˆ(a, a′, c) (55)

where pˆ(a, a′, c) is defined in (16).

□

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 71, NO. 4, APRIL 2025

TABLE VII DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS FOR LDPC-BATS CODES WITH K′ = 128
APPENDIX F TABLES OF EMPIRICAL RANK DISTRIBUTIONS AND
DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS The degree distribution Ψ = (Ψ1, Ψ2, . . . , ΨK ) is represented by the polynomial
K
Ψ(x) = Ψdxd.
d=1
The empirical rank distributions are given in Tables II–IV, and the degree distributions are given in Tables V–VII.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Yang and R. W. Yeung, “Batched sparse codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5322–5346, Sep. 2014.
[2] S. Yang, T.-C. Ng, and R. W. Yeung, “Finite-length analysis of BATS codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 322–348, Jan. 2018.
[3] M. Luby, “LT codes,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., Nov. 2002, pp. 271–280.
[4] S. Yang and B. Tang, “From LDPC to chunked network codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Hobart, TAS, Australia, Nov. 2014, pp. 406–410.
[5] B. Tang and S. Yang, “An LDPC approach for chunked network codes,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 605–617, Feb. 2018.
[6] D. Silva, W. Zeng, and F. R. Kschischang, “Sparse network coding with overlapping classes,” in Proc. Workshop Netw. Coding, Theory, Appl., Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2009, pp. 74–79.
[7] A. Heidarzadeh and A. H. Banihashemi, “Overlapped chunked network coding,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop Inf. Theory (ITW, Cairo), Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[8] Y. Li, E. Soljanin, and P. Spasojevic, “Effects of the generation size and overlap on throughput and complexity in randomized linear network coding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 1111–1123, Feb. 2011.

[9] B. Tang, S. Yang, Y. Yin, B. Ye, and S. Lu, “Expander graph based overlapped chunked codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Cambridge, MA, USA, Jul. 2012, pp. 2451–2455.
[10] K. Mahdaviani, M. Ardakani, H. Bagheri, and C. Tellambura, “Gamma codes: A low-overhead linear-complexity network coding solution,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Netw. Coding (NetCod), Cambridge, MA, USA, Jun. 2012, pp. 125–130.
[11] S. Yang and Q. Zhou, “Tree analysis of BATS codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 37–40, Jan. 2016.
[12] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollah, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 13th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput. (STOC), 1998, pp. 249–258.
[13] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 2551–2567, Jun. 2006.
[14] F. Lázaro, G. Liva, and G. Bauch, “Inactivation decoding of LT and raptor codes: Analysis and code design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 4114–4127, Oct. 2017.
[15] X. Xu, Y. L. Guan, Y. Zeng, and C.-C. Chui, “Quasi-universal BATS code,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 3497–3501, Apr. 2017.
[16] W. Zhang, M. Zhu, M. Jiang, and N. Hu, “Design and optimization of LDPC precoded finite-length BATS codes under BP decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 3151–3155, Dec. 2023.
[17] R. Karp, M. Luby, and A. Shokrollahi, “Finite length analysis of LT codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Chicago, IL, USA, Jul. 2004, p. 37.
[18] A. Shokrollahi and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of a certain class of LDPC codes,” Preprint, 2001.
[19] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[20] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[21] S. J. Johnson, “A finite-length algorithm for LDPC codes without repeated edges on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 27–32, Jan. 2009.
[22] N. Rahnavard, B. N. Vellambi, and F. Fekri, “Rateless codes with unequal error protection property,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1521–1532, Apr. 2007.
[23] B. Schotsch, G. Garrammone, and P. Vary, “Analysis of LT codes over finite fields under optimal erasure decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 1826–1829, Sep. 2013.
[24] P. Wang et al., “Performance analysis of raptor codes under maximum likelihood decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 906–917, Mar. 2016.
[25] K. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and J. Jiao, “Bounds on the reliability of RaptorQ codes in the finite-length regime,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 24766–24774, 2017.
[26] F. Lázaro, G. Liva, G. Bauch, and E. Paolini, “Bounds on the error probability of raptor codes under maximum likelihood decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 1537–1558, Mar. 2021.
[27] A. Shokrollahi, S. Lassen, and R. Karp, “Systems and processes for decoding chain reaction codes through inactivation,” U.S. Patent 7 265 688 B2, Sep. 4, 2007.
[28] A. Shokrollahi and M. Luby, “Raptor codes,” Found. Trends Commun. Inf. Theory, vol. 6, nos. 3–4, pp. 213–322, 2011, doi: 10.1561/0100000060.
[29] S. Yang, J. Meng, and E.-H. Yang, “Coding for linear operator channels over finite fields,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, USA, Jun. 2010, pp. 2413–2417.
[30] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[31] C. Di, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Weight distribution of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 4839–4855, Nov. 2006.
[32] K. Kasai, C. Poulliat, D. Declercq, T. Shibuya, and K. Sakaniwa, “Weight distribution of non-binary LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Auckland, New Zealand, Dec. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[33] T. Richrdson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of various low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun. 2002, p. 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHU et al.: PERFORMANCE BOUNDS AND DEGREE-DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION OF FINITE-LENGTH BATS CODES

2481

[34] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[35] E. Paolini, G. Liva, B. Matuz, and M. Chiani, “Maximum likelihood erasure decoding of LDPC codes: Pivoting algorithms and code design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 3209–3220, Nov. 2012.
[36] J. H. Van Lint and R. M. Wilson, A Course in Combinatorics. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001.
[37] I. F. Blake and C. Studholme. (2006). Properties of Random Matrices and Applications. [Online]. Available: https://www.cs.toronto.edu/

Ming Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in communication and information engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1998, 2003, and 2007, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University. His research interests include coding and modulation technology.

Mingyang Zhu (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in information engineering and the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2018 and 2024, respectively. He was a Research Assistant with the Institute of Network Coding, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, from 2023 to 2024, where he is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow. His research interests include channel coding theory and practice.

Shenghao Yang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from Nankai University in 2001, the M.S. degree from Peking University in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree in information engineering from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2008. He was a Visiting Student with the Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway, in Spring 2017. He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the University of Waterloo from 2008 to 2009 and the Institute of Network Coding, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, from 2010 to 2012. He was with the Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, from 2012 to 2015. He is currently an Associate Professor with The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen. His research interests include network coding, information theory, coding theory, and quantum information.

Chunming Zhao (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. and M.S. degrees from Nanjing Institute of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China in 1982 and 1984, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Kaiserslautern, Germany, in 1993. He has been a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, where he is currently a Professor and the Vice Director of the Laboratory. He has managed several key projects of the Chinese Communications High-Tech Program. His research interests include communication theory, coding/decoding, mobile communications, and VLSI design. He received the First Prize of the National Technique Invention of China in 2011 and the Excellent Researcher Award from the Ministry of Science and Technology, China.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:17:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

