A Paired-Page Reading Scheme for NAND Flash
Memory
Sangha Lee, Daesung Kim, and Jeongseok Ha
School of Electrical Engineering,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon, 34141, Korea
Email: sangha2gg@gmail.com, gods5614@kaist.ac.kr, jsha@kaist.edu
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a joint decoding and
signal processing scheme for NAND flash memory. The proposed
scheme provides a considerable improvement of error correcting
capability when the raw error rate depends on programming
voltage levels, equivalently user data, of the target memory cell
and/or adjacent cells. It will be shown that the proposed scheme
also requires a fewer number of voltage sensing than the existing
scheme, which leads to lower latency in the read operation of
NAND flash memory.
I. INTRODUCTION
NAND flash memory based storage devices, i.e. solid-state
drives (SSDs), have received extensive attention over the last
few years due to their many unparalleled advantages such as
fast read/write operations, lower power consumption, and non-
mechanical parts. While the bit-cost, i.e. cost per bit of SSDs
is still more expensive as compared to their competitors, e.g.
hard disk drives (HDDs), the gap of per-bit cost between SSDs
and HDDs has been dramatically reduced due to aggressive
technology scaling and the introduction of multi-level flash
cell (MLC) technology. These efforts, however, degrade mem-
ory cell reliability and cause endurance issues. In order to
overcome these issues, strong error correcting codes (ECCs)
and advanced signal processing techniques have been widely
adopted.
Among various sources of errors in NAND flash memory,
some of them depend on their own data stored in the target
and/or adjacent memory cells. For example, automatic driving
systems have come in the spotlight and employs NAND flash
based storages due to their fast read/write speed and physical
endurance. However, hot temperature in automobile systems
may cause memory cells to lose the stored data, which is called
retention problem. The amount of errors due to the retention
problem strongly depends on the data stored in the cells. In
addition, the technology scaling makes the distance between
adjacent cells closer, which causes inter-cell interference (ICI).
The amount of interference also depends on the data stored in
the coupled memory cells.
In NAND flash memories, user data are represented in the
form of programming voltages, e.g. four different program-
ming voltage levels are employed for two bit information.
Later, user data are retrieved by reading threshold voltages of
memory cells which are nosy observations of the programming
voltage levels. It is well-known that certain combinations of
programming voltage levels called patterns may cause serious
ICI and/or retention problems, which is collectively called
pattern dependent errors in this work. Thus, an efficient use
of the threshold voltage levels of the adjacent memory cells
is practically important to improve error-correcting capability.
Motivated by the practical importance, run length limited
(RLL) codes have been considered to deal with pattern de-
pendent errors [3]. This scheme carefully avoids highly error
prone patterns such as the E-PH pattern [3]. However, even
though the most dominant error patterns can be avoided by the
RLL coding scheme, RLL codes usually require a significant
rate loss to the extent that some of storage systems cannot
tolerate. In [2], Kim et al. proposed a way to estimate the
amount of ICI which is subsequently taken into a decod-
ing process. In particular, the scheme in [2] estimates the
amount of interference by retrieving the data stored in the
next wordline. While the proposed scheme in [2] results in
a considerable error-rate performance improvement, the data
retrieval from the adjacent wordline may cause excessive read
latency, which degrades an overall system throughput.
In this paper, we consider an error-control system with
an low-density parity-check (LDPC) code for MLC NAND
flash based storages which may suffer from some pattern
dependent errors. In particular, we propose a reading scheme
called paired-page reading aiming to effectively resolve pat-
tern dependent errors. Our main contribution is that the
proposed scheme can mitigate interference only symbol level
informations which is easier than voltage values in NAND
flash memory. It will be shown that the proposed scheme not
only improves an error-rate performance but also saves read
latency.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
In this work, we only consider 2-bit per cell MLC NAND
flash memory protected by LDPC codes. However, the pro-
posed idea can be easily generalized to the cases with more bits
per cell, e.g. 3-bit per cell NAND flash memory. It is assumed
that each wordline consists of two logical pages: the most
significant bit (MSB) and least significant bit (LSB) pages.
The data for these two logical pages form symbols which are
used in the programming of memory cells.
A. Inter Cell Interference Model
In NAND flash based memory, the shift in threshold volt-
age of a cell causes interference to adjacent cells due to
the parasitic capacitance between the interfering cell and
its adjacent cells, which is called ICI. In general, a target
cell is affected by its eight neighboring cells. As mentioned
earlier, user data or symbols are represented as programming
voltage levels. Thus, when adjacent cells are programmed into
different symbols, equivalently different programming voltage
levels, the cells will have voltage differences, which causes
interference through the parasitic capacitance. For a victim
1065
978-1-5090-1325-8/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
ICTC 2016
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
cell, there are eight different interfering cells, two x-direction
cells (belonging to the same wordline and adjacent bitlines),
two y-direction cells (belonging to the next wordline and same
bitline), and four xy-direction cells (belonging to the next
wordline and adjacent bitlines). Among the eight interfering
cells, we consider only five of them whose programming
processes complete after the programing for the victim cell
is performed.
The disturbance to the threshold voltage of the victim cell
∆V(i,j) due to the five interfering cells can be quantified as
follows [3]:
∆V(i,j)
=
α{γx

∆V(i,j−1) + ∆V(i,j+1)

+
γxy

∆V(i+1,j−1) + ∆V(i+1,j+1)

+
γy

∆V(i+1,j)

}
where ∆V(a,b) = V(a,b) −V(i,j), and α is the interference
coupling coefficient which represents the overall interference
level of the NAND flash based memory while γx, γy and γxy
are the coupling coefficients between individual interfering and
victim cells. We refer the interested readers to [3] for details
of this model.
B. Proposed Paired Page Reading Scheme
A threshold voltage, i.e. a noisy observation of program-
ming voltage, distribution of MLC NAND flash memory is
illustrated in Fig. 1 where there are four different programming
voltage levels denoted by PV0, PV1, PV2 and PV3. In the
proposed pair-page reading scheme, we focus only on the
recovery of data stored in the MSB page since the MSB
page is considerably noisier than the LSB page when a Gray
mapping is employed. The programming voltage levels PV1
and PV2 represent the MSB value of 0. We define the groups
of the entire programming voltage levels and the ones for
MSB value of 0 (resp. 1) by P = {PV0, PV1, PV2, PV3} and
P0 = {PV1, PV2} (resp. P1 = P \P0 = {PV0, PV3}). As an
example, we consider a situation that the error-control system
fails to recover data in the MSB page. Then, the proposed
scheme fetches the data stored in the LSB page instead of
trying to take soft information for the target page, i.e. the MSB
page, by conducting the so-called multiple read technique.
In Fig. 1, the existing and the proposed schemes are
illustrated. In the MSB page, there are two sensing levels,
i.e. S1 and S2 with which hard decisions for the data in the
MSB page are performed. In the multiple read technique, the
soft information for the threshold voltages of memory cells are
acquired in such a way that two extra reading operations for
the MSB page are conducted with the sensing levels denoted
by S+
i
and S−
i
for i = 1, 2 in Fig. 1 (b). Thus, there will
be three read operations to achieve log-likelihood ratio (LLR)
values of 2-bit precision.
Meanwhile, the proposed scheme conducts an extra reading
for the LSB page instead of MSB page as shown in Fig. 1 (c).
We will show that the extra reading for the LSB page provide
an efficient way to address pattern dependent errors.
C. Read Latency Comparison
In 2x nm architecture, the voltage sensing operation usually
takes about 40µs. If the NAND flash controller adopts the
DDR2 input/output (I/O) interface, the latency of data transfer
from NAND to controller is about 10µs for 8K byte page,
Threshold
Voltage
Threshold
Voltage
Threshold
Voltage
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉0
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉1
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉2
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉3
𝑆𝑆1
𝑆𝑆2
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉0
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉1
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉2
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉3
𝑆𝑆1
𝑆𝑆2
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉0
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉1
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉2
𝑃𝑃𝑉𝑉3
𝑆𝑆1
𝑆𝑆2
𝑆𝑆3
𝑆𝑆1
−
𝑆𝑆1
+
𝑆𝑆2
−
𝑆𝑆2
+
1 1
MSB
LSB
0 1
0 0
1 0
Fig. 1. (a) Hard decision for the MSB page (b) 3-read for the MSB page and
(c) the proposed paired-page reading.
which takes relatively a small fraction of the entire voltage
sensing latency. Since the data reads for the MSB and and LSB
pages require two and single voltage sensing, respectively, the
read operation latency for the MSB and LSB page is then
about 90µs(= 2 × 40µs + 10µs) and 50µs(= 40µs + 10µs)
respectively. In this manner, the 3-read operation in Fig. 1
(b) requires additional 180µs after the hard decision decoding
while the proposed scheme only takes 50µs. The comparison
of latency between the proposed and 3-read schemes, however,
seems not fair, since the proposed scheme only has a total of
two read operations. To make the comparison fair, we consider
a scheme with 2 read operations for the same page, i.e. the
MSB page, which results in a 1.5 bit LLR precision [5]. In this
case, the 2 read operations for the same page take additional
latency of 90 µs, which is 40 µs longer than the one for the
proposed scheme.
III. PROGRAM LEVEL ESTIMATION
Since the read operation provides only a noisy observation
yi, i.e. threshold voltage, of the stored data xi, i.e. program-
ming voltage, in Fig. 2, the error probability in the retrieved
data must be taken into the calculation of LLR values.
𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖−2
𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖−1
𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖
𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖+1
𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖+2
𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖−2
𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖−1
𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖
𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖+1
𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖+2
Fig. 2. Interference channel model; memory cells are indexed from i −2 to
i + 2 among which the cell i is the victim cell, and the cells i −1 and i + 1
are the interfering cells.
In this paper, we are interested in problematic combinations
of threshold voltage values in the victim cell (xi) and its
adjacent cells (xi−1, xi+1) in Fig. 2. When we have noisy
observations of the threshold voltages, i.e. yi−1, yi, and yi+1,
1066
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the LLR value of cell i is given by
Li = log

xi∈P0 Pr

yi+1
i−1|xi


xi∈P1 Pr

yi+1
i−1|xi
,
(1)
where yk+m
k
represents a vector, [yk, yk+1, . . . , yk+m].
However, we should estimate the patterns only through
noisy observations, i.e. yi−1, yi, and yi+1. Note that in the
LLR computation, yi−1 and yi+1 are also affected by the
programming voltages of their adjacent cells, i.e. xi−2 and
xi+2. Thus, the channel should be modeled as a conditional
probability distribution between programming and threshold
voltage groups as follows:
Pr

yi+1
i−1|xi+2
i−2

=
i+1

k=i−1
Pr

yk|xk+1
k−1

,
(2)
where xi+2
i−2 and yi+1
i−1 can be considered as the input and output
groups of a noisy channel. Assuming that the programming
voltage levels are uniformly distributed, the conditional prob-
ability in (2) enables us to rewrite Pr

yi+1
i−1|xi

in (1) as
Pr

yi+1
i−1|xi

=

˜xi+2
i−2∈P4
Pr

yi+1
i−1|xi+2
i−2

Pr

˜xi+2
i−2

=
1
256

˜xi+2
i−2∈P4
Pr

yi+1
i−1|xi+2
i−2

=
1
256

˜xi+2
i−2∈P4
 i+1

k=i−1
Pr

yk|xk+1
k−1


,(3)
where ˜xi+2
i−2 indicates a vector [xi−2, xi−1, xi+1, xi+2], and
the number 256 tells the number of possible combinations of
programming voltage levels in four cells, i.e. |P|4. Finally, by
substituting the result in (3) with the conditional probability
in (1), we can get the LLR computation as
Li = log

xi∈P0

˜xi+2
i−2∈P4
i+1
k=i−1 Pr

yk|xk+1
k−1


xi∈P1

˜xi+2
i−2∈P4
i+1
k=i−1 Pr

yk|xk+1
k−1
.
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, performance of LDPC based error-control
systems with existing and proposed schemes are compared.
The LDPC code has the quasi-cyclic structure [4] whose
parity-check matrix is generated with the progressive edge
growth algorithm and has a girth of six. To make the sim-
ulation more realistic, we adopt a NAND flash channel model
from [1], and the all bit line structure and incremental step
pulse programming scheme are also considered. It is assumed
that the NAND flash memory is aged to the end of life, 6K
program/erase cycles.
The performance comparison is shown in Fig. 3 where CH
indicates the performance based on one read operation for
the MSB page which requires two overall voltage sensing
operations. Meanwhile, CS tells the reading strategy in which
one more reading operation for the MSB page is carried out
when CH fails. Thus, CS requires a total of four voltage
sensing operations in the worst case. P shows the performance
of the proposed scheme which conducts additional reading
for the LSB page when CH fails. Since the reading for the
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Interference coupling coefficient, α
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
WER
Conv. MSB Hard Decision, CH
Conv. MSB Two Reads, CS
Proposed Scheme, P
Fig. 3. Error rate performance comparisons with a (18432, 16384) LDPC
code of R = 0.8889.
LSB page requires a single sensing operation, it requires three
sensing operations in the worst case. The results in Fig. 3
show that when α = 0.15, the proposed scheme has almost
the same performance as the one for CS, which however
outperforms that of CH by about three orders of magnitudes.
As the interference gets worse, the proposed scheme shows an
unparalleled performance improvement compared to CS.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduced a scheme for soft information
extracting using a paired page reading which detects pro-
grammed symbol level instead of increasing the bit-level LLR
resolution. Our claim was substantiated with both quantitative
and qualitative measures. The proposed scheme requires a
lower read latency and provides an efficient way to take
the interference effect into decoding processes with limited
information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Research Founda-
tion of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea Government
(MISP) (No. NRF-2015R1A2A2A01007739).
REFERENCES
[1] G. Dong, Y. Pan, N. Xie, C. Varanasi, and T. Zhang, “Estimating
information-theoretical nand flash memory storage capacity and its impli-
cation to memory system design space exploration,” IEEE Transactions
on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1705–
1714, 2012.
[2] D. Kim, J. Choi, and J. Ha, “On the soft information extraction from hard-
decision outputs in mlc nand flash memory,” in Global Communications
Conference (GLOBECOM), 2012 IEEE.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 3208–3213.
[3] Y. Kim, B. V. Kumar, K. L. Cho, H. Son, J. Kim, J. J. Kong, and J. Lee,
“Modulation coding for flash memories,” in Computing, Networking and
Communications (ICNC), 2013 International Conference on.
IEEE,
2013, pp. 961–967.
[4] P. Prompakdee, W. Phakphisut, and P. Supnithi, “Quasi cyclic-ldpc codes
based on peg algorithm with maximized girth property,” in Intelligent
Signal Processing and Communications Systems (ISPACS), 2011 Inter-
national Symposium on.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[5] J. Wang, K. Vakilinia, T.-Y. Chen, T. Courtade, G. Dong, T. Zhang,
H. Shankar, and R. Wesel, “Enhanced precision through multiple reads
for ldpc decoding in flash memories,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, 2014.
1067
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:06:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
