Hybrid Iterative Decoding for LDPC Codes Based on Gradient Descent Bit-Flipping Algorithm

Hua Li, Hong Ding and Linhua Zheng
School of Electronic Science and Engineering National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China E-mail: hjhylihua@126.com

AbstractвҖ”Gradient descent bit-flipping (GDBF) decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes has gained great attentions because of low complexity and relatively good performance. However, the performance of the GDBF decoding is still much poorer than that of the MS algorithm. To further improve the performance, the iterative decoding process is introduced to GDBF decoding in this paper. At the end of each iteration, the latest information is used to update the reliability of the flipped bit, by which its reliability is greatly improved. Simulation results indicate that the proposed algorithm has about 0.4 dB performance gains compared to GDBF. Meanwhile, there is small computational complexity increased.
KeywordsвҖ”LDPC codes; GDBF algorithm; iterative decoding; low complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to their powerful error correcting ability, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] have been used in many communication standards. LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded by hard-decision, soft-decision, and hybrid algorithms. The soft-decision algorithms, such as brief propagation (BP) algorithm, can achieve near-capacity performance with a large of real-number calculations. While the hard-decision algorithm, such as bit flipping (BF) algorithm, only needs logic operations but resulting in significantly decreasing in performance [1]. Thus, various hybrid decoding algorithms are proposed based on BF decoding by introducing soft information. The reliability information of received symbols was first included in weight BF (WBF) algorithm [3]. Of course, the real-number operations bring not only the performance improvement but also the complexity increasing to the WBF. To improve the performance of the WBF algorithm, many variants, such as MWBF [4], IMWBF [5] and RRWBF [6], were proposed. These algorithms improve the error performance or speed up the convergence rate with computations relatively increasing. In [7], a new class of hybrid algorithms for decoding LDPC codes was presented. These algorithms, denoted as gradient descent bit flipping (GDBF) algorithms, perform very well compared with most known WBF algorithms. The noisy gradient descent bit-flipping (NGDBF) [8] was proposed to further improve the performance of GDBF algorithm. The dynamic weight bit-flipping (DWBF) algorithms were presented in [9]. The decoding performances were improved by introducing new flipping function and flipped bit selection rules. To speed up the convergence rate, a multi-threshold bit-

flipping (MTBF) algorithm is proposed in [10]. Simulation results show that the MTBF algorithm has low complexity, fast convergence speed and good performance.
In this paper, we introduce iterative decoding to improve the performance of GDBF algorithm. In GDBF algorithm, the reliability value remains unchanged throughout the decoding process and only the sign of each bit updates per iteration. For most of the bit nodes, it is reasonable because their reliability information is credible. But for the flipped and flipping bit nodes, since their reliability information is not credible, their reliability should be updated by the real-time information to improve the credibility. Based on this idea, we design a new architecture, which can improve the performance of GDBF algorithm by iteratively updating the reliability of the flipped variable node. We refer the modified algorithm as HGDBF algorithm. The HGDBF algorithm only increases small computational complexity and have about 0.4 dB performance gains compared with original GDBF algorithm. The proposed HGDBF algorithm can achieves a good tradeoff between performance and complexity.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the notations of LDPC codes and GDBF algorithm. Section III summarizes the proposed hybrid iterative decoding algorithm and Section IV presents simulation results. Conclusions are presented in Section V.
II. LDPC CODES AND GDBF ALGORITHM
A LDPC code is defined by a sparse parity-check matrix H. Suppose that matrix H has the size M Г— N , the Tanner graph representation of the LDPC code has N variable nodes and M check nodes. In other word, each variable node is represents a column of H and each check node represents a row of H. The set of variable nodes is denotes by V={v1, v2,вҖҰ , vN} and the set of check nodes is denoted by C={c1, c2,вҖҰ , cM}. If Hij=1, it is said that the check node ci is connected with variable node vj. For a variable node vj, the set M(vj)={ci: Hij=1} is denoted as the neighbor set of vj and the size of M(vj) is the degree of vj. For a check node ci, the set N(ci)={vj: Hij=1} is the neighbor set of ci and the size of N(ci) is the degree of ci.
Suppose that the encoded LDPC code is modulated by BPSK and transmitted over AWGN channel. The codeword c=[c0, c1, вҖҰ, cN-1] is mapped to x=[x0, x1, вҖҰ, xN-1] by xn=2cn-1 before transmission. At the receiver, y=[y0, y1, вҖҰ, yN-1] is the

978-1-5090-2860-3/16/$31.00 В©2016 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

received vector with channel information, where yn=xn+vn and vn is the additive white Gaussian noise with zeros mean and variance Пғ = N0 / 2 . Let z=[z0, z1, вҖҰ, zN-1] be the binary harddecision vector obtained from y, where zn=1 if rn вүҘ 0 , otherwise, zn=0. Let ul = вҺЎвҺўвҺЈu1,u2,",uN вҲ’1 вҺҘвҺӨвҺҰ be the tentative decoded vector at the end of per decoding iteration. We compute the syndrome s=[s0,s1, вҖҰ, sN-1] by s = ulHT .
The GDBF algorithm was presented by considering the BF decoding process of LDPC codes as the gradient descent optimization of the objective function. The objective function proposed by Wadayama et al.

вҲ‘ вҲ‘ N

M

f (x) = xkyk + si

(1)

k =1

i =1

To get the maximal value of f(x), one reasonable way is to flip the bit (or bits) at which the absolute value of the partial derivative is largest. By taking the partial derivative with respect to the symbol xk, the flipping function of GDBF decoding is obtained as follows:

вҲ‘ Ek

= xk

вҲӮf (x) вҲӮxk

= xkyk

+

si

iвҲҲM (k )

(2)

Based on these ideas, the GDBF algorithm can be summarized as follows:

idea, we intend to use the latest information update the reliability of the flipped variable nodes per iteration. Next, we need to find the suitable information to update the reliability value. In GDBF algorithm, En in (2) is a reasonable candidate. However, En may have larger absolute value than the yn for the code bits, which may cause oscillations in decoding process. Thus, a weighting factor is adopted to update the reliability of the variable nodes more robust. Considering the Eb/N0, the weighting factor is given as follows:

Оұ =О· вӢ… N0

(4)

Eb

where N0 is the one-sided power spectral density of AWGN
and Eb is the average energy per information bit. The value of О· is close to 0.5.

Based on (4), the reliability of flipped variable node is updated at the end of the k-th iteration as follows:

yn

=

yn

+ un

вӢ…О· вӢ… N0 Eb

вӢ… Enk

(5)

where Enk is flipping function of variable node n after k iterations. The optimal value of О· is obtained by simulation
before the decoding process. Incorporating the iterative updating process and the original GDBF decoding algorithm, the proposed hybrid gradient descent bit-flipping (HGDBF) algorithm is presented as follows:

Algorithm I: Standard GDBF Algorithm

Initialization: Input parity-check matrix H, lmax, Set l=0. Step 1: Compute syndrome s = ulHT (mod 2). If s=0 or l=lmax, output ul and

stop; otherwise l=l+1.

Step 2: Compute the flipping function for all the variable node n вҲҲV ,

вҲ‘ En = unyn +

(1 вҲ’ 2sk ) .

k вҲҲM (n)

Step 3: Flip the bit v* for v* = arg minvвҲҲV Ev and return to Step 1.

Algorithm 2: Hybrid Gradient Descent Bit-Flipping Algorithm

Initialization: Input parity-check matrix H, weight factor О· , maximal

iteration number lmax, set l=0. Step 1: Compute syndrome s = ulHT (mod 2). If s=0 or l=lmax, output ul and

stop; otherwise l=l+1.

Step 2: Compute the flipping function for all the variable node n вҲҲV :

вҲ‘ ( ) Enl = unyn +

1 вҲ’ 2sm .

mвҲҲM (n)

Step 3: Flip the bit v* for v* = arg minvвҲҲV Evl . Step 4: Update the reliability of the flipped variable node v* by (5). Step 5. Return to Step 1.

To improve the performance of GDBF decoding, Sundararajan et al. modified the flipping function by introducing a weighting on syndrome and zero-mean Gaussian perturbation term.

вҲ‘ ( ) En = unyn + w

1 вҲ’ 2sk + qn

(3)

kвҲҲM (n)

III. HYBRID ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHM
In this section, we want to use another way to improve the performance of GDBF algorithm. In the GDBF algorithm, we consider the reliability of most of variable nodes is creditable except the bits which are selected to be flipped. Based on this

In algorithm 2, we can see that the initialization, step 1, step 2 and step 3 are the same as the standard GDBF algorithm. Step 4 is the updating process for the reliability of the flipped variable node. Compared with GDBF algorithm, the HGDBF algorithm increases the iteratively updating step (referred to as Step 4 in Algorithm 2). To update the reliability of the flipped variable node v*, we need to obtain the channel information N0 and the bit symbol information Eb. Besides, we need additional two multiplications per iteration. Although we only consider flipping one bit per iteration in the proposed HGDBF algorithm in the simulation section, this iterative updating mechanism can be easily extended to multi-bit GDBF decoding algorithm. Furthermore, this HGDBF algorithm can be improved by introducing a random perturbation in step 2 as it done in (3).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS In this section, we compare the HGDBF with the GDBF, WBF and MS algorithms over AWGN channel via BPSK modulation. We select two LDPC codes in simulation, the one is (1008, 504), which is constructed by progressive edgegrowth (PEG) method with dv=3 and dc=6. The other is (1023, 781) FG-LDPC code with dv=32 and dc=32. The maximum number of iterations is set to 100 for WBF, GDBF, HGDBF algorithms, and 30 for the MS algorithm. In both the (1023, 781) and (1008, 504) LDPC decoding using HGDBF algorithm, the О· is set to 0.5.
10-1
10-2
10-3

HGDBF algorithm is still about 0.8 dB away from MS algorithm.
To further demonstrate the performance of HGDBF algorithm, the error performance of the (1008, 504) PEG LDPC code are presented in Fig.2. It can be seen that the HGDBF algorithm also has 0.4 dB coding gain over GDBF algorithm at the bit error rate of 10-4. However, the HGDBF still has 2.8 dB performance loss compared with MS algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a hybrid iterative decoding algorithm, denoted as HGDBF, is proposed based on GDBF algorithm. In HGDBF, the reliabilities of flipped variable nodes are iteratively updated per iteration to improve the decoding performance. With a small increase of computation, the proposed HGDBF algorithm has about 0.4dB gains compared with original GDBF algorithm. Although we only consider the GDBF algorithm in this paper, this proposed iterative-updating method can also be used in noise GDBF and multi-bit GDBF version.

BE R

10-4

MS HGDBF

GDBF

WBF

10-5

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 1. BER of the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code with MS, HGDBF, GDBF and

WBF algorithms

10-1

MS

HGDBF

GDBF

10-2

WBF

BE R

10-3

10-4

10-5

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 2. BER of the (1008, 504) PEG LDPC code with MS, HGDBF, GDBF and WBF algorithms

Fig.1 shows the error performance of the (1023, 781) FGLDPC code with HGDBF, GDBF, WBF and normalized MS algorithms. At the bit error rate of 10-4, the HGDBF has about 0.4 dB coding gain over GDBF. And the performance of

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, вҖңlow-density parity-check codes,вҖқ IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, вҖңNear Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,вҖқ Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645-1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, вҖңLow density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711-2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, вҖңA modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,вҖқ IEEE commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165-167, Mar. 2004.
[5] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, вҖңAn improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,вҖқ IEEE commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814-816, Sep. 2005.
[6] F. Guo and H. Henzo, вҖңReliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes,вҖқ Electron. Lett., vol. 40, No. 21, pp. 1356-1358, Oct. 2004.
[7] T. Wadayama et al., вҖңGradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 16101614, Jun. 2010.
[8] G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead and E. Boutillon. вҖңNoisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 10, Oct. 2014.
[9] T. C. Y. Chang and Y. T. Su, вҖңDynamic weight bit-flipping decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 11, Nov. 2015.
[10] Y. Liu, X. Niu, and M. Zhang, вҖңMulti-threshold bit flipping algorithm for decoding structured LDPC codes,вҖқ IEEE commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 127-130, Feb. 2015.
[11] Z. Liu and D. A. Pados, вҖңA decoding algorithm for finite geometry LDPC codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, pp. 415-421. Mar. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:59:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

