2016 8th International Congress on Ultra Modern Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT)
An Efficient Scheduling Scheme for Layered Belief Propagation Decoding of Regular LDPC Codes

Hua Li, Hong Ding, Linhua Zheng, Ziwei Lei, Hui Xiong, Tan Wang
School of Electronic Science and Engineering National University of Defense Technology
ChangSha, China Email: hjhylihua@126.com

Abstract—Schedule plays an important role in layered belief propagation (BP) decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. It affects the error-rate performance as well as convergence rate of the decoder. In this paper, an efficient scheduling scheme is proposed to arrange the updating order of check nodes for layered BP decoder of regular LDPC codes. This scheme selects check node one at a time based on the reliability of the variable nodes. Specifically each time the check node with maximum number of low-reliability neighbors is selected. For simplicity, we introduce the updating state instead of the realtime messages to represent variable-node reliability. Simulation results on regular LDPC codes prove that the proposed scheduling scheme can obtain efficient schedules with fast convergence and good error-rate performance.
Keywords—LDPC codes; layered belief propagation;, scheduling scheme; convergence rate
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were discovered by Galleger in 1960s [1] and rediscovered in 1990s [2]. LDPC codes are defined by sparse parity-check matrices and can be represented by Tanner graph, which are bipartite graphs consisting of variable nodes and check nodes. Due to their superior performance, LDPC codes are used in many communication standards recently, such as DVB-S2, WiMax and IEEE 802.11n. LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded by relatively low-complexity belief propagation (BP) algorithm [1], [2], where the messages transfer along the edges connecting variable nodes and check nodes based on the bipartite graph of the LDPC codes. In BP decoding, the order of passing the messages is referred to as schedule, which affects the decoder’s convergence rate, decoding complexity and error-rate performance [3]. The standard schedule of BP algorithm is the flooding schedule. Flooding schedule is operated in two stages per iteration, firstly all the variable nodes pass the messages to its connected check codes, and subsequently all the check nodes, pass the messages to its connected variable nodes [4]. Even though the flooding schedule is very popular, it is not efficient in terms of convergence rate and decoding complexity [5]. Alternative schedules are the serial schedules, which can be implemented based on variable-node and check-node sequences. In variablenode-based serial schedule, such as shuffled BP decoding in [6], each variable node and its connected check nodes are updated sequentially; whereas in the check-node-based serial schedule,

such as layered BP decoding in [7], [8], each check node and its neighbors are updated sequentially. These schedules are expected to converge twice compared with flooding schedule [9]. To reduce the number of message propagations, a lazy scheduling strategy was proposed in [10], where only the sub set of variable nodes was updated per decoding iteration. With the motivation that an appropriate schedule can improve the decoding convergence rate as well as error-rate performance, various informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategies were proposed in [11], [12], [13]. Each significantly reduces the number of iterations required for decoding and improves the error-rate performance. However, they all introduce additional computations and result in hardware-complexity increase. Thus the fixed decoding schedules, which have no additional computations, attract a lot of attentions. In [14], A maximum mutual information increase (M2I2)-based algorithm was proposed to arrange the LDPC decoding schedule for faster convergence. Moreover this schedule can mitigate the effects of the trapping sets and thus improve the error rate in the floor region. For irregular LDPC codes, two fixed scheduling schemes [15], [16] were presented for layered BP and shuffled BP respectively. The check-node degree, variable-node degree and edge connection between the nodes were considered in the serial schedule in [15]. The schedule in [16] selected the variable nodes only based on the based on the variable-node degree. Both of them remarkably increase the convergence speed without introducing additional complexity.
In this paper, we propose a scheduling scheme to arrange the fixed order of check nodes for layered BP decoding of regular LDPC codes. In layered BP decoding, the availability of check node mainly depends on the low-reliability of the neighbors. Thus propagating the variable-node messages with less reliability first would speed up the convergence rate. Based on this observation, the check node with the maximum number of low-reliability neighbors is selected to update firstly in the proposed scheme. Since additional computations are needed to dynamically calculate the reliability of variable nodes, the updating state of variable node is introduced to represent its reliability for simplicity. This scheme is easy to implement. Investigations further demonstrate that the convergence rate of layered BP decoder can be improved using the proposed scheduling scheme.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The notations of LDPC codes and layered BP decoding algorithm are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4673-8818-4/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

397

ISSN: 2157-023X

presented in section II. The efficient scheduling scheme is proposed in section III. In section IV, the simulation results are provided to demonstrate the effect of the proposed scheme. Section V concludes this paper.

II. LDPC CODES AND LAYERED BELIFF PROPAGATION

A. LDPC Codes A LDPC codes can be specified by a sparse parity-check
matrix. For a LDPC code with parity-check H of m lows and n columns, it can also be defined by the Tanner graph consisting of n variable nodes and m check nodes. The sets of variable nodes, check nodes and graph edges are denoted by V, C and E respectively. A variable node, denoted by v, represents a bit in the transmitted codeword and a check node, denoted by c, represents a parity-check constraint. The ci is connected to vj if and only if Hij=1. If d edges emanate from a node, variable or check node, we say that the node has degree d. A LDPC code is called regular if the degrees of all the check nodes and variable nodes are the constants dc and dv respectively. Otherwise, if the degrees of the check nodes and variable nodes vary from node to node, the LDPC code is said to be irregular. For variable node v (or check node c), N(v) (or N(c)) is denoted as the set of the neighbors of v (or c), which can be reached from v (or c) by traversing only one edge.

B. Layered BP Algorithm LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded by BP decoding
algorithm, which operates on the Tanner-graph representation of the codes by iteratively exchanging messages between the variable and check nodes along the edges. We denote the message passing from a variable node v to a check node c by Qvc and the message from c to v by Rcv. The BP algorithm defines certain computation rules for Qvc and Rcv. However, it does not specify the order of passing the messages along the graph edges, which is known as schedule. The layered BP decoding algorithm is proposed based on a serial updating of the check-node messages. The initialization, stopping criterion and output steps remain the same as the BP algorithm with flooding schedule. The only difference lies in the updating order of the messages. In layered BP algorithm, the rows of parity-check matrix H are horizontally divided into layers. The messages updating between check nodes and variable nodes within a layer would be done in one sub-iteration. In this paper, we only focus on the layered BP algorithms in which each layer corresponds to one check node. Therefore in a subiteration, updating these variable nodes connected to a given check node is done serially in three steps. Firstly, the message from v to c is calculated as follows:

Qvc  Qv  Rcv

(1)

where the value of Qv is associated to each variable node and firstly initialized by the channel log-likelihood ratio

(LLR=log(P(v=1)/P(v=0))). The second step is the serial

updating of Rcv. Let N(c)\v be the set of all the neighbors of check node c excluding v. We have

    Rcnvew 

sign



Qv

'c





 

  Qv'c  (2)

v 'N (c)\c

v'N (c)\v



where (x)   ln tanh(x / 2) . The third step is the calculation of Qvnew value:

Qvnew  Qvc  Rcnvew

(3)

The updated Qvnew value can be used in the same iteration

by another sub-iteration.

III. THE PROPOSED SCHEDULING SCHEME For layered BP decoder, the updating order of check nodes determines the decoding process. It plays an important role in the convergence rate, decoding complexity and error-rate performance. In this section, an efficient scheduling scheme is proposed to arrange the updating order of check nodes for layered BP algorithm. In layered BP, we firstly note that each edge is updated once per iteration regardless of which sequence of check nodes is executed. Thus for a variable node v with degree dv, it will be updated dv times whichever the schedule is. In one iteration, we denote the updating state of a variable node v by U(v), which equals the number of updated times of v. In general, the reliability of v1 is higher than that of v2 if U(v1)>U(v2). Since the decoding schedule arranged by the proposed scheme is pre-determined and fixed, we use U(v) instead of real-time message Qv to represent the reliability of variable node v. Next we consider the availability of the check nodes. According to (2), the reliability message from the check node c to the variable node v is mainly dependent on the variable-node message with less reliability. Based on this phenomenon, the measurement (denoted by A(c)) of the availability of check node c can be defined as follows:

A(c)  min U (v)

(4)

vN (c)

When the value of A(c) is a large, it indicates that the check

node c sends the highly reliable messages to its neighbors.

The criterion of the proposed scheme is minimizing the number of check nodes with low availability per decoding iteration. This criterion can be operated as follows: a check node c is selected to update first if its neighbors has maximum number of variable nodes with U(v)=0. If there are more than one check nodes with the same number of neighbors with U(v)=0, we then select the one with the maximum number of neighbors with U(v)=1. We continue this process until a check node is selected. For a given value of dv, if there are still a number of check nodes with the same number of neighbors with U(v)=dv, we select one randomly. The detail of the proposed scheduling scheme is given in Algorithm 1.

In initialization, T0, T1, …, Tdv are the sets of indices of variable nodes with U(v)=0, U(v)=1, …, U(v)=dv respectively. The set S is used to store check nodes and the order is the schedule for layered BP decoding. The set R is used to store the candidate check nodes. Obviously, R contains all the check nodes in the initialization. The loop between step 1 and step 4 continues until j=m, where j represents the index of check-node order. In Step 2, the j-th check node cs is selected from R to S based on the proposed criterion. If we can not select a check node until k=dv, we will select one randomly form set  . In step 3, we first update S and R based on cs, and then update the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
398

sets T0, T1, …, Tdv based on N(cs). In step 4, we intend to select (j+1)-th check node if j<m.
Algorithm 1: Proposed Scheduling Scheme Initialization: For a regular LDPC code with parity-check matrix H and
variable-node degree dv. T0=V, T1, T2, …, Tdv empty sets, R=C, S   ,
j=0. Step 1: j=j+1. Step 2: Set k=0,   R and C   ;
  (a)   c*   : N (c*)  Tk  N (c)  Tk ,c   ;
(b) If   1 , make cs   and go to Step 3;
(c) If k  dv , k=k+1 and go to (a); else pick cs from  randomly.
Step 3: S  S  cs , R  R \ cs ; Tl  Tl 1  N (cs ) ,   Tl 1  Tl 1 \ Tl 1  N (cs )
for 1  l  dv . Step 4: If j<m, go to Step 1; else stop.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS To investigate the performances of the proposed scheme described in the previous section, we compare the schedule, produced by proposed scheme, with the flooding schedule and the random-selecting schedules by Monta Carlo simulations. The schedules selected by proposed scheme and flooding schedule are denoted as Proposed and Flooding schedule respectively. To avoid the influence of the random seed, the schedules by randomly selected are implemented thirty times with different random seeds. The averaged performance is denoted as Random. The regular LDPC codes used in the simulations is the rate-1/2 Mackay code with block length N=504, dc=6, dv=3. Simulations are performed with binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Notations Eb and N0 denote the average energy per information bit and the one sided power spectral density of the AWGN respectively. The bit-error rate (BER) performances are measured after observing at least 200 erroneous code words at each Eb/N0 value to guarantee statistical confidence. First, the (504, 252) LDPC code is implemented to demonstrate the improvement in the convergence rate. The availability distributions of check nodes of the three schedules are listed in Table I. As the Flooding schedule can not use the updated information per iteration, all the availability values of check nodes are equal to 0. Since the proposed scheme selects schedules by minimizing the number of check nodes with low availability, we observe that the Proposed schedule have less number of check nodes with A(c)=0 than other two schedules. Meanwhile it has more number of check nodes with A(c)=1 and A(c)=2. Fig.1 shows the BER values versus the number of iterations when the three schedules are adopted, where the considered decoding Eb/N0 value is 3.0 dB. From Fig.1, it is obvious that the Proposed schedule converge faster than the Flooding and Random schedules. When the decoding iterations is less than 25, the Random schedule perform better than

flooding schedule, while poorer than the schedule obtained by proposed scheme.

10- 1 Flooding

Random

10- 2

Proposed

10- 3

BER

10- 4

10- 5

5

10

15

20

25

The Number of Iterations

Fig 1. Convergence speed of BP decoder of rate-1/2 length-504 regular LDPC codes using different decoding schedules.

TABLE 1. COMPAPRISON OF CHECK-NODE AVAILABILITY A(C) OF THE (504, 252) REGULAR LDPC DECODER USING FLOODING, PROPOSED AND RANDOM
SCHEDULES.

Flooding

nA(c)=0 252

nA(c)=1 0

nA(c)=2 0

Proposed

161

66

25

Random

169.62

62.97

19.41

10- 1 Flooding, iter=50

10- 2

Proposed, iter=20

Random, iter=20

Flooding, iter=20 10- 3

BER

10- 4

10- 5

10-16. 5

2

2. 5

3

3. 5

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig 2. BER performances of the rate-1/2 length-504 regular LDPC codes using different decoding schedules.

The BER performances of BP decoder with the three decoding schedules are compared in Fig.2. It is observed that the BP decoder with Proposed schedule only need 20 iterations can approach the performance of flooding-schedule-based BP decoder with 50 iterations. When the maximum number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
399

iterations is set to 20, the Proposed schedule has better BER performance than the Flooding and Random schedules.
V. CONSLUSION This paper proposes an efficient scheme to arrange the updating order of check nodes for layered BP decoding of regular LDPC codes. Firstly the updating state is introduced to represent the reliability of variable node and then we select the check node based on the updating state of its neighbors. The fixed schedule, produced by proposed scheme, can eliminate the need for run-time computations; improve the convergence rate for the layered BP decoder. Simulation results on the regular LDPC codes prove that the schedule selected by the proposed scheme outperforms the random selected schedule in term of convergence rate. When the maximum number of iterations is limited, it has better error-rate performance. This paper only considers the case of AWGN channel, and the next work is the implementation of other channels.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theoty, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[3] G. Han, Y. L. Guan and X. Huang, “Check node reliability-based scheduling for BP decoding of non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 877-885, Mar. 2013.
[4] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219-230, Feb. 1998.

[5] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial messagepassing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory} vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076-4091, Nov. 2007.
[6] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier. “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun.} vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209-213, Feb. 2005.
[7] D. E. Hocevar. “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC code” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal processing and Systems (SIPS. 04), Austin, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 107-112.
[8] J. Zhang, Y. Lei and Y. Jin, “Check-node lazy scheduling approach for layered belief propagation decoding algorithm,” Electron. Lett., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 278-279, Feb. 2014.
[9] E. Sharon, N. Presman and S. Litsyn, “Convergence analysis of generalized serial message-passing schedules,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1013-1024, Aug. 2009.
[10] D. Levin, E. Sharon, and S. Litsyn, “Lazy scheduling for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 70-72, Jan. 2007.
[11] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoder with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 34703479, Dec. 2010.
[12] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Ye, and G. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC code,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683-2691, Oct. 2011.
[13] H. C. Lee, Y. L. Ueng, S. M. Yeh, and W. Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886-896, Mar. 2013.
[14] H. C. Lee and Y. L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun.} vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104-3113, Sep. 2014.
[15] M. K. Kim, D. H. Kim and Y. H. Lee, “Serial scheduling algorithm of LDPC decoding for multimedia transmission” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. BMSB, Seoul, Korea, Jun. 2012, pp. 1-4.
[16] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan and K. Cai, “Improving the belief-propagation convergence of irregular LDPC codes using column-weight based on scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1283-1286, Aug. 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
400

