A Post-Processing Algorithm for Reducing Strong Error Effects in NAND Flash Memory

Sung-Rae Kim, Kijun Lee, Gyuyeol Kong, Myung-Kyu Lee, Dongmin Shin, Geunyeong Yu, Beomkyu Shin, Pilsang Yoon, Hongrak Son, and Jun-Jin Kong
Solution Product & Development, Memory Business Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. Hwaseong-si, Korea
{sr36.kim, kijuni.lee, gyuyeol.kong, myungkyu.lee, dm1229.shin, geunyeong.yu, beomkyu.shin, pilsang.yoon, hr25.son, jjkong}@samsung.com

AbstractвҖ” This paper introduces a novel post-processing algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes adequate for NAND flash memory, to improve error correction capability of a soft decision decoding by reducing strong error effects in an efficient way. In this algorithm, it can detect variable nodes of strong errors using incoming check-to-variable (c2v) messages and reduce magnitude of channel reliability of the nodes to avoid supplying large erroneous variable-to-check (v2c) messages for the check nodes. The proposed post processing algorithm with a finite precision LDPC decoding scheme is named edge-based post processing and effectively reflects time varying characteristic of NAND flash channel.
KeywordsвҖ”G Finite precision LDPC decoder, LDPC codes, NAND flash memory, strong errors

I. INTRODUCTION
As NAND flash memory stores more than one bit in each cell by programming the cell threshold voltage into one of several voltage windows, the capacity of NAND flash memory increases continuously but its data reliability becomes degrade [1]. Therefore, error control coding (ECC) for NAND flash memory is becoming more important as the storage density increases and this makes stronger errorcorrection codes necessary. Mainly, LDPC codes [2]-[3] are adopted as ECC for SSDs of major NAND flash manufacturers because of their superior error correction capability.
LDPC codes essentially use soft-decision (SD) memory sensing to achieve a noticeable coding gain depending on the quality of SD data. But, in NAND flash memory, the quality of SD data is strongly affected by program/eraser (P/E) cycles, retention time, and read disturb, etc., [4]. Not only the raw-bit error rate (RBER) of NAND flash memory gradually increases, but also the number of errors above a SD read offset called вҖҳвҖҳstrongвҖҷвҖҷ errors is increased simultaneously, which is defined formally later. In a hard decision (HD) decoding of LDPC codes, they donвҖҷt make an impact upon degrading the error correction capability since only HD data are used. But in a SD decoding, the LDPC decoder should

Figure 1. The soft decision read scheme in NAND flash memory
assigns them larger channel reliability compared to вҖҳвҖҳweakвҖҷвҖҷ errors which are errors below a SD read offset, Н‘ consequentiallyН‘ it induces a great loss of the error correction capability of a SD decoding. In spite of the same RBER, the SD error correction capability grows worse as the number of strong errors in total errors is increased. In [5], the authors introduced concepts of strong and weak errors and indicated that incorrect assignment of channel reliability for strong errors is very critical to achieving good error correction capability of a SD decoding. But they did not suggest how to detect strong errors and how to manipulate them to reduce strong error effects.
This paper presents definitions of strong and weak errors in NAND flash memory and investigates that how strong errors make an effect on calculating variable-to-check messages of a finite precision LDPC decoder. Also, to reduce strong error effects, a novel algorithm will be devised. The proposed algorithm reflects time varying feature of NAND flash channel to a decoder.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly introduces strong and weak errors formally. And a finite precision LDPC decoder is descried to be used through this paper. Strong error effects on calculating variable-to check messages are also investigated. From these observations,

978-1-5090-1570-2/16/$31.00 В©2016 IEEE

465

APCCAS 2016

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a novel algorithm is introduced in order to improve the error correction capability of a SD decoding as a post processing. In Section III, simulation results will be shown for demonstrating the effect of a proposed post processing algorithm and concluding remarks are given in Section IV.
II. REDUCING EFFECT OF STRONG ERRORS
A. Strong and Weak Errors
The concepts of strong and weak errors are now introduced formally. Assume that a 2 bits SD sensing at the read voltage levels of HD_read, SD1_read, and SD2_read is carried out as like in a Figure 1. To perform a SD decoding of LDPC codes, HD data and SD data of memory cells in a page of NAND flash memory are needed and they are obtained as the following way; if the threshold voltage of a memory cell is above HD_read, an HD data is decided as one; otherwise it is decided as zero. To obtain its SD data indicating magnitude of channel reliability, whether the threshold voltage is in the region of between SD1_read and SD2_read or not should be checked. If the threshold voltage is in the region of between SD1_read and SD2_read, the SD data is decided as zero; otherwise it is decided as one.
The strong error is defined by an error which is not in the region of between SD1_read and SD2_read. In contrast to the strong error, the weak error is defined by an error in the region of between SD1_read and SD2_read. The LDPC decoder decides signs and magnitudes of channel reliability of a codeword internally using received HD data and SD data from NAND flash memory. The strong error ratio is defined as follows.
В–ВҠВҮ ВҗВ—ВҸВ„ВҮВ” В‘ВҲ В•В–В”В‘ВҗВү ВҮВ”В”В‘В”В•  В”ВғВ–ВӢВ‘ аөҢ В–ВҠВҮ ВҗВ—ВҸВ„ВҮВ” В‘ВҲ В–В‘В–ВғВҺ ВҮВ”В”В‘В”В•
B. Finite Precision LDPC Decoder
A parity-check matrix Ы¶ of an LDPC code can be represented by a bipartite Tanner graph вҖ« Ь©вҖ¬аөҢ бҲәЬё вҖ«ЬҘ Ч«вҖ¬ЗЎ вҖ«Ь§вҖ¬бҲ» , where Ьё is a set of variable nodes, вҖ« ЬҘвҖ¬is a set of check nodes and вҖ« Ь§вҖ¬is a set of edges бҲәЭ…ЗЎ ЭҶбҲ» connecting check node Э… and variable node ЭҶ if and only if Ы¶аӯ§ЗЎаӯЁ аөҢ Ні. The set of neighbors of variable node вҖ«Э’вҖ¬аҜқ is denoted as аЈЁбҲәвҖ«Э’вҖ¬аҜқбҲ»ЗЎ and the set of neighbors of check node ЬҝаҜң is denoted by аЈЁбҲәЬҝаҜңбҲ». Moreover, let ЭҖаҜ© be the corresponding variable node degree and ЭҖаҜ– be the corresponding check node degree. For simplicity, the current iteration is not specified in the notations of the messages.
The finite precision min-sum decoder вҖ« ЬҰвҖ¬is composed with 4-tuple вҖ« ЬҰвҖ¬аөҢ бҲәаЈ§ЗЎ аЈ©ЗЎ И°аӯҙЗЎ И°аӯЎ бҲ» [6]-[7]. The set of messages аЈ§ with a вҖ«ЭҚвҖ¬-bits precision is confined to a finite alphabet such as аЈ§ аөҢ бҲјаөҶвҖ«Ь®вҖ¬аҜ•ЗЎ ЗҘ ЗЎ аөҶвҖ«Ь®вҖ¬а¬өЗЎ НІЗЎ вҖ«Ь®вҖ¬а¬өЗЎ ЗҘ ЗЎ вҖ«Ь®вҖ¬аҜ•бҲҪ where вҖ«Ь®вҖ¬аҜң вҖ«ЧҗвҖ¬ Ф№а¬ҫand вҖ«Ь®вҖ¬аҜң аөҗ вҖ«Ь®вҖ¬аҜқ for any Э… аөҗ ЭҶ. Especially, аЈ§ with вҖ« ЭҚвҖ¬аөҢ Нҙ bits precision takes 4-values бҲјаөҶвҖ«Ь®вҖ¬а¬¶ЗЎ аөҶвҖ«Ь®вҖ¬а¬өЗЎ вҖ«Ь®вҖ¬а¬өЗЎ вҖ«Ь®вҖ¬а¬¶бҲҪ without zero.
The set аЈ© denotes the set of all possible channel reliability. For the case of NAND flash memory, the channel reliability вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқ for a variable node вҖ«Э’вҖ¬аҜқ is determined by its HD data and SD data. If its SD data is one (strong), it has magnitude вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ of

strong, otherwise it has вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜӘ of weak and its HD data is mapped НІ Хң аө…Ні and Ні Хң аөҶНі. Therefore, at this channel, аЈ© consists of 4-values such as аЈ© аөҢ бҲјаөҶвҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰЗЎ аөҶвҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜӘЗЎ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜӘЗЎ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰбҲҪ where вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰЗЎ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜӘ вҖ« ЧҗвҖ¬Ф№а¬ҫ for вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜӘ аөҸ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ. Usually, вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ is larger than вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜӘ because of obtaining the noticeable gain of a SD decoding.
The function И°аӯЎЗЈ аЈ§аҜ—аіҺа¬ҝа¬ө Хң аЈ§ used for min-sum updating a check node with degree ЭҖаҜ– is defined as
аҜ—аіҺа¬ҝа¬ө
И°аӯЎаө«ЭүаҜңЗЎа¬өЗЎ ЗҘ ЗЎ ЭүаҜңЗЎаҜ—аіҺа¬ҝа¬өаөҜ аөҢ бүҢ а·‘ вҖ«ЭҠЭғЭ…ЭҸвҖ¬бҲәЭүаҜңЗЎаҜқбҲ»бүҚ аҜқвҖ«ЧҗвҖ¬бҲја¬өВҸЗЎЗҘВӢЗЎаҜ—ВҗаіҺа¬ҝа¬өбҲҪаё«ЭүаҜңЗЎаҜқаё«
аҜқаӯҖа¬ө
(1)

where sign is the sign function and ЭүаҜңЗЎа¬өЗЎ ЗҘ ЗЎ ЭүаҜңЗЎаҜ—аіҺа¬ҝа¬ө denote the incoming messages to a check node ЬҝаҜң
The function И°аӯҙЗЈ аЈ© аөҲ аЈ§аҜ—аіҺа¬ҝа¬ө Хң аЈ§ used for updating at a variable node with degree ЭҖаҜ© is defined as
аҜ—аіЎа¬ҝа¬ө
И°аӯҙаө«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқЗЎ Эүа¬өЗЎаҜқЗЎ ЗҘ ЗЎ ЭүаҜ—аіЎа¬ҝа¬өЗЎаҜқаөҜ аөҢ Ьі бүҢ а·Қ ЭүаҜңЗЎаҜқ аө… вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқбүҚ
аҜңаӯҖа¬ө
(2)

where ЬібҲәО®бҲ» is specified based on 2 bits precision level set аЈ® аөҢ бҲјЬ¶аҜЎЗЈ ЭҠ аөҢ НіЗЎНҙбҲҪ such that Ь¶аҜЎ вҖ« ЧҗвҖ¬Ф№а¬ҫ and Ь¶а¬¶ аөҗ Ь¶а¬ө and Ь¶а¬¶ аөҢ О».

ЬібҲәвҖ«Э”вҖ¬бҲ» аөҢ аөңвҖ«ЭҠЭҠЭғЭғЭ…Э…ЭҸЭҸвҖ¬бҲәбҲәвҖ«Э”Э”вҖ¬бҲ»бҲ»вҖ«Ь®Ь®вҖ¬а¬өа¬¶

ВӢВҲ ИҒвҖ«Э”вҖ¬ИҒ аөҗ Ь¶а¬ө ВӢВҲ НІ аө‘ ИҒвҖ«Э”вҖ¬ИҒ аө‘ Ь¶а¬ө

(3)

C. Strong Error Effects
Assume that all-zero codeword is transmitted and 2-bit precision LDPC decoder which is composed with аЈ§ аөҢ бҲјаөҶНөЗЎ аөҶНіЗЎ аө…НіЗЎ аө…НөбҲҪ, аЈ® аөҢ бҲјНҙЗЎ О»бҲҪ, and аЈ© аөҢ бҲјаөҶНёЗЎ аөҶН¶ЗЎ аө…Н¶ЗЎ аө…НёбҲҪ is considered in this paper. If there are many variable nodes with strong errors, large erroneous reliability have an influence on calculating v2c messages of the nodes, therefore an LDPC decoder cannot help but using erroneous messages.
For example, if a variable node вҖ«Э’вҖ¬аҜқ with ЭҖаҜ© аөҢ Н· has channel reliability вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқ аөҢ аөҶНё and its c2v messages consist of бҲјаө…НөЗЎ аө…НөЗЎ аө…НөЗЎ аөҶНөЗЎ аөҶНібҲҪ, it process its c2v messages to produce v2c messages such as бҲјаөҶНөЗЎ аөҶНөЗЎ аөҶНөЗЎ аө…НіЗЎ аө…НібҲҪ and provides the neighbor check nodes with them. Furthermore, it is decided as one and still remains to an error because of its large magnitude of channel reliability, i.e.аё«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқаё« аөҢ ИҒаөҶНёИҒ аөҢ Нё. Strong errors tend to incur erroneous decision and v2c messages.
From these observations, a novel algorithm which can detect strong errors as correctly as possible will be devised. It takes advantage of incoming c2v messages at a variable node. At a strong node which has magnitude of channel reliability аё«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқаё« аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ , signs of c2v messages tell that how many of them agree or disagree to it and magnitude of the sum of them tell that how much of reliability agree or disagree to it. So, if the majority of signs of its c2v messages are

978-1-5090-1570-2/16/$31.00 В©2016 IEEE

466

APCCAS 2016

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

opposite to a sign of it and magnitude of the sum of its c2v messages is less than аё«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқаё« аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ very slightly, it has great possibility of a strong error; this is reason why although the majority of c2v messages are opposite to a variable node of a strong error, it does not be decoded correctly because of large аё«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқаё« аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ. To detect a variable node with strong error, c2v messages in a strong node can be efficiently used to decide whether it is a strong error or not.

D. Detection of Strong Errors The proposed algorithm is composed of two steps, i.e.,
detection of variable nodes with strong errors and reducing magnitude of them. To detect variable nodes with strong errors, there are two kinds of conditions for checking incoming c2v messages at the strong nodes.
For a variables node with strong аё«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқаё« аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ , the sign condition is
Н“ В‘ВҲ В…НҙВҳ ВҸВҮВ•В•ВҮВүВҮВ• ВҷВӢВ–ВҠ В‘В’В’В‘В•ВӢВ–ВҮ В•ВӢВүВҗ В‘ВҲ В–ВҠВҮ  аөҗ Н“ В‘ВҲ В…НҙВҳ ВҸВҮВ•В•ВҮВүВҮВ• ВҷВӢВ–ВҠ В•ВғВҸВҮ В•ВӢВүВҗ В‘ВҲ В–ВҠВҮ .
(4)
And the magnitude condition is
НІ аөҸ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ аөҶ аё«ПғаҜқаҜ—аӯҖаіЎа¬ө ЭүаҜңЗЎаҜқаё« аө‘ Нҙ. (5)
Two conditions can be interpreted as follows. In a variable node satisfying them, its c2v messages insist that the variable node should be zero but it is decided as one and still remains to an error because of strong аё«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқаё« аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ. After detecting a variable node with a strong error, magnitude of it аё«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқаё« аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ should be reduced in calculating v2c messages so as not to produce large erroneous messages for a decoder. To obtain new magnitude of channel reliability аё«вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬аҜқаё«аҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ вҖ«ЬҘ ШқвҖ¬аҜҰаҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ can be formulated as follows.
вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰаҜЎаҜҳаҜӘ аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬аҜҰ аөҶ Яң. (6)
To determine Яң properly, Яң should be satisfied with the sign constraint of outgoing v2c messages to reflect c2v messages importantly for calculating v2c messages. The number of signs of v2c messages should be satisfied with the following constraint.
Н“ В‘ВҲ ВҳНҙВ… ВҸВҮВ•В•ВҮВүВҮВ• ВҷВӢВ–ВҠ В‘В’В’В‘В•ВӢВ–ВҮ В•ВӢВүВҗ В‘ВҲ В–ВҠВҮ  аөҗ Н“ В‘ВҲ ВҳНҙВ… ВҸВҮВ•В•ВҮВүВҮВ• ВҷВӢВ–ВҠ В•ВғВҸВҮ В•ВӢВүВҗ В‘ВҲ В–ВҠВҮ .
(7)
There are various Яңs satisfying the sign constraint of the outgoing v2c messages. Proper Яң is selected by evaluating

Figure 2. Variable node unit including a SE detector and a SE substractor
the error correction capability of the proposed algorithm in advance.
E. Edge-based Post Processing(EPP)
The proposed algorithm is adopted as a post processing in order to reflect time varying characteristic of NAND flash memory. It is called as the edge-based post processing since it uses c2v messages in order to detect strong errors. Since initial NAND flash channel is similar to AWGN channel, usually the LDPC decoder is designed and optimized to AWGN channel, therefore it is used as a normal mode which does not include the EPP. But NAND flash memory gets worse as P/E cycles, retention time, disturb increase and consequentially it has higher RBER and SE ratio than those of initial NAND flash channel. The EPP designed for NAND flash channel is adopted as a post processing in order to compensate for the error correction capability of a normal mode.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this paper, the derived density [8] is used for devising the strong error channel model to simulate the EPP instead of NAND flash channel. Strong error channel will be used for simulations. From test of NAND flash memory, we obtain characteristics of the SE ratio and the RBER. After then, given a RBER and a SE ratio of NAND flash memory, AWGN samples are generated under BPSK modulation and some samples of weak errors are randomly selected to be converted to samples of strong errors for meeting a SE ratio constraint. In addition, the block-type LDPC code with the efficient encoding [9] is adopted for Ы¶ matrix having a rate 0.9 and 4KB information bits under BPSK modulation. And min-sum decoder functions И°аӯҙЗЎ И°аӯЎ are optimized to 2 bits precision LDPC decoder.
Figure 3 demonstrates that the EPP has a critical impact on protecting the error correction capability at a strong error channel. In contrast at a strong error channel, the EPP does not improve the error correction capability compared with that of a normal mode at AWGN channel because the number of strong errors is very limited and so the EPP plays the only

978-1-5090-1570-2/16/$31.00 В©2016 IEEE

467

APCCAS 2016

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UBER

1.0E-06 1.0E-07 1.0E-08 1.0E-09 1.0E-10

Normal mode at SE 30% EPP at SE 30% Normal mode at SE 20% EPP at SE 20% AWGN EPP at AWGN

1.0E-11

1.0E-12

1.0E-13

1.0E-14

1.0E-15

1.0E-16 6.00E-03

8.00E-03

1.00E-02 1.20E-02
RBER

1.40E-02

1.60E-02

Figure 3. UBER performances at SE channels and AWGN
restricted role in reducing effect of strong errors as a post processing.

Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 5. pp. 892-899, May 2014.
[6] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic, вҖҳвҖҳFinite alphabet iterative decoders----part I: decoding beyond belief propagation on the binary symmetric channel,вҖҷвҖҷ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4033--4045, Oct. 2013.
[7] D. Declercq, B. Vasic, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, вҖңFinite alphabet iterative decoders, Part II: Towards guaranteed error correction of LDPC codes via iterative decoder diversity,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4046вҖ“4057, Oct. 2013.
[8] D. P. Bertsekas, and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Introduction to Probablity, Second Edition, Athena Scientific, 2008.
[9] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, вҖңQuasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894-2901, Aug. 2005.

IV. CONLUTIOINS
In this paper, the edge-based post processing is introduced to reduce the effect of strong errors of NAND flash memory. It is well known that strong errors of NAND flash memory have larger magnitude of channel reliability compared to weak errors in a soft decision decoding; that is a major reason why an LDPC decoder suffers from degradation of the error correction capability of a soft decision decoding as the ratio of strong errors increases. The proposed algorithm detects variable nodes of strong error using some check-to-variable messages and reduces magnitude of channel reliability of the nodes to avoid producing harmful variable-to-check messages. The soft decision error correction capability of LDPC codes is protected by simply manipulating variable node processing. Finally, it is adopted as a post processing to compensate for a normal mode optimized to AWGN channel.

REFERENCE
[1] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, вҖҳвҖҳUsing data postcompensation and predstortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interferecne in MLC NAND flash memory,вҖҷвҖҷ IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718-2728, Oct. 2010.
[2] R. Gallager, Low Density Pairty Check Codes. MIT Press, 1963.
[3] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, вҖңThe capacity of
low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,вҖқ IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599вҖ“618, Feb. 2001.
[4] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, вҖҳвҖҳOn the uses of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,вҖҷвҖҷ IEEE Trans.Circuits Syst. ,.Reg, Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429-438, Feb. 2011.
[5] M. N. Kaynak, P. R. Khayat, and S. Parthasarathy, вҖңClassification codes for soft information generation from hard flash reads,вҖқ IEEE J. Sel.

978-1-5090-1570-2/16/$31.00 В©2016 IEEE

468

APCCAS 2016

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:03:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

