Grouping Dynamic Scheduling for LDPC Codes in Symmetric Alpha-Stable Impulsive Noise
Bin Dai,1, Rongke Liu1,*, Zhen Mei2, Yi Hou1, and Ling Zhao1
1School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, P.R. China 2School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK
1E-mail: daibinok@buaa.edu.cn.

Abstract—In some practical applications, impulsive noise can severely degrade the performance of a communication system. As a class of powerful error correction codes, Low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes have been shown superior performance on AWGN channels. In addition, belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm of LDPC codes based on scheduling strategy has better performance and faster convergence rate than conventional BP decoding algorithm. In this paper, a dynamic scheduling of LDPC codes is first used on impulsive noise channels. Moreover, we propose a new scheduling strategy which named grouping dynamic scheduling (GDS) for impulsive noise channels to further improve the performance. Simulation results show that the dynamic scheduling on impulsive noise channels provides more performance gain than AWGN channels and the gain becomes significant when the channel is more impulsive. In addition, compared with conventional dynamic scheduling strategy, our proposed algorithm not only provides better performance, but also lowers the actual decoding computational complexity.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, dynamic scheduling, impulsive noise, symmetric alpha-stable distribution.
I. INTRODUCTION
The current state of the art in channel coding is featured by the use of compound codes to achieve performance close to the channel capacity developed by Shannon with affordable decoding complexity. Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [1] have recently received a great attention and are widely applied to different standards such as WiMAX and DVBS2 owing to their excellent performances. These advances have been accomplished on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. In spite of the fact that Gaussian noise has always been adopted to many real-life communication systems, the ambient noise is found to be non-Gaussian and exhibits an impulsive interference in some communication systems, including wireless networks [2], shallow water communications [3] and powerline communications [4]. Impulsive noise usually appears relatively large instantaneous power randomly exceeding the power of the useful signal and leads to significant reduction in the system capacity. Symmetric alphastable distributions [5] according to the generalized central limit theorem have proved to be very successful in modeling impulsive signal under those above mentioned circumstances. Hence in this paper, the impulsive channel model we use is called additive white symmetric alpha-stable (AWSαSN) channel.

Message passing algorithms on factor-graph of LDPC codes have been well developed during the past decade. According to the schedule of message update in the graph, message passing algorithms can be divided into two types: simultaneously update schedule (flooding scheduling scheme) and sequentially update schedule (sequential scheduling scheme). Compared to the flooding scheduling scheme, sequential scheduling scheme (SSS) can provide both fast converging speed and higher code performance, such as check-node-wise sequential scheduling scheme which is called layer belief propagation (LBP) [6] and variable-node-wise sequential scheduling scheme which is called shuffled belief propagation (SBP) [7].
Recently, a novel sequential scheduling scheme called informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) was proposed in [8], [9] which uses the residual of message to determine the sequence dynamically in which nodes update within one iteration time. The residual is the absolute value of the differences between the messages before and after an update. The messages consist of check-to-variable (C2V) messages and variable-to-check (V2C) messages. As a well-known IDS, the residual belief propagation (RBP) [8] algorithm uses the C2V residual to evaluate the sequence of the messages. To achieve a superior convergence performance, node-wise RBP (NW-RBP) [9] and twofole-RBP (T-RBP) [10] were further presented. Another IDS algorithms such as variable-to-check RBP (VC-RBP) and node-wise variable-to-check RBP (NVCRBP), which use the V2C residuals to determine the update sequence, were proposed in [11], [12].
The uncoded and LDPC coded performance with different receivers in SαS noise have been investigated by many literature [13]–[15]. However, to our best knowledge, there is no literature about the influence of dynamic scheduling strategy for LDPC codes on the AWSαSN channel. In this paper, we first study the performance of IDS for LDPC codes over AWSαSN channels with different levels of impulsiveness. In addition, as we know, dynamic sequence order strategy is an important part in dynamic decoding algorithm. Inspired by non-linear log-likelihood ratio (LLR) demappers for the impulsive noise, we propose a more effective dynamic scheduling strategy for such channels. Firstly, a grouping dynamic scheduling (GDS) scheme is presented by dividing VNs into two groups: impulse group and non-impulse group. Then, GDS scheme is combined with the residual order sequence to obtain a faster converging

978-1-5090-2860-3/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:57:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

speed. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the background knowledge including system model, the SαS distribution and a definition of the geometric signalto-noise ratio (GSNR). Section III describes the IDS algorithm and the grouping dynamic strategy (GDS). Simulation results are shown in section IV. Section V draws the conclusion.

is not suitable for assessing the comparison of different coding schemes. In digital communications, we are more interested to characterize the bit error rate (BER) and the frame error rate (FER) in terms of Eb/N0, i.e., the ratio of signal energy per bit to the noise spectral density. For BPSK modulation, the geometric ratio of signal energy per bit to the noise spectral density in AWSαSN channel [16] is:

II. BACKGROUND
A. System Model
The channel model considered in this paper is the AWSαSN channel which is memoryless with a binary input comes from a BPSK modulation and symmetric output. The channel output is given by

Y = X + N,

(1)

where X is the channel input which is +1 or −1 after the BPSK modulation. N is the impulsive noise which follows symmetric alpha-stable (SαS) distribution and is independent of X.

B. The Symmetric Alpha-Stable Distribution
The SαS distribution is a generalization of the Gaussian distribution that accommodates impulsive characteristics and in fact includes the Gaussian distribution as a special case. A practical difficulty in dealing with the SαS distribution is the lack of closed-form expression for the density functions except two special cases where α = 2 (Gaussian distribution) and α = 1 (Cauchy distribution). Accordingly, the distribution is defined by its characteristic function as

Eb/N0

=

GSNR 2R

,

(4)

where R is the code rate.

III. PROPOSED INFORMED DYNAMIC SCHEDULING NAMED GROUPING DYNAMIC SCHEDULING
Considering the non-linear characteristic of the initial soft messages in the AWSαSN channel, we proposed a new informed dynamic scheduling scheme named grouping dynamic scheduling (GDS). GDS scheme is the first dynamic selection criterion, then VNs at each group are updated by the residual order sequence. We will first describe the informed dynamic scheduling and then introduce the proposed GDS scheme combined with NVCRBP in this section.

A. Informed Dynamic Scheduling
The conventional message passing algorithm for the iterative decoding of binary LDPC codes is belief propagation (BP), which uses Tanner graphs as decoder models. BP algorithm updates and exchanges messages between check nodes and variable nodes (VNs) of the Tanner graph within each iteration time. For any check node ci and variable node vj, the loglikelihood ratio message propagates between them as follows:

φ(ω) = e−|γω|α ,

(2)

where γ > 0 is the scale parameter, which measures the spread of samples around the mean value, similar to the role of variance for the Gaussian distribution. 0 < α ≤ 2 is the characteristic exponent, which sets the level of impulsiveness of the noise. When α decreases, the channel becomes more impulsive. The probability density function (PDF) can be calculated numerically using the Inverse Fourier Transform (IFT) of 2.

C. The Geometric Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Since only the moments with order less than α are finite for a SαS distribution, the variance of SαS distribution does not exist when α < 2, making the standard signal to noise ratio (SNR) unsuitable to be a well-define measure. Hence, the geometric signal-to-noise ratio (GSNR) [16] is adopted to measure the impulsive noise, which can be defined as:

2

GSNR

=

1 2Cg

A

1
Cgα

−1

γ

,

(3)

where A is the amplitude of the transmitted signal (A = 1) and Cg is the exponential of Euler constant (Cg ≈ 1.78). As GSNR do not take the code rate into account, the use of GSNR

mvj →ci =

mca→vj + Cvj ,

ca∈N (vj )\ci
⎛

(5) ⎞

mci→vj = 2 × arctan h ⎝

tanh

vb∈N (ci)\vj

mvb →ci 2

⎠, (6)

where N (vj)\ci denotes the neighbors of vj excluding ci, and N (ci)\vj denotes the neighbors of ci excluding vj. m with a subscript indicating the direction denotes the exchanging

message between nodes, and the channel information of vj is given as Cvj .
Unlike the serial strategy, the dynamic scheduling strategy is

informed without a fixed update sequence. It is first processed

to determine which node will be updated based on the least

reliable message. It means that the least reliable message has

the update priority. Most of the dynamic decoding algorithms

take the residual as the basis of the dynamic selection strate-

gies. A residual is the norm of the differences between the

messages before and after an update. Let mk denotes the newly computed message of the k-th message in the vector of all the

messages in the graph, and mk denotes the old k-th message accordingly, the message update residual is defined as follows:

r(mk) = |mk − mk| .

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:57:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10

8

α=1

α=1.2

6

α=1.4

α=1.6

4

α=1.8

α=2

2

LLR

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

−10

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Y

Fig. 1: LLRs calculated by numerical integration methods for different values of characteristic exponent α with γ = 0.5.

Among the proposed dynamic decoding algorithms, NVCRBP has both less complexity and better asymptotic performance. Hence it is employed as a comparison of our proposed algorithm.
We note that the update sequence of the message may not be the only criterion for impulsive noise channels. In fact, the initial residual comes from the AWSαSN channel is nonlinear, the variable node with the largest residual does not mean it is definitely the least stable. In our proposed dynamic selection strategy, a more accurate criterion with a combination of two judgments is adopted. First, all VNs are divided into two groups. Then, the VNs of each group are updated by the residual order sequence.

B. The Grouping Dynamic scheduling
In the dynamic decoding algorithm, the soft messages are initially calculated based on the channel output. The soft messages in terms of Log-Likelihood-Ratios (LLRs) of the transmitted symbols, are defined as

LLR(yj )

=

ln

Pr(yj Pr(yj

|xj |xj

= =

+1 ) −1 )

(8)

where Pr(y |x) is the channel transition probability. yj = xj + nj is the received symbol, xj ∈ {±1} is the BPSK symbol and nj is an independent and identically distributed random variable following SαS distribution.
In the SαS noise, the LLRs are non-linear except α = 2 (the Gaussian distribution). Fig. 1 presents the LLRs for different α values. All VNs (according to the received symbols) are divided into two groups: one of which consists of the received symbols located between the maximum and the minimum of the LLR corresponding to the received symbols which are closed to zero, and is denoted with G1; The other of which consists of the remaining VNs that is denoted with G2. Let Lmax to be the maximum value of the LLRs corresponding to the received symbol ymax. Then, the variable node vj which belongs to G1 can be denoted as:

vj ∈ G1, if |yj | ≤ ymax

(9)

and the variable node vj which belongs to G2 is:

vj ∈ G2, if |yj | > ymax

(10)

According to the two groups, the new dynamic scheduling strategy is named as grouping dynamic scheduling (GDS). The VNs in G1 are to be chosen as the first one to be updated. After the number of updated VNs reaches the total number of VNs in G1 which is N1, the VNs in G2 which has N2 VNs are to be selected for updating. After grouping all VNs, the VNs of each group are updated by the residual order sequence. As discussed in the above section, NVCRBP has better performance among the improved RBP algorithms. The variable node at each group with the largest residual has the update priority copied with the NVCRBP algorithm. It can be named grouping dynamic scheduling NVCRBP (GDSNVCRBP) algorithm which is described by algorithm 1 as follows.

Algorithm 1 The GDS-NVCRBP algorithm

1: Initialization

2: Initialize all mc→v = 0 3: Initialize all mv→c = Cv 4: Initialize all G1(v) 5: Initialize all G2(v)

6: Iterative Decoding

7: Find the largest r(mv→c) in G1(v)

8: Let mvj→ci be chosen 9: for every ck ∈ N (vj) do

10: Set r(mvj→ck ) = 0 11: for every va ∈ N (ck)\vj do

12:

Generate and propagate mck→va

13:

for every cb ∈ N (va)\ck do

14:

Generate and propagate mva→cb

15:

Compute r(mva→cb )

16:

end for

17: end for

18: end for

19: if Nupdate < N1 then 20: Find the largest r(mv→c) in G1(v)

21: Let mvj→ci be chosen 22: else

23: Find the largest r(mv→c) in G2(v)

24: Let mvj→ci be chosen 25: end if

26: if stopping rule is not satisfied then

27: Go back to line 8

28: end if

C. Complexity Analysis of GDS-NVCRBP
We can define dv and dc as the variable node degree and check node degree, respectively (which are fixed numbers for regular LDPC codes and average numbers for irregular LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:57:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2: FER performance comparison of LBP, NVCRBP and GDS-NVCRBP vs. number of iterations for (3,6) LDPC code with rate 1/2 and block-length 8000 at α = 1 and Eb/N0 = 4.4 dB

Fig. 3: BER and FER for three decoding algorithms of LDPC codes at α = 1.9 with 5 iterations

codes). Assume that an LDPC codes consists of N variable nodes and M check nodes. the number of all edges in the Tanner graph is E = N × dv = M × dc which is valid for regular and irregular LDPC codes.
In an SSS or flooding BP iteration, E variable-to-check and check-to-variable messages must be updated. However, the IDS outperform sequential and flooding scheduling at the cost of the increased computations of the variable-to-check or the check-to-variable messages. For GDS-NVCRBP an iteration will be counted after a number of VN updates equals the number of VN of the code. If we define the procedure from line 7 to line 25 in Algorithm 1 as an update, then there are N updates in one GDS-NVCRBP iteration. The computations of CVMs and VCMs for GDS-NVCRBP are equals to which for NVCRBP are N · dv · (dc − 1) = E · (dc − 1) and N · dv · (dc − 1)(dv − 1) = E · (dc − 1)(dv − 1), respectively. The only difference of complexity between GDS-NVCRBP and NVCRBP is the comparisons: E · (E − 1) for NVCRBP and N1 · (N1 · dv − 1) + N2 · (N2 · dv − 1) for GDS-NVCRBP. Thus, GDS reduces the complexity of the NVCRBP algorithm when they combined.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we show simulation results of BP, NVCRBP and GDS-NVCRBP decoding for LDPC codes over AWSαSN channels. All the simulations are based on (3,6) LDPC code with rate 1/2 and block-length 8000. Fig. 2 shows the FER performance of different implementations for LDPC code at α = 1 and γ = 4.4. When the number of iterations is less than 5, the convergence speed of GDS-NVCRBP is very close to which of NVCRBP which is much faster than BP. When the number of iterations increases, there exists an obvious superiority in GDS-NVCRBP and NVCRBP compared with BP and GDS-NVCRBP provides a better FER performance than NVCRBP. After the number of iterations becomes 20,

Fig. 4: BER and FER for three decoding algorithms of LDPC codes at α = 1.5 with 5 iterations
the FER performance of both algorithms decreases slowly with the number of iterations increases while GDS-NVCRBP still provides the best performance. Therefore, GDS-NVCRBP achieves the best performance and fast convergence with a low complexity compared with BP and NVCRBP.
The bit-error-rate (BER) and frame-error-rate (FER) performance for three decoding algorithms of LDPC codes at different degrees of impulsiveness with a maximum number of iterations 5 over AWSαSN channel are shown in Figs. 35. Fig. 3 represents the performance of different scheduling strategies for the case of the slightly impulsive noise (α = 1.9). As compared with standard BP, it can be seen that both GDSNVCRBP and NVCRBP greatly improve the performance which have a gain about 2dB over BP at BER of 10−5. While the gap between GDS-NVCRBP and NVCRBP is only 0.02dB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:57:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with NVCRBP has an significant advantage for the strong impulsive noise. In addition, compared with NVCRBP, GDSNVCRBP speeds up the convergence rate and achieves better performance with less complexity. Compared with Gaussian noise, impulsive noise shows different nature which means the conventional scheduling might not be valid and it inspires us to develop GDS-NVCRBP. In the future, other techniques which can further improve GDS-NVCRBP could be examined to cope with the present of impulses.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 91438116 and No.61401010 and New Century Excellent Talents in University of China under Grant No. NCET-12-0030.

Fig. 5: BER and FER for three decoding algorithms of LDPC codes at α = 1 with 5 iterations
which is not obvous. When the channel becomes more impulsive, as shown in
Fig. 4 for the case of the moderate impulsive noise (α = 1.5). We notice that the gap between GDS-NVCRBP and NVCRBP becomes larger. GDS-NVCRBP performs the best which has a gain of 0.2dB and 2.7dB over NVCRBP and BP at BER of 10−5, respectively.
Finally, when α = 1 which the noise is very impulsive (in Fig. 5), similar results can be found. GDS-NVCRBP performs the best among those three algorithms which achieve a gain of 0.3dB and 5 dB over NVCRBP and BP at BER of 10−5. This figure shows again that GDS-NVCRBP can achieve excellent performance in impulsive noise.
From the above three figures, we can find that IDS (NVCRBP used in this paper) has an obvious advantage compared with BP in impulsive noise. When the channel becomes more impulsive, the gain is more obvious. Moreover, our proposed GDS combined NVCRBP can further improve the performance of NVCRBP especially for the strong impulsive noise. Note that GDS scheme is a dynamic sequence selection strategy which can be combined with any IDS algorithm. In this paper, we combine GDS with NVCRBP to represent the simulation results because NVCRBP is a recently proposed IDS with very lower complexity and better performance compared conventional IDS.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we first investigate the performance of BP and NVCRBP for LDPC codes over the AWSαSN channel. It has been shown that NVCRBP can achieve more gain on impulsive channels rather than AWGN channels, especially when the effect of impulse is strong. Moreover, An efficient grouping dynamic schedule for BP of LDPC codes is presented. This new scheme is based on a more accurate criterion which all VNs are divided into two groups by GDS scheme and then VNs in each group are ordered by the residuals. Simulation results show that the proposed GDS scheme combined

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Oct. 1962.
[2] K. Gulati, B. Evans, J. Andrews, and K. Tinsley, “Statistics of cochannel interference in a field of poisson and poisson-poisson clustered interferers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 6207–6222, Dec. 2010.
[3] M. Chitre, “A high-frequency warm shallow water acoustic communications channel model and measurements,” J. Acoust. Soc.America., vol. 122, no. 5, pp. 2580–2586, Nov. 2007.
[4] P. Lopes, J. Pinto, and J. Gerald, “Dealing with unknown impedance and impulsive noise in the power-line communications channel,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 58–66, Jan. 2013.
[5] G. Tsihrintzis and C. Nikias, “Incoherent receivers in alpha-stable impulsive noise,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 2225– 2229, Sep. 1995.
[6] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architechture via layered decoding of ldpc codes,” in IEEE Workshop Signal Processing Systems, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[7] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[8] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Ldpc decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[9] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of ldpc codes,” in IEEE Int.Conf. on Commun(ICC), Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[10] H. C. Lee and Y. L. Ueng, “Informed dynamic schedules for ldpc decoding using belief propagation,” in IEEE 24th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Sep. 2013, pp. 321–325.
[11] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, and H. Y. Song, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for ldpc codes,” Electronics Letters., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 117–118, Jan. 2009.
[12] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, H. Y. Song, and K. M. Lee, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for informed dynamic scheduling of ldpc codes,” in In Information Theory and Its Applications(ISITA), Dec. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[13] Z. Mei, M. Johnston, S. Le Goff, and L. Chen, “Error probability analysis of M-QAM on Rayleigh fading channels with impulsive noise,” in The 17th IEEE International workshop on Signal Processing advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC). IEEE, 2016.
[14] Y. Hou, R. Liu, and L. Zhao, “A non-linear llr approximation for ldpc decoding over impulsive noise channels,” in 2014 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC). IEEE, 2014, pp. 86–90.
[15] Z. Mei, M. Johnston, S. Le Goff, and L. Chen, “Density evolution analysis of LDPC codes with different receivers on impulsive noise channels,” in 2015 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[16] J. G. Gonzalez, “Robust techniques for wireless communications in nongaussian environments,” Ph.D dossertatopm, University of Delaware, Newark,DE,USA, 1997.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:57:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

