SACI 2020 • IEEE 14th International Symposium on Applied Computational Intelligence and Informatics • May 21-23 • Timişoara, Romania

Layered LDPC decoder in-order message access scheduling: a case study

Oana Boncalo University Politehnica Timisoara
Timisoara, Romania oana.boncalo@cs.upt.ro

Alexandru Amaricai University Politehnica Timisoara
Timisoara, Romania alexandru.amaricai@cs.upt.ro

Abstract—This paper discusses the problems of message mapping and message access scheduling for data hazards avoidance in layered Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder architectures, by using in-order message update strategy. We provide a detailed description of the offline algorithm that provides the fine tuning of message access scheduling that mitigates pipeline related hazards. An increase of 25%, up to 66% in hardware usage efficiency has been obtained when using these algorithms, for WiMAX rate 3/4 code, for the minimum latency case (2 clock cycles), with respect to the case when no off-line optimizations are used. Similar results have been obtained for DVB-S2X code, with 10%, up to 47%, showing that the fine-tune access scheduling improves the throughput of the LDPC decoder architecture at the same cost.
Index Terms—forward error correction, iterative, scheduling, mapping
I. INTRODUCTION
Quasi-Cyclic (QC-LDPC) code provide efficient error correction and high throughput, due to their structure suitable for parallelization. Hence, they have been adopted in modern standards for wireless communication standards (e.g. WiFi [1], WPAN [2], WiMAX [3]), digital video broadcasting (DVBS2X [4]), as well as flash memories [5]. The high throughput of the QC-LDPC decoder architecture implementations is powered by increased parallelization of data processing, as well as efficient pipelining. Another key characteristic of these architectures refers to their cost. Since most LDPC decoding architectures implementations are memory centric, the usage of low cost efficient memory tiles such as single-port SRAM blocks creates incentives for optimizing cost. Therefore, we focus on providing off-line algorithms that optimize memory message mapping and memory message access scheduling of layered LDPC decoders employing pipeline and memory single port SRAM memory bank organization, such that the data hazards are mitigated, and the hardware usage efficiency is maximized.
The problem of optimum message mapping in memory banks has been addressed in [7]–[10], by expressing it as a graph coloring problem. An important difference with respect to state of the art is the number of processing units considered, as well as the processing unit level parallelism. We address the case of larger parallelization, leading to less emphasis on the control information storage requirements. Furthermore, these works do not discuss pipeline. In prior art, pipeline is

addressed separately. Thus, the works of [11]–[14] proposed message read re-ordering strategies in order to mitigate the stall clock cycles introduced for avoiding hazards. Since these works consider only the case when parallelism at the processing unit level is 1 (i.e. one message is inputted per clock cycle to the processing unit), meaning a single memory bank implementation, no message mapping issue arise.
The contribution of this paper is: (i) a detail description of the algorithm that does the fine tuning of the message access scheduling, and (ii) a case study of the approach presented in [15] for a different update strategy – the in-order message update.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses Layered scheduling decoding, introduces the architecture assumptions, notations and metrics, Section III gives and overview of the off-line algorithms, with emphasis on the fine tuning od the message access scheduling that is linked to the choice of message update strategy, Section IV presents the results, and some conclusions at the end.
II. LDPC DECODING
A. Layered scheduling principle and Notations
QC-LDPC codes [16] are structured codes, characterized by a bipartite base graph, G, with cyclic shifts labeled edges of integers modulo z values. The z notation is used to denote the expansion factor. The G graph has two types of nodes, the set of check-nodes, denoted by M , and the set of variablenodes, denoted by N . The G graph can also be represented in matrix form, denoted by B, with the non −1 (m, n) entry values corresponding to the G edge labels. The parity check matrix of the code, H, is obtained by replacing each non −1 B entry by a cyclic shift of the identity matrix by B(m, n) positions, otherwise they are replaced by the all-zero z × z matrix. This effectively maps a check-node m ∈ M to a set of z check-nodes of H, denoted by r ∈ H(m), and maps a variable-node n ∈ N to a set of z variable-nodes of H, denoted by t ∈ H(n). The degree of a check-node m, dc(m) is the cardinal of the set N (m), and dm c ax being the maximum value amongst all degrees. A similar notation is used for the variable node degrees dv(n). An LDPC code is regular if all of it has constant dc(m) degrees, and constant dv(n) degrees. We note that, since the architecture assumes a number of z processing elements, for the purpose of this work, both the

978-1-7281-7377-1/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

000193

O. Boncalo and A. Amaricai • Layered LDPC decoder in-order message access scheduling: a case study

memory mapping and the pipeline issues can be formulated with respect to the G base graph.
For layered scheduling, each iteration (denoted by It) is made of successive processing of layers, which are groups of H matrix rows that have at at most one non-zero entry per column within each layer. In this paper, a layer corresponds to a check-node m ∈ M (i.e. one row of B). Thus, we need to determine an ordering σ, such that each check-node is mapped to a layer, with all layers being executed once, in order during the span of a decoding iteration.
One of the advantages of layered scheduling is related to the message storage. It allows to store the sum of checknode messages and channel Log-Likelihood Ratios (LLR) contributions, in so-called A-Posteriori Log-Likelihood Ratios (AP-LLR) messages. Thus, the variable-node message read and computation, n ∈ N (m), is equivalent to the APLLR message read, followed by the subtracting of m checknode message contribution. Therefore, the AP-LLR is updated dv(n) times per iteration. Furthermore, the variable message access scheduling can be formulated as the problem of finding a function ψ that describes the visiting order of the (m, n) graph G edges, such that, all edges of a given check-node m are visited before moving to the next check-node of the ordering σ. In addition to this, we need to map the constraint that the common AP-LLR messages of two successive layers have their values updated by the first layer (i.e two checknodes share a common variable node n ), before being read by the second, otherwise read-after-write (RAW) data hazards occur. If RAW data hazards occur, the check-node message contribution (m, n) from the first scheduled layer is lost. A possible way to relax this condition is to employ residue based layered-scheduling [15]. It accounts for the missed contribution, and adds it to the AP-LLR message at the earlies possible during the update of a subsequent check-node m , more specifically during the (m , n) message contribution update. For the detailed description of the residue based layered decoding principle refer to [15].
B. Architecture Assumptions and Metrics
The hardware architecture for the LDPC decoder considered in this work is depicted in Fig. 1. It is important to emphasize that Fig. 1 describes a family of QC-LDPC decoder architectures, with the following assumptions:
• z processing units, corresponding to a line of the base matrix B.
• Memory is built out of single port memory blocks, being the lowest cost implementation solution, as argued before. This decision has no impact on the check-node message memory since each message is read only once per iteration. However, it raises issues for the AP-LLR message memory, where each message is read dv(n) times per iteration. Each processing unit fetches different messages during check-node processing, and two distinct units may end up requesting messages mapped on to the same memory bank, thus, leading to a conflict. This requires serialization of read accesses and a stall cycle for

one of the processing units. Thus, the message mapping to memory banks is a critical off-line optimization step that avoids such cases. • Different degrees of parallelization may be employed at unit level (i.e. number of statically configured messages processed by each unit during a clock cycle execution). • The processing is pipelined.
The architecture is characterized by three key parameter:
• nbanks – the number of AP-LLR memory banks. Nothe that the proposed architecture does not support multi-port, only single port memory blocks, thus, the need to map AP-LLR messages for avoiding memory access conflicts. The check-node message memory is not subject to access conflicts, since every message is accessed once, and only once during an iteration.
• nlatency – the number of clock cycles in-between an aPLLR message read, and its corresponding memory write.
• nΩ the longest number of updates that a residue value corresponding to an AP-LLR message has before it is added to it.
Thus, we are mining for a family of QC-LDPC decoder architecture implementations described using the template approach from [17], that we found best suitable to describe the architecture variations. One important aspect is the control. Having a large number of parallel units and increasing the parallelism at unit level entitles for tight synchronization, and efficient control signaling amongst block. This is handled by the control unit that issues a read operation, all other control information is pipelined throughout the data-path processing and routing, such that the complexity on the control side is minimized. Hence, it is fair to say that the ”intelligence” lies in the offline computed ROM memories based on the LDPC code (i.e. B matrix), and the architecture parameter choices.
Regarding the metrics used to asses the off-line algorithms, we use the Hardware Usage Efficiency (HUE). As defined in [15], HUE represents the fraction of the useful AP-LLR memory read accesses out of the total number of possible memory accesses.

dc(m)

HU E(G, σ) = m∈M

· 100

(1)

IG · nbanks

Here, IG is used to denote the iteration duration with respect to a 3-tuple < ξ, σ, ψ >, equal to the total number of clock cycles

needed to execute an iteration and continue to the next. Note

that it also includes any additional clock cycles in-between

subsequent iterations, such that the messages needed in the

beginning of the next iteration are first updated by the former

iteration before a iteration starts.

III. THE OFF-LINE ALGORITHMS
A. Overview
For the memory mapping and access order optimization, two problems need to be solved. First, we need to map each message to its respective memory bank. Next, for the order in which messages are read from each bank needs to be

000194

SACI 2020 • IEEE 14th International Symposium on Applied Computational Intelligence and Informatics • May 21-23 • Timişoara, Romania

Fig. 1: Decoder architecture

computed. Note that it is possible to change the order in which check-nodes are processed. However, for a given check-node all variable messages corresponding to a check-node need to be computed, in order to finish the check-node processing, and to start the AP-LLR updates. We pursue the following approach:
• First, we do the message memory mapping into memory banks. For this, purpose we abstract this problem to an hypergraph edge coloring problem. In order to better correlate this abstraction to the Tanner graph representation, we will adopt in the following lose wording, by referring to the hypergraph coloring as variable-node coloring (i.e. since all edges connected to a variable node need to have the same color, it is acceptable to say that we color the variable node). The coloring problem is solved by a modified Misra and Gries heuristic algorithm, with polynomial complexity, followed by a genetic optimization step that tries to improve the solution. Details of this algorithm, and an example are presented in [15].
• Next, we map check-nodes to layers and determine σ. A possible way to solve this is by reducing it to a traveling salesman problem.
• Last, we need to determine the access order of each APLLR message (i.e. the read order, and read clock-cycle with respect to the beginning of an iteration processing).
The problem of message mapping to memory banks has been solved in [15] using a modified Misra and Gries algorithm. Furthermore, the finding of a check-node processing order (i.e. the mapping of check-nodes to layers) is done using a a genetic Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) solver that maps check-nodes to layers, and achieves a coarse grain message access scheduling. The remaining fine tuning step is detailed in the next subsection.
B. Fine tunning of the message read access scheduling
The last step is in fact an in-layer reordering that tries to achieve fine tune optimizations by only fixing the values of

the read and write-back clock cycles for check nodes that have overlapping intervals, while letting all the other variable node read accesses undecided (denoted with U), for as long as possible. Hence, this extra flexibility can be used for fine fitting and stall avoidance between end of iteration k, and start of iteration k + 1. This is referred to as correction step. At the end, after the check-node corresponding to the last layer is processed, all read accesses are set. order layer (mlast) procedure is called for the current layer from σ having check node mlast in order to fix the ψ values for all the previously processed check-nodes that have common variable nodes with mlast, as described in Algorithm 1. At first, all variable node related accesses for mlast (ψ(mlast, n), with n ∈ N (mlast)) are undecided.
The first possible read of variable node n for check node mlast, colored with c, is computed as:
rdF P (mlast, n) = max{rdF (mlast, c), wb(mprev, n) + 1} (2)
where mprev denotes the check-node mapped on the first layer from σ ordering previously scheduled, which shares variable node n with mlast. Note that rdF (mlast) depends on the layer start clock cycles set for mlast, which in not available yet. In other words, there is a circular dependency between the first possible read rdF P (mlast, n) and the first scheduled read rdF (mlast, c). In order to solve it, we use the most optimistic value, which assumes the layer k, where check-node mlast is mapped, starts immediately after layer k − 1 (i.e. next read is scheduled after the last write-back clock cycle). The zero stall between layers k−1 and k assumption is later on corrected if it proves wrong.
Given a check node m, and a color c, let Nξ(m, c) = {n1, ..., nl}. We define the ordered sequence of first possible reads as R = (r1, ..., rl), where ridx = rdF P (m, nidx), ∀idx ∈ {1, . . . , l}. The variable nodes nidx ∈ Nξ(m, c) are accessed with correct information if:

000195

O. Boncalo and A. Amaricai • Layered LDPC decoder in-order message access scheduling: a case study

ridx ≤ rdF (m, c) + idx − 1, ∀idx, 1 ≤ idx ≤ l (3)

Inequality (3) is used to determine the first clock cycle of the check node m for color c:

rdF (m, c) = max (ridx − idx + 1)

(4)

1≤idx≤l

Hence, the layer start clock cycle rdF (m) is the worst case over all colors c ∈ {1 . . . NC}. The idx − 1 factor from the inequality is needed in order to satisfy the hardware architecture constraint that requires all stalls for a layer to be pushed before the start of the layer. In order to resolve the circular dependency between Eq. (2) and Eq. (3), we select an optimistic value for the rdF (mlast, c) – the next read access after the last read from the previous layer.
Here, TG(ξ, mlast) is used to denote the maximum number of clock-cycle required to read the AP-LLR messages corresponding to the variable nodes of mlast out of all memory banks. Note that it is possible to have message mapping conflicts left unsolved by ξ that translate into stalls and may increase the value of TG(ξ, mlast). Also, rdLP is equal to the clock cycle of the last read from the previous layer if there is any, and −1 otherwise. The additional TG(ξ, mlast) − |Nξ(c, mlast)| clock cycles are mandatory because of the coloring imbalance on check node mlast (i.e. if Nξ(c, mlast) does not have the same number of elements for all c).
Using the moment of the first read for mlast, we can compute the access intervals of the previously scheduled check-nodes which share variable nodes with mlast, ∀n ∈ N (mlast). The access interval of a check-node is determined by the clock cycle of the first read and the clock cycle of the last write-back. The last write-back of an arbitrary check-node can be approximated using the first read, the number of messages that need to be read, and the data-path processing delay. For the previously scheduled check-nodes that access intervals overlapping with the current check-node we need to fix the read cycles such that RAW are avoided. This operation, called set, tries to fix the smallest possible value for wb(mprev, n) for all overlapping check-nodes mprev of mlast, where mprev is used to denote the previous check-node from σ, overlapping with mlast. For in-order write back policy, minimizing wb(mprev, n) is equivalent to minimizing rd(mprev, n). Then, the first possible read value of n is updated, as well as the ordered sequence R. When all possible check-node overlaps have been considered, the start of the layer can be determined using Eq. (4).The maximum difference between the original optimistic start, and the one computed, for all colors is denoted with D. The delay D is added to the original rdF (mlast, c) value considered. These new values may generate different access intervals than the ones previously computed. In fact due to D offset added to the layer start, some check-nodes may no longer overlap. Hence, they will be released. This is handled by function call revise(mlast, mprev, n).

Other functions used in order layer (mlast) procedure are: prev(m, n) – determines the first check node mprev, n ∈ N (mprev), for which variable node n has been previously accessed, for a given a partial layer order. set(mprev, n) – for check node mprev, and variable node n ∈ N (mprev), computes ψ(mprev, n), such that the write back for n occurs as soon as possible, and condition from Eq. (3) is verified (i.e. value wb(mprev, n) is minimized). For reverse write back minimizing wb(mprev, n) is equivalent with maximizing rd(mprev, n). All the overlapping checknodes are recorded, in case future delay computation overturns this condition; revise(mlast, mprev, n) – if mprev has been recorded as overlapping during the set operation, the revise operation checks to see if the overlapping is true for the newly computed rdF (mlast, c). Due to the D delay, which shifts later the layer start of mlast, an access interval overlap between the two check-nodes may no longer exist. In this case the fixing of the ψ(mprev, n) value is undone.i.e. it is reset to U.

Algorithm 1: Fine tuning of read access time for check-node mlast. The procesure in invoked check-node by check-node in the order given by σ.

1: procedure ORDER LAYER(mlast)

2: for c ← 1 to NC do

3:

rdF (mlast, c) ← {compute optimistic read first}

4: end for

5: for all n ∈ N (mlast) do

6:

c ← ξ(n)

7:

mprev ← prev(mlast, n)

8:

if (∃mprev) and overlap(mprev, mlast, c) then

9:

set(mprev, n)

10:

end if

11: end for

12: delay ← {D satisfying Eq. (4), ∀c}

13: for c ← 1 to NC do

14:

rdF (mlast, c) ← rdF (mlast, c) + delay Update

15: end for

16: for all n ∈ N (mlast) do

17:

mprev ← prev(mlast, n)

18:

if (∃mprev) then

19:

revise(mlast, mprev, n)

20:

end if

21: end for

22: end procedure

When the check node for the last layer is added to the layer order, one final check needs to be satisfied with respect to the start of the next layer. The first read of variable nodes having overlapping access interval with the previous iteration (i.e. end of previous iteration) is delayed, in order to reduce the iteration duration. In this case, the unset values are useful in order to minimize the in between iterations delay. The delay is added at the end of the last layer of iteration i, and before the start of the first layer of iteration i + 1. Finally, all remaining

000196

SACI 2020 • IEEE 14th International Symposium on Applied Computational Intelligence and Informatics • May 21-23 • Timişoara, Romania

variable node accesses are set, and the iteration duration IG is computed.
C. Case study: WiMAX rate 1/2 LDPC code
In this subsection, an example of the off-line message mapping and message read access scheduling is presented. The input base graph Gin is the WiMAX [3] rate 1/2 code. Each row of the matrix represents a check node of the base graph, each column of the base graph represents a variable node of the base graph, and each non-empty cell represents an edge of the base graph. The order of the rows specify the processing order of the check nodes. Figure 2 shows the base matrix representation of Gin. The architecture parameters considered are: nbanks = 2, nlatency = 5, and nΩ = 0. After the first two steps of the off-line algorithms proposed are executed, we obtain the graph Gord. The base graph Gord, with its variable nodes colored with the newly ξ coloring function, and checknodes mapped to layers according to the σ function is depicted in Fig. 3.

shade is correlated with Fig. 3. There are no extra clock cycle introduced for the first 3 check nodes of Gout. The HUE is still below 100%, due to the dc slight irregularity. There are 3 variable nodes with on a color and 4 with the other color, meaning that there is an empty slot when no variable node from the first bank (i.e. the first color) is being processed.

Fig. 4: The pipeline scheduling of the 3 first check nodes form Gout.

Fig. 2: The initial base matrix, corresponding to Gin, WiMAX code rate 1/2.
Fig. 3: The base matrix of Gord, having its columns colored using ξ, and check-nodes mapped to layers – the σ ordering.
Finally, during the in check node mapping to layers step, the processing order of the variable nodes are determined inside each check node. The final base graph Gout is obtained during this step. Due to space limitations, we only present the pipeline scheduling of the first 3 check nodes from Gout, in Fig. 4. Each column of the figure corresponds to a clock cycle, and each variable node access is mapped to a row, with indexes staring from 0. There are 3 groups of rows in order to illustrate the first 3 check node of Gout. Clock cycles when variable node data is accessed, are marked with gray cells. The gray

IV. EVALUATIONS
In the paper, the off-line algorithm assessment uses the inorder write-back strategy. However, the off-line algorithms can be used with any update policy. The results for normal writeback policy have been obtained using 2 LDPC codes: WIMAX code, rate 3/4, code length 2304 bits, and DVB-S2X code, rate 140/180, code length 64800 bits. The metrics employed are: HUE, and the total number of register file entries. The maximum allowed runtime of the genetic coloring algorithm has been set to 1 hour for the WiMAX code, and to 2 hours for the DVB-S2X code. The HUE analysis for WiMAX rate 3/4 and DVB-S2x rate 140/180 is presented in Fig.5. Note that conventional layered decoding corresponds to nΩ = 0, while ad-hoc refers to no algorithm being used, only the natural order (i.e. no off-line algorithms used) given by the base matrix of the code.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper discusses fine tune off-line optimizations of message access scheduling, and presents a case study of two standard codes. Improvement of the iteration duration for the case of in-order message update policy of up to 66% has been obtained with respect to no optimization case, at the same hardware architecture cost.
REFERENCES
[1] “Wireless LAN medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specification,” IEEE Std. 802.11, 1997.

000197

O. Boncalo and A. Amaricai • Layered LDPC decoder in-order message access scheduling: a case study

(a) HUE – WiMAX rate 3/4 normal write-back

(c) HUE – DVB rate 140/180 write-back

(b) Total number of register file entries – WiMAX

(d) Total number of register file entries - DVB

Fig. 5: Evaluation for the proposed off-line mapping and access schedule algorithms for 2 standard codes using the HUE metric. (b), (d) report the total number of register file entries needed to store the residue messages

[2] “Wireless medium access control (MAC) and physi- cal layer (PHY) specifications for high rate wireless personal area networks (WPANs) amendment 2: Millimeter-wave-based alternative physical layer extension,” IEEE 802.15.3c-2009, available online:. [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.15.3c-2009.pdf
[3] “Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems physical and medium access control layers,” IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, 2005.
[4] “DVB-the family of international standards for Digital Video Broadcasting, second generation framin structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering, and other broadband satelite applications, Part 2: DVB-S2 extensions (DVBS2X),” Oct 2014.
[5] K. C. Ho, C. L. Chen, and H. C. Chang, “A 520k (18900, 17010) Array Dispersion LDPC Decoder Architectures for NAND Flash Memory,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1293–1304, April 2016.
[6] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Workshop onSignal Processing Systems, 2004. SIPS 2004., Oct 2004, pp. 107–112.
[7] A. Tarable, S. Benedetto, and G. Montorsi, “Mapping interleaving laws to parallel turbo and LDPC decoder architectures,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2002–2009, Sept 2004.
[8] E. Amador, R. Pacalet, and V. Rezard, “Optimum LDPC decoder: A memory architecture problem,” in Design Automation Conference, 2009. DAC ’09. 46th ACM/IEEE, July 2009, pp. 891–896.
[9] A. Briki, C. Chavet, and P. Coussy, “A conflict-free memory mapping approach to design parallel hardware interleaver architectures with optimized network and controller,” in SiPS 2013 Proceedings, Oct 2013, pp. 201–206.
[10] S. U. Reehman, C. Chavet, P. Coussy, and A. Sani, “In-place memory mapping approach for optimized parallel hardware interleaver architectures,” in 2015 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition

(DATE), March 2015, pp. 896–899. [11] Z. Wu and K. Su, “Updating conflict solution for pipelined layered
LDPC decoder,” in Signal Processing, Communications and Computing (ICSPCC), 2015 IEEE International Conference on, Sept 2015, pp. 1–6. [12] C. Marchand, J. B. Dore, L. Conde-Canencia, and E. Boutillon, “Conflict resolution for pipelined layered LDPC decoders,” in 2009 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Oct 2009, pp. 220–225. [13] M. Rovini, G. Gentile, F. Rossi, and L. Fanucci, “A Scalable Decoder Architecture for IEEE 802.11n LDPC Codes,” in IEEE GLOBECOM 2007 - IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Nov 2007, pp. 3270–3274. [14] Z. Wu, D. Liu, and Y. Zhang, “Matrix reordering techniques for memory conflict reduction for pipelined QC-LDPC decoder,” in 2014 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC), Oct 2014, pp. 354–359. [15] O. Boncalo, G. Kolumban-Antal, A. Amaricai, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, “Layered LDPC decoders with efficient memory access scheduling and mapping and built-in support for pipeline hazards mitigation,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 1643–1656, April 2019. [16] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug 2004. [17] O. Boncalo, P. F. Mihancea, and A. Amaricai, “Template-based QCLDPC decoder architecture generation,” in 2015 10th International Conference on Information, Communications and Signal Processing (ICICS), Dec 2015, pp. 1–5.

000198

