Algorithm for Removal of Short Cycles in Tanner Graphs with Minimum-Hamming-Distance Check

Viktor Ďurček Department of Multimedia and Information-Communication
Technologies, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and
Information Technology, University of Žilina
Žilina, Slovakia viktor.durcek@fel.uniza.sk

Michal Kuba Department of Multimedia and Information-Communication
Technologies,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, University of Žilina Žilina, Slovakia michal.kuba@fel.uniza.sk

Milan Dado Department of Multimedia and Information-Communication
Technologies,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, University of Žilina Žilina, Slovakia milan.dado@uniza.sk

Abstract—Two algorithms for removal of short cycles in Tanner graphs of parity-check matrices of binary LDPC codes constructed by Progressive Edge-Growth algorithm are described. These loop-removing algorithms can be used to improve error-correcting performance of existing LDPC codes and achieved results are provided.
Keywords—LDPC codes, short cycles, Tanner graphs, channel coding
I. INTRODUCTION LDPC (Low-Density Parity-Check) codes are a class of linear error-correcting block codes, which are characteristic by their sparse parity-check matrices (usually means amount of ones is below 1-2%) [1]. They were first introduced by Robert L. Gallager in 1960, who also provided an algorithm for their decoding [2]. In 1990’s they were independently reinvented by D. MacKay [3], [4]. LDPC codes are used in variety of applications, including satellite communications, Deep Space Network, Digital Video Broadcasting standards (DVB-S2, DVB-C2, DVB-T2), IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX), LTE networks. For the best error-correcting performance, LDPC codes are usually decoded by iterative soft-decision algorithms, e.g. sum-product algorithm (SPA) and its variations like min-sum algorithm (MSA).
c1 c2 c3 c4
101010 100101 011001 010110
v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6
Fig. 1 A parity-check matrix and its Tanner graph
PEG (Progressive Edge-Growth) algorithm is used for design of LDPC codes on a computer, which generates a bipartite graph with the lowest number of short cycles possible [5]. This graph is called Tanner graph and is a representation of a binary parity-check matrix. It is a general effort to create LDPC codes with high girth (length of the shortest cycle in a Tanner graph), which means avoiding short cycles in Tanner graphs of their parity-check matrices. In Fig. 1 an example parity-check matrix and its Tanner graph can be seen. Number

of square-shaped nodes in the graph (called check nodes, CN) is equal to the number of rows in the matrix and number of circle-shaped nodes in the graph (called variable nodes, VN) equals number of columns in the matrix. Each edge in the graph is represented by number 1 in the parity-check matrix [6].
II. SHORT CYCLES IN TANNER GRAPHS c1 c2 c3 c4
000000 010100 000000 010100
v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6
Fig. 2 An example of a cycle with length of 4 in a Tanner graph
c1 c2 c3 c4 000101 010100 000000 010001
v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6
Fig. 3 An example of a cycle with length of 6 in a Tanner graph
In Fig. 2 an example of a shortest possible cycle in a Tanner graph (with length of 4) can be seen along with its matrix representation. Fig. 3 is similar but shows a cycle of length 6. Number of edges in a cycle can only be an even number higher than 2 in Tanner graphs (because they are bipartite). After choosing a node in both of the figures and following any edge, the path will always end in the chosen starting node. In the matrices, every number 1 represents an edge in the graph with rows/columns representing check/variable nodes. Here the cycles can be followed by e.g. choosing a row, then a number 1 (edge) in this row. This edge must be connected to a variable node – in the matrix, this number 1 is also placed in a column. Another number 1 can

978-1-7281-7542-3/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:56:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

be found in this column (another edge connected to this variable node), which is also placed in another row (connected to another check node). By alternating rows and columns every time a new number 1 is found, the cycle can be followed back to the chosen starting row with the starting number 1.
III. ALGORITHM FOR REMOVAL OF SHORT CYCLES Short cycles in Tanner graphs of LDPC parity-check matrices can degrade decoding performance (because after number of decoding iterations that equals half-length of a cycle the information sent through its edges is no longer independent [1]). That is why our own two algorithms which remove short cycles from Tanner graphs (which are provided in form of a matrix) were created. Algorithms will be referred to as CB1 and CB2 (which stands for Cycle Break). The CB1 and CB2 algorithms need two inputs: a parity-check matrix (or a binary matrix in general) and a maximum length of cycles to remove – valid value is an even integer equal or larger than 4. Four is the length of the shortest possible cycle in a Tanner graph. If the maximum length parameter has a value of 4, the algorithm will only remove cycles of length 4. If the value of this parameter equals 6, the algorithm will only remove cycles of length 4 and 6. If the parameter equals 8, algorithm will only remove cycles of length 4, 6 and 8.
At first, the CB1 algorithm chooses a check node and progressively scans every unique path (in Tanner graph of the input matrix) that originates in said check node while taking note of every cycle it finds along the way. After this analysis, the program has a complete list of every cycle (of length given by the “maximum length” input parameter or shorter) which intersects the currently chosen check node. The next step is to create a list of all edges found in these listed cycles, the edges being ordered by frequency of their occurrence in the list of cycles. Goal of the CB1 algorithm is to remove all possible cycles of specified length (by input parameters) while not making any check node isolated in the process (degree of a node cannot get lower than 2). When an edge is removed (meaning when a one is removed from the paritycheck matrix), all the cycles this edge was a part of are removed from the list of found cycles. The process of edge removal continues (by investigating the next most frequent edge) until all the listed cycles are removed or until the only edges left to remove are those which would make a check node isolated by their removal. Afterwards, the program chooses another check node and repeats the aforementioned process (again makes a list of every cycle leading through it and tries to remove them) until every check node is analyzed and left.
Based on shortcomings of the CB1 algorithm (in some cases, the stopping criterion was too loose; the algorithm removed too many ones from parity-check matrices and severely degraded performance of the LDPC codes; more in simulation analysis), we designed and implemented the CB2 algorithm – which works in similar ways to the CB1 algorithm (it does not isolate check nodes in the process of removing cycles), but before removing a cycle, it also takes into consideration the changes to the minimum Hamming distance of the current parity-check matrix, which would be caused by the removal. CB1 also chooses an anchor check node and locates every cycle (of specified lengths) leading through this node and sorts edges of these cycles based on the most frequent occurrence in these cycles. But removes an edge only in the case it does not result in drop of its minimum Hamming distance (while also not making nodes isolated).

Calculations of minimum Hamming distance makes CB2 algorithm much more computationally expensive compared to CB1 algorithm, because this distance needs to be frequently recalculated during the whole process. After finishing work with one CN, it chooses a different one etc.
The CB1 and CB2 algorithms search for short cycles directly in the provided binary parity-check matrix. They directly scan its ones and zeroes, search for every possible path based on their patterns and regularly check, whether the current path does not create cycles of specified lengths (the input parameter: maximum length of cycles to remove). Various different approaches to detection and removal of short cycles were published, e.g. in [7] so-called adjacency matrix constructed from a parity-check matrix is used to detect cycles and erased edges are added back to different places in Tanner graph of the matrix. A cycle-detection method which uses a relative matrix of the Tanner graph constructed from transformed parity-check matrix is described in [8]. In [9] a method for detecting cycles based on combinational analysis of the matrix is presented. A different approach, using modified message-passing algorithms for detection of short cycles can be found in [10], [11] and [12]. A method for counting short cycles specifically for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes using eigenvalues of a so-called directed edge matrix of the Tanner graph is described in [13]. A short cycle analysis and elimination method specific to LDPC convolutional codes can be found in [14].
IV. TEST RESULTS AND COMPARISONS
A. Simulation parameters Several series of computer simulations were conducted to
test error-correcting performance of LDPC codes generated by PEG algorithms and also versions of these codes processed by our algorithms for removal of short cycles (CB1, CB2) with various sets of parameters (each code was processed multiple times by both CB algorithms with different value of the “maximum length of cycles to remove” parameter, namely: 4, 6 and 8). LDPC codes for these simulations were generated with multiple densities of parity-check matrices (each matrix had a constant VN degree distribution of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 or 9, which are equal to the amount of ones in every column of the matrix, also called column weight). The dimensions of each parity-check matrix were 252 × 504. Therefore, each simulated code has a code rate of ½. Each LDPC code was tested in a BI-AWGN channel with Eb/N0 range from -2 dB to 10 dB. New graph data points were fully simulated in 0.5 dB intervals (total 25 data point for each code). In the Eb/N0 range of -2 ÷ 1 dB (first 7 graph data points), 105 bits were encoded, exposed to BI-AWGN and decoded for each data point. In the Eb/N0 range of 1.5 ÷ 10 dB (last 18 graph data points), 108 random data bits were processed in the same way for each data point (an identical binary input sequence was used in each simulation).
B. Simulation results In Fig. 4 error-correcting performance of a PEG LDPC
code with constant VN degree of 2 can be seen compared to the performance of the same LDPC code processed by the CB1 algorithm. In this case, the PEG LDPC code had its cycles of length 4, 6 and 8 removed (the maximum length parameter in CB1 was set to 8). The CB1 algorithm with these parameters erased only two ones from the binary parity-check matrix and the improvement is already visible in higher Eb/N0

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:56:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ranges. CB2 algorithm has left this PEG code with VN degree of 2 untouched.
Fig. 4 Error-correcting performance of codes with column weight of 2
When the PEG LDPC matrix was generated with column weight of 3 and CB1 algorithm was set to only remove cycles with length of 4, the output matrix remained unaltered. The algorithm could not find any cycles of length four or was not able to remove them without making a check node isolated. However, this was not the case when maximum length of cycles to remove was set to 6. The resulting improvement in error-correcting performance can be seen in Fig. 5. CB2 left this matrix in its original state, which means it did not improve the code, but also did not degrade it.

refuses to remove an edge only under one condition: when doing so would make a check node isolated. This stopping criterion proved to be too loose for many of the tested codes, so CB2 algorithm was designed with a stricter criterion in mind (described above).
In Fig. 6, error-correcting performance of several LDPC codes can be seen. The PEG code was generated by PEG algorithm with constant column weight of 4. The PEG-CB1 code originates from the mentioned PEG code by removing its short cycles (length of 4 and 6, specifically) using the CB1 algorithm. As can be observed from the figure, the CB1 algorithm improves performance of the original PEG3 code in low Eb/N0 range, but severely degrades it by introducing an error floor early (still at low Eb/N0 values), nearly stopping BER improvement with growing Eb/N0 values. In the same scenario (having identical PEG matrix as input with an objective to remove cycles of length 4 and 6 from it), the CB2 algorithm managed to improve performance of the PEG code along the whole simulated Eb/N0 range (until both codes started correcting 100% of the errors; from this point on). CB2 algorithm increased minimum Hamming distance of the original PEG LDPC code from 104 to 112 while CB1 algorithm decreased it to 91.

Fig. 5 Error-correcting performance of codes with column weight of 3
When testing performance of the rest of the codes (VN degree of 4 and higher), in large majority of cases, the CB1 algorithm removed too many edges and degraded errorcorrecting performance of the original PEG matrices. The CB1 algorithm managed to improve performance of these codes with denser matrices only in small number of cases and this was solely in cases when only the shortest cycles of length 4 were to be removed. When CB1 algorithm was set to remove larger variety of cycles, it always degraded performance of the original codes (this was often accompanied by a severe decrease in minimum Hamming distance). The CB1 algorithm

Fig. 6 Comparison of error-correcting capabilities before and after removal of short cycles (VN degree: 5)
The LDPC code denoted PEG in Fig. 7 is the original code of this scenario generated by PEG algorithm with column weight of 5. The dimensions (502, 252) are identical to the rest of the aforementioned codes. The CB1 algorithm and CB2 algorithm were set to remove cycles of length 4 and 6 (maximum length parameter = 6) from the parity-check matrix of the PEG1 code. Results are similar to the previous selection of codes (with column weight of 4), but the differences in performance of codes are more pronounced. PEG-CB1 code has better error-correcting performance than the rest of compared codes in the lowest Eb/N0 ranges, but with raising Eb/N0 values it never even manages to enter the waterfall region of decreasing BER in the tested range and both remaining codes quickly take over. While the CB1 algorithm decreased overall error-correcting performance of the PEG code again, the CB2 did not remove as many edges because of its stricter deciding criterion and improved upon the original PEG code across the whole tested Eb/N0 range. The minimum Hamming distance of the CB1-processed code dropped to number 2 compared to 106 of the PEG code. The CB2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:56:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithm increased the Hamming distance of the PEG code to 110 too.

C. Additional simulations and notes Additionally, an LDPC code with different parameters
was generated by our PEG algorithm and tested in simulations. Data word length of this code is 8000 bits and its code word length is 10000 bits, which are much higher than word lengths of the previously tested (502, 252) codes. Although the words of the new code were significantly lengthened, redundancy of the code was substantially reduced to 25%, compared to 50% redundant bits in code words of previous codes. Code rate is equal to 4/5. The PEG code had its parity-check matrix processed by the CB1 cycle-removing algorithm, which was set to remove cycles of length 4. In Fig. 9, error-correcting performance of the PEG code is shown before and after the removal of short cycles. As can be seen, the CB1 algorithm managed to improved performance of the original PEG code, curve of which is starting to leave its waterfall region in the simulated ranges, as opposed to PEGCB1.

Fig. 7 Comparison of error-correcting capabilities before and after removal of short cycles (VN degree: 4)
In Fig. 8, error-correcting performance of a group of codes related to a PEG code with constant VN degree of 6 is depicted. Operation of the PEG code, PEG-CB1 code and PEG-CB2 code were simulated the same way as the rest of the mentioned codes. Both loop-removing algorithms were set up to remove cycles of length 6 or smaller. Aforementioned general parameters (e.g. 252 × 504 dimensions of parity-check matrices, lengths of transmitted data sequences, frequency of data points) remained the same. Results are similar to the previous two described cases. CB1 algorithm has made the original PEG matrix too sparse and degraded performance of the resulting code overall, while CB2 improved performance of the code along the whole Eb/N0 range. The improvement is even more visible in this case, compared to the previous cases with sparser input parity-check matrices. The minimum Hamming distance of the CB1-processed code dropped to number 2 compared to 107 of the PEG code. The CB2 algorithm increased the Hamming distance of the PEG code to 110 too.
Fig. 8 Comparison of error-correcting capabilities before and after removal of short cycles (VN degree: 6)

Fig. 9 Comparison of generated (10000,8000) codes
LDPC codes created by PEG algorithm are classified as random, because their parity-check matrices mostly lack structure, other than being a linear code [15]. Although LDPC codes constructed by this algorithm are among the best codes with large girth, their disadvantage is high complexity of encoding and decoding, which is often too high for many hardware implementations [16], [17]. However, there exist LDPC codes with structured parity-check matrices. One of these codes are called quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes. Their parity-check matrices comprise of several submatrices called circulants (every row in a circulant matrix is a cyclic shift of their previous row). This structure lowers their complexity and makes them much more hardware-friendly. Although PEG LDPC codes themselves are often impractical for hardware implementations, there exist several methods for construction of QC-LDPC codes with the use of the PEG algorithm (while retaining the advantages of QC-LDPC codes) [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], e g. by generating each submatrix of the final parity-check matrix with use of the PEG algorithm. Such codes could then be used in variety of applications, e.g. high-speed optical networks, wireless networks or satellite communications. This makes PEG LDPC codes worthy of further research.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:56:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. CONCLUSION CB1 and CB2 loop-removing algorithms were described and tested in simulations with various parameters. The first one of these algorithms, CB1, removes all detected cycles from its input matrix unless it makes any check node isolated. The CB2 algorithm abides by the same rule, but also follows one additional, stricter, rule: If erasure of an edge leads to a decrease of estimated minimum Hamming distance, it will not erase the edge.
In the situations where the CB1 loop-removing algorithm degraded performance of codes on its input (e.g. by introducing an early error floor), the CB2 algorithm managed to improve upon it. But both algorithms are suitable for specific situations: the CB1 algorithm removes cycles more aggressively because of its looser pre-removal deciding criterion and managed to improve error-correcting performance of PEG codes with sparser parity-check matrices (constant column weight: 2, 3), but degraded performance of PEG codes with denser parity-check matrices (constant column weight: 4 ÷ 9) in most cases. Because of its stricter pre-removal criterion, the CB2 algorithm managed to improve performance of the codes with denser matrices in most cases but did not remove any cycles in cases of the codes with sparser matrices, making CB1 algorithm the better choice in these particular cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by the Slovak Research and Development Agency under the project APVV-17-0631, and Slovak Grant Agency VEGA 1/0840/18. This work was also supported by project ITMS: 26210120021 co-funded from EU sources and European Regional Development Fund.
REFERENCES
[1] W.E. Ryan, S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[2] R. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," IRE Trans Inform Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[3] D.J.C. MacKay, R.M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes," Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645, 1996.
[4] D.J.C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," in Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Ulm, Germany, 1997.
[5] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[6] R.E. Blahut, Algebraic Codes for Data Transmission, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[7] J.A. McGowan, R.C. Williamson , "Loop removal from LDPC codes," in Proceedings 2003 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Paris, France, 2003.
[8] Bo Li, Gang Wang, Hong-juan Yang, "A new method of detecting cycles in Tanner graph of LDPC codes," in 2009 International Conference on Wireless Communications & Signal Processing, Nanjing, China, 2009.

[9] Pan Hu, Hongyu Zhao, "Improved method for detecting the short cycles of LDPC codes," in 2010 IEEE International Conference on Information Theory and Information Security, Beijing, China, 2010.
[10] M. Karimi, A.H. Banihashemi, "Message-Passing Algorithms for Counting Short Cycles in a Graph," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 485 - 495, 2012.
[11] J. Li, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, "Improved message-passing algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs," in 2015 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Hong Kong, China, 2015.
[12] S. Cho, K. Cheun, K. Yang, "A Message-Passing Algorithm for Counting Short Cycles in Nonbinary LDPC Codes," in 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Vail, CO, USA, 2018.
[13] M. Karimi, A.H. Banihashemi , "Counting Short Cycles of Quasi Cyclic Protograph LDPC Codes," IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 400 - 403, 2012.
[14] Z. Su, Q. Qiu, H. Zhou, "Analysis and elimination of short cycles in LDPC convolutional codes," in 2016 2nd IEEE International Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC), Chengdu, China, 2016.
[15] X. Liu, W. Zhang, Z. Fan, "Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes and the Performance on the PR4-Equalized MRC Channel," IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3699-3702, 2009.
[16] X. Jiang, M.H. Lee, H. Wang, J. Li, M. Wen, "Modified PEG algorithm for large girth Quasi-cyclic protograph LDPC codes," in International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), Kauai, HI, USA, 2016.
[17] P.Hailes et al., "A Survey of FPGA-Based LDPC Decoders," IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1098-1122, 2015.
[18] P. Prompakdee, W. Phakphisut, P. Supnithi, "Quasi Cyclic-LDPC codes based on PEG algorithm with maximized girth property," in 2011 International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communications Systems (ISPACS), Chiang Mai, Thailand , 2011.
[19] Y. Huang, Y. Cheng, Y. Zhang, H. Han , "Construction of non-binary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on PEG algorithm," in 2010 IEEE 12th International Conference on Communication Technology, Nanjing, China , 2010.
[20] A.G.D. Uchôa, C. Healy, R.C. de Lamare, R.D. Souza , "Generalised Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes based on Progressive Edge Growth Techniques for block fading channels," in 2012 International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), Paris, France , 2012.
[21] Z. Li, B.V.K.V. Kumar , "A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph," in Conference Record of the Thirty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, USA, 2004.
[22] Y. Lei, M. Dong, "An Efficient Construction Method for QuasiCyclic Low Density Parity Check Codes," IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 4606-4610, 2017.
[23] X. Jiang, H. Hai, H. Wang, M.H. Lee , "Constructing Large Girth QC Protograph LDPC Codes Based on PSD-PEG Algorithm," IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 13489-13500, 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:56:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

