2006 6th International Conference on ITS Telecommunications Proceedings

Iterative Decoding for the Concatenation of LDPC
Codes and BCH Codes Based on Chase Algorithm
Zhiping Shi"2, Liang Zhoul, Hong Wen', Shaoqian Li'
'National key Laboratory of Communication, UESTC, 610054, Chengdu, China 2National Mobile communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University

Abstract-In this paper, an iterative joint decoding algorithm for low density parity check codes with BCH codes based on Chase algorithm is proposed. After a certain number of iterations, the soft output values delivered by belief propagation algorithm of LDPC codes are used as reliability values to perform Chase decoding of BCH codes. And BCH decoder also will return soft information to LDPC decoder as input. This approach presents an option scheme for LDPC with medium length because of the relevant presence of short loops. It allows to bridge the gap between error performance and maximum likelihood decoding. Simulation result for the scheme is given.
Keywords: Chase algorithm; LDPC codes; BCH codes;
I. INTRODUCTION
Iterative decoding of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes has received a great deal of interest. The main motivations are the excellent performances achieved by such codes for long enough lengths and their relatively simple iterative decoding methods based on belief propagation (BP). Although BP iterative decoding of such codes does not achieve maximum likelihood decoding (MLD), it has been shown both theoretically and experimentally that its application can closely approach channel capacity for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
On the other hand, the derivation of these theoretical limits assumes that the influences of loops in the Tanner graph representation of the codes [1] are irrelevant, which may need very long code lengths to be satisfied with a sufficiently high probability [2]. Consequently, BP decoding of medium lengths (say between hundred and few thousand bits) may fall short of MLD, due to the sub-optimum graph structure of the code with short loops. At the same time, MLD of such codes is generally way too complex to be implemented. In order to trade off between complexity and performance, in [3,4,5], an iterative reliability-based decoding (RBD) algorithm was proposed for LDPC codes of medium to long block lengths. In this paper we give an iterative decoding algorithm of serial concatenated codes using LDPC and BCH codes based on Chase algorithm. The scheme allows
to bridge the gap between error performance and maximum likelihood decoding.
The work was supported by the open research fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University

II. LDPC AND BP DECODING

An LDPC code is a linear block code specified by a very sparse parity-check matrix. As a linear block code, an LDPC code can be represented by a bipartite graph. Suppose the low density parity-check matrix H has N columns and M rows (the designed code rate R=1-(M/N)); the corresponding bipartite graph consists of bit nodes, check nodes, and a certain number of edges. Each bit node represents a bit of the codeword. Each check node represents a parity check of the code. An edge exists between a bit node and a check node if and only if there is a 1 in the corresponding entry in the parity-check matrix. Regular LDPC codes are those for which all nodes of the same type have the same degree, where the degree of a node is the number of edges for which it is a neighbor node. A (j, k) regular LDPC code has a bipartite graph in which all bit nodes have degree j and all check nodes have degree k. Correspondingly, in the parity-check matrix H , all the column weights is j and all the row weights is k.
The decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is based on the idea of BP. As described in [6], for each edge of the underlying bipartite graph, the decoding algorithm iteratively updates two types of log a posteriori probability ratio (LAPPR) messages, q and r . The quantity q is the message sent from the bit node to the check node along a connecting edge e , which is expressed as q = log(p(x = 0 t) / p(x = 1 t)), Where x denotes the value of the bit node, and t denotes all the messages coming from the channel and the edges connected to the bit node, other than edge e. The quantity r is the message sent from the check node to the bit node along an edge e , which is defined as r = log(p(x = 0 v) I p(x = 1 v)) , Where v denotes the messages coming from the edges connected to the check node, other than edge e.
For a regular LDPC code and BPSK modulation, the message to be sent from the n-th bit node to any check node is [6]

i-l

qn =qO+ r

(1)

i=l

where q0 is the initial message conditioned on the

channel output, and r, 1,2

-1, are the incoming

LAPPR messages from all the incident edges, other than

edge e. On the other hand, the message passed from the

m-th check node to any bit node is [6]

0-7803-9586-7/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE.

12

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:22:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

rm

k

tanh

t

(2)

2 i=1

2

where qi ,i = 1,2., k

1, are the incoming LAPPRs from

the neighbor edges, other than edge e . q, is the a posteriori

LLR of bit n computed at each iteration. It is obtained

from the a priori information q0 and the message from

all neighbor edges. For each bit node n , update qn by

qn=qo+ i

(3)

i=l

Createx =[xv] such that x, =1 if q, < O , and xn 0 if
qn > 0. If Hx= o, then x is considered as a valid decoded word and the decoding process ends; if the number of iterations exceeds some maximum number and x is not a valid codeword, a failure is declared and the decoding process ends; otherwise the decoding continue to iteratively compute.

Itt CHASE - BASED SOFT-DECISION DECODING OF BCH CODES

Recent research has further investigated soft decision decoding of BCH codes[7]. Chase decoding is well known as a soft-decision decoding technique for approximating the error performance of an ML decoder. Chase decoding generates a set of candidate codewords by using algebraic algorithms, and the most likely of these is selected as the decoder output.
For (N,K,d) block codes, the binary decoder will

determine the codeword xm = ( Xm1,Xm2,Xm3,- XmN ),
Xmi E {O,1},i = 1,2,...N, which differs in the least number

of places from the received sequence

17Y2 = (Y YN ), ........

YiE {O,1},i = 1,2,...,N. The error sequence that contains a

1 in the places where Y and Xn differ is given

by Zn = Y G Xn = Y1 G XnI, Y2 G X.2,...: YmX XX , where

the notation represents modulo-2 addition. If we

define the binary weight of a sequence Zm as

W(Z.) =zmithe function of a binary decoder is to find

the codeword, or equivalently the error sequences, that

satisfy

w(z,,) < L(d 1)/2]

(4)

The binary decoder will find a unique codeword if the

inequality given by (4) is satisfied; otherwise, no

codeword will be found. A complete binary decoder can

be defined as a decoder capable of finding the codeword

that satisfies

min W(Y Xm.) = min W(Zm)

where the range of m is over all possible codewords. The set of error patterns {Z, } considered is obtained by
perturbing the received sequence Y with a test pattern T, which is a binary sequence that contains 1's in the location of the digits that are to be inverted. By adding this test pattern, modulo-2, to the received sequence a new sequence Y= Y T is obtained and by binary decoding a new error pattern Z' is obtained. The actual

error pattern relative to Y is given by ZT= T ) Z' which may or may not be different from the original error pattern depending on whether or not Y' falls into the sphere of a new codeword. The test pattern come from a sequence of N positive numbers denoted by
a = a1,a2,...,aN called the channel measurement
information. The quality a will be used to provide a measure of the relative reliability of the received binary
digits. Thus, if ai >aj, the decoder shall assume that Y
is more likely to be correct than Y . Each value of a can thus be viewed as a confidence value on the reliability of each received digit. Since the decoder is fed both the sequence Y and the sequence a .
In a similar manner we can define a complete channel measurement decoder as one that is capable of finding the codeword that satisfies
min Wa (Y Xm.) = min Wa (Zm)

In this case we are concerned with finding the error pattern Zm= Y ® Xm of minimum analog weight, where the analog weight of a sequence Zm is defined as

N

Wa(Zm) = Z aiZmi.

(5)

i=l

The Chase algorithm elects least reliable bits (LRBs)

per decoding by selecting the symbols having least absolute channel value. Each test pattern is added in turn to the most likely (ML) sequence, this being the result of a hard decision applied to the received channel values, and subsequently the perturbed sequence is passed through the algebraic decoder. The ML codeword is chosen from the set of decoded codewords as the sequence for which the estimated error pattern has minimal weight.
There are three different algorithms based on test sequence election for Chase method. Using Chase's notation, each algorithm selects p erasures as those symbols with the lowest channel measurements {ai } .For
Chase-2, p =Ld/2]with 2P test patterns constructed
consisting of all bit combinations in the erasure positions.

IV. ITERATIVE DECODING FOR LDPC AND BCH CODES

Because of its powerful error-correcting capability and efficient decoding scheme, binary BCH codes are one of the most important linear block codes. Recently, with the intense interests on LDPC codes, a concatenation coding scheme with LDPC codes as inner codes while binary BCH codes as outer codes is widely accepted and finds its applications [8]. In order to achieve high coding gain, we use efficient soft-decision decoding based on Chase algorithm for the concatenation coding scheme. Serial concatenation of BCH codes and LDPC codes is shown in Figure 1. The BCH code is called as outer code and the LDPC code as inner code.
The input data bit sequence X is fed into the outer encoder, which encodes the data and creates coded sequence Y. The sequence Y is directly fed as an input

13

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:22:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

data bits into a LDPC encoder. We define the sequence R as output from LDPC encoder. Over AWGN channel, the received sequence with noise is defined as R' corresponding to R. First, belief propagation algorithm does a fixed number of iterations and output the estimation Y' of Y. If HY'=O, the decoding is successful and output final codeword. Otherwise, the sequence Y' is fed into BCH decoder. Chase-based soft-decision algorithm is used to correct the residual bit errors. Otherwise, outer decoder delivers reliability L(Y') to inner decoder.
F
Figure 1 Serially concatenated scheme with BCH and LDPC codes
There are three key differences from pure chase and belief propagation decoding for the iterative decoding of
the serial concatenated code.
First, for chase algorithm, hard-decision sequence and reliability sequence of chase soft-decision decoding come from the outputs of LDPC belief propagation algorithm based on formula (3) and (1), respectively, not
from channel and modem.
Second, in order to reduce computing complexity of BCH chase algorithm, inner codes will exchange
message with outer codes after a fixed maximum number
of iteration is performed. Final, Chase-2 algorithm is employed in Soft-In
Soft-Out (SISO) decoding. For a bit y' , soft outputs are generated in the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain using [9]

Wq(Zk ) =min Wq{Zj} 0

and decoder would output corresponding codeword
X;,= Y'-z which would be final codeword and
decoding would end. Otherwise, BCH decoder delivers

soft message L(Y') based on formula (6) into inner

decoder as input of LDPC decoder for next iteration.

Step 3: inner decoder performs BP decoding

algorithm in based on formula (7) and (8) replacing

formula (1) and (3).

J-1

qn =L(y'n) + r

(7)

i=l

q, =L(y',)+r

(8)

i=l

And formula (2) is unchanged.
If H. =0, thenx' is considered as a valid decoded word and the decoding process ends; Otherwise, repeat step 2 and step 3 until decoding is successful or the number of iterations exceeds fixed maximum number of outer round between inner and outer decoder.

Lyj 2 x[min{ W.(Z,- )} min{W.(Z,-)}] (6)
Wvhere cy2 is the variance of the AWGN channel and
{ZJ7 and { Zr, } are the error pattern sets in which
codeword have Yj= 0 and 1, respectively. If either of these sets is empty then the decoder employs default soft outputs J 19].
The factor graph of the concatenated code is shown in Figure 2. Iterative process is following as:
Step 1: Inner decoder of LDPC has done BP decoding until iteration number is satisfied by a fixed maximum
for inner round. If Hx =, then x is considered as a valid decoded word and the decoding process ends; Otherwise, go
to step 2. Step 2: the BCH decoder as outer code runs
soft-decision decoding based on Chase algorithm. Reliability sequence a from channel would be replaced with q of output from inner decoder. If error pattern Zk is satisfied by

Figure 2. Joint iterative decoding graph of serial concatenated codes using LDPC and BCH codes based on Chase Algorithm
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In our simulation, the block size is 1416 bits with BCH (63,51) and (3,6) regular LDPC code. LDPC code with rate 0.8008 is concatenated with 18 times of BCH(63,5 1) code of rate 51/63. Thus the total code rate is 0.6483 in this case. The parity check matrix size is 282X1416. So the input of LDPC code is 1134 bits for the concatenated codes. For impartiality, compared LDPC code rate is 0.6483, mean column weight is 3 and parity check matrix size is 498X 1416. In Figure.3, the variation in BERs with p is illustrated when iterative number is 5.
Maximum number of iteration is 10 for LDPC decoding as inner code. Maximum number of iteration between LDPC as inner code and BCH code as outer code (out round iteration) is 5 and 10. For Chase-2

14

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:22:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithm, p with 2P test patterns constructed is independently used for each block. In our simulation, we setup p with 3 , 4 and 5. The compared LDPC code perform inner iteration with maximum number 50. For each code with rate r=0.6483, the Shannon limit is Eb/N *.... dB where Eb/NO is the ratio of energy per information bit-to-noise power spectral density over AWGN channel with BPSK. Simulation shows that the code gain becomes larger when either of the quality p and number of iteration increases, but the computing complexity becomes more complicated. Figure 3 shows that there are 0.3dB gains for the concatenated codes against the LDPC codes when p=4 and maximum number of outer round iteration is 5. And the scheme achieves better tradeoff for performance and complexity.
10-1
no0-20

10-3

10-4
io4

LDPC iter='5 O'. LDPCp- BCHH3 iter='5- < \
+~} LDPC-BCHpp4iter=5 L +.4LDDPPC--BCC'H pp=44 iItteer=10X
x LDPC-BCH p=5 iter=5

0

0.5

1.5

2.5

EbNOdb

Figure 3. BER variation of the concatenated scheme

The low complexity fast Chase algorithm is based on the reordering of test patterns using a Gray code. Using the method, the calculation of syndromes and analog weights relating to each test pattern can then be made efficient. Hence, complexity increases more slowly with p. Soft output calculation using (6) is also simplified by treating the erasure positions and the symbols corrected by the binary decoder separately. For all other positions, rather than use ,B values an adaptive default metric is employed which equals the analog weight difference between the most likely and least likely codeword. Consequently, the new decoder can operate more effectively using fewer erasures.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we propose an iterative decoding algorithm with BCH codes as outer codes and LDPC codes as inner codes. Performances of the concatenated scheme with chase SISO algorithm are compared with the LDPC codes. Simulation results show that the concatenated scheme and iterative decoding is effective for the LDPC codes with medium length. Furthermore, use of the efficient decoder means that this performance is possible with relatively low decoding costs.

REFERENCES
[1] N.Wiberg, H. A. Loeliger, and R.Koetter, "Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs," Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513, Sept. 1995.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, "The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001,
[3] M. Fossorier, "Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes," IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 908-917, May 2001.
[4] W. Jin and M. Fossorier, "Reliability-based list decoding with multiple bases," in Proc. 43rd Annual Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. And Comput., Sept. 2005.
[5] Aditi Kothiyal, Oscar Y. Takeshita, Wenyi Jin, and Marc Fossorier, "Iterative Reliability-Based Decoding of Linear Block Codes with Adaptive Belief Propagation", IEEE Communication Letters, vol. 9, NO. 12, pp.1067-1069, Dec. 2005
[6] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, "Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[7] Aditi Kothiyal, Oscar Y. Takeshita, Wenyi Jin, and Marc Fossorier, "Iterative Reliability-Based Decoding of Linear Block Codes with Adaptive Belief Propagation ," IEEE Comm. Letters, vol.9, NO. 12,pp.1067-1069, Dec. 2005
[8] Draft ETSI EN 302 307. Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB), Second gcnerafion fiaming srrucfure. channel coding and niodulation sysfems for Broadcasting Interactive Services,News Gathering and other broadband satcllire applicadons. ETSI. France, Jun. 2004.
[9] Simon Hirst, Bahram Honary, "Application of Efficient Chase Algorithm in Decoding of Generalized Low-Density Parity-Check Codes", IEEE Comm. Letters, vol.6, NO. 9,pp.385-387, Sep. 2002

15
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:22:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

