HDL Library of Processing Units for an Automatic
LDPC Decoder Design

Gabriel Falcao
Inst. Telecom. Univ. of Coimbra Coimbra - Portugal gff@deec.uc.pt

Marco Gomes
Inst. Telecom. Univ. of Coimbra Coimbra - Portugal marco @co.it.pt

Joao Gonqalves
DEEC
Univ. of Coimbra
Coimbra - Portugal jpnag@co.it.pt

Pedro Faia
DEEC Univ. of Coimbra Coimbra - Portugal faia@deec.uc.pt

Vitor Silva
Inst. Telecom. Univ. of Coimbra Coimbra - Portugal
vitor@co.it.pt

Abstract- In this paper we propose an efficient and generic HDL library of processing units which are the key elements of a modular low-density parity check (LDPC) decoder design approach. General purpose, low complexity and high throughput bit node and check functional models are developed. Both full serial and parallel architectures are considered. Also, it is described an automatic HDL code generator for the proposed processing units using Matlab® language and synthesis results for a Xilinx FPGA device are documented.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [1] [2] are among the most powerful forward error correction codes known and can be applied in a vast number of applications, from data storage to telecommunications. The existence of efficient coding and decoding algorithms combined with their good decoding performance called the attention of the scientific community and led already to their inclusion in the recent digital video satellite broadcasting standard (DVB-S2) [3]. Although simple, the decoding algorithm presents a significant challenge from the hardware implementation point of view.
LDPC codes are a sub-set of linear block codes, defined by sparse parity check matrix H, to which a Tanner graph [4] can be coupled as for any linear block code. This bipartite graph is formed by two types of nodes, Check Nodes (CN), one per each code constraint (H rows), and Bit Nodes (BN), one per each bit of the codeword (H columns), with the connections between them given by H.
The importance of the Tanner graph is reinforced by the fact that best known LDPC decoding algorithms, namely the Sum Product Algorithm (SPA) [1] [5], are all derived from the Tanner Graph structure. The iterative procedure is based on an exchange of messages between the BN's and CN's of the Tanner graph, containing believes about the value of each codeword bit with these messages (probabilities) being represented rigorously in their domain or, more compactly, using logarithm likelihood ratios. The iterative procedure

stops when a valid codeword is achieved or the maximum number of iterations is attained (in this case a decoder failure is declared). A simple iterative decoder can thus be constructed by considering each CN and BN of the Tanner graph as processing units, and the connections between them as bidirectional communication channels where through the processed information is sent. In this paper we propose a generic implementation for the CN and BN processing units.
The fact that LDPC decoders can be constructed taking a modular approach allows the usage of auxiliary tools/libraries in their development. Following this line of thought, it is possible to design Matlab© application scripts, that according to certain parameters, are capable of creating and connecting the full set of module units needed for each decoder according to the target architecture, by generating Verilog code automatically.
In the following sections we will describe with further detail the proposed Verilog models for each processing unit. Section II presents a brief review of the sum product algorithm following the traditional flooding schedule approach. In section III, generic hardware modules are proposed for the basic processing units of a LDPC decoder. Section IV describes automatic generation of VerilogNVHDL code for previously developed libraries based on simple Matlab© application scripts. Finally, section V presents the synthesis results of the CN's and BN's processing units, obtained for a Virtex2P Xilinx FPGA.
II. SoFT-DECODING
Best known LDPC decoding algorithms [1] are based on an iterative message-passing between the BN's and CN's of the Tanner graph, containing believes about the value of each codeword bit. Traditionally, this procedure follows the so-called flooding schedule approach which consists in: all messages sent by BN' s are updated all-together before being sent to CN' s processing units and vice-versa.
Given a (n, k) LDPC code, we assume BPSK
modulation which maps a codeword, c = (cl, c2, ., cn), onto

The authors would like to thank the partial support from Xilinx.

1-4244-0157-7/06/$20.00 C2006 IEEE

349

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the sequence, x =(xl, x2, ,xj), according to x (-i) .
Then, the modulated vector x is transmitted through an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The
received sequence is y= (y1, y2,.., yj, with yi= xi +ni where ni is a random gaussian variable with zero mean and
variance No/2. We denote the set of bits that participate in check m by N (m) and, similarly, we define the set of checks in which bit n participates as M (n). We also denote N(m)\n as the set N(m) with bit n excluded and M (n) \ m as the set M (n) with check m excluded.
Denoting the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of a random
variable x as L(x) = ln(p(x = O)/p(x = 1)), we designate:
* LPI - The a priori LLR of BN n, derived from the
received value yn. * Lrn - The message that is sent from CN m to BN n,
computed based on all received messages from BN's N(m)\n . It is the LLR of BN n, assuming that the CN m restriction is satisfied. * - The LLR of BN n, which is sent to CN m, and is calculated, based on all received messages from CN's
M (n) \ m and the channel information, LPI. * LQn - The a posteriori LLR of BN n.

The Sum Product Algorithm (SPA), proposed by Gallager, is carried out in the logarithmic domain as follows:

- For each node pair (BNn, CNm), corresponding to hmn = 1
in the parity check matrix H of the code do:

Initialization:

Lq,m = LPI = (2y

Iterative body:

1. Calculate the log-likelihood ratio of message sent from

CNm to BNn,:

LrD = Lqn,m

(2)

n'N(m)\n

with
aW]b - sign(a)sign(b)min(lal,|bl) + LUT1(a, b),
and

LUT1(a,b) =log(I+e la+bl)log(+e lba l)a

2. Calculate the log-likelihood ratio of message sent from

BNn to CNm:

Lqnm = LIn + fi Lrmn *

(3)

m'eM(n)\m

3. Compute the a posteriori pseudo-probabilities and

perform hard decoding:

LQn =Lfn + E Lrmn *

(4)

m'eM(n)

Vn,

<I 1¢ LQ, <0

(5)

The iterative procedure is stopped if the decoded word c verifies all parity check equations of the code (HT = 0 ) or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

III. PROCESSING UNITS FOR A GENERIC LDPC DECODER
As already mentioned, a simple iterative decoder can be constructed by considering each CN and BN of the Tanner graph as processing units, and the connections between them as bidirectional communication channels where through the processed information is sent. Yet, this approach presents some disadvantages (principally for long and unstructured LDPC codes) from the hardware implementation point of view, as the high number of processing units required, but also the huge number of connections between them which impose severe routing problems. However, even for best known hardware structured and efficient LDPC codes, such as the one recently proposed for DVB-S2 standard [3] [6], or for
LDPC decoders following different schedule approaches [7] [8], the updating procedure of a single BN or a single CN remains unchanged which means that elementary hardware processing units can be developed for both CN and BN and, thus, LDPC decoders can be constructed under a modular approach.
A. BN Processing Unit
A BN processor should calculate the log-likelihood ratio messages sent from the assigned BN to its CN's neighbours, the a posteriori pseudo-probabilities associated to the current BN and perform hard decoding taking a decision about its bit value. Considering a BN of weight w, the BN processor can be seen as a black box with w +1 inputs, from where it receives the channel information plus w CN
messages, Lrrn, sent from the CN's connected to it, and with w + 1 outputs, through where it communicates the hard decoding decision and sends the w messages, Lqn,, to the
CN's connected to it. Observing equations (3) and (4) we note that the
message sent from BN n to CN m, can easily be obtained by

Lq,m = LQn-Ltm *

(6)

The computation procedure can thus be optimized and

done in serial or parallel mode.

In a parallel version the inputs are added all together,

producing the value of the a posteriori pseudo-probabilities,

LQn. The message outputs can them be computed

simultaneously by just subtracting all entries from the

output of the referred adder. This type of implementation

requires an adder capable of adding w +1 inputs of x bits, as

well as, w output x bits adders in order to be able to

perform the w subtractions. This means that a high number

of gates is required to implement just a single processing

unit, but has the great advantage of a minimum delay system

(high throughput), allowing us to lower the clock frequency

which implies a reduction in the power consumption.

350
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

x bits

v

x bits

WAx Reg Entrys[O]
bits Reg Entrbyist[sl]

bis
bits

add-eara~d~e~x 7rxit dx i

Reg Entrys[2]

adder

-

x bits

x bits

Reg Entrys[n-1]

ade

Figure 1. BN processor unit - parallel configuration.

Alternatively, in a serial version, the inputs are added on
a recursive manner as shown in figure 2. The Reg-Sum
register is initialized with the received channel information. The output messages can be obtained in a parallel manner as in figure 1, or using a full serial approach as shown in figure 2, with a new message being obtained at each clock cycle. This implementation minimizes the hardware complexity (measured in terms of number of logic gates) at the cost of a significant increase in processing time (time restrictions could require an increase in the clock frequency). The serial implementation has also the advantage of supporting the processing of a BN of any weight, at the expense of little additional control.

Information
Channel
x bits/o*__Reg S UM

_x+k
Adder

Lr x bits
r

~~~~FIFO

bits
Re vmou Rx+kgbitSs MOt

Hard Decoding

I~~~~~~~~~~~~ bit

xbt

Figure 2. BN processor unit - serial configuration.

B. CN Processing Unit
A similar approach to the one used in the previous section, can be followed in the computation of the Lrrn messages, sent by a CN. In fact, the boxplus operation defined in (2) can be reversed as:

xWy =Z X=zy,

(6)

where the boxminus operation is defined as:

aEDbLUT2 (a, b) - b,
and LUT2 (a, b) = log(ea,b -1) - log(ea-b 1).
Also, Equation (2) can be rewritten in the following way

Lrmn = (7)Lq.m Lqnm

(7).

~,n ' N(m)

However, LUT1 (.) and LUT2 (.) functions contain logarithmic operators whose hardware implementation consumes a significant number of resources. Their implementation can be significantly simplified by approximating them by fixed point piece-wise linear functions, namely, with powers of two based multiplying factors (shifts and adders) [9] [10].
Boxplus and boxminus operations can both be implemented at the cost of four additions, one comparison and two corrections, each involving a shift and a constant addition, as shown in figure 3 and figure 4.

F

LUT,
Figure 3. Block diagram of the Boxplus unit.

Figure 4. Block diagram of the Boxminus unit.
Sometimes the boxplus operation is even more simplified, with a small decrease in performance, by considering a void correction factor. This simplification of the SPA algorithm is known by Min-Sum [5] [9].
Based on the proposed boxplus and boxminus hardware modules, it is possible to adopt a serial or parallel configuration for the CN processor (similar to the described BN processor units). Nevertheless, the complexity of the boxplus operation on a parallel implementation requires a boxplus-sum chain of all inputs according to the figure 5.
The advantages of one configuration compared with the other are similar to the ones that were mentioned for the BN processor. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the proportion of silicon area, occupied by a parallel implementation with respect to a serial implementation, is in this case significantly higher than the one for the BN processor, due to the number of operations involved in the boxplus and boxminus processing. In fact, the number of

351
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

gates required by the boxplus and boxminus processing units is superior to the common add and subtract arithmetic operations.
x bits
Figure 5. CN processor unit - parallel configuration.
Figure 6. CN processor unit - serial configuration.
IV. AUTOMATIC HDL CODE GENERATION WITH A MATLAB PRE-PROCESSOR
The HDL decoder hand design for good LDPC codes (>1000 bits) may seem almost unfeasible and minor changes on the H matrix always have considerable repercussions on the structure of the correspondent decoder, even when the architecture principles remain unchanged. Simple modifications may, therefore, imply a considerable amount of time in the readjustment of the Verilog/VHDL code of the decoder.
Considering the fact that LDPC decoders can be constructed taking a modular approach and that basic LDPC
decoding operations, such as boxplus and boxminus, are
hardware translated by independent modules, it allows the use of auxiliary tools/libraries in their development. Thus, it
is possible to design Matlab'© libraries containing fully
configurable basic building LDPC decoder blocks where the number of inputs, message precision, etc., are user defined.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS This section presents and compares the synthesis results for serial and parallel implementations of CN and BN units
described in section III, considering the XC2VP30 Virtex2P
Xilinx FPGA. Typical BN and CN units with, respectively,

4 and 8 weights were assumed. Messages are 4-bit precision represented in 2's complement format.

TABLE I.

BN AND CN PU's SYNTHESIS RESULTS

Adders/Subtractors Registers Latches Comparators Multiplexers Xors FPGA slices (%) Gain (Serial vs Par.)

BN

Parallel Serial

8

6

56

32

16

--

8

10

2

0.63 0.34 1.85

I_ CN
Parallel Serial

158

23

127

101

--

--

189

30

49

6

7

2

10.01 2.06

4.86

It is clear for both BN and CN processing units results in Table I that the serial architectures require less hardware than their similar parallel versions. The gain is more notorious for CN units even for a small weight case as the one tested. Thus, a larger gain in complexity would be accomplished with a heavier weight CN.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have proposed a HDL library of processing units for automatic and fast generation of HDL LDPC decoders, based on Matlab© scripts. This approach considerably reduces the design development time. Synthesis results for XC2VP30 FPGA Xilinx device are also reported.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes", IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp.21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, "Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes", IEEE Electronics Letters, vol. 32, n°.18, pp. 1645-1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] European Telecommunications Standards Institude (ETSI). Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) Second generation framing structure for broadband satellite applications; EN 302 307 VI .1.1. www.dvb.org.
[4] R. Tanner, "A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes", IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[5] J. Chen e M. P. C. Fossorier, "Near Optimum Universal Belief Propagation Based Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes", IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, n° 3, March 2002.
[6] Kienle, F., Brack, T., Wehn, N., "A Synthesizable IP Core for DVBS2 LDPC Code Decoding," DATE'05, vol. 3, pp. 100-105, 2005.
[7] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn and J. Goldberger, "An efficient messagepassing schedule for LDPC decoding", 23rd IEEE Convention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel, Sept. 2004.
[8] H. Xiao and A. M. Banihashemi, "Graph-Based Message-Passing Schedules for Decoding LDPC Codes", IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2098-2105, December 2004.
[9] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold e A. Dholakia, "Efficient Implementations of the Sum-Product Algorithm for Decoding LDPC Codes", IEEE GLOBECOM '01, vol. 2,2001.
[10] G.Masera, F. Quaglio and F. Vacca, "Finite precision implementation of LDPC decoders", IEE Proceedings-Communications, Vol. 152, No. 6, December 2005.

352
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

