2006 6th Intermational Coference on ITS Teleconuiiic&ations Proceedings

A novel simple stoin citerion fr the PCGC decoder

Xu Xiaojian Infortion Egineerng Uiersity
Zhengzhou, 450002, P.R.China Enail: xuxiaojianaplaieu. cn

Li Jin
SouthEast University, NCRL Nanjing, 210096, PRR.China
Einaill:iJin dseu.edu.cn

Hu Han)ying
Infortation Engineenng Unuiversity
Zhengzhou, 450002, P.R.China Email:huhanying ttvip.sina.com

Abstract In this paper, in order to degrade the computation complexity and storage of the iterative decoder of parallel con-
catenated LDPC (Low-Density Parity-Check) eodes, we propose a novel stopping criteria by using of the mean of the magnitude of
the extrinsic information. We verify our algorithms with Monte
Carlo simulation, and the results proved that the proposed rules
outperforms the other existing: criterions in terms of BER and average number of super iterations.

I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, in order to degrade the decoding complexity, people break the fairly complicated decoding of a long code
into steps while inaintaining the information flox between
the component decoders and minimizing aW information loss
between the decoding steps. Onie of the important efforts is the PCGCs (Parallel Concatenated Gallager Codes) [1], which are a class of concatenated codes built from the direct parallel concatnation of LDPC codes [21 without interleavers. For a PCGCs decoder, it follows the scenario of turbo decoding, where a super iteration is defined as the process of exchanging extrinsic information between the two component decoders, anid in each super iteration, each component decoder performs a number of local iterations before passing any information to the other component decoder. One of the important problem of this iterative decoding is when and how did the decoder stop the iterations. For a conventional decoder, the process of exchanging information between the component decoders will continMe till both decoders converge to the valid codewords, or reaches the preset maximum number of super iterations (called "FIXED" scheme hereafter). Unfortunately, the preset M7NSI (Maximum Number of Super Itration) in FIXED
scheme must be set to guaranty the convergence of ail 'good' (can be decoded) frames, fnrthermore, when 'bad' frames
are considered, the decoders will always do the iterations till reaching MNSI although they can't converge through the spe'riterations. As a results of above decoder charaten'stic,
computation wastage is inevitable. However, if xve can derive
a criterion to stop the noneffective iterative decoding when the
decoder approaches the linmit of performance, we can rednce the computation complexity and the delay of the decoder greatly, Which is the main work of this paper
Ihis paper was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) of
China under grant number 60472064.

Fig. 1. Illustration of PCGC decoder.
There had been some stopping criterions being presented [3]-[8], buLt most of them considered the decoding of TLrbo code. In this paper, we will throw our target on the stopping criterion of PCGC decoder, aind propose a novel stopping criteria, which is realized through taking into account for the statistic of the extrinsic information exchanged between the component decoder.
The remaining of this paper is as follows: in section II, we will introduce the application of some existing stopping criterions in the PCGC decoder, and in section III a lowcomplexity stopping criteria is proposed, then the simulation results will be shown and analyzed in section IV Finally, we will draw some conclusions in section V
II. EXISTING STRATEGIES
Several stopping criterion had beenz devised for the Turbo decoder, such as the CE (Cross-Entropy) criterion [3], the SCR (Sign-Change-Ratio) criterion [4], the HDA (Hard-DecisionAided) criterion [4] and the SDR (Sign-Difference-Ratio)
criterion [5]. More works on the stopping criterion can be
found in [6]-[8], and most of the existing criterions can also be used in PCGC decoder. The SCR, the HDA and the SDR criteria are much more simply for implementation compared with the CE rule, and the number of iterations they caan save is nearly tie same. Thus in this section, for simplicity we will just reviewv the CE criteria aind the SCR criteria.
At first, we introduce the structure of the PCGC decoder. Let uk, k E {1l, .., N}, be the infomation bits, the code bits
of which are binary phase shift kqying (BPSK) modulated and
transmitted through ani N(07, o) additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) chanlnel. At the receiver, (y8 Pt 1V4) are signals

0-7803-9586-7/06/$20.00 C2006 IEEE.

1327

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

corresponding to uk,iwhere ys is the systematic signal, ypj
and yg are parity for LDPC sub-code 1 and LDPC sub-code 2 respectively. The) are sent to the soft-input soft-output (SISO) maximum a postenrori probability (MAP) decoders to produce
the estimates k, as shown in Fig. 1, and N0 = 2cr2
At ith super iteration, let L5 (ak) and L6J(at) denote
the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information and the extnnsic inforation of the estimated bit ak delivered by decoder j respectively, with j 1,2 Iit is shown in [3] that
L" (ak) L` '(ak) ± (2/07 ± L> (at) (1)

L'(ak) LL (ua) ± (2/02 + L>(

(2)

xvhere (2/792)ys is the soft output xalue if the channel.
In the CE criterion, the cross entropy between the output a
prior information of the two sub-decoders at iteration i can be approximated by [3]

M(3) T(i)

>3 L>62(a)

]4~' (ak) 2

T t

Hence the CE stopping rule computes T(i) at the iteration and stop further iterations when T(i) falls to a value in the range (10-2 - 10-4)T(1). When T(i) is in this region, two distributions of the output value of the sub-decoders are said to be close enough and the iteratixe process can be tenninated
with a minimal performance degradation. According to the
results in [3], the CE rule saves a considerable amount of
complexity in terms of iterations. In the SCR method, it is shown that T(i) is directly related
to the nmwnber of sign changes C(t) in L62 (ak) from iteration
i-1 to iteration I. Thus the SCR rule stops the super iterations
of the decoder if C(t) < (0.005 0.03)N. The advantage of this method is that the decoder only needs to count the number of sign changes of the extnnsic information between the consecutive iterations, thle it requires less computation
operation. In Section IV, we will show the performance of the CE method and the SCR method when they are used in the PCGC decoder.

III. THE PROPOSED CRITERION

From the repeated simulation, we obsered that, as the number of super iteration increases, for a 'good' frame, the magnitudes of the LLR gradually become larger. Since the
term (2/(T2) in (1) and (2) is fixed for eveiy super iteration, the increment of the LLR message L3 (atk) is due to the increase of the extrinsic information Li (ak). Hence, it is
conceivable that the performance gain reaches the limit if the magitudes of the extrinsic infrmation do niot continue increasing. If the decoder terminates when the magiitude of the extrinsic information converge, the unnecessary computation and the delay of the decoder can be avoided. Based on the
description above, we compute

EA(i)

K?0 NL>6) 2(at)I N

at the end of thLe super iteration ito trace the magnitudes of
tie extinsic information.
By the way, through the repeated simulations, we had
observed that the EA(i) of 'bad' frames would increase at
the beginning of the iterative decoding and then fluctuate in a small range when the number of super iteration in-
creases. The EA(i) of the most of 'good' frames will increase monotonously till conwergence to the valid codewords. But the
EA(t) of some 'good' fraines do not increase monotonously.
It will fall in big amplitLde sometimes. Thus we can design
a stopping criterion which counts the number of th event
"the EA(it) falls in a small range" to distingnish the 'bad' frames from the 'good' frames, and stops the decoder when the number of the events reaches a preset vahlie.
The detailed proposed scheme is: Initialization: Reset the counter 0. aid setup the paranieter of the critenron, the threshold T and the fall ratio threshold P.
Step 1: At the end of each super iteration i, compute EA( Step 2: If EA(i) < EA(i - 1) and EA(i - 1) - EA(i) < P x EA(- 1), C plus one; Step 3: If C equals 1, stopping the decoder, else begin the
niext super iteration and go to step 1
Because the proposed critenon is based on the mean of magnitude of the extnrnsic information , hence we naine it the MEM (Mean of Extrnsic information Magnitude) cnrtenron.
The computation complexity and the storage requirement are important to the stopping criternon. Hence we compare the implementation requirement of the CE, the SCR and the MEM methods. At each super iteration i, the CE criterion requires (5N -1) real nutumber operations and (N + 2) real number
memory units for storing LI (ut), T(i) and T(1) [4]. The SCR
critenron needs (3N - 1) integer operations and (N+2) integer memory units for storing the signs of L' (uk), C(i) and C(1) [4]. However, die MIEM crterion only needs N real number operation and 2 real nLumber memory for storing EA1(i) and EA(i -1). Then we can conclude that the MEM critenion has low computation complexity and needs the least storage memeory.
IV SIMULATION RESULTS AND COMPARISON
For all simulations, the component encoders are rate onehal, random generated LDPC encoder, both of dimensions 6401280. The MCW (Mean Column Weight) of the first encoder is 2 and the second is 2.667 [1]. At the receiver, the frames are decoded by th algorithm in log domain[9], and the maximum number of local iteration in component decoder is
25, the maximum number of super iteration is 15. In Fig. 2 we shows the perfomriance in terms of bit error rate
(BER) when the PCGC decoder uses the CE criterion or the SCR criterion with different parameters. Both of the criterions result performance degradation at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNTh region. Though the degradation directed by the SCR technique is smaller than the one directed by the CE method, but at least 0.1dB loss exists. From the fignre 2, we can find that the best thresholds of the CE and SCR method in the PCGC decoder is 0.001 and 0.005 respectively.

1328

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1 10'
a:10
LU
10-4

- FIXED
-_- CE Threshold=0.01 -+- CE Threshold0.001 -e- CE Threshold0Q0001 -*- SOR Threshold=0.01 -4- SCR Threshold 0 005 -A, SCR Threshold=0.001

1144 r-
12 P
1X 10 oa)
a) Q0 E

- FIXED
- CE Threshold=0001 -4- SCR Threshold=0005 --- MEM T=2 P 005

10

0.4

0.6

OS8

1.2

14

16

1.8

2

E,/N,, dB

Fig. 2. BER perfortmnarce for the CE criterion and the SCR criterion.

El,/N dB
Fig. 4. Average number of super iterations for various stopping schemes.

10

-

Fl E

~~~~~~~_~~~~~ FIXED

V CONCLUSION

~~~~~~~~~_~~~~~~0 T=1 P=0.05 -4- T2 P=0.05 -e- T=1 P=0.1

In this paper, we investigate how to reduce the computation

- T=2 P=0.1

complexity and the decoding delay of the PCGC decoder

1 02

with stopping criterion, and propose a novel simple stopping

cntenon. The proposed MEM inethod is based on the statistic

of the magnitude of the extrinsic infonration. The simulation

results verify that the MIM rules needs less computAtion, least
10
storage requirement, and results least performance degradation

compared with two existing stopping critenrons. Hence we
103
can draw a conclusion that the MIEM criterion can reduce

the computation complexity of the PCGC decoder efficiently

with negligible performance loss and has the advantage of

hardware implementation.

10-5

REFERENCES

0.4

06

0.8

1

12

14

1.6

18

2

EblNb dB

Fig. 3. BER performance for the MEM rule with various paramneters.

In Fig. 3, we show the BER cuxrves of the PCGC decoder using the MIEM rule with dierent T and P. From the
curves, we can find that there is negligible BER performance degradation when the decoder using MEM rule with T of 2 and P of 0.05, and a smaller T or bigger P are unfavorable though they can save more sqper iterati6ns.
In Fig. 4, we compare the average number of the super
iteration against the SNR when the decoder uses different
stopping criterions. We can observe that all the three stop-
ping criterions can save super iterations efficiently at loW
to medium SNR. The CE method, while requires the most
complexity computation and storage memory, saves more suer iterations tlhan the SCR method. However, the proposed MEMImethod outperforms both of the CE crntenron and the
SCR criterion.

[1] H. Behairy, S. C. Chang, "Parallel Concatenated Gallager codes", Elec-
tron. Letter, 2000, 36(24), pp.2025-2026. [2] R. G. Gallager: Low -Density Parity-Check Codes, IRE TRans. Inform.
Theory, Jan., 1962, pp.21-28. [3] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer anid L. Papker. "Iterative decoding of binary block
and convoluitional", IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 1996, 42, pp.429-445. [4] R. Y. Shao, S. Lin and M. P. C. Fossorier, "Two simple stopping criteria
for turbo decoding", IEEE Trans. Commun., 1999, 47, pp.1I 17-1120. [5] X. Wu, B. D. Woe\u er and WX. J. Ebel, "A simple stopping criterion fur
turbo decoding", IEEE Commun. Lett., 2000, 4, (8).
[6] T. M. N. Ngatched, F. Takawira, "Simple stopping criterion for turbo decoding"1, Electron. Lett., 2001, 37(22), pp.1350-1351.
[7] N. Y. Yu M. G. Kis, Y. S. Kim and S. U. Chung, "Efficient stopping criterion for iterative decoding of turbo codes", Electron. Letter, 2003,
39(1), pp.73-75.
[8] D. Bokolamulla, T. Aulin, 'A nev stopping criterion for iterative decoding", in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2004, Jun., vol.1, pp.538-541.
[9] J. Li, X. H. You and Y. H. Kim, "Low complexity decoding algorithm of parallel concatenated LDPC code", in Proc. IEEE Circuits andi Systems Symposium on Emerging Technologies, 2004, May, vol.1, pp.289-291.

1329

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

