994
Transactions Papers

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006

On Unequal Error Protection LDPC Codes Based on Plotkin-Type Constructions
Vidya Kumar and Olgica Milenkovic

Abstract—We introduce a new family of unequal error protection (UEP) codes, based on low-density parity-check (LDPC) component codes and Plotkin-type constructions. The codes are decoded iteratively in multiple stages, and the order of decoding determines the level of error protection. The level of UEP among the code bits is also influenced by the choice of the LDPC component codes and by some new reliability features incorporated into the decoding process. The proposed scheme offers a very good tradeoff between code performance on one side and encoding/decoding and storage complexity on the other side. The novel approach to UEP also allows for finding simple approximations for the achievable degrees of UEP, which can be used to govern practical code design implementations.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Plotkin construction, unequal error protection (UEP).
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are iteratively decodable codes on graphs that exhibit capacity approaching performance over binary erasure and additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels [2]. The near-optimal performance of LDPC codes over these standard channels suggests that they may also offer good error-correcting performance when used over channels with nonuniform characteristics. The goal of this paper is to explore one possible LDPC code design and decoding scheme for such channels. More specifically, we propose to investigate the application of iterative decoding methods for channels that require unequal error protection (UEP). UEP of data is a necessary system requirement for many practical applications, including joint coding for parallel channels with nonuniform noise statistics, robust transmission
Paper approved by T.-K. Truong, the Editor for Coding Theory and Techniques of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received November 23, 2004; revised May 19, 2005 and August 5, 2005. This work was supported by the Colorado Center for Information Storage, Boulder, CO. This paper was presented in part at the Global Telecommunications Conference, Dallas, TX, December 2004.
V. Kumar was with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309 USA. She is now with Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121 USA.
O. Milenkovic is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309 USA (e-mail: milenkov@colorado. edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.876842

of still images/videos over wireless channels, and storage on holographic memories. The code design problem for nonuniform channels reduces to constructing codewords, which, when transmitted over a uniform channel, have the property that different parts experience different effective noise powers. Such a situation usually arises when the codewords can be divided into frames, according to the importance of the information they convey. For storage applications, UEP schemes can be used to simplify the data processing architecture of the system, although at the cost of a certain performance loss.
We propose to design UEP-LDPC codes based on the algebraic Plotkin construction and to decode the codeword frames in multiple stages. For this technique, one starts with a set of random-like and/or structured LDPC codes as the basic components and then creates a code of long length in an iterative fashion. The component codes are decoded individually and in multiple rounds. The underlying soft-decision decoding algorithm operates iteratively on two different levels: one, the level of the Plotkin construction itself, and another, the level of iterative decoding of the component LDPC codes. The results of the individual decoding processes are combined in a manner that guarantees UEP characteristics for the component codes. The decoding algorithm also incorporates a reliability feature, a threshold function that describes how the outputs of the component decoders ought to be combined. The UEP features of this scheme can be vaguely seen as arising both from the irregular structure of the parity-check matrix, where different blocks of variable nodes have different degrees, and as an inherent characteristic of the decoding scheme employed for the component codes. A decoding method with only the first of the described features was also investigated by Dumer and Shabunov [3], [4] for soft-decision decoding of Reed–Muller (RM) codes [10], although without any reference to UEP.
The UEP techniques described in this paper are conceptually fundamentally different from previously known UEP schemes [12], [15], [16]. In [15], the effect of applying the direct sum or Plotkin construction on the UEP performance of the resultant code was investigated. The resulting codes’ separation vector, a vector which quantifies the UEP properties of a code, was described in terms of separation vectors of the component codes. A different approach to UEP was pursued in [12] and [16], where codes with such properties were designed by using irregular LDPC codes. The technique proposed in this paper is based on a

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR AND MILENKOVIC: ON UEP LDPC CODES BASED ON PLOTKIN-TYPE CONSTRUCTIONS

995

specialized decoding algorithm that exploits the “nested” struc-

ture of the code and is therefore different from both the approach

in [15] and the schemes in [12] and [16]. Furthermore, as will

be demonstrated subsequently, there exist simple approximation

methods that can be used to estimate the different protection

levels of Plotkin-type LDPC codes. These estimates can be used

to govern the practical code-design process.

The outline of the paper is as follows: in Section II we in-

troduce the Plotkin-type construction, relevant terminology and

definitions, as well as the multi-stage, multi-round decoding al-

gorithm. We also propose a novel method for constructing UEP

codes based on LDPC component codes. In Section III, we de-

scribe how the Plotkin-type construction can lead to an UEP

scheme and analyze the UEP levels offered by the new decoding

scheme. Additionally, we propose several modifications of the

basic decoding algorithm that further improve the performance

of the coding scheme of interest. Simulation results and conclu-

sions are presented in Section IV.

Throughout the paper, all derivations and simulations are per-

formed for BPSK-modulated codewords of a binary, linear code

transmitted over an AWGN channel, with noise samples gener-

ated according to the Gaussian distribution

. The pro-

posed UEP techniques and the corresponding analysis can be

extended in a straightforward manner to apply to other classes

of memoryless channels.

II. PLOTKIN-TYPE CONSTRUCTIONS AND MULTISTAGE DECODING

and are adequately named depth-two component codes. This

terminology extends in an obvious manner to components at any

given depth. Note that there are depth- component codes,

for

. The generator and parity-check matrix of a

Plotkin-type code of depth

are of the form

(2)

where and represent the generator and parity-check ma-

trix of the codes

, respectively, and 0 stands for the

all-zero matrix of appropriate dimension.

Plotkin-type codes usually have very good error-correcting

properties. For example, the well-known class of RM codes [10]

can be devised in this manner.

There exist many other code construction techniques closely

related to the Plotkin method. Examples include the

construction [10], and extensions thereof, described as follows.

Definition 2: Let be a code with parameters

,

and let be a code with parameters

. A code de-

fined according to

(3)

is called an

-type code. The length of

its rate is

, with

,

generator and parity check matrix of an

are of the form

is , while . The
-type of code

The Plotkin construction, also known as the

con-

struction, is a code design method which increases the length of

the code by combining component codes in an additive manner

[10]. For the sake of completeness, we will briefly review the

most relevant characteristics of this and related construction where and represent the generator and parity check ma-

strategies.

trix of the codes ,

, respectively.

Definition 1: Assume that two codes, and , with pa- Let us briefly describe some of the properties of Plotkin-type

rameters

and

are given. The Plotkin code codes of depth

based on LDPC component codes, under

with components and is defined as

standard encoding and message-passing decoding.

First, the component codes and of a Plotkin-type code

can be chosen from the class of linear codes in an arbitrary (1) manner; hence, LDPC codes are good candidates for this tech-

where denotes word concatenation. The parameters of the

code are

. The codes

and will be referred to as the component codes. Note that the

first half of the codeword contains information bits, while the

second half contains information bits.

The Plotkin construction can be applied recursively up to a

prescribed depth . For example, if each of the component

codewords and is itself of Plotkin-type, constructed from

codes with components

and

, then

nique. For most LDPC codes, the encoding complexity scales as a square function of the length of the code. But, the Plotkin-type of encoding is performed in several stages, using short information sequences. This implies that for a depth construction of resulting length , the component codes are of length and can be encoded much faster individually than jointly. Additionally, LDPC component codes can be decoded using the sum–product algorithm. There are several additional advantages for using LDPC component codes in the described setting: first, the component codes can be very long, yet efficiently decoded

producing soft outputs; second, one can choose some compo-

nent codes to be structured and others to be random-like. In this

way, the performance of the coding scheme can be traded for

The components

and

can themselves be taken storage and encoding complexity and vice versa. This is why we

from a Plotkin-type code, and such a “nested construction” can will focus exclusively on Plotkin-type codes with LDPC com-

be extended up to depth . For a depth Plotkin-type code, ponent codes.

the longest component codes specifying (i.e., and ) will The next observation is that in order to ensure large error

be called depth-one component codes, while those defining resilience for a given set of variable nodes, it is desirable to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006

have these nodes involved in as many check equations as pos- lexicographical order. A vector in such an ordered list is said

sible. Hence, one may expect the first half of the variables in a to be ranked higher than a vector , if it is positioned anywhere

Plotkin-type code to have a higher level of error protection below . Decoding is performed only on depth- components,

than the second half. But such a requirement can be seen not such that a component of higher rank is always decoded before

to be sufficient, in general. Good irregular codes usually have a one of lower rank. For the sake of simplicity, we will describe

degree distribution optimized with respect to the overall codes’ the decoding process only for depth

codes. The general-

performance. Large degree nodes in the code graph have a high ization to larger values of is straightforward [4].

level of error protection during the first several iterations of be- Let the transmitted codeword be

lief propagation, but due to the nonseparable nature of iterative

and the received vector be

. As-

decoding, these nodes also tend to improve the decisions of the sume that all the transmitted bits are equally likely. For the de-

low-degree nodes in the final stages of decoding. Hence, for scribed setting, we define the log-likelihood and the spread

good irregular codes there should be a very small difference in (following the same terminology as in [3]) of the th symbol

the error-protection levels of the nodes at the end of the decoding of the word as

process (see Fig. 11 for an illustration of this phenomena). Fur-

thermore, in an arbitrary irregular LDPC code many low-degree

variables may share a check with a variable that has large de-

gree; such a configuration tends to cause unreliable information to propagate to reliable variables. This observation would suggest the need to design a code structure where nodes of high degree share many checks with other nodes of high degree and very few with low-degree nodes. A code design approach satisfying such constraints is clearly very hard to devise. This is why an alternative solution, like the one pursued in this paper,

Let , denote the left and the right half of the received vector

. The log-likelihoods and spreads of the th coordinate of the

two halves of are , , , and , respectively. It

can be shown that and are both distributed according

to the Gaussian distribution

. For noise-free

transmission, one has

is desirable.

It is also to be noted that has a block-row with two iden-

tical copies of placed side by side. Hence, any column in

(4)

with

nonzero entries introduces at least four-cy-

cles in the Tanner graph of the code. Consequently, the com-

plete code graph of a Plotkin-type LDPC code necessarily has a

large number of cycles of length four. This implies that decoding

Plotkin-type LDPC codes in a global iterative fashion will pro-

duce very poor results, regardless of the quality of the compo-

nent codes. On the other hand, as will be shown in the next

section, Plotkin-type codes can be decoded in multiple stages;

For

, the previous formula can recover only an estimate

of , and the available information for finding the estimate con-

sists of the likelihoods and the spreads of the various coordinates

(bits) of the received vector . By invoking the well-known du-

ality principle [5], it is straightforward to see that the spread and

the log-likelihood of the th coordinate of the word can be de-

termined as

each stage involves one component only, and one can repeat

the different decoding stages multiple times. If the component codes have Tanner graphs without short cycles, then such a de-

(5)

coding method does not lead to a poor performance of the general scheme. It is also worth pointing out that the multistage decoding process may not fully exploit the codes error-correcting potential, but it can be analytically shown to achieve a very good quality of UEP differentiation.
The multistage (MS) decoding algorithm, and its multiround (MR-MS) version, will be described next.

Since is used in constructing both halves of the codeword

, one needs to distinguish between the two incidences of .

These will be denoted by and , while the respective log-

likelihoods of their th coordinate will be denoted by and

. Clearly,

.

The MS decoding process can now be summarized as follows.

1) Step 1—Computation of log-likelihoods of : From the

A. MS Decoding

Plokin-type codes are inherently suitable for MS decoding.

The MS decoding process can be most easily described in terms

of the binary tree representation of the component-codes hier-

archy [4]. The tree is constructed by starting from a root node,

representing a codeword

. Two branches leave the root

node: one, the left branch, leads to the component of , and

is labeled zero; the other, the right branch, leads to the com-

ponent and is labeled one. The same procedure is repeated re-

cursively, starting with the components and as root nodes.

received vector , the log-likelihood and the spread

are evaluated. Based on and , the spread and

log-likelihood of are computed according to (5).

2) Step 2—Decoding of : The log-likelihoods of evaluated

in Step 1) are used for soft-input soft-output decoding. The

output of the decoder for codeword is denoted by .

3) Step 3—Computation of log-likelihoods of and : As

already shown,

, while can be determined

based on the soft output . This is accomplished by ob-

serving that if

, then

Hence, each component code at depth of the Plotkin con-

struction has an equivalent binary representation

. The

binary representations are assumed to be ordered in the standard

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR AND MILENKOVIC: ON UEP LDPC CODES BASED ON PLOTKIN-TYPE CONSTRUCTIONS

997

Fig. 1. Graphical representation of MS decoding for depth-one Plotkin-type construction.

while if

, then

. In summary,

.

4) Step 4—Decoding of : The values of and rep-

resent the log-likelihoods of the th coordinate of two re-

peated observations of , namely

. Based on these

observations, the log-likelihoods of the coordinates of

can be obtained according to

prove the estimate of . We will refer to this repeated appli-

cation of MS decoding as the MR process. A description of

the MR-MS algorithm for a Plotkin-type construction of depth

is summarized as follows. As noted before, a straight-

forward extension is possible for decoders operating on codes

of depth

as well.

1) Step 1—MS Decoding of and : Based on the channel

log-likelihoods

, the MS decoding algorithm is

executed to obtain soft-output estimates for the and

component, termed , .

2) Step 2—Iterating MS algorithm: The round-counting

index is set to . For a -round decoder, these instruc-

tions are followed:

1) The log-likelihood values

of the output of

the decoder for

are computed.

2) The MS decoding data is initialized to

; complete MS decoding is per-

formed to obtain new estimates for the component

codes, namely and . The counting index is

increased,

.

3) Steps 1) and 2) are repeated, unless . For ,

the decoding process is terminated. The final estimates

of and are of the form and .

(7) III. PLOTKIN-TYPE UEP SCHEMES: INTUITION AND ANALYSIS In this section, we will describe why Plotkin-type construc-

Finally, is used to initialize the decoder for , which sub- tions with MS or MR-MS decoding provide for UEP of the

sequently produces the estimate .

transmitted component codewords. We will also perform an

A pictorial description of the algorithm is provided in Fig. 1. analysis that shows the approximate levels of error protection

Example 1—Decoding Depth

Plotkin-Type Codes: achieved by the different components. The analysis will be pre-

For a depth-two Plotkin-type code, the channel output sequence sented for a depth-one construction only, but it can be extended

can be represented in the form

, to higher depths as well. In order to simplify the analysis, we

where,

and

. The log-likelihoods and will define the notion of an equivalent channel. Although not

spreads of can be computed according to (5), as described for all distributions of the noise present in the component codes

the MS algorithm above. These results are then used to com- at various stages of the decoding algorithm are Gaussian,

pute the spread of , and this component codeword is decoded we will only use the first two moments of the variables in-

first. The log-likelihoods and spreads of are calculated ac- volved and assume that for all equivalent channels considered

cording to (5) and (6), using information provided by the de- the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as for a Gaussian

coder output for . Using the decoder output for

, the channel. Recall that the SNR for a Gaussian channel variable

log-likelihoods and spreads of are evaluated according to (6) with distribution

is defined as

. These ideas

and (7); a similar procedure is performed in order to find esti- are formalized by the following set of simplifying assumptions.

mates for and , thereby leading to an estimate of the com- Assumption 1: For a Plotkin-type construction, the means

plete codeword.

and variances of the noise “embedded” in the and compo-

B. MR-MS Decoding

nents during and after decoding will be used to specify an equivalent Gaussian variable.1 An AWGN channel corresponding

Based on the description of the MS algorithm, one can observe that once the complete codeword is decoded using a softoutput decoder, new (and more accurate) estimates for the loglikelihoods of the component codes are available. This suggests that one should perform the MS decoding algorithm in an iterative (recursive) manner. For example, after one round of MS decoding, the log-likelihood values at the output of the iterative decoder for , rather than the original channel information, can be used to find an improved estimate for . Such an iterative scheme is meaningful since the component after decoding usually has a significantly reduced number of errors, compared

to such a random variable will be referred to as the equiva-

lent AWGN (or simply, equivalent) channel. Furthermore, if the

mean and variance of two variables , , say, are , ,

and , , we say that the variables experience an equiva-

lent channel SNR if

. This implies that for a

variable experiencing the same channel as , and for which

, one would have

.

Assumption 2: The log-likelihood variables of different com-

ponent codes at any decoding stage are assumed to be indepen-

dent. A similar assumption was also used for conducting the

analysis in [3].

with the same component before decoding. In other words, at 1This is, in essence, equivalent to the Gaussian approximation method deeach round of decoding, better estimates of are used to im- scribed in [2].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006

Assumption 3: For the proofs of Lemmas 2–5 only, it will be assumed that no errors are present at any previous stage of the MS or MR-MS decoding process. Alternatively, any component code is assumed to be decoded based on perfect estimates provided by higher ranked components (a valid assumption for high SNRs). This assumption was also used in [4] for the purpose of determining the effective minimum distance of RM codes under a special form of MS decoding.

A. Analysis of MS Decoding: Perfect Decoder Model

Let us start by characterizing the equivalent channel for the

component . Based on (5), it is straightforward to show that

the noise variance of the equivalent channel experienced by

is

, provided that

. The same result was

proved in [3], based on the fact that

. The fol-

lowing lemma describes the equivalent channel of for the case

.

Lemma 1: For

, the variance of the equivalent

channel experienced by the component codeword, , equals

.

Proof: Based on the analysis in [4], it can be seen that

(8)
Therefore, . Ignoring higher order terms in the expansion
of the square leads to the following approximation:

Since (8) holds for any Gaussian variable, from

(9) can be obtained

has a higher level of error protection. For high-depth Plotkin

constructions there exists a fine gradation in the error protec-

tion quality. Additional variations in error protection levels can

be also achieved by suitably choosing the component codes. It

is worthwhile to point out that with this scheme a gradation of

UEP levels can also be achieved for different parts of the in-

formation sequence. More details about UEP properties of the

information symbols are provided in Section III-C.

The next lemmas describe the equivalent noise variances ex-

perienced by component codes at different depths. The results

are derived based on the binary tree representation of the Plotkin

construction and Assumption 3. The two cases

and

are treated separately.

Lemma 2: Let a component-code

of a Plotkin-type

construction of depth have the binary representation

,

. The equivalent noise variance

experienced by

, for

, is obtained from the recursion

if

if

(11)

where

.

Proof: For large values of , experiences an equiv-

alent channel with noise variance , whereas experiences

an equivalent channel with noise variance

. Every right

branch followed (corresponding to a bit

) in the binary

tree results in squaring the noise variance; similarly, every left

branch followed (corresponding to a bit

) leads to halving

the noise variance. This proves the claimed result.

Lemma 3: Let a component-code

of a Plotkin-type

construction of depth have the binary representation

,

. The equivalent noise variance

experienced by

, for

, is obtained from the recursion

Consequently,

(10) . By

if

if

(12)

taking logarithms of both sides of the last asymptotic equality,

and by neglecting lower order terms in the expansion [in this

case,

], one obtains

where

.

Proof: The proof follows along the same lines as the proof

of Lemma 2.

Remark 1: Note that the results of Lemmas 2 and 3 show that

the operations performed on the equivalent noise variance differ

only when a bit

is encountered in the binary representa-

since

for

Repeating the bootstrapping process shows that

.

For both

and

, by invoking Assumption

3 and (7), it holds that

. Hence, is dis-

tributed according to

, as both and are

Gaussian

variables. This shows that expe-

riences an equivalent channel with noise variance

. The

tion of a component code.

The previous lemmas can be generalized for the case of

MR-MS decoding as demonstrated in the following.

Lemma 4: Let a component-code

of a Plotkin-type

construction of depth have the binary representation

,

. The equivalent noise variance

experienced by

, for

, and for rounds of MR-MS decoding, is

given by (11), where

last result now clearly demonstrates how a UEP gradation is achieved by a Plotkin-type code construction and MS decoding. The vector is decoded first by using “indirect” information

for

for

(13)

and therefore experiences an equivalent channel degraded com-

Proof: During the first round of MR-MS decoding, both

pared with the original one. On the other hand, can be esti- and experience channel noise with variance . At the be-

mated from two different parts of the codeword and therefore ginning of the second round of MR-MS decoding, experiences

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR AND MILENKOVIC: ON UEP LDPC CODES BASED ON PLOTKIN-TYPE CONSTRUCTIONS

999

an equivalent channel with noise variance

. The log-like-

lihoods of

are fixed to the channel estimates throughout

the whole decoding process. In other words, the second half of

the codeword always experiences a channel with noise variance

. This implies that

. Therefore,

during the second round of decoding, experiences a channel

with equivalent noise variance

. The log-likelihoods

of the first half of the codeword are now distributed according to

, while the log-likelihoods of the second half

of the codeword are distributed according to

.

Based on (7) and Assumption 3, one can show that the log-like-

lihoods of are distributed according to

.

This is equivalent to the statement that experiences a channel

with noise variance

. Repeating the argument iteratively

up to the th round of decoding shows that and experience

equivalent noise variances

and

, respectively.

These variances are used as the initial values for the recurrence

described in Lemma 2.

Corollary 1: The equivalent noise variance experienced by

any component code at a fixed stage of MS decoding decreases

with the number of rounds of the MR process.

Proof: As already shown, the component codes at depth

one experience equivalent noise variances

and

after rounds of MR-MS decoding. These variances

clearly decrease when increases. Hence, components at

higher depths also experience channels with equivalent noise

variances decreasing with . This is due to the fact that the

initial conditions for the recursion of Lemma 4 are determined

by the depth-one component code noise variances only.

Lemma 5: Let a component-code

of a Plotkin-type

construction of depth have the binary representation

,

. The equivalent noise variance

experienced by

, for

, and for rounds of MR-MS decoding is

given by (12) where

for for

(14)

the noise variances experienced by can be derived in the same

way and are of the same form, as described in Lemma 4.

Example 2—Effective Noise Variances: Based on Lemmas

2–5, one can show that a depth

and -round MR-MS

decoding algorithm results in equivalent noise variances of the

four component codes equal to

for

for

(16)

B. Analysis of MS Decoding: Incorporating Decoder Error Probabilities

The results of the previous section do not provide sufficiently

accurate approximations for the exact forms of the equivalent

noise variances, due to the fact that they are based on the as-

sumption that no decoding errors occur in any of the component

codes (Assumption 3). This assumption is, of course, not valid

for low-to-medium channel SNR values. For these SNR values,

the properties of the component codes, as well as the charac-

teristics of the decoding algorithm, have a strong influence on

the equivalent noise variance. In this section, we will show how

to find more accurate approximations for the special case of

Plotkin-type constructions with iteratively decoded LDPC com-

ponent codes. For this purpose, we will use a Gaussian approx-

imation (GA) technique for density evolution presented in [2].

Since is the first component to be decoded, we can use the ex-

pressions for the equivalent noise variances of derived in the

previous section. For large values of ,

, while for

small values of ,

.

Assume that the densities of the messages passed during

sum–product decoding are Gaussian variables. Let

and

be the degree distributions of the variable and the check

nodes, respectively. For an AWGN channel with noise variance

, the message variables can be approximated by Gaussian

variables distributed according to

. Here, the mean

at the th iteration of sum–product decoding is given by [2]

Proof: In the first round of decoding, both and

experience an equivalent noise variance . In the second

round of decoding, the first half of the codeword experiences a

channel with equivalent noise variance

. As in Lemma 4,

the log-likelihood values of

remain fixed, implying that

the second half of the codeword always experiences an equiva-

lent noise variance . Hence, for

, according to (8),

one has

(17)

where and are the maximum degree of the variable and

check nodes, respectively, and

. The function is

defined as

if

if

(15)
Applying the bootstrapping technique as described in Lemma 1, one can prove that based on (15), the equivalent noise variance observed by is asymptotically . It can also be shown that
experiences the same noise variance independently from the number of rounds of MR-MS decoding. On the other hand,

The previous equations imply that for a left-regular code with

variable degree , after iterations of sum–product decoding,

one can approximate the log-likelihoods of the variable nodes

by Gaussian variables, with distribution

.

Consequently, the probability of error after iterations [2] of

sum–product decoding can be approximated by

(18)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006

When

, and

,

, where is a

positive constant that depends on the degree distribution of the

code and only [2].

Lemma 6: The equivalent noise variance of the channel ex-

perienced by , the output of the sum–product decoder for ,

is

. Here,

, for

, and

, for

.

Proof: The proof is a straightforward consequence of the

observation that the log-likelihoods of variable nodes after it-

erations of sum–product decoding, , can be approximated

by a Gaussian

variable, where

, and depends on , as described in the previous

section.

Theorem 1: The mean and the variance of the variable

are approximately equal to

and

, respectively. Consequently, the mean and the variance

of the variable are

and

, respectively. Here, denotes the bit error probability

of and is given by (18).

Proof: Assume without loss of generality that the all-ones

codeword was transmitted. An error occurs in when is de-

coded to 1, so that from (18) it can be shown that

C. Improved Reliability-Based Decoding

For a Plotkin-type construction of high depth, the first few

codes to be decoded will experience a significantly degraded

equivalent channel. The reliability values of their code bits are

used in all subsequent decoding steps and may be detrimental

to the overall performance of the decoding scheme. It is there-

fore desirable to modify the decoding process in such a way

to include only very reliable estimates from previous decoding

stages into the re-valuation process of the log-likelihoods of sub-

sequently decoded components. Hence, instead of always sum-

ming up the likelihoods of both halves of the vector

,

one can choose to perform this step only for sufficiently reli-

able -based estimates. This can be accomplished by using a

threshold in the following way. If

, where denotes

the log-likelihoods of the th bit of , then

; oth-

erwise,

. The threshold may also be taken to depend

on itself and be adapted according to the channel quality

at hand. We will refer to the previously described iterative de-

coding methods as the threshold multistage (TMS) and adaptive

threshold multistage (ATMS) algorithms.

Analysis of ATMS Decoding Algorithm: For the ATMS algo-

rithm, the log-likelihood values of the bits of are given by

for otherwise.

Note that is distributed according to

.

Therefore, based on Assumption 2 and the fact that

, one has

(19) This implies

This is equivalent to

, where

for

for otherwise.

The conditions

and

are equivalent to the

condition

, and similarly

and

are equivalent to

. Therefore

(20)

Based on Assumption 1, it follows that the equivalent noise

variance experienced by the component is

. Observe that since

,

it holds that

. Since is distributed according to

, (7) implies

for for otherwise.
Under Assumption 2, it follows that

Hence, experiences a channel with equivalent noise variance

(21) where

, and

. Similarly, one has

For

, the result reduces to the expression in Lemma 2.

For

, it follows that the UEP gradation level between

and is actually smaller than shown in Lemma 2, under

Assumption 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR AND MILENKOVIC: ON UEP LDPC CODES BASED ON PLOTKIN-TYPE CONSTRUCTIONS

1001

When combined with the fact that is distributed according

to

, the last equation implies that under TMS

decoding one has

A good choice for the threshold can now be obtained by maximizing the equivalent SNR experienced by (SNR as follows), with respect to

SNR

(22)

D. Properties of UEP-Plotkin Schemes

Before presenting the simulation results, we would like to

briefly describe various advantages offered by the Plotkin-type

UEP scheme.

The

information bits of a Plotkin-type codeword are

divided in such a way that the first half of the codeword con-

tains information bits, while the second half of the codeword

contains information bits. From the analysis provided in the

previous sections, it can be seen that the first half of the code-

word is better protected than the second half of the codeword.

Consequently, one may expect that the first information bits

have better error protection than the remaining information

bits. Hence, a gradation of UEP levels also exists with respect to

the information bits. This gradation can be further improved by

an adequate choice of the generator matrices of the component

codes [1]. It was shown in [1] that in many cases the optimal en-

coding matrix (for which information bits have the highest de-

gree of protection) is systematic. Therefore, one can use system-

atic generator matrices for all the component codes, along with

the aforementioned decoding algorithms, in order to improve

the quality of error protection for the information bits. Finally,

by using the Plotkin-type UEP scheme one can also obtain a

relatively large number of information bits that have good error

protection. Consequently, the average SNR required to achieve

a given bit-error rate (BER) for the technique proposed in the

paper is much smaller than the one needed for the UEP scheme

proposed in [16].

Fig. 2. BER versus E =N (in decibels) for different choices of code components.
quasi-cyclic, with parity-check matrices composed of powers of a basic circulant permutation matrix , as follows:

(23)

Code Construction 1— : A set a Sidon set of order if all the sums

is called

(24)

for

are distinct. One simple construction for Sidon

sets is based on the formula

(25)

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

where is a primitive element of

, for some prime . Let

In this section, we present the UEP BER performance of

denote the exponents of in the parity-check matrix .

Plotkin-type LDPC codes under MS, TMS, ATMS, and MR-MS If is a subset of a Sidon set , where

,

decoding. The component codes used in this comparative study then the code described by has girth at least six. The

include random-like codes listed in [9] and two classes of struc- simulation results shown in Figs. 2–7 and 9 are obtained

tured codes. For all schemes investigated, half of the compo- for a length 3120 component code based on the Sidon set

nent codes are chosen to be random-like and half of the compo- {23,72,244,313,565}, for which

and

. The other

nent codes are chosen to have a mathematical structure. The first component code is random-like and of the same length, taken

class of structured LDPC codes is based on Sidon sets, described from [9].

by the authors in [6], while the second class is a generalization Code Construction 2— : A generalized array code

of array codes [11]. Both families of structured LDPC codes are has a parity-check matrix of the form shown in (23).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1002

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006

+ + Fig. 3. Performance of juju
decoding.

vj UEP scheme under MS, TMS, and ATMS

Fig. 5. Performance of juju

vj UEP scheme under MR-MS decoding.

Fig. 4. Performance of four-level Plotkin-type UEP scheme under MS, TMS, and ATMS decoding.

+ Fig. 6. Performance of juju vj UEP scheme under MR-MS decoding with
thresholding.

vary to a great extent with the choice of the component

Here,

and

are integer se- codes. This can be explained by the following arguments.

quences avoiding solutions to specific sets of linear equa- When compared with the original channel, experiences

tions, as described in [11]. For

, a a relatively degraded channel. Hence, by choosing

code graph specified by , with

and to belong to a code with a powerful error-correcting

, has girth ten [11]. The length capability, one can ensure less degradation in the overall code

and dimension of such a code are 1866 and 933, respectively. performance. Note also from Fig. 2 that has a better

A code graph with variable-degree four and girth eight can be performance than

(the descriptions of these codes

obtained by choosing

, with

and are given in the figure). This is due to the fact that the

. The length and rate of the random-like code which is used for the

dimension of the resulting codes are 7983 and 4435, respec- component of

is very high; hence, its error-correcting

tively. The simulation results involving these codes are shown potential is quite limited. Fig. 3 shows two degrees of

in Fig. 8.

UEP offered by a depth-one Plotkin-type construction,

The results presented in Figs. 2–9 demonstrate several under MS, TMS

, and ATMS, [SNR,

important properties of the MS, TMS, ATMS, and MR-MS

decoding algorithms. First, it can be observed that the BERs

], decoding with 15 iterations of sum–product at each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR AND MILENKOVIC: ON UEP LDPC CODES BASED ON PLOTKIN-TYPE CONSTRUCTIONS

1003

+ + + + + Fig. 7. Performance of ju ju v ju u ju v u v j UEP
scheme under MR-MS decoding with thresholding.

+ Fig. 8. UEP of juju vj scheme for different code components and with two = 1 = 0 86 rounds of MR-MS decoding with parameters t and t : .

level. The BER improvement for codes at depth one is not very

significant under TMS and ATMS, as compared with

MS decoding. But, as one increases , a considerable

improvement in BERs is observed for TMS and ATMS

decoding. As shown in Fig. 4, for

, there exists a

substantial enhancement in the performance of TMS-decoded

(with

) and ATMS-decoded [SNR,

], compared with MS-decoded Plotkin-type codes. The thresholds used are obtained from (22) and through several trial-and-error rounds of simulation. The performance of the best protected part of the code under TMS decoding shows a 1-dB gain, while ATMS shows a 1.5-dB gain in SNR, when compared with MS decoding. Figs. 5–7 show the performance of the previously described codes under MR-MS decoding. Fixed thresholds were set to incorporate the

reliability information. Furthermore, since the reliability of the

decoded bits of increases with the number of rounds of

MR-MS decoding, the thresholds of the MR-MS decoder are

taken to be a decreasing sequence (from one round to the next

one). It is clear from the simulation results that as the number

of rounds of MR-MS decoder increases from one to three, the

performance of the component codes experiences significant

improvements. The simulation results indicate a performance

gain of nearly 1 dB for the best protected part of the codeword,

when two-round MR-MS decoding is used instead of MS

decoding. Also, it is observed by extensive simulations that the

largest improvement in the performance of MR-MS decoding

is achieved when switching from

to

. The

performance gain obtained for

is not significant when

compared with the increase in decoding complexity. As a side

remark, the apparent emergence of an error floor for several

BER curves is due to the small number of iterations (15 in this

case) performed. By increasing the number of iterations to 30,

the error floor vanishes. It is also worth pointing out that in the

Plotkin UEP scheme, even the worst protected component

codes show significant improvement with respect to uncoded

signalling. This is illustrated in Figs. 3 and 6.

Based on the simulation results described previously, one can

also check the validity of the approximation results described

in Section III. Lemmas 2 and 3 indicate that for the cases of

and

, one can expect a 3-dB performance

gain for the first half of the codeword under MS decoding, as

compared with the performance of the component code associ-

ated with this part under standard sum–product decoding. From

Fig. 2, one can see an improvement of 0.8 dB at SNR = 3 dB

for the performance of the first half of the code

word under MS decoding, when compared with the performance

of the component code under sum–product decoding. Since the

two described BER curves are diverging, for very high SNRs

one can expect to achieve a 3-dB gain as predicted by analysis.

But, for the case of

, there is clearly no 3-dB gain be-

tween these two curves. This validates the observation made in

Section III-B which states that for low SNRs the assumption of

no decoding error in certain decoding stages is not valid. Hence,

one needs to use the improved approximation given in Theorem

1. For SNR = 0 dB, applying Theorem 1 with

gives a

gain in performance of 0.0046 dB, which is almost identical to

the one observed by simulation. Also, by Lemma 3, there is no

loss in the performance of the second part of the codeword for

large SNRs, and this can also be observed from the simulation

results.

Fig. 8 gives an illustration of the influence of the choice of

code structure and design on achievable levels of UEP. The most

important fact to be noted for all these results is that the best pro-

tected component code has a significantly better performance

than the best known LDPC codes of comparable length, rate,

and decoding complexity.

The performance of one

-UEP code construction is

shown in Fig. 9. The component , when decoded using the MS

algorithm, experiences an equivalent channel with very large

noise variance. Since all other components of the codeword are

dependent on , all three component codewords have large error

rates and no fine error-characteristic tuning is possible.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1004

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006

[16]. One should also note that in the Plotkin-type of construction the number of bits that is best protected is 271 as compared with 237 for , while the number of least protected bits in the Plotkin-type construction is 271 as compared with 316 least protected bits in . The average SNR per code bit required to attain a given BER for a code of rate 0.57 offering four levels of protection in the Plotkin scheme is nearly identical to that required for a code of rate 0.43 obtained by the method in [16].

A. Irregular LDPC Codes and UEP

So far, several approaches to UEP coding based on the use

of irregular LDPC codes were proposed, including the work de-

scribed in [12] and [13]. It was tacitly assumed that UEP can

be achieved by using nonuniform degree distributions of vari-

able nodes. Clearly, in such a setting, nodes of large degree

are assumed to be better protected than nodes of small degree.

We would like to point out that such findings are valid for the

+ + + + Fig. 9. UEP of ja xjb xja b xj scheme under MS decoding.

AWGN channel only under certain restrictions, including: 1) a very small number of performed iterations of belief propagation;

2) a two-level UEP scheme where only a small fraction of

coded (or information) bits is guaranteed additional pro-

tection;

3) a very large number of required levels of UEP, of which

only the best protected few components tend to show sig-

nificant improvements.

The reasons behind this phenomenon can be deduced directly

from the seminal paper on irregular code degree optimization

[8, p. 586]. There, the well-known “wave effect” of LDPC

iterative decoding is described. This effect is a consequence

of the fact that variable nodes of high degree get corrected

first, consequently aiding in the process of error correction of

variable nodes of slightly smaller degree, all up to the level

of the nodes of smallest degree. After a sufficiently large

number of iterations, the wave effect leads to all variable nodes

exhibiting the same level of error protection. This is illustrated

in Fig.11, where the results for five different progressive edge

Fig. 10. Comparison of performance of MR-MS decoded Plotkin-type code
(with thresholding) and performance of irregular C code under standard be-
lief propagation.

growth (PEG) [9] coding schemes are plotted. In the first four plots (viewed from the right), the dashed curves correspond to the BER of a fraction of 50% variable nodes of largest degree, while the solid curves correspond to the BER of a fraction

of 50% variable nodes of smallest degree. When read from

Fig. 10 shows a comparison of the BER performance of the the right, the codes have parameters [600,300], [1000,500],

scheme introduced in this paper and the LDPC-UEP technique [600,300], [1000,500], and [1600,800], and they correspond to

described in [16]. The component codewords and used codes with nonoptimized and optimized degree distributions for

for the Plotkin-type construction are taken from [271,144] and a given rate of 1/2, respectively. The optimal degree distribution

[271,188] codes, respectively. The overall length and rate of was obtained from [14], with maximum degree 15, while the

the code are 542 and 0.58, respectively. The simulations are nonoptimized degree distribution was chosen to have only two

performed for a three-round MS-MR algorithm with ten iter- possible degrees appearing with the same frequency, namely

ations per component code. Another UEP code was de- 3 and 15. As can be seen from the figure, no UEP gradation

signed using Netto’s cyclic difference families, as outlined in can be detected for these codes after 50 iterations of iterative

[16]. The parameters of the construction are:

points, decoding. It is also worth pointing out that for the first code,

block-size

, and with

,

the variable nodes of higher degree actually exhibit a slightly

. The performance of is shown for worse performance than the variable nodes of lower degree. On

a total number of 60 iterations of sum–product decoding. The the other hand, if one repeats the same experiments for a very

length of the code is 553, while the rate is 0.57. The sim- small number of iterations, say five, the findings are slightly

ulations show a significant improvement in the performance of different. For the degree-optimized length

irregular

the Plotkin-type codes as compared with the irregular codes of LDPC code, at 2.5 dB one observes a BER of

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAR AND MILENKOVIC: ON UEP LDPC CODES BASED ON PLOTKIN-TYPE CONSTRUCTIONS

1005

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to S. Laendner for his help in generating the code performance simulation results. Furthermore, the authors express their gratitude to Dr. Truong for handling the manuscript and to the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments which largely improved the presentation of the results in the paper.

Fig. 11. Protection levels in irregular codes with optimized and nonoptimized degree distributions.

for the lower and higher degree nodes. Similarly,

at 2.75 dB, one obtains the following BER values:

and

. In both cases, the slight increase in UEP

gradation comes at the cost of an overall performance loss

of almost two orders of magnitude of the BER. Furthermore,

observe that for 15 iterations of iterative decoding and at 2.5 dB

the BER of the two components exhibit negligible performance

variations of

and

. These described

findings are consistent with the ideas behind the wave effect,

since only five iterations do not suffice to achieve a significant

“spread” of the wave.

The UEP properties of small fractions of variable nodes were

observed in [12] and [13], but we would like to point out that

for many applications of interest, one is actually concerned

with providing protection levels for a large portion of variable

nodes. Finally, the fifth set of curves in Fig. 11 corresponds

to a four-level variable node partition in a degree-optimized

irregular LDPC code of length

. As one can see, after

30 iterations of decoding only the variables of highest degree of

protection show a slightly improved performance and only for

high SNR values. This finding can be attributed to the fact that

the number of iterations required to achieve the wave effect is

dependent on the code length.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Chen, “Optimal encoding, trellis structure and normalized weight of linear block codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1999.
[2] S. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[3] I. Dumer and K. Shabunov, “Recursive decoding of Reed–Muller codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2000, p. 63.
[4] I. Dumer and R. Krichevskiy, “Soft-decision majority decoding of Reed–Muller codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 258–265, Jan. 2000.
[5] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 520–549, Feb. 2001.
[6] V. Kumar, O. Milenkovic, and B. Vasic, “Structured LDPC codes over GF(2 ) and companion matrix based decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2004, p. 271.
[7] V. Kumar and O. Milenkovic, “On unequal error protection LDPC codes based on Plotkin-type constructions,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Dec. 2004, vol. 1, pp. 493–497.
[8] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–599, Feb. 2001.
[9] Web resource [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy. cam.ac.uk/mackay/CodeFiles.html
[10] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland, 1977.
[11] O. Milenkovic, D. Leyba, D. Bennett, and N. Kashyap, “New partitionregular sequences and array codes of large girth,” in Proc. 42nd Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Sep. 2004, pp. 240–249.
[12] H. Pishro-Nik, N. Rahnavard, and F. Fekri, “Nonuniform error protection using low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2002, pp. 311–320.
[13] N. Rahnavard and F. Fekri, “Unequal error protection using low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2004, p. 449.
[14] Web resource [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/
[15] W. J. Van Gils, “Linear unequal error protection codes from shorter codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-30, no. 3, pp. 544–546, May 1984.
[16] B. Vasic, A. Cvetkovic, S. Sankaranarayanan, and M. Marcellin, “Adaptive error protection low-density parity-check codes for joint source-channel coding schemes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2003, p. 267.

V. CONCLUSION
We analyzed, both analytically and through extensive computer simulations, the properties of a novel, recursive, Plotkin-type construction of UEP-LDPC codes. The proposed technique is structured around a specialized MS-MR iterative decoding algorithm, which provides for a high degree of error protection differentiation. Furthermore, the proposed UEP-LDPC scheme was shown to offer the possibilities of significant tradeoffs between code performance, storage, and computational complexity. This makes it a good potential candidate for practical applications where UEP of data is sought.

Vidya Kumar received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Colorado, Boulder, in 2004.
She is currently with Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego, CA. Her research interests include signal processing, error-correcting coding, and low-density parity-check code design.
Olgica Milenkovic received the M.S. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in 2002.
She is currently with the University of Colorado, Boulder. Her research interests include the theory of algorithms, bioinformatics, constrained coding, discrete mathematics, error-control coding, and probability theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:23:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

