A Linear-Programming Approach to The Design of LDPC Codes for Non-Uniform Channels
Masoud Ardakani Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Alberta Edmonton, Alberta, CANADA Email: ardakani@ece.ualberta.ca Telephone: 1 (780) 492–2567

Abstract— We propose a linear-programming approach to the design of low-density parity-check codes for non-uniform channels, i.e., when different bits of the codeword experience different channel parameters. Non-uniform channels are encountered in many communication systems, e.g., in a network that different packets are sent through parallel routes; in orthogonal frequency division multiplexing, where the codeword bits are modulated in different frequency bins with different SNR; also in multi-input multi-output systems, where different channel pairs have different parameters. We formulate the problem of optimizing the rate of an irregular low-density parity-check code, with guaranteed convergence over such a channel, as an iterative linear-programming. The number of design-parameters for code-design over non-uniform channels is much greater than the number of design-parameters in conventional channels. Therefore, search-based optimization methods are impractical. As a result, a linear-programming approach is significantly more efficient. The methodology of this paper is directly applicable to all decoding algorithms for which an exact or accurateenough one-dimensional analysis is possible. For other decoding algorithms, we show that the method can still be applied after minor modifications.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) coding [1] is the most powerful coding technique known thus far. It can achieve the capacity of the binary erasure (BEC) channel [2] and can approach the capacity of many other channel models , e.g. [3]. There has been much work on the design of irregular LDPC codes over different channel models. However, it is usually assumed that the channel parameters are the same for all the symbols of a codeword. Obviously, this assumption is not always valid. For example, in a network, different packets may be sent through different routes and therefore experience different channel qualities. Another example is multi-input multi-output channels, where different channel pairs do not have the same parameters. Yet another important case is orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems, where different frequency bins have different quality, hence not all the bits of an OFDM symbol see the same channel parameters.
We consider LDPC coding over a binary-input communication channel whose parameters are not the same for all the bits of the codeword (a non-uniform channel). We assume that the channel parameters are perfectly known for the purpose of

code design. The latter assumption is valid if the transmission platform remains fixed over a large number of codewords. This is a routine assumption for OFDM-based data transmission over power-line channels, for example. Before discussing benefits and drawbacks of employing a single code for nonuniform channels, we quickly review the background and previous work on this topic and we point out the contributions made in this paper.
In [4], the problem of LDPC coding for non-uniform channels is studied. Clearly, the problem is equivalent to LDPC coding for data transmission over K parallel channels (subchannels). The focus of [4] is on volume holographic memories, but the solution technique, which is based on breaking the variable node degree distribution of the code to sub-degree distributions, is quite general. The degree distribution in [4] defines the percentage of edges connected to variable nodes of different degree at the output of different sub-channels. That is to say, if there are four sub-channels the number of design parameters is increased by a factor of four. Therefore, a design method which is primarily based on a search in the space of the design parameters would be quite inefficient. To tackle this problem, the author’s of [4] propose semi-regular codes when nodes of equal-degree in the code can only be assigned to one sub-channel. This significantly reduces the search space, but the downside is that the resulting code may not be optimal. Although, in the examples provided in [4], very good semi-regular codes are found, it is not hard to find cases for which semi-regular codes result in considerable performance degradation.
In this work, we show that the problem of designing irregular LDPC codes for non-uniform channels can be solved by an iterative linear-programming (LP). This allows for a global optimization of the degree distribution without limiting ourselves to semi-regular codes. Since semi-regular codes are special cases of irregular codes, optimized irregular codes will perform better than semi-regular codes. Hence, finding the global optimum degree distribution would be more desirable, especially if it could be found in an efficient way.
Here, a quick discussion on the existing approaches towards coding on non-uniform/parallel sub-channels and the benefits and drawbacks of each approach is relevant.
The most basic approach is to design separate codes for the

1142 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei U1n-i4v.2D4o4w-0nl3o5a5de-3d/o0n6/J$u2ne0.2030,2(0c2)62a0t0168:I2E8:E56EUTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2006 proceedings.

data transmitted over different sub-channels. The main benefit of this approach is that if the capacity of each sub-channel is achieved by its corresponding code, then the overall capacity of the channel is achieved. However, it should be mentioned that capacity approaching codes, such as LDPC codes can approach the capacity only at very long block-lengths. Since each sub-channel has its own code, the buffer fill delay will be unacceptable for delay-sensitive applications, if long codes are employed. Another disadvantage is that this method requires separate encoders/decoders for each sub-channel which adds to the complexity of the system.
Another approach is to interleave the bits and model the non-uniform channel as a uniform one. The main advantage here is that one code (and hence one encoder/decoder) can be used. The buffer fill delay is also reduced, since all the subchannels contribute in filling the encoder’s buffer. However, interleaving the bits can be an ineffective solution, if the quality of sub-channels experienced by different bits are not close to each other. To see why, consider the binary symmetric channel (BSC). The capacity of the BSC is a convex function of its crossover probability, hence, interleaving will reduce the capacity. That is to say, even if capacity achieving codes are used over the interleaved channel, the actual capacity of the channel is still not achieved. Interleaving is acceptable if the quality of sub-channels is close to each other. Another case for which interleaving is acceptable, is the binary erasure channel (BEC), because its capacity is a linear function of the erasure rate of the channel. Therefore, the capacity is not reduced by interleaving. Interestingly, in the numerical result section, we will see that even in the case of the BEC we benefit by designing a code for the non-interleaved channel.
A third approach, which combines the benefits of both previous methods, yet avoid their drawbacks, is to use a single code for the channel, but instead of interleaving the bits use the existing information about the different quality of subchannels in the code-design. In this work, we study efficient methods of optimizing code parameters for such cases, without limiting ourselves to the class of semi-regular codes.
The main insight in [4], which leads to formulation of density evolution for non-uniform channels, is to redefine the irregularity of the code by breaking the variable node degree distribution of the irregular code to sub-degree distributions. A similar technique is used in [5], where hybrid decoding algorithms are studied. In [5], again, the degree-distribution is broken to sub-degree distribution to allow a decoder design, where different bits of the code are decoded using different decoding algorithms. In both cases, the fact that different bits have different situations resulted in breaking the variable node degree distributions to sub-degree distributions. Notice that such a degree distribution defines the irregularity of the code as well as how the code should be assigned to different sub-channels (or in the case of [5], how different decoding algorithms should be assigned to the codeword bits).
In this work, we first show that, whenever a one-dimensional analysis of the decoder (to be described later) is available, the problem of code optimization over non-uniform channels

can be solved by LP (or a few iterations of LP). The design variables are the modified variable node degree distributions, and the design objective is to find the highest-rate LDPC code, which provided reliable communication over a given nonuniform channel. If a one-dimensional analysis of the decoding algorithm is not exact, but accurate-enough, our methodology is still applicable within the approximations of the analysis.
When a one-dimensional analysis is not possible or inaccurate, we show that with some modification in the design process, once again, the design problem can be solved by iterative LP.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II we quickly review some of the existing methods for irregular LDPC code design. In Section III we define and formulate the code design problem for non-uniform channels and provide a solution technique for it. Section IV presents some examples. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. LDPC CODE DESIGN
Irregular LDPC codes are characterized by their variable node and check node degree distributions [6]. The variable node degree distribution is usually denoted by λ = {λ2, λ3, · · · }, where λi denotes the fraction of edges in the Tanner-graph (or factor-graph) of the code [7], [8], which are incident to variable nodes of degree i. Similarly the check node degree distribution is denoted by ρ = {ρ2, ρ3, · · · }. In the sequel, we will see that this characterization of irregular LDPC codes is not quite appropriate for our code-design problem. Nevertheless, this characterization serves our purpose of introducing code-design techniques.
A. Design objective
When the code-length is large, the performance of an LDPC code is only a function of λ and ρ [9]. Therefore, by LDPC code design, we usually mean finding a variable node and a check node degree distribution which result in the maximum decoding threshold for a fixed rate or equivalently result in the highest code rate for a given channel condition.
LDPC codes can be analyzed using density evolution algorithm [10]. The task of density evolution algorithm is to track the evolution of the probability density function of extrinsic messages in the decoder iteration by iteration. Density evolution can figure out whether or not a given variable node and check node degree distributions result in convergence to zero error rate. Hence, it can be used as a probe in search of highly-optimized codes. However, the complexity of this search can increase exponentially with the number of design variables, resulting in an inefficient and even infeasible search as the number of design variables increases. For non-uniform channels, we will see that the number of design variables is considerably more than conventional code-design problems, therefore, more efficient code-design methods are needed.
Whenever the density of extrinsic messages in the decoder is completely describable by a single parameter, we say the decoding algorithm is one-dimensional. In such cases, the problem of finding the highest-rate code for conventional

1143
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2006 proceedings.

channels can be cast as an LP [11]. If such a one-dimensional description of the decoder is not possible, approximate onedimensional methods are used to simplify the code-design problem, e.g., [12], [13].
In this work, we first assume that an exact one-dimensional description of the decoder is possible. Then we show that the code design problem can be solved through an iterative LP approach. In the simulation results, we see that in some cases, even one round of LP is enough. Even if a few rounds of LP is required, due to the high efficiency of LP, our approach is still significantly more efficient than search-based methods. When, one-dimensional analysis is not accurate-enough, we slightly modify our method to allow for an LP-based code design.
In the remainder of this section we quickly review the code design procedure for one-dimensional problems. In the next section, we modify this code-design procedure in order to make it suitable for non-uniform channels.

B. Design technique

When the density of extrinsic messages in the decoder can be described by a single parameter, density evolution simplifies to tracking the evolution of that single parameter. Moreover, since density evolution is based on the assumption that the allzero codeword is transmitted, an error rate can be associated to the decoders extrinsic messages [9]. Hence, tracking the evolution of the message error rate iteration by iteration is equivalent to density evolution. The main benefit of tracking the message error rate is that, using the Baye’s rule, the message error rate at the output of variable nodes, pout, can be written as

pout = λipout,i,

(1)

i

where pout,i is the message error rate at the output of variable nodes of degree i. Notice that pout,i is a function of the message error rate at the input of the iteration, pin. Therefore, we denote it with pout,i(pin). Now, for every pin, fixing the check degree distribution, one can find pout,i(pin) for different values of i. Hence, the task of code design is to find λi’s that result in the maximum-rate code for which pout(pin) is less than pin for all pin ∈ (0, p0]. Here p0 is the initial message error rate dictated by the channel quality. When pout(pin) is always smaller than pin, it can be shown that convergence to zero error rate is guaranteed [1].
The rate of the code in terms of its degree distribution is

R = 1 − i ρi/i .

(2)

j λj /j

It is shown that fixing ρ (and in many cases putting all the weight on one degree) and optimizing λ is an effective
design method without considerable performance degradation
[2], [10]. Therefore, the design parameters are λi’s and rate optimization is equivalent to maximizing i λi/i, which is a linear function of the design parameters. The constraints on the design parameters are also linear, i.e., i λi = 1; ∀i, λi ≥ 0;

and

∀pin ∈ (0, p0] pout(pin) = λipout,i(pin) < pin.
i
III. NON-UNIFORM CHANNELS

A. Problem formulation

We consider transmission of N LDPC-coded bits (N → ∞) over K independent sub-channels. Sub-channel j, 1 ≤ j ≤ K

passes γj fraction of the bits and is parameterized by pj, where pj can be a single parameter or a vector of parameters. Our goal is to find the irregular LDPC code which achieves the

highest rate of data transmission over this channel.

The conventional method of representing the degree dis-

tribution of the code is not useful for this channel model,

because in addition to the pattern of irregularity of the code,

we also need to specify how the outputs of different sub-

channels are assigned to variable nodes of different degree

in the LDPC code. Therefore, similar to [4], [5] we define Λ(ij) as the fraction of edges connected to variable nodes of degree i, assigned to sub-channel j. Using the Baye’s rule we

have

pout =

Λ(ij) · p(oju)t,i(pin),

(3)

ij

where p(oju)t,i is the error rate at the output of degree i nodes assigned to sub-channel j. Notice that pin is the same for all nodes as the structure of the LDPC code interleaves all the
messages from the previous iteration.
Similar to other LDPC code-design methods, we fix the
check degree distribution. Therefore, the design parameters are Λ(ij)’s. Typically, the number of design parameters can be K times more than the case of conventional channels, making a search-based code design practically infeasible.
There are a number of constraint on the design parameters as follows. The first constraint is ∀i, j, Λ(ij) ≥ 0. The second constraint is i j Λi(j) = 1. In addition, since γj is the fraction of nodes assigned to channel j, another constraint comes into play. To formulate this constraint, let us assume that there are E edges in the factor graph of the code. The number of degree i nodes connected to channel j is then

Λ(ij) · E . i

Therefore, the total number of nodes connected to channel j

is

Λi(j) i

·

E

,

i

and the total number of nodes (code-length) is

Λ(ij) · E . i
ij

1144
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2006 proceedings.

Since the number of nodes connected to channel j should form γj fraction of the code-length, we have:

Λ(ij) · E i

− γj

i

i

Λ(ij) · E = 0 , ∀j , 1 ≤ j ≤ K.. i
j
(4)

Now we can eliminate E and form the following K linear constraint on Λ(ij)’s

Λ(ij) i

−

γj

Λ(ij) = 0 , ∀j , 1 ≤ j ≤ K. (5) i

i

ij

It is not hard to see that out of this K constraints, a maximum of K − 1 of them can be linearly independent.
Moreover, since convergence to zero error rate has to be guaranteed, we require pout to be less than pin at each iteration. Using (3), we need

Λ(ij)p(oju)t,i < pin,

(6)

ij

which is another linear constraint. In practice, the latter constraint cannot be forced for all continues values of pin, but usually a finite set of pin’s serves the purpose of design [6].
All the constraints seem to be linear functions of the design
parameters (essential for an LP formulation of the problem).
However, there is a minor difficulty with this formulation. In a conventional channel, we require pout < pin for all pin ∈ (0, p0], where p0 is the intrinsic message error rate (the channel error rate). This is because, at the first iteration, all
the variable nodes propagate the channel observation on their
incident edges. Hence, the error rate of the decoder messages is initially equal to p0. In the case of non-uniform channels no unique p0 is defined. In fact the initial decoder message error rate, p∗0, is also affected by the degree distribution of the code. To see why, notice that, if a variable node of degree i is assigned to sub-channel j, immediately (at the beginning of the iterative decoding), the output of this sub-channel is copied over i edges. So the message error rate of these i edges depend on the parameter of channel j. It is evident here that p0∗ in the case of non-uniform channels is a function of Λi(j)’s.

B. Solution strategy: an iterative LP approach

Similar to discussions of Section II, we fix the check degree distribution and we argue that maximizing the code rate is equivalent to maximizing

Λ(ij) . i
ij

Notice that this is also a linear function of the design parameters. The problem could be cast as an LP if p∗0 was independent of Λ(ij)’s. One strategy for solving this difficulty is to overlook the dependency of p∗0 to the design parameters, start with some approximation of p0∗, formulate the problem as an LP and after finding the optimum Λ(ij)’s update p0∗. Now, we can solve the problem with the updated p0∗ again. If the solution is not

very sensitive to p∗0, this approach will converge in only a few rounds. In fact, in some of the examples provided in the
next section, we see that this is a very effective method and
in many cases requires only one or two rounds of LP.
For the sake of clarification of the details, we write the optimization problem as a standard LP for the case of K BEC with erasure rates p1 to pK under belief propagation. Before presenting this formulation, for a check degree distribution ρ = {ρ2, ρ3, · · · }, we define ρ(x) = i ρixi−1.
It can be seen [2] that if the message erasure rate at the input of check nodes is pin after check node operations the erasure error rate is

pch = 1 − ρ(1 − pin).

Therefore, at the output of a degree i variable node connected to sub-channel j, the erasure error rate is

p(oju)t,i = pj ·

i−1
1 − ρ(1 − pin) .

Hence, the optimization can be formulated as

maximize subject to
∀i, j
∀j, ∀pin ∈ (0, p∗0]

max(dv) K Λ(ij) i
i=2 j=1

Λ(ij) ≥ 0
max(dv ) K
Λ(ij) = 1
i=2 j=1

max(dv) Λ(ij) i

max(dv )
− γj

K

Λ(ij) = 0 i

i=2

i=2 j=1

max(dv ) K
Λ(ij)pj 1 − ρ(1 − pin) i−1 < pin.
i=2 j=1

Here, max(dv) is the maximum variable node degree allowed in the code and p∗0 is the initial message erasure rate which can be computed as

p0∗ =

Λ(ij) · pj .

(7)

ij

Similar formulation can be done for other one-dimensional decoding algorithms. The only difference will be in the relation between pin and p(oju)t,i(pin).

C. Multi-dimensional decoding algorithms

There are cases for which, density evolution cannot be simplified to studying the evolution of a single parameter. In other words, the decoding algorithm is not one-dimensional. In some cases, a one-dimensional approximate analysis is acceptable. Clearly in such cases, our methodology without any changes is applicable. However, if a one-dimensional approximation is not accurate-enough, one still can formulate the problem as an LP.
To see how this works, notice that after performing N iterations of density evolution, it is possible to visualize the

1145
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2006 proceedings.

convergence behaviour of the decoder by plotting the message error rate of iteration m, m ∈ {1, 2, · · · , N } vs. the message error rate of iteration m − 1. This gives pout as a function of pin, in a set of N discrete points. Recall that in the LP formulation, we need p(oju)t,i(pin) at a discrete set of points. Any iteration of density evolution defines a unique pin and also gives the density of messages at the output of degree i nodes of sub-channel j. As a result, p(oju)t,i(pin), which is the negative tail of the density, can be computed. Therefore, p(oju)t,i(pin) is known at N values of pin. Hence, one can run the LP using this N values of pin, or can use interpolation to add intermediate points to the set of pin’s.
There is only one minor technical problem, which should be addressed. The value of p(oju)t,i(pin) is itself a function of the design parameters Λ(ij). Therefore, the problem of code design cannot be cast as an LP anymore. In other words, pout is affected by any Λ(ij) in two ways. Once through the linear combination of (3) as a multiplying factor and also through the direct effect of Λ(ij) in p(oju)t,i(pin). For conventional channels, it is shown in [14] that the direct effect of degree distribution on pout is much less than the effect through (3). Therefore, one can overlook dependency of p(oju)t,i(pin) on Λi(j)’s when Λ(ij)’s undergoes a small change.
Hence the problem can be cast as an LP, if we make sure that the changes made in Λ(ij)’s are small. To impose this as a linear constraint lets define Λ as a vector whose entries are Λ(ij)’s in some order. Also consider another vector Λ∗, and assume that we want Λ to be close to Λ∗. We also assume that Λ ≈ Λ∗ , which is a valid assumption if Λ and Λ∗ are close to each other. If θ is the angle between these two vectors, we want cos(θ) ≈ 1 or in other words, for some small
> 0 we want
Λ, Λ∗ ≥ Λ Λ∗ (1 − ),
where ·, · is the inner product of two vectors and is defined as i j Λ(ij)Λi(j)∗ . Therefore, for a given Λ∗ and we have
Λ(ij)Λi(j)∗ ≥ Λ∗ 2(1 − ),
ij
which is a linear constraint in Λ(ij)’s. If is very small, we need to repeat the LP quite a number
of times, to find the optimum Λ. One efficient approach is to choose larger ’s initially and reduce the value of as we proceed [14].
IV. EXAMPLES
In this section, we solve a few examples for the case of data transmission over K binary erasure sub-channels under belief propagation and K binary symmetric sub-channels under Gallager’s algorithm B [1], [9]. In all examples, we use regular check degree distribution. This is because, the focus of this work is on variable degree optimization. In addition, regular check degrees results in a very minor performance degradations.

As we discussed earlier, if the initial error (erasure) rate p∗0 was independent of the design variables, the design problem would reduce to an LP. We discussed that we deal with the dependency of p∗0 on Λ(ij)’s by taking an iterative approach. For the initial value of p∗0, we use p0∗ = j γjpj. This reflects the average error (erasure) rate on the variable nodes, which can be a reasonable initial estimate of the error (erasure) rate on the edges. After finding the optimum Λ(ij)’s for this p0∗, we find the actual value of p∗0 using (7). If the actual value is the same as the assumed value, we are done. Otherwise, we choose a new p∗0 as the average of the actual and the assumed values and repeat the optimization with the updated p0∗. Again, we optimize Λ(ij)’s and we find the actual p∗0. This should be repeated until the assumed and the actual values of p0∗ are equal. In all the examples that we have tried, this simple procedure converges in only a few iterations. This is mainly because, the optimum values of Λi(j)’s are not very sensitive to p0∗.
Example 1: Consider data transmission over two binary erasure subchannels with p1 = 0.2 and p2 = 0.4 and assume γ1 = 0.5, γ2 = 0.5. We seek the highest rate LDPC code which achieves convergence over this channel with a maximum node degree of 10 in the code. The results of the optimization program are Λ(21) = 0.3228, Λ2(2) = 0.1135 Λ(32) = 0.1207, Λ(42) = 0.1342 Λ(120) = 0.3088, and dc = 10 with a rate of R = 0.6902. It is easy to verify that the capacity of this channel is C = 0.7. Therefore, with this simple code, 98.6% of the capacity is achieved. The check degree is selected to allow for the maximum rate. This is done by trying other values of dc.
Notice that for the case of BEC, if we interleave the output of the sub-channels, the channel can be modeled as one BEC with p0 = j γjpj, and the capacity of the interleaved channel is the same as the averaged capacity of sub-channels. Therefore, initially it seems that our method will have no benefit. However, if we design the optimum code for the case of interleaved channel, with a maximum degree of 10 the highest rate code which can be found for p0 = 0.3 has a rate of R = 0.6844 achieved by dc = 10, λ2 = 0.3574, λ3 = 0.2475, λ7 = 0.3512 and λ8 = 0.0439. This example shows that, even in the case of BEC, where no benefit is expected, approaching the capacity with a certain maximum degree is faster in non-interleaved channel than in the interleaved channel. This is probably because, the noninterleaved channel has an inherent irregularity on top of the irregularity of the code.
One last comment about the design of this code is that the optimization started with p0∗ = 0.3. After optimizing the degree distribution, the actual p∗0 is computed to be 0.3354. Interestingly, solving the LP with p0∗ = 0.3354 gives rise to the same set of optimized degree distributions. In other words, the results of the LP in the first round were the final results. However, a second round was required to verify this degree distribution.

1146
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2006 proceedings.

Example 2: In this example, we consider data transmission over two binary symmetric channels with p1 = 0.01 and p2 = 0.09. We assume γ1 = 0.5, γ2 = 0.5, Gallager’s decoding algorithm B and we allow a maximum node degree of 15 in the code.
The optimum degree distribution with a rate of R = 0.6293 is as follows: Λ2(1) = 0.0229, Λ(22) = 0.0163, Λ(31) = 0.1770, Λ(32) = 0.1897, Λ(41) = 0.1332, Λ(124) = 0.3434, Λ(125) = 0.1175 and dc = 13. This degree distribution is reached after two rounds of LP plus a third round for verification of the results.
On an interleaved channel with the average error rate of 0.05 the optimum degree distribution with a maximum variable degree of 15 and a check degree of 16 achieves a rate of only R = 0.5785, which is considerably less than what can be achieved on the non-interleaved channel. Also notice that a higher check degree is used here, which results in a higher decoding complexity per bit.
Example 3: In this example, we consider data transmission over four binary symmetric channels with p1 = 0.04, p2 = 0.06, p3 = 0.08 and p4 = 0.1. The fraction of bits is described by γ1 = 0.4, γ2 = 0.4, γ3 = 0.1 and γ4 = 0.1. We want to find the highest rate LDPC code with a maximum node degree of 15 which guarantees convergence to zero error rate over this channel. The optimum degree distribution with a rate of R = 0.5569 is as follows: Λ(21) = 0.0111, Λ(22) = 0.0275, Λ3(1) = 0.1287, Λ3(2) = 0.1671, Λ3(3) = 0.0086, Λ(41) = 0.0459, Λ1(14) = 0.1332, Λ1(35) = 0.2176, Λ(145) = 0.2603, dc = 13.
It should be pointed out here that the capacity of the above mentioned channel is C = 0.6850 bits/symbol (averaged per sub-channel). The interleaved channel has a capacity of C = 0.6805 which is more than 99% of the non-interleaved channel. Yet, on the interleaved channel, the best code with the maximum node degree of 15 can achieve only 95% of the rate of the above-optimized code. This is another evidence that codes designed for the non-interleaved channel approach the capacity with lower degree nodes than codes for the interleaved channel.
Another interesting observation is that the optimized codes are not semi-regular. In Example 3, for instance, there is a significant weight on degree 15 nodes shared by sub-channels three and four. Also the weight on degree 3 nodes is shared by sub-channels one, two and three. Similar situation is true for degree two nodes.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper we studied the problem of designing LDPC codes over non-uniform channels, i.e., channels which have different parameters for different bits of the data stream. Examples of such channels include OFDM systems for frequency selective channels; multi-input multi-output systems, where channel pairs vary in their parameters; networks, where different packets of data travel trough different routes; and in

relay channels where the bits that are repeated by the relay receive with a better quality at the destination.
We were able to formulate this design problem as an iterative LP. This significantly reduces the design complexity, as the space of design parameters is considerably larger for the case of non-uniform channels than the case of conventional channels. Through some examples we showed that our design technique outperforms methods based on interleaving the channel outputs. Also, our examples suggest that codes designed for the non-uniform channel approach the capacity with lower-degree nodes than codes designed for the interleaved channel.
The improved performance obtained in this work is almost at no extra cost. The only change in the system is in the mapper, where bits from different sub-channels are mapped to the LDPC code. Such a mapper should exist even in the interleaved channel. Here, however, this mapper should assign the bits to the code according to their quality.
The examples provided in this paper are on one-dimensional decoding algorithms. Our preliminary results for multidimensional decoding algorithms suggests that significant performance improvement can be obtained.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] A. Shokrollahi, “New sequence of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. the International Symposium on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes, no. 1719, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1999, pp. 65–67.
[3] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[4] H. Pishro-Nik, N. Rahnavard, and F. Fekri, “Non-uniform error correction using low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[5] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hybrid hard-decision iterative decoding of irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., submitted for publication.
[6] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[7] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[8] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[9] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[11] M. Ardakani, T. H. Chan, and F. R. Kschischang, “EXIT-Chart properties of the highest-rate LDPC code with desired convergence behavior,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 52–54, Jan. 2005.
[12] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for multi-antenna modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., submitted for publication.
[13] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “A more accurate one-dimensional analysis and design of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2106–2114, Dec. 2004.
[14] M. Ardakani, B. Smith, W. Yu, and F. R. Kschischang, “Complexityoptimized LDPC codes,” in Proc. 43rd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Allerton House, Sep 2005.

1147
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:28:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2006 proceedings.

