Interconnect-Efficient LDPC Code Design

Aiman El-Maleh, Basil Arkasosy, M Adnan Al-Andalusi
King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
aiman ccekumedu.sa basil arkasos ~hotmail.com, andalusi &ku edu.sa

Abstract In this paper, we present a new, hardware-oriented technique for designing Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes. The technique targets to achieve an interconnectefficient architecture that reduces the area and delay of the decoder implementation while maintaining good error correction performance. With a fully parallel implementation of the LDPC decoder, the proposed design assumes a constraint on the interconnect wire length which has a direct impact on the maximum signal delay and power dissipation. Furthermore, this design approach is shown to lower interconnect routing congestion, and hence reduce the chip area and maximize chip utilization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Forward Error Correcting (FEC) codes are an essential component of modem state-of-the-art digital communication and storage systems. In many of the
recently developed standards, FEC codes play a crucial role for improving the error performance capability of digital transmission over noisy interference-impaired communication channels.
The two leading families of FEC codes are widely considered to be Turbo Codes [1] and Low Density Parity Check codes (LDPCs) [2]. Both families demonstrate performance very close to the information-theoretic bounds predicted by Shannon theory, while at the same time having the distinct advantage of efficient, near-optimal iterative decoding.
Recently, the trend in error correcting code implementation is focused on using custom chips for codecs. This is motivated by the need to maximize performance and increase codec throughput. This is particularly true for coding schemes which can use the parallelism offered by hardware: by using more devices, frequency can be reduced, and voltage scaled, thereby achieving the same throughput for less power [3]. In this regard, the sum-product iterative algorithm used in LDPC decoding is found to be amenable to high parallelization, thus offering a clear advantage over turbo decoders that use more sequential processing [4], and hence, don't fully benefit from hardware implementations. Recently, practical implementations of LDPC codecs with high throughput levels were reported [4, 5].

Most of LDPC code designs are based on random code

generation which may result in long interconnect wires.

Long interconnect wires increase the load capacitance

resulting in slower designs and higher power dissipation. In

addition, random code design results in interconnect routing

.'

.

coneston w .redestthenchia Lizaton. in [] based on a parallel implementaion of LDPC codes, it is
reported that routing congestion has resulted in 50% chip

area utilization and that most of the power dissipation is due

to the switching activity of the long interconnect wires. In

[6], an algorithm is proposed to generate LDPC codes with a

bound on the 'height' of the VLSI layout of the decoder. It

is shown that this approach limits the routing congestion

with little impact on error correcting capability of the code.

In this paper, we present a new technique to design

LDPC codes that are interconnect-efficient, which translates

into substantial reduction in chip area and decoding latency.

These advantages are also achieved while maintaining good

error correction performance by constraining the girth

(minimum loop size) of the codes' bipartite graph, as will be

discussed in the subsequent sections.

II. LDPC CODES LDPC codes have been recently re-discovered and are undergoing very active research after their original introduction by Gallager in 1962 [3]. A tutorial review of the
work of Gallager that highlights the powerful, capacity-
achieving performance of LDPC codes can be found in [7]. LDPC codes are a type of linear block codes, and can be decoded by an efficient, linear-complexity decoding algorithm known as the belief propagation (or sum-product) algorithm, and shown to achieve near optimal performance approaching that of maximum likelihood decoding (when the code is cycle-free, as will be described next) [7].
An LDPC parity check matrix H represents the parity equations in a linear form, where any given codeword c satisfies the set of parity equations H c =0. Each column in the matrix represents a codeword bit while each row
represents a parity check equation. The 1's in this matrix
indicate a relationship between the column and the row that
contains this 1. For example, if a 1 exists in the ith row and
the jth column, then the jth codeword bit is contained in the

l1-4244-0765-6JO06S OUO c;0O6 ISEEE

127

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ith parity check equation. LDPC codes can be classified as regular or irregular. The associated parity check matrix is
said to be (Wc,Wr)-regular Parity Check when each parity check code contains the same number of codeword bits, Wr,
and each codeword bit is contained in the same number of
parity check equations, W,.
LDPC codes can also be graphically represented by a

eight-loops free. We found that it is not possible to generate a (3,6)-regular eight-loops free LDPC codes with 1024 variable nodes, and a rate of 1/2. This is consistent with the results reported in [8]. Thus, we considered the design of (3,6)-regular LDPC codes that are four- and six-loops free and have minimal eight loops. The algorithm used for
adegtercttinmg want eigwht looopesisessimilar to the six-loop detection

special type of graphs called Tanner Graphs. A Tanner

Graph is a bipartite graph that contains two types of vertices

(or nodes): Bit Vertices and Check Vertices, with edges

connecting them. Rows in the LDPC parity check matrix are
represented1.oChecking rrbeeypprrBeietsseeVnnettreetddicbbeyys.BVCiehtreetccikkcVeerst.ices and columns aarre represented

if an edge between the ith bit node and the jth check node Fcirnedatetshea sfeoturofloaolpl:bit nodes K to which the jth check
node is connected.

In the parity check matrix, the presence of I's indicates
the existence of an edge (or connection) between a given Bit
Vertex and Check Vertex. Another parameter of interest is the code rate defined as the ratio of the number of

2. For each bit node k in K (k . i), find all the check nodes
L that are connected to that node.
3. For each check node 1 in L (1 . j), find all the bit nodes
M that are connected to that node.

information bits to the total number of bits in the codeword.

4. If node i is in M, then a four loop is detected and the

This is also given by the ratio of the number of check nodes

edge should be removed.

to the number of bit nodes in the code's Tanner graph.

Fig. 1 Four-loop detection algorithm.

III. PROPOSED INTERCONNECT-EFFICIENT LDPC CODES DESIGN
It is known that randomly designed LDPC codes achieve good error correction performance. In this paper, different LDPC code constructions are investigated where some are purely random, while others are designed with a specified degree of randomness that is confined to a limited area of parity matrix (or code graph). The different scenarios that have been used to design these codes are described in the following sections.
A. Cycles-Free LDPC Codes
A cycle or a loop of size K in a given graph is a closed path that is composed of K edges that visit a given vertex more than once, while visiting each edge in this path only once. Since we are dealing with a Bipartite Graph with bit nodes connecting only to check nodes, the possible loops are of even sizes, starting by four.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the existence of
loops insLDPC codes decreases their efficiency [7]. Thus, we
have considered the design of LDPC codes that are free from loops (or of reduced loops count) of different sizes and tested the performance of these codes.
Our objective in the first set of experiments was to design
(3,6)-regular LDPC codes that are four-loops free. The rate of the graph was 1/2 of 1024 bit nodes. Connections between bit nodes and check nodes are made randomly as long as no 4-loops are created. The algorithm used to detect if a four
loop will result after making a connection is given in Fig 1. Similarly, in the second set of experiments we considered the design of (3,6)-regular LDPC codes that are six-loops free. The algorithm used to detect if a six loop will result after making a connection is given in Fig. 2. The third set of experiments was to design (3,6)-regular LDPC codes that are

Checking if an edge between the ith bit node and the jth check node creates a six loop:
1. Find the set of all bit nodes K to which the jth check node is connected.
2. For each bit node k in K (k . i), find all the check nodes L that are connected to that node.
3. For each check node 1 in L (1 . j), find all the bit nodes M that are connected to that node.
4. For each bit node m in M (m X {i, k}), find all the
check nodes N that are connected to that node.
5. For each check node n in N (n X {j, 1}), find all the bit
nodes 0 that are connected to that node. 6. If node i is in 0, then a six loop is detected and the edge
should be removed.
B. Area-ConstrainedLDPC Codes
diffTerheentdessiizegsn sofhoLwDePdCgocooddeserrtohrat caorrerefcrteiengfrpoemrfloorompasncoef
results. However, due to the random connections between nodes, this might lead to an inefficient design, in terms of the
area used and the delay.
As stated earlier, our objective in this work is to design
LDPC codes that result in interconnect efficient decoder implementations while maintaining a good performance. This is achieved by the design of LDPC codes with a constraint on the interconnect wire length. The approach that we used in this work is to assume that bit nodes and check nodes are laid out in a two-dimensional structure as shown in Fig. 3. Then, with a given requirement on the degree of bit nodes, connections between bit nodes and check nodes will be constrained within a given window of a specified number of rows and columns. This guarantees that the wire length interconnecting a bit node with check nodes is bounded by a

128
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

maximum length. For example, as shown in the previous figure for a 1/2 rate 32-bit code, bit nodes 18 and 19 with the given constraint window of two rows and three columns can only connect to check nodes 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 bounded by the specified window. In addition, the code will be
designed taking into account the girth of the graph i.e., it will
be ensured that the designed code has no cycles of a predetermined length e.g. 4. Connections between bit nodes
and check nodes will be done randomly as long as they do not violate the specified constraints. We discuss next how to determine the check nodes bounded by a window constraint for each bit node.

80 l6]1 l]E82l] 8E3l] 84 l] [886s 8E6~] 87

CO

C1

C2

C3 ]

R

Row#= ; Column #= i modM; Vertical Domain= =-

_ M_

2

Assigned check node= C ±

t=l;

2

foreacht < VerticalDomain

I
if (assigned check node + (t-1) * (M/2)) < number of check nodes Then assigned check node = assigned check node + ((t -1)* (M/2))
Add_Horizontal(assigned check node, Row# + (t-1)

if (assigned check node - t * (M/2)) >0 Then
assigned check node = assigned check node - (t * (M/2))
Add_Horizontal(assigned check node ,Row# -t
t=t+1;

}
Add_Horizontal (assigned check node, Row#)

C4

CS

2B16

B17

218

219

C
20 B21

C7K

222

22

liCS

lic9

10~]

lCII

824

625

826

827

828

829

830

831

LCC1C1

CO

CI

Fig. 3 Layout representation of a Tanner graph.

Considering the assumed two-dimensional layout of bit
nodes and check nodes, each check node has two logical bit nodes associated with it. In other words, we can consider that
for each bit node, there is an assigned check node, and every two bit nodes have a common assigned check node.

Given a layout of N x M bit nodes, N x M/2 check nodes and a window constraint (R, C), we need to determine the set of possible check nodes that the ith bit node can connect to. It should be observed that R is the number of rows of the
given constraint window and should be an even number including the row of the assigned check node. Furthermore, C is the number of columns of the given constraint window and should be an odd number, including the column of the assigned check node.

The set of check nodes to which the ith bit node can

connect to is determined by the algorithm given in Fig. 4. A

similar algorithm can be used to determine the set of bit

nodes to which the jth check node can connect to. In this

work, we consider the design of LDPC codes with 32x32

layout of bit nodes and 32x16 layout of check nodes. A

constraint window (R, C) =(16, 15) is assumed .

.

Limiting th.e.a.rea of connecti.ons to these di. mensi.ons wil. l

guarantee that the wire length does not exceed the length of

eight rows and eight columns of check nodes.

Horizontal Domain

; add the assigned check node; k 1;

2

for each k < Horizontal Domain if (assigned check node + k) < ((M/2) * (Row# + 1)) Then
add the check node whose number is "assigned check node + k"

if (assigned check node - k) > ((M/2) * Row#) Then add the check node whose number is "assigned check node - k"
k = k + 1;

}
Fig. 4 Set of check nodes for a given bit node.

IV. EXPERIMETAL RESULTS
We have generated randomly a set of five LDPC codes for each criteria considered i.e. 4-loop free (4L), 6-loop free
(6L), minimized 8-loop (M8L), and window constrained
minimized 8-loop (WM8L). Then, we have selected the best performing code in each category for comparison
purposes. Our comparison is based on the frame error rate (FER), the loop count, the area, delay and routing
congestion for the implemented LDPC decoders. FER performance was obtained using matlab simulations at different SNR points with stopping criteria of 200 frame
errors at SNR<2 and 200,000 code words for SNR>2.
Iterative decoding was performed for 64 iterations.
Hardware comparisons of the different LDPC codes were
made based on a generic VHDL model that models a parallel implementation of the LDPC decoder for any given H
matrix. The functions of the check nodes and variables nodes
were assumed to be just a dummy single gate to simplify the design as the emphasis here is on interconnect complexity.
Synthesis is performed using Xilinx synthesis tools mapping .t.h.e...d.e.s.i.g.n...o.n. Xilinx Spartan3 XC3S5000-fg900 FPGA
~~c~~o~m~~popatirmiezedd LfoDrPCareac.odeFsig.an5d Tsahbolwes 1thseumFmaErRizeosf tthhee lfoooupr
analysis and synthesis results. As can be seen, the FER performance of the four LDPC codes is very close with a

129
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

noticeable difference at SNR=2.75. Apparently, the M8L LDPC code is achieving the best performance and the
WM8L has a lower performance than M8L by around 0.1 dB. Thus, the performance impact of the window constrained LDPC code, WM8L, is considered small. As shown in Table
1, the WM8L LDPC code achieves the smallest delay and
requires less FPGA slices, demonstrating the impact of constraining the interconnect wire length in the LDPC decoder. To further illustrate the impact of the window constrained LDPC code design, we show in Fig. 6 & 7 snapshots of the post place and route synthesis of the LDPC decoders for M8L and WM8L, respectively. It is noticeable from the figures that the routing congestion for WM8L LDPC decoder is less than that for M8L LDPC decoder.

[8] J. A. McGowan and R. C. Williamson, "Loop removal from LDPC codes", Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, pp. 230-233, 2003.

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

014L
*
0.01

0.001

_L

0.0001

*l/KI

0.0001

TABLE 1 Loop count and synthesis results.

LDPC Code Structure
4L 6L M8L WM8L

No. of loops
46 8 0 172 1273 0 0 1300 0 0 226 0 0 870

Synthesis

Slices used Delay

out of 33,280 ns

2,562 14.191

2,562

14.336

2,562

13.096

2,527

11.879

Fig. 5 FER Comparison of LDPC codes.

_' -'

M

-

I;

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have investigated the design of_
interconnect-efficient LDPC codes that reduce the area and delay of the decoder implementation while maintaining good
error correction performance. We have demonstrated that it
is possible to deign LDPC codes that are interconnect efficient with small performance impact compared to the randomly unconstrained generated LDPC codes.

1

1l

__ iini

-,

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Fig. 6 Post place and route snapshot of synthesized M8L

LDPC code.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of King

oleum Minerals in this work.

.......................

.........

REFERENCES
[1] M. Bossert. Channel Coding for Telecommunications. John Wiley and Sons, Aug. 1999. [2] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963 [3] A. P. Chandrakasan, S. Sheng, and R. W. Brodersen, "Low-Power CMOS Digital Design," IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, pp. 473-484, Apr. 1992.
[4] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, "VLSI Architectures for Iterative Decoders in Magnetic Recording Channels," IEEE Trans. Magnetics, pp. 748-755, Jan. 2001. [5] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, "A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, Rate1/2 Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder," IEEEJ. Solid-State Circuits, pp.
404-4 12, M ar. 2002.................. [6] M. Mohiyuddin, A. Prakash, A. Aziz and W. Wolf, "Synthesizing Interconnect Efficient Low Density Parity Check Codes," Design=_,=__
Automation Conf., pp. 488-491, 2004.
[7] D.J.C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse Fig. 7 Post place and route snapshot of synthesized WM8L matrices," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp.1399-431, March 1999. LDPC code.

130
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:13:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

