Forty-Ninth Annual Allerton Conference Allerton House, UIUC, Illinois, USA September 28 - 30, 2011
Error Floor Approximation for LDPC Codes in the AWGN Channel
Brian K. Butler and Paul H. Siegel Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037

Abstract—This paper addresses the prediction of error floors of variable-regular Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes in the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. Specifically, we focus on the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) decoder in the log-domain at high SNRs. We hypothesize that several published error floor levels are due to numerical saturation within their decoders when handling high SNRs. We take care to develop a log-domain SPA decoder that does not saturate near-certain messages and find the error rates of our decoder to be lower by at least several orders of magnitude. We study the behavior of near-codewords / trapping sets that dominate the reported error floors.
J. Sun, in his Ph.D. thesis, used a linear system model to show that error floors due to elementary trapping sets don’t exist under certain conditions, assuming that the SPA decoder is non-saturating [1]. We develop a refined linear model which we find to be capable of predicting the error floors caused by elementary trapping sets for saturating decoders. Performance results of several codes at several levels of decoder saturation are presented.
I. INTRODUCTION
A very important class of modern codes, the Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, was first published by R. Gallager in 1962 [2]. LDPC codes are linear block codes described by a sparse parity check matrix.
Decoding algorithms for LDPC codes are generally iterative. An iteratively decoded code’s error rate performance versus channel quality graph is typically divided into two regions: the waterfall and error floor. The error floor appears at higher channel quality and is characterized by a more gradual decrease in error rate as channel quality improves. For non-ML, iterative decoders the error floor is apparently determined by small structures within the code that are specific to the selected graphical description of the code.
The understanding of the LDPC error floor has progressed beyond just the binary erasure channel, but most memoryless channels are difficult to characterize and the presence of error floors has limited the adoption of LDPC codes in some applications. For the DVB-S2 standard, an outer algebraic code is concatenated with LDPC to ensure a low error floor. MacKay and Postol found that near-codewords caused the error floors of the Margulis-type codes in the AWGN channel in their belief propagation decoder [3]. Richardson wrote the seminal paper on the error floors of memoryless channels shortly afterward [4]. In it, he called near-codewords trapping
This research was supported in part by NSF Grant CCF-0829865 and by the Center for Magnetic Recording Research.

sets and defined them with respect to the decoder in use as the error-causing structures. The parameters (a, b) are used to characterize both near-codewords and trapping sets, where a is the number of variable nodes in the set and b is the number of adjacent check nodes with an odd number of connections to the set of variable nodes. The (a, b) parameters of errorfloor-causing structures are typically small. Dolecek et al. noted empirically that the trapping sets dominating the error floor had a combinatorial description termed absorbing sets [5].
There has been work on analytical techniques to predict error floors in AWGN. Sun developed a model of elementary trapping set behavior based on a linear state-space model of the trapping set with density evolution applied to the code outside of the trapping set [1], [6]. This work has gained little attention, even though it reaches a conclusion contrary to prior results. Sun’s models show no error floor for elementary trapping sets (excluding codewords) in regular, infinite-length LDPC codes if the variable-degree of the code is at least three and the decoder’s metrics are allowed to grow very large. Sun is able to make similar claims for irregular LDPC codes under certain conditions. In these cases, Sun shows that the graph outside of the trapping set will eventually correct the trapping set errors; in his example, using a (3, 1) trapping set, this occurred at a mean log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of about 1010 after about 40 iterations. In his Margulis code example, Sun estimates a non-zero, but very low error floor for a non-saturating decoder using his approximation to SPA. He attributes this error floor to the code’s finite length.
Sun’s analytic development was asymptotic in the number of iterations. We work to identify the conditions when the growth of the check nodes’ beneficial LLRs from outside of the trapping set can out-pace the internal growth of the trapping set’s detrimental LLRs. In doing so, we develop new signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) thresholds that indicate when this LLR growth region is reached. We also show how the independence assumption breaks down when applied to finite-length codes with cycles due to strongly correlated LLR messages when the decoder is non-saturating.
Schlegel and Zhang [7] extended Sun’s work by adding time-variant gains and channel errors from outside of the trapping set to the model. They then matched predicted error floors to error floors observed in hardware simulation, specifically for the code in IEEE 802.3an. Their results show that the external errors have very little impact and that the

978-1-4577-1818-2/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

204

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

error floor can be predicted quite accurately. The model derived in [7] was specific to the dominant (8, 8) trapping set of that code. We generalize their model and match predicted error floors to simulations for two different codes with several LLR limits. We find the model estimates the error floor to within 0.2 dB for the codes we examine. We also show how a model that breaks down for finite length codes may work fairly well when saturated LLRs are introduced to the finite length codes.
Several authors have found empirically that increasing LLR limits in the SPA lowers the error floor level [8]– [11]. We concur, but we believe the effect to be orders of magnitude stronger than noted. We have found that when care is taken to implement the SPA decoder without saturation (or “clipping”), especially at high SNRs, the effect of error floors reduces very dramatically. As an example, the frame error rate (FER) results of the (2640, 1320) Margulis code from our simulation are shown as the steepest series in Fig. 4. The results of [3] show a floor starting at about 10−6 at an Eb/N0 of 2.4 dB dominated by near-codewords. Others report even higher error floor levels for the same code [4], [12]. As shown in Fig. 4, our simulation has not shown any error floor down to the measurement limit of 2 × 10−8. In fact, the error events that we collected at this point suggest that any error floor in our simulator is substantially lower still. We develop the framework to explain this behavior.
Our focus in this paper will be on the development of error floor predictions over the AWGN channel for binary LDPC codes of regular variable-degree. Section II introduces the general terminology related to SPA decoders and trapping sets. Section III develops the state-space model we will be using for the analytical results of this paper. Section IV develops the needed properties of the dominant eigenvalue required to characterize the system and the probability of error model. Section V demonstrates the model’s accuracy at predicting saturated performance compared with simulation results for two specific codes. Section VI discusses bounds on unsatisfied-check LLR growth to determine ultimate error floor bounds for non-saturating decoders and the difficulties in extending the results to finite length codes. Finally, we draw our conclusions.
II. PRELIMINARIES
LDPC codes are defined by the null space of a parity check matrix H. The codewords are the set of column vectors C, such that c ∈ C satisfies Hc = 0 over a particular field. A given code can be described by many different H matrices.
The H matrix over GF(2) may be associated with a bipartite graph termed a Tanner graph. Tanner graphs do not have parallel edges, and their vertices are partitioned into two sets: variable nodes V and check nodes C.
Assumption 1. We are only concerned with codes over the binary field GF(2). Thus, the elements of H and c are binary. We consider only codes described by variable-regular Tanner

graphs of variable-degree dv ≥ 3. Also, we assume binary antipodal signaling over the AWGN channel.
After encoding, each binary symbol is transmitted over the AWGN channel as a binary antipodal symbol ti ∈ {+1, −1}. Every received symbol ri is simply the sum ti + ni of the transmitted symbol plus independent and identicallydistributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian noise of zero-mean and variance σ2. This yields a channel SNR of 1/σ2 or 2REb/N0, where Eb is the received energy per information bit, R is the rate of the code, and N0 is the one-sided power spectral density of the noise.

A. Sum-Product Algorithm

The reader is referred to [13]–[15] for a complete description of the most broadly used decoding process for LDPC codes with soft-information, the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA). Like many, we prefer to implement our decoder simulation in the log-domain, as it avoids normalization and is closer to the approximations used in building hardware.
We use the notation N (i) to indicate the set of check nodes adjacent to variable node i. Likewise, we use N (j)\i to indicate all variable nodes adjacent to check node j, excluding variable node i. The received symbols ri must be scaled to log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) λ[i], as λ[i] = 2ri/σ2 prior to decoding.
Here, we focus on the check node update portion of SPA’s iteration loop, in which we compute the messages to be sent from check node j to connected variable node i as





λl[i←j] = 2 tanh−1 

tanh λ[lk−→1 j]  ,

(1)

2

k∈N (j)\i

where l is the iteration count. Upon the completion of the

iterations, each symbol decision tˆ[li] is set to the sign of the

soft output t˜l[i] = λ[i] +

λ[li←k].

k∈N (i)

B. SPA without Saturation
Direct implementation of (1) yields numerical problems at high LLRs. Double-precision floating-point (64-bit IEEE 754) computer computations maintain 53-bits of precision. Thus, such a computer implementation results in tanh(x/2) being rounded to 1, for any x > 38.1230949 = 55 ln(2).
As an argument of ±1 to the tanh−1 function will cause an overflow, protection from high magnitude LLRs must be added to the SPA iteration loop to ensure numerical integrity or an alternate solution not using tanh−1 must be found. Thus, preventing tanh−1 overflow by limiting LLRs will result in a maximum producible LLR magnitude. This is what we refer to as “saturating” in a log-domain SPA decoder throughout this paper. Our examination of published error floors suggests that LLR saturation is commonly employed.
Our non-saturating decoder simulation is based on an exact pairwise check node reduction [13], [16]. Letting N (j)\i =

205
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

{k1, k2}, the following exactly equals (1).

λl[i←j] = sign λl[k−11→j] · sign λ[lk−21→j]·

min λ[lk−11→j] , λ[lk−21→j]

+ ln 1 + exp − λl[k−11→j] + λ[lk−21→j]

(2)

− ln 1 + exp − λl[k−11→j] − λ[lk−21→j]

The check node re-formulation in (2) contains no possibility of overflow for any possible LLR.

C. Trapping Sets
Definition 1 (Richardson [4]). A trapping set is an error-
prone set of variable nodes T ⊂ V that depends upon the decoder’s input space and decoding algorithm. Let Dl[i](r) denote the ith output symbol at the lth iteration given the
decoder input vector r. We say that symbol i is eventually correct if there exists L such that, for all l ≥ L, Dl[i](r) is correct. If the set of symbols that is not eventually correct is
not the empty set, we call it a trapping set, T (r).

Definition 2. A Tanner subgraph or trapping set is called elementary if all the check nodes are of degree one or two [17].

Elementary trapping sets are simple enough to model with linear or nearly-linear systems and also account for most of the error floors seen in practice. In [4], [17], the authors observe that the majority of trapping sets contributing to the error floors of belief propagation decoders are elementary trapping sets.

III. STATE-SPACE MODEL
In this section we develop a linear system model which closely approximates the non-linear message passing of the log-domain SPA for elementary trapping sets. The state-space model was introduced in [1], [6] to analyze trapping sets.

Assumption 2. All trapping sets of interest are elementary, connected, and contain more than one variable node. Since this is a linear block code, we assume for simplicity that the all-zero codeword has been sent.

First, we review the failure state of an elementary trapping set. Let the variable nodes of the trapping set S ⊂ V induce the Tanner subgraph BS . In later iterations the condition is reached where the variable nodes S within the trapping set are in error and those variable nodes outside the trapping set are correct. In this condition, the subgraph’s check nodes of degree-one are unsatisfied and those of degree-two are satisfied.
The vector of messages from the degree-one (i.e., unsatisfied) check nodes λl(ex) at iteration l are taken to be stochastic system inputs to the state-space model and are therefore modeled separately. We will use density evolution and simulation techniques, described in later sections, to model this input vector. The other system input vector is the intrinsic information λ provided by the channel to be used in variable node updates every iteration. From the

... VN i1

... dc-2 ...
Check node j VN i2

Fig. 1. Illustration of a check node with degree two in the trapping set and degree dc in the Tanner graph.

AWGN channel model, we know that each element of λ is an i.i.d. Gaussian random variable produced by the channel and scaled to be an LLR.

A. Check Node Gain Model
Sun’s linear model included the asymptotic approximation that every degree-two (i.e., satisfied) check node output message is equal to the input message [1]. This is based on the conditions of correct variable nodes and very high LLR values outside of the trapping set. Schlegel and Zhang introduced more accuracy to this model by applying a multiplicative gain gl at the degree-two check nodes, where 0 < gl ≤ 1 [7]. This gain models the effect of the dc − 2 external variable nodes lowering the magnitude of LLR messages as they pass through the degree-two check nodes. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. This approach adds accuracy to modeling the early iterations, and after several iterations these gains approach 1.

Assumption 3. We will assume that the external inputs to the trapping set’s degree-two check nodes are i.i.d. This is generally a reasonable assumption to make as the gain computations are most significant at early iterations. By the time significant message correlation is present on the check nodes’ inputs the gains are approximately 1.

Schlegel and Zhang compute the mean gain g¯l corresponding to each iteration count l. We take gl to be

gl

dc −2
tanh

λl[k−→1 j]

,

2

(3)

k=1

for a check node of degree dc. Then the expected value of the check node’s gain over channel realizations will be denoted g¯l. In practice, we will use the following simplification

g¯l = Eλ tanh

λl[k−→1 j] 2

dc −2
,

(4)

which uses Assumption 3.

The application of gain at the check node may be justified

using a Taylor series expansion of (1) that begins with letting

f (y) 2 tanh−1 tanh y g ,

(5)

2

where g is the check node’s gain (3) that we are interested

in introducing. The first three terms of the Taylor series

about y = 0 yield the linear approximation f (y) ≈ gy. This approximation is good for |y| ≤ 2 tanh−1(g).

We now extend the check node gain model to include

inversions through the degree-two check nodes caused by

206
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

erroneous messages from outside of the trapping set. When an odd number of the dc − 2 messages from outside of the trapping set into a degree-two check node within the trapping set are erroneous, then that check node will invert the polarity of the LLR message sent from variable node i1 to i2, as well as the message sent in the opposite direction.
We will present a simplification of the method used by Schlegel and Zhang to account for these inversions [7]. During the first iteration, messages from variable nodes may contain inversions due to channel errors. The probability that a specific input to the check node contains an inversion during iteration l = 1 is just the uncoded symbol error rate

Pe,1 = Q

2REb . N0

(6)

Thus, utilizing Assumption 3, the probability of a polarity inversion in a specific check node is given at iteration l by

(dc −1)/2
Pi,l =
k=1

dc − 2 2k − 1

Pe2,kl −1(1 − Pe,l)dc−1−2k,

(7)

which is the probability of an odd number of errors in the dc − 2 input messages at iteration l.
For additional iterations we can use density evolution [14], [15] to predict an effective Eb/N0. When there is a channel inversion the output message magnitude will likely be very low, as suggested in [7]. Hence, to model this we will equate random channel inversions to randomly setting the check node gain to zero with probability Pi,l. We introduce the check node’s modified mean gain as simply

g¯l = g¯l(1 − Pi,l).

(8)

B. Linear State-Space Model

Assumption 4. In deriving the model we will assume the messages within the trapping set under study have little impact on the rest of the Tanner graph.

The state-space modeling equations are shown below for input column vectors λ(lex) and λ and for output column vector ˜tl, whose entries tˆl[i] = sign(t˜l[i]) are the log-domain SPA estimate of the sign of the ith transmitted binary
antipodal symbol, at iteration l [1], [7].

x0 = Bλ

(9)

xl = g¯lAxl−1 + Bλ + Bexλ(lex) for l ≥ 1

(10)

˜tl = g¯lCxl−1 + λ + Dexλ(lex) for l ≥ 1

(11)

The central part of the state-space model, of course, is the updating of the state xl. The state vector xl represents the vector of LLR messages sent along the edges from
the subgraph’s variable nodes towards the degree-two check
nodes. The state is updated once per full iteration. One may consider that g¯lxl−1 represents the LLR messages after passing through the degree-two check nodes during the first half-iteration, and g¯lAxl−1 represents their contribution to the variable node update during the second half-iteration of iteration l. Since adv equals the number of edges of the

variable-regular Tanner subgraph of a variable nodes, the number of states in our model of an elementary subgraph is m = adv − b, that is, just the m edges connected to the degree-two check nodes. Note that m must be an even integer.
The m × a matrix B and the m × b matrix Bex are used to map λ and λl(ex), respectively, to the appropriate entries of the state vector to match the set of variable node update equations. Since every variable node has exactly one element from λ participating, B has a single 1 in every row, and is zero otherwise. The number of 1 entries per row of Bex corresponds to the number of degree-one check nodes connected to the corresponding variable node, which may be none.
The m × m (0, 1)-matrix A describes the dependence of the state update upon the prior states. In the ith row of A, a 1 indicates which edges are used to compute the ith output edge. In the jth column of A, a 1 indicates to which edges the jth input edge contributes in the current update. Thus, the matrix AT may be taken as the adjacency matrix associated with a simple digraph of order m which describes the state-variable update relationships. Given our variableregular codes, the row weight of A and the row weight of Bex will sum to dv − 1 for every row.
If there is a single degree-one check node neighboring every variable node in the subgraph, such as in the (8, 8) trapping set of 802.3an, then (10) degenerates to the case where B = Bex and B has regular column weight as derived in [7]. Furthermore, this degenerate case produces only A matrices which have uniform row and column sums and only r = dv −2. Thus, our development will be significantly more general than [7].
The eigenvalues of A, as the roots of the characteristic equation det(A−µI) = 0, correspond directly to the poles of the discrete-time system as the gains approach 1. We find that for the trapping sets addressed herein, the dominant poles are on or outside the unit circle. Hence, the system is marginally stable or (more often) unstable.
Generalizing (10) to an arbitrary iteration l > 0 without feedback, we have

l

l

xl = AlBλ g¯j + Al−i

j=1

i=1

Bλ + Bexλ(iex)

l
g¯j .
j=i+1
(12)

IV. DOMINANT EIGENVALUES & PROBABILITY OF ERROR MODEL
This section will simplify the linear equation used to update the states developed in the prior section to the point that we can easily apply a probability model and predict failure rates for specific trapping sets.

A. Utilizing Dominant Eigenvalues
For analysis of our model, we need to simplify the powers of A that appear in (12). To do this we will rely on the dominant eigenvalues of the nonnegative m × m matrix A and its left eigenvectors. This approach will avoid some of the rough edges of prior analyses. Sun assumed that the matrix

207
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A was diagonalizable [1]. However, our extensive search of
potential trapping sets showed a small percentage of them
have A matrices which cannot be diagonalized. Schlegel and Zhang used an asymptotic approximation to Ai in [7] which
we also want to avoid, because when LLRs saturate we only
need to model a small number of iterations. Let µk ∈ C be an eigenvalue of matrix A, and let wk
be the left eigenvector associated with µk, such that wk∗A = µkwk∗, where wk∗ is the conjugate transpose of column vector wk. Then, by induction, for any positive integer i,

wk∗Ai = µikwk∗.

(13)

We now shift to using a specific left eigenvector of the

nonnegative matrix A, the left eigenvector w1 associated with the eigenvalue of maximum modulus r. The nonnegative

matrix A can either be reducible or irreducible. The reducible

case is addressed in the full version of this paper [18].

The theory of nonnegative irreducible matrices allows us

to make certain statements regarding w1 and r [19]. Let the m × m nonnegative matrix A be irreducible. Then, there is a

simple eigenvalue r > 0 that is real with magnitude greater

than or equal to that of all other eigenvalues. Also, the left

eigenvector w1 associated with r is real and positive. We now define the error indicator βl w1T xl. We define
βl this way to create a scalar indicator of trapping set error.
Consider βl as the scaled projection of the state vector xl
onto the positive vector w1. Since the state vector xl contains

the internal messages of the trapping set, the projection

onto a positive vector indicates the trapping set’s messages

are generally either in the positive (correct) direction or

negative (erroneous) direction. Thus βl is only approximately

indicative of the variable nodes’ decisions. Especially in

the case where the system is inherently unstable, r > 1,

the state variables will tend to all move toward positive or

negative infinity and dominate the soft output expression (11). The domination of (11) by xl−1 is obvious when λ(lex) is
saturated.

Our error indicator expression simplifies if we rescale βl

by a positive constant to βl

βl/ rl

l j=1

g¯j

, so

βl = w1T Bλ + l w1T
i=1

Bλ + Bexλ(iex)

ri

i j=1

g¯j

.

(14)

This expression is similar to, but more general than (1) in [7],

which was derived for a specific degenerate trapping set as previously described. Thus, (14) allows us to consider a much wider class of trapping sets, such as the dominant trapping sets of the Margulis code.

B. Probability of Error Model
The expression for βl in (14) is a linear combination of stochastic vectors λ and λl(ex). Since elements of λ are i.i.d. Gaussian, linear operations on λ will produce a Gaussian
distribution. Several authors [7], [14] have used the approximation that the check node output LLRs, including λ(lex), are Gaussian, too. The central limit theorem implies that the
distribution of a linear combination of many independent

messages will be nearly Gaussian, even if the check node output LLRs are only approximately Gaussian.

Assumption 5. We assume that βl has a Gaussian distribution.

Under this assumption, the probability of the failure event, ξ(S), corresponding to trapping set S, at iteration l, is then simply





P {ξ(S)} = P βl < 0 = Q  E[βl ]  . (15) VAR[βl ]

If {Si} enumerates all potential trapping sets, the union bound provides an upper bound on the error floor of the codeword error rate

Pf ≤ P {ξ(Si)} .

(16)

i

The codeword error rate of (16) is commonly called the frame error rate (FER) or block error rate.

C. Codewords
In the case of elementary trapping sets that are also codewords, we let b = 0 and Bex = 0. This simplifies drastically as the eigensystem of A for codewords is rather simple. Every row sum and column sum of the matrix A is dv − 1, so the spectral radius is r = dv − 1. The positive left eigenvector associated with r is proportional to the all-ones vector, w1 ∝ [1, 1, . . . 1]T . Also, B has uniform row weight one and column weight dv. We recognize that a is just the Hamming weight wH in the context of codewords, so (15) simplifies to the more recognizable

P {ξ(Si)} = Q

2REb N0

wH

,

(17)

independent of iteration count l.

D. Non-codewords

To further understand the general behavior of (15), we examine the numerator and denominator terms. Letting mλ(l()ex) be the expected value of each entry of λ(lex), we can write the numerator of the Q-function argument as

l

E[βl ] = mλ

1+ i=1 ri

1

i j=1

g¯j

a
(w1T B)k
k=1

+

l i=1

m(λi()ex)

ri

i j=1

g¯j

b
(w1T Bex)k.
k=1

(18)

We are interested in the behavior of (18) as the number of iterations goes towards infinity. The divergence of the first series within (18) is not of interest as its effect will be canceled by the first series within the denominator when they are combined into (15). Noting that the gains g¯l approach 1

208
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

rapidly with increasing l, we will apply the Ratio Test to the second series within (18), evaluating ρ as

ρ = lim ai+1 i→∞ ai

= lim m(λi(+ex1)) . i→∞ m(λi()ex)r

(19)

This series converges absolutely if ρ < 1 and diverges if
ρ > 1. Thus, if the mean unsatisfied-check LLRs satisfy mλ(i()ex) > Cri as i → ∞, for some positive constant C, then ρ > 1, and (18) will grow without bound.

Assumption 6. We will assume that the entries of λ and λl(ex) are statistically independent of each other at a given iteration l as is often done in density evolution studies. Further, we assume that the entries of λl(ex) are independent
from iteration to iteration, as was implicitly assumed in [7].

If we can be assured that VAR[βl ] does not grow as fast as the square of (18), then the entire argument to the Q-
function will grow without bound, driving the failure rate of
the potential elementary trapping set towards zero. In that case, sufficient iterations and headroom for mλ(i()ex) growth are the requirements for the model to achieve as low an error
floor as desired.
Other models of error floor behavior [1], [7] have used the
Gaussian approximation to LLR densities [14], which implies σl2 = 2mλ(l()ex). With an LLR variance of twice the mean or less, we find that the entire argument to the Q-function grows without bound in the cases that satisfy mλ(i()ex) > Cri. However, if the variance grows as the square of the mean,
then the argument to the Q-function reaches a finite limit and
a non-zero error floor is produced. This is a very important
issue that we will revisit.

E. Bounds on Spectral Radius
We now need some bounds on r, the spectral radius of the A matrix, in order to compare it with the growth rate of m(λi()ex) which we will develop later.
Theorem 1. Consider a variable-regular LDPC code with variable-degree dv ≥ 3. Let trapping set S induce an elementary connected subgraph BS with a ≥ 2 variable nodes and b > 0 degree-one check nodes. Further, let every variable in BS neighbor at least 2 degree-two check nodes. Then, the (0, 1)-matrix A of the state-space description must have spectral radius r such that 1 ≤ r < dv − 1. Moreover, if A is irreducible, then 1 < r < dv − 1.
Proof: Omitted.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS WITH SATURATION
This section completes the prediction model by presenting the techniques used to produce the linear system’s inputs and then compares predicted error floors to simulation results for three LDPC codes. Two numerical models are described for use as system inputs for the mean and variance of the unsatisfied, degree-one check nodes within the trapping set. These models also generate the mean degree-two check node gain g¯l required by the model presented in Section III.

The first technique is the numerical version of density evolution known as discretized density evolution (DDE) [15]. This technique is selected for the saturated case as it allows us to precisely model the behavior of LLRs as they saturate since it works directly on the probability mass functions. The second technique is to simply run the logdomain SPA decoder with early termination turned off and collect the required statistics. We find one-hundred frames to be sufficient, and of course very quick to produce.
The first code we examine is the (640, 192) quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code from [12], with dv = 5 and irregular check degree. The dominant trapping set for a saturating log-domain SPA is the (5, 5) elementary trapping set shown in [12]. The A matrix for this trapping set is primitive and has maximum eigenvalue r = 3. The multiplicity of this trapping set in the code is just 64 and all such sets have disjoint sets of variable nodes. Figs. 2 and 3 show FER results for simulation and error floor prediction for this code at two levels of LLR saturation. Our error floor prediction model shows very fast convergence, attributed to the large eigenvalue (i.e., r >> 1), so we stop our model at 14 iterations.
The FER simulation results shown in these figures are produced by our log-domain SPA decoder, implemented in double-precision floating-point. This SPA decoder is nonsaturating, as shown in (2). We have not witnessed our nonsaturating decoder fail on the (5, 5) trapping sets, which were reported to dominate in [12]. Next, saturation was intentionally introduced into our decoder at levels shown in the figures’ legends. The intentional saturation was introduced at a point corresponding to the output of the check node calculation in (2). We simulate the transmission of the all-zero codeword for simplicity and take any other decoding result to be decoding failure and a frame error. The simulations were run for a maximum of 200 iterations.
Fig. 2 shows the error floors predicted by (16), with the mean gains of (4) applied to our model. We note that the mean gains provided a significant improvement in the model’s accuracy, to within 0.5 dB of simulation. Fig. 3 shows the same conditions, but this time with the modified mean gains of (8) applied to account for polarity inversions within the degree-two check nodes. We modified the mean gains for just the first 3 iterations. Comparing Figs. 2 and 3, one notices that the channel polarity model represents an improvement in the model’s accuracy to within ±0.1 dB of simulation.
Heuristically, the reason that error floor predictions drop when check node gains are introduced has to do with incorrect state buildup in early iterations. With unity gains, incorrect channel inputs may propagate rapidly in the highly interconnected states of the trapping set. With small gains in early iterations this is held off for several iterations, giving the unsatisfied check nodes a better chance to correct the system. As we previously noted, during early iterations polarity inversions through the degree-two check nodes act to effectively lower the check node gain. Therefore, as we’d expect, introducing the inversions lowers the predicted error floor.

209
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Ryan 640-192 schlegel analysis C FER ch2b

Margulis smodel floor FER chd3 e5b

1.E-01 1.E-02 1.E-03

FER state-space estimate for (5,5) trapping in Ryan (640,192) QC-LDPC
Sat 15, TS model w/mean gains Sat 15, simulation w/CN sat Sat 50, TS model w/mean gains Sat 50, simulation w/CN sat Non-saturating simulation

1.E-04

1.E-05

1.E-06

1.E-03 1.E-04 1.E-05 1.E-06 1.E-07

FER state-space estimate for (12,4) trapping in Margulis
Sat 7, TS model w/mod. mean gains Sat 7, simulation w/CN sat Sat 25, TS model w/mod. mean gains Sat 25, simulation w/CN sat Non-saturating simulation

1.E-07

1.E-08

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1.75

2

2.25

2.5

2.75

3

3.25

3.5

Eb/No [dB]

Eb/No [dB]

Fig. 2. FER vs. Eb/N0 in dB for (640, 192) QC code with simulation Fig. 4. FER vs. Eb/N0 in dB for (2640, 1320) Margulis code with and trapping set RBryiaann6K4.0B-1u9tl2erschlegel analysis C FER ch2d (TS) model predicted floor using mean gains in modelBraiann8/Kd14. /B2u0t1le1r6s:i3m4 PMulation and trapping set (TS) model predicted floor using modified mean 9/19/2011 11:50 PM

no check node inversions.

gains.

1.E-01 1.E-02 1.E-03

FER state-space estimate for (5,5) trapping in Ryan (640,192) QC-LDPC
Sat 15, TS model w/mod. mean gains Sat 15, simulation w/CN sat Sat 50, TS model w/mod. mean gains Sat 50, simulation w/CN sat Non-saturating simulation

1.E-04

1.E-05

1.E-06

Overall, this is consistent with Schlegel and Zhang’s results [7]. Their predicted error floor appears to be nearly on top of the simulated results of a hardware decoder. Our own floating-point simulations show that their hardware decoder has implementation losses. We measure their implementation losses at about 0.15 dB at the onset of the error floor.
Surprisingly, we find that LLR saturation at the fairly high values of 25 and 50 produce noticeable error floors in simulation and model prediction. Finally, we note that the terms corresponding to the variance of the unsatisfied check nodes have a small impact on the overall results.
VI. RESULTS WITHOUT SATURATION

1.E-07

This section attempts to remove the saturation constraint

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 to make ultimate error floor predictions. First, by applying

Eb/No [dB]
Fig. 3. FER vs. Eb/N0 in dB for (640, 192) QC code with simulation density evolution [14] to the nodes outside of the trapping set

and Brian K. Butler trapping set (TS) model predicted floor using modified mean gains we find in9/6/2011 1:18 PM their growth eventually sufficient to overcome trap-

model.

ping sets for variable-regular codes. In [18], we derived SNR

thresholds and SNR-LLR regions where m(λl()ex) > C(dv −1)l

is satisfied.

The second code analyzed is the (2640, 1320) Margulis However, density evolution assumes that the Tanner graph

LDPC code. It’s a (3, 6)-regular code with dominant trapping does not contain cycles and useful finite-length LDPC codes

sets reported to be the (12, 4) and (14, 4) elementary trapping do contain cycles. We find that for (2640, 1320) Margulis

sets [3], [4], [12]. The A matrices for these two trapping code, by the ninth iteration, the unsatisfied check nodes’ LLR

sets are both imprimitive, with h = 2, and have maximum variance has clearly taken on the trend of the square of the

eigenvalues r of 1.6956 and 1.7606, respectively. We ran the mean. As discussed in Section IV, this trend can generate an

model for 16 iterations. The multiplicity of each of these error floor as the mean to standard deviation ratio of βl in trapping sets is 1320 with lots of overlap between variable (15) reaches a fixed value rather than growing as iterations get

nodes of differing sets. In fact, each (14, 4) trapping set large. The cause of the variance’s departure from the behavior

contains all 12 variable nodes and 2 of the unsatisfied check predicted by density evolution is the positively correlated

nodes from a (12, 4) trapping set. Thus, when we compute nature of the LLRs after several iterations. Another flaw in

the failure probability of one (12, 4) trapping set, it largely our probability of error model, in the non-saturating case, is

includes the failure probability of the (14, 4) trapping set that that the distribution of βl becomes substantially skewed. contains it. Fig. 4 shows the error floors predicted for just

the (12, 4) trapping sets, utilizing the model with modified

VII. CONCLUSION

mean gains. We modified the mean gains for the first 5 We have drawn into question the error floor levels pub-

iterations. We find that the state-space model overestimates lished in [3], [4], [12] and their root cause. We have shown

the simulation’s error floor by less than 0.2 dB.

that those error floor levels are caused by the interaction

210
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of non-codeword trapping sets and the numerical effects of handling highly-certain messages in a belief propagation decoder, such as the log-domain SPA. We have shown that when care is taken in processing those messages the error floor level may be lowered by orders of magnitude.
We have added some clarity to the situation of two distinctly different applications of the linear system model. On one hand, Sun introduced the state-space model and proved that many error floors don’t exist for infinite length codes without cycles [1]. On the other hand, Schlegel and Zhang improved upon the model and predicted non-zero error floors due to the dominant (8, 8) trapping sets of the 802.3an code [7].
With respect to Sun’s work, we are in agreement with Sun’s conclusion as applied to variable-regular LDPC codes. However, we have shown empirically that the assumptions in the probability of error model do not hold for codes with cycles. For these codes, we showed that the effects of positively correlated LLRs when allowed to grow (without saturation) drive the ratio of the mean to standard deviation to a finite value possibly implying an error floor. This error floor level is difficult to estimate due to the positively correlated LLRs and the substantially non-Gaussian distribution of our error indicator.
We are also able to put Schlegel and Zhang’s work into perspective. Their error rate results showing a non-zero error floor for a trapping set were for a decoder that saturated (i.e., “clipped”) the LLR values. Our model is more general than theirs, in that we do not require that B = Bex, that B have constant column weight, or that A have constant row weight and constant column weight. Additionally, we have simplified considerably the incorporation of polarity inversion by the degree-two check nodes into the model. We have shown that the reason the model predicts saturated performance relatively well is that by the iteration count at which LLRs become substantially correlated, their variance is driven to zero by the effect of saturation. This means that the model derived for the case with no cycles actually works rather well for the case with cycles when there is a significant saturation effect present. In our experiments the model with modified mean gains estimated the FER floor of floatingpoint simulation to within 0.2 dB for two different LDPC codes.
Altogether, we have reached a better understanding of trapping set failure mechanisms. Trapping sets can be avoided when the beneficial unsatisfied check LLRs eventually overpower the trapping set’s own detrimental LLR growth. Achieving this reliably can take significant LLR metric dynamic range. The greater the LLRs are allowed to grow the more often channel inversions aligned to trapping sets can be overcome. The results make clear that when presenting error floors, future researchers should document the levels of any LLR saturation.
Future work may include extensions to a larger collection of trapping sets, to variable-irregular graphs, and to more channels. We are also interested in improvements to the model to account for correlated LLRs and for greater

predictive accuracy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Aravind Iyengar, Christian
Schlegel, Roxana Smarandache, and Xiaojie Zhang for their
helpful discussions and encouragement. Further, the authors
are indebted to Xiaojie Zhang for verifying several of our
low floor results in the AWGN channel with an independent
implementation of the non-saturating SPA decoder. Also, we
thank Yang Han and William Ryan for providing the QC
parity check matrix.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Sun, “Studies on graph-based coding systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Ohio State Univ., Columbus, 2004.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. on Inform. Theory, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and M. J. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan–Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. of 2nd Irish Conf. on the Math. Foundations of Comput. Sci. and Inform. Tech., ser. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Comput. Sci., vol. 74, Galway, 2003.
[4] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. of the 41st Annu. Allerton Conf., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[5] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic´, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Commun., IEEE Int. Conf. on, Glasgow, Jun. 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[6] J. Sun, O. Y. Takeshita, and M. P. Fitz, “Analysis of trapping sets for LDPC codes using a linear system model,” in Proc. of the 42nd Annu. Allerton Conf., Oct. 2004, pp. 1701–1702.
[7] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jul. 2010.
[8] J. Thorpe, “Low-complexity approximations to belief propagation for LDPC codes,” Oct. 2002, unpublished, online.
[9] J. Chen and M. P. Fossorier, “Density evolution for BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes and their quantized versions,” in Global Telecommun. Conf., IEEE, vol. 2, Taepei, Nov. 2002, pp. 1378–1382.
[10] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[11] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic´, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Global Telecommun. Conf., IEEE, San Francisco, Nov. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[12] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[13] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Global Telecommun. Conf., IEEE, vol. 2, San Antonio, Nov. 2001, pp. 1036–1036E.
[14] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[15] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[16] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Global Telecommun. Conf., IEEE, vol. 2, San Antonio, Nov. 2001, pp. 1021–1025.
[17] S. La¨ndner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Wireless Networks, Commun. and Mobile Computing, 2005 Int. Conf. on, Maui, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635 vol.1.
[18] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” in preparation.
[19] C. Meyer, Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra. Philadelphia: SIAM, 2000.

211
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

