IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2011

585

Strong Secrecy on the Binary Erasure Wiretap Channel Using Large-Girth LDPC Codes
Arunkumar Subramanian, Student Member, IEEE, Andrew Thangaraj, Member, IEEE, Matthieu Bloch, Member, IEEE, and Steven W. McLaughlin, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—For an arbitrary degree distribution pair (DDP), we

construct a sequence of low-density parity-check (LDPC) code en-

sembles with girth growing logarithmically in block-length using

Ramanujan graphs. When the DDP has minimum left degree

at least three, we show using density evolution analysis that the

expected bit-error probability of these ensembles, when passed

through a binary erasure channel with erasure probability ,

decays as

with the block-length for positive

constants and , as long as is less than the erasure threshold

of the DDP. This guarantees that the coset coding scheme

using the dual sequence provides strong secrecy over the binary

erasure wiretap channel for erasure probabilities greater than

.

Index Terms—Binary erasure channels, density evolution, information-theoretic security, large girth, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, secrecy capacity, strong secrecy, wiretap channels.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE notion of information-theoretic security on a communication system with a passive eavesdropper was

first introduced by Shannon in [1]. This model consists of

three parties—Alice, Bob, and Eve; Alice wants to convey a

secret message to Bob without revealing it to Eve, who can

passively intercept the transmission. Shannon’s model involves

noiseless communication channels and secret communication

can be achieved only if Alice and Bob share an encryption key

that is not known to Eve. Alice converts the message into

an -symbol cryptogram using the key and transmits

the cryptogram to Bob. The communication scheme is said to

attain perfect secrecy if

. Shannon proved that

perfect secrecy is guaranteed only if

. In other

words, Alice and Bob must share a secret key that is at least as

long as the confidential message.

Wyner [2] introduced an alternative model called the wiretap

channel where communication occurs over noisy channels,

with Eve receiving a degraded version of Bob’s received signal.

Csiszár–Körner [3] considered a generalization of this model

Manuscript received September 29, 2010; revised February 20, 2011; accepted April 10, 2011. Date of publication May 02, 2011; date of current version August 17, 2011. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Dr. Aylin Yener.
A. Subramanian and S. W. McLaughlin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: arunkumar@gatech.edu; swm@ece.gatech.edu).
A. Thangaraj is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India (e-mail: andrew@iitm.ac. in).
M. Bloch is with the Georgia Tech—CNRS UMI 2958, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 57070 Metz, France (e-mail: matthieu.bloch@ece.gatech.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2011.2148715

where Eve’s reception need not be a degraded version of Bob’s

reception. In these models, it is possible to achieve secret

communication without using a preshared encryption key by

exploiting the fact that Eve’s channel is “noisier” than Bob’s

channel.

Since perfect secrecy may not be achievable over the wiretap

channel for short block-lengths, Wyner introduced the asymp-

totic notion of weak secrecy. If is the -symbol vector re-

ceived by Eve, weak secrecy is said to be achieved if the rate of

information leakage

vanishes as

. The au-

thors of [2] and [3] calculated the secrecy capacity of the respec-

tive channels under the weak secrecy condition. A shortcoming

of weak secrecy is that the amount of leaked information can be

unbounded even if the rate of leakage goes to zero. Maurer and

Wolf [4] highlighted this shortcoming and introduced the notion

of strong secrecy, which requires the total amount of leaked in-

formation

to vanish as

. Though the strong

secrecy condition is more stringent, it does not reduce the se-

crecy capacity [4], [5].

In this paper, we consider the binary erasure wiretap channel

(BEWC) model, where Bob’s channel is noiseless and Eve’s

channel is a binary erasure channel (BEC). This wiretap model

is also called a “binary-erasure-channel wiretap” (BEC-WT)

[6] in literature.1 The BEWC model is important because other

wiretap scenarios can be modeled based on it. This is because

any wiretap system with a noiseless main channel and an arbi-

trary binary-input memoryless channel wiretap can be regarded

[10, Prop. 6.4] as a degraded BEWC. We employ the forward

coding approach to achieve secrecy on our wiretap model. Other

approaches, like the ones in [4] and [11], use public discussion

on authenticated channels in addition to communication on the

wiretap channel to achieve secrecy on the overall system.

In [12], Thangaraj, et al. proposed using the duals of low-den-

sity parity-check (LDPC) codes in a “coset coding scheme” [2],

[7] to achieve weak secrecy on the BEWC. They showed that

this scheme achieves weak secrecy over BEWC for

, where is the BEC threshold of the LDPC code ensemble

under message passing (MP) decoding. Extending this result,

Suresh, et al. [13] showed that strong secrecy on the BEWC can

be achieved using the duals of short-cycle-free LDPC codes in

1Liu, et al. [6] considered a generalized version of our BEWC model where there is a binary-input memoryless symmetric-output wiretap, and called it a type-II wiretap model. The original type-II wiretap model introduced by Ozarow–Wyner [7] has a noiseless main channel with a fixed number of transmitted bits revealed to Eve, who can also choose which bit locations are revealed to her. These two wiretap models are different—in [6], the wiretapper’s channel is memoryless, whereas in [7] it is not.
In [6], the BEWC model is called a BEC-WT. Contrastingly, Rathi, et al. [8], [9] use BEC-WT to denote the wiretap model with a BEC main channel and an independent BEC wiretapper’s channel.

1556-6013/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2011

the coset coding scheme. They first show that a sufficient con-

dition for strong secrecy is to have the MP block-error proba-

bility decay as

. Using a stopping-set-based analysis,

they prove that short-cycle-free LDPC code ensembles satisfy

this condition. Specifically, they show that strong secrecy is

achieved on BEWC for

, where is the lower

bound on error-floor of LDPC codes defined in [14]. Since

, there is a gap between the strong and weak secrecy thresholds for finite-girth ensembles.

Fig. 1. Binary erasure wiretap channel model.

The work presented in this paper is based on the approach of

[12] and [13]. We show that the duals of “large-girth” LDPC codes achieve strong secrecy on the BEWC with no gap between the strong and weak secrecy thresholds. We do this by first analyzing the asymptotic behavior of the bit-error probability estimate given by density evolution. We then construct irregular Tanner graphs for arbitrary degree distribution pairs (DDPs) such that the girth of these graphs increases logarithmically in the number of vertices. This construction is based on the large-girth regular Ramanujan graphs constructed by Lubotzky, et al. [15]. We show that the LDPC codes based on our graphs have a bit-error probability that closely follows the density evolution estimate for increasing iterations. This guarantees that the

Prior to transmission, Alice and Bob publicly agree on a

binary linear code . For each possible value

of the bit secret vector , we associate a coset of given

by

, where is the

parity check matrix of . Note that all the vectors in this paper

are assumed to be row vectors. To convey the message to

Bob, Alice picks a vector from one of the

vectors

of

at random and transmits it. Bob obtains the secret

message from the received vector by calculating

.

The amount of information that is leaked to Eve through her

observation can be bounded [13] as

duals of our LDPC codes will achieve strong secrecy on the

BEWC.

In recent work [16], [17], polar codes have been suggested as methods for approaching the secrecy capacity of general degraded and symmetric wiretap channels, of which the BEWC is a special case. However, since the threshold phenomenon of LDPC codes is observed at shorter block-lengths than polarization, there is enough interest in studying the strong secrecy properties of LDPC code ensembles. Also, the mechanism of security using polar and LDPC codes is different. Security of polar codes is proved using the capacity-approaching properties of these codes. In the case of LDPC code ensembles over the BEWC, we use the duals of codes with a threshold property

where

is the block-error probability under

maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding of the dual code

transmitted over BEC

. This upper bound can be weak-

ened by substituting

with

, the block-error prob-

ability using the message passing (MP) decoder with infinite

number of iterations. Since strong secrecy requires

as

, we have the following result.

Lemma 1 (Adapted From [13, Corollary 1]): If

is a

sequence of binary linear block codes of rate with increasing

block length such that for some

that need not be close to capacity.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give a

brief introduction of the channel model and the coset coding scheme, and relate the strong secrecy condition to the bit-error probability of the duals of the codes used in the coset coding scheme. In Section III, we give a brief overview of the density evolution analysis for LDPC codes and state the result regarding the double exponential decay of the density evolution bit-error

then strong secrecy is achieved on BEWC when the dual

sequence

is used under the coset coding scheme.

We use the standard order notations , , , , and as

defined in [18]. From Lemma 1, it is clear that the sequence

achieves strong secrecy on BEWC if

probability estimate as the number of iterations increases. We

then show that this result translates to strong secrecy on the

BEWC using the duals of large-girth regular LDPC codes. In

Section IV, we provide a quick overview of existing construc- Using the union bound on the block-error probability, we get tions for graphs with good girth. We then describe our construc-

tion of large-girth graphs and prove that the duals of the re-

sulting LDPC codes achieve strong secrecy.

where

is the bit-error probability using the MP decoder.

II. COSET CODING SCHEME AND STRONG SECRECY

Corollary 2: If a sequence

of binary linear codes with

increasing block length and rate

is such that the dual

We consider the binary erasure wiretap channel (BEWC) sequence

has a bit-error probability such that

model introduced in [12], which consists of two legitimate

parties, Alice and Bob, and an eavesdropper, Eve (Fig. 1).

The channel from Alice to Bob is noiseless and Eve sees the

bits sent to Bob through a binary erasure channel (BEC) with then strong secrecy is achieved on BEWC when is used

erasure probability .

under the coset coding scheme.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUBRAMANIAN et al.: STRONG SECRECY ON THE BINARY ERASURE WIRETAP CHANNEL

587

III. ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR OF THE BEC DENSITY EVOLUTION FORMULA

The asymptotic behavior of the bit-error probability of LDPC codes under MP decoding can be tracked using density evolution [19, Sec. 3.9]. The main result of our paper is based on the asymptotic behavior of the BEC density evolution expression as the number of iterations increases. Since density evolution gives only an approximate value of the bit-error probability and our aim is to study the asymptotic behavior of the bit-error probability, it is important to understand where and how approximations are made in density evolution.

Fig. 2. Example of a level-2 decoding neighborhood tree.

A. Density Evolution Analysis—A Background

Let be any ensemble of Tanner graphs with variable

nodes. Suppose a graph is selected uniformly at random from

and a random codeword from the associated block code is

transmitted over BEC . The receiver, knowing , tries to de-

code the transmitted word using the MP algorithm. For a family

of ensembles

with increasing , let

•

the probability that a randomly selected edge

in the Tanner graph transmits an erasure message from its

variable node to its check node at the th iteration;

•

the probability that a randomly selected code-

word bit is unknown after iterations.

1) Computation Graphs [19, Sec. 3.7.1]: To evaluate

and

explicitly, the computation graphs associated with

may be considered. Suppose a graph is selected from

uniformly at random and a random edge is picked from . Let

be the variable node connected to . The level- edge-rooted

computation graph of is defined as the subgraph obtained

by traversing from up to iteration depth in all directions ex-

cept along . is a random graph whose distribution depends

only on and . Also,

can be evaluated given the pos-

sible realizations of and their probabilities.

To evaluate

, the level- node-rooted computation

graph , defined subsequently, may be considered. As before,

a graph is selected from uniformly at random. Then, a

random variable node is picked from . is defined as the

subgraph obtained by traversing from up to iteration depth

analysis by considering tree ensembles, which are asymptotic

approximations of computation graphs.

The node-rooted tree ensemble is an approximation of

the computation graph of

. is a random graph

which takes all possible level- decoding neighborhood trees

(see Fig. 2, for example) permitted by

and it is generated

by the following rules.

• The degrees of all nodes are chosen independently.

• The root variable node has degree with probability ,

where is the fraction of degree- variable nodes in

.

• The leaf variable nodes have degree one.

• Any other variable node has degree with probability .

• Check nodes have degree with probability .

The edge-rooted tree ensemble , which is an asymptotic ap-

proximation of , is defined similarly, except for the fact that

the root variable node has degree with probability .

Suppose the block code corresponding to the Tanner graph

is transmitted over BEC . The probability that the root node

is unknown after iterations of the MP decoder, denoted by ,

is given by the recursive equation

, with

. The threshold is defined as the

supremum of all values of for which the sequence con-

verges to zero.

For the ensemble a similar probability may be defined.

We will have

, where

is the degree distribution polynomial from the node perspective.

in all directions. The probability

can be uniquely B. Density Evolution—Asymptotic Behavior

determined given the possible realizations of and their

probabilities.

2) Tree Ensembles [19, Sec. 3.7.2]: While studying the

error-correcting performance of LDPC codes, the codes cor-

responding to the socket permutation ensemble of Tanner

graphs, denoted by

, are usually considered. The

graphs in this ensemble contain variable nodes, whose

degrees are determined by the degree distribution poly-

nomial

, where is the fraction of

It is a well-known result that and exhibit a double-ex-

ponential decay as goes to infinity for

. A proof of this

result for regular codes is provided in [20, Sec. V-A]. For the

sake of completeness, we state the more general result for irreg-

ular codes and provide an alternative proof (see Appendix A)

involving mathematical induction.

Lemma 3: For a distribution pair

with minimum vari-

able node degree

and

, we have

edges that are connected to degree- variable nodes. The

(1)

check-node degree distribution is determined by the polyno-

mial

, where is the fraction of edges as

, where

is a constant.

connected to degree- check nodes.

It is important to note that a similar double exponential decay

In the classical setting,

is considered, and result is not true for DDPs that have degree-2 variable nodes.

and

are analyzed while fixing and increasing . Working out the expressions for this case, we can see that

The possible computation graphs of

are not cycle-free (and ) exhibits only an exponential decay in the number of

and hence enumerating them is cumbersome. Doing an exact iterations. Note that is the expectation of the root-node bit-

analysis of the bit-error probability

for this ensemble is, error probability taken over the possible outcomes of . The

therefore, difficult. Density evolution resorts to an approximate dominating term in this expectation is the contribution of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2011

worst-case trees, namely, the trees that contain only variable nodes of the least degree. DDPs with degree-2 variable nodes form a special case where the contribution by the worst-case trees decays only exponentially.

Assume that there exists a sequence

of

-regular

LDPC codes with

such that their Tanner graphs have

girth at least

with

C. Asymptotic Decay of Bit-Error Probability

Suppose we are given a DDP

with

. For

, let be a strictly increasing sequence of positive

integers and let be such that

(The existence of such codes will be proved in Section IV.) For these codes, we have

for

. Here,

denotes the bit-error proba-

bility after iterations. By the above equation, the dual sequence

for some positive integer . This means that

.

will achieve strong secrecy on BEWC for

.

In particular, we have

for

(we drop the

subscript for convenience). Since is only an approximation

IV. LARGE-GIRTH GRAPHS

of

, this does not necessarily mean that the actual bit-error

probability

itself decays as

. There are only a

few results regarding the “closeness” of the density evolution

approximation. Some of them are:

• For

and a fixed , we have [19, Th. 3.49]

A. Existence of Large-Girth Graphs

For our scheme to achieve strong secrecy, we require a se-

quence of regular bipartite graphs whose girth increases faster

than

, where is the number of vertices. We define a

sequence of large-girth graphs as one with a prescribed degree

distribution whose girth increases as

. These large-girth

graphs satisfy the girth condition required for strong secrecy.

• The “exchange of limits” result by Korada–Urbanke [21].

To achieve strong secrecy, we must find some ensemble

for which

, where is growing with at

least as fast as

. In general,

is not such an

ensemble. For example, any irregular DDP with

does

not satisfy

for any

(see [14, Th. 16]).

The existence of these graphs is related to the problem of cages

[22] in graph theory. A

cage is a vertex minimal -regular

graph of girth . Erdös and Sachs [23] showed that cages exist

for all

and

. For a given

, let

be a

sequence of

cages in

vertices. From the upper [24]

and lower [23] bounds on , we have

. This means

that is a sequence of large-girth graphs. Since cages are not

D. Strong Secrecy on the BEWC Using Large-Girth Regular LDPC Codes

necessarily bipartite and we require a sequence of large-girth bipartite graphs, we make use of Algorithm 1 [25, Sec. 3.1], illustrated in Fig. 3. For convenience, we denote the operation

Let

denote the subset of Tanner graphs in performed by this algorithm by

whose girth is at least . Clearly, the level- compu- straightforward result.

. We note the following

tation graphs of

are cycle free. This means that

any possible outcome of is also a possible outcome of . Algorithm 1 Constructing a bipartite graph given any graph

This does not necessarily mean that and are identically [25, Sec. 3.1]

distributed and, therefore,

is not necessarily true

for

.

The regular LDPC code ensemble

is

a special case for which and are equal to a unique tree

. Since

is calculated from in the same way as

is calculated from , we have

. Using a similar

reasoning, we can also say that

.

In essence, density evolution analysis is approximate because

it makes the following assumptions.

1: Given a graph in vertices, create an identical copy

with

. Let

be a

graph homomorphism.

2: Create a graph with vertex set

and edge set

. That is, if ,

,

,

and

(or

equivalently, if

), then ,

.

1) The decoding neighborhood is a tree.

2) The node degrees in the decoding tree are independent.

Lemma 4: Given a graph , if

then

For large-girth Tanner graphs, the first assumption is true. For

.

large-girth regular Tanner graphs, there is a unique decoding By the above lemma,

is a sequence of large-

neighborhood with only one choice for variable-node degrees girth -regular bipartite graphs. Using this sequence, it is pos-

and only one choice for check-node degrees, and hence the sible to construct (see Algorithm 4) large-girth

regular

second assumption is also true. However, the second assumption Tanner graphs for arbitrary , .

is not justified for large-girth irregular Tanner graphs. Therefore, However, it should be noted that there is no standard con-

we are able to assert that the density evolution estimate is exact struction of

-cages that works for all and . Moreover,

in the case of large-girth regular LDPC codes, but are unable to the structures of cages for

or for

are not currently

do the same for the irregular counterpart.

known. Though the existence of cages proves the existence of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUBRAMANIAN et al.: STRONG SECRECY ON THE BINARY ERASURE WIRETAP CHANNEL

589

Fig. 3. Illustration of Algorithm 1 to create bipartite graphs.

Fig. 4. Illustration of Algorithm 2 to split a vertex.

large-girth regular LDPC codes, it does not result in a generalized construction algorithm for these codes. In the later sections, we will construct large-girth LDPC codes from large-girth graphs that are not necessarily cages.

B. Existing Constructions for Tanner Graphs With Good Girth

A construction of regular large-girth LDPC codes was pro-

posed by Gallager in his monograph [26, Appendix C]. The pro-

gressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [27] constructs LDPC

codes with a prescribed left (variable-node) degree distribu-

tion and rate. Though empirical evidence shows that PEG cre-

ates codes of good girth, we are unable to prove that they are

large-girth codes. A PEG-like algorithm to construct almost reg-

ular large-girth graphs was proposed in [28]. A modification of

this algorithm to create almost

-regular large-girth LDPC

codes was published as the Almost Regular large-Girth (ARG)

algorithm [29].

Based on the large-girth regular graph construction in [30]

and [31], Kim, et al. [32] constructed large-girth regular LDPC

codes of rate , for any prime power . In other work, Mar-

gulis [33] constructed -regular large-girth graphs and based

on his idea, Rosenthal and Vontobel [34] constructed large-girth

(3, 6)-regular LDPC codes using the algebraic structure behind

the construction of Ramanujan graphs proposed by [15].

It can be noted that the above constructions produce only

large-girth LDPC codes of specific rates and specific (regular)

degree distributions. On the other hand, the construction de-

scribed in Section V produces large-girth graphs of arbitrary

rates and degree distributions.

2) If is a quadratic nonresidue modulo , then

is a bi-

partite graph with

vertices, satisfying

For our purposes, we will not be using the Ramanujan prop-

erty of the graphs ; we will merely use the above lower

bounds on the girth.

When is a quadratic residue modulo , we can use the con-

struction in Algorithm 1 to generate a bipartite

-regular

graph in

vertices with girth at least

. Therefore,

given primes and with

, it is possible to construct a

-regular bipartite graph in

vertices with girth

at least

.

We want to construct -regular bipartite graphs of large girth

where is any natural number, i.e., it is not necessarily the suc-

cessor of a prime number. To do this, we first find an integer

such that

is a prime number, say . The existence of

(and ) is guaranteed by the following.

Theorem 6 (Dirichlet’s Theorem on Arithmetic Progressions

[36, Ch. 7]): Given two positive integers , that are relatively

prime, i.e.,

, the sequence

contains

an infinite number of primes.

Substituting

and

, we obtain the following.

Corollary 7: Given any positive integer , there are infinite

numbers of primes of the form

, with

.

For an arbitrary natural number , we can create a family

of -regular graphs of large girth for some natural number .

Using this family, we can create a family of large-girth -regular

graphs by using Algorithm 2, illustrated in Fig. 4.

Algorithm 2 Splitting a vertex into vertices of smaller degrees

C. Proposed Construction of Large-Girth Graphs

1: Given a vertex in a graph , we partition the set of all

The adjacency matrix of a simple graph with vertices is an

matrix

such that

whenever vertices and

are adjacent, and

otherwise. Consider the eigenvalues

of the adjacency matrix. For a -regular graph, any eigenvalue

its neighbors

into

.

2: We create a new graph by deleting from and

adding new vertices

and connecting to

the vertices in for all .

is such that

. A Ramanujan graph is a -regular graph

such that if is an eigenvalue and

, then

.

For a detailed discussion of Ramanujan graphs, see the book by

Davidoff, et al. [35].

Algorithm 3 Constructing large-girth -regular bipartite graphs.

For primes and , Lubotzky, et al. [15] construct a family

of Cayley graphs

with the following properties.

1: Given a positive integer , find the smallest solution for

Theorem 5 ([35, Th. 4.2.2]): Let , be distinct, odd primes,

such that

is a prime.

with

. The graphs

are

-regular graphs that 2: Pick a sequence of primes greater than . For each

are connected and Ramanujan. Moreover,

such prime , generate the graph

described in [15].

1) If is a quadratic residue modulo , then

is a nonbi- 3: If is a quadratic residue modulo , then

.

partite graph with

vertices, satisfying the girth

Otherwise,

. In either case, is an -regular

estimate

bipartite graph on

vertices and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2011

4: Split each vertex of successively into vertices of

degree according to either version of Algorithm 2. The

resulting graph is a -regular bipartite graph with

vertices and

.

disconnections introduced by node splitting. Furthermore, the proof of our main theorem relies only on Lemma 8 and is valid even though some of the Tanner graphs in our ensemble may be disconnected.

Algorithm 4 Constructing large-girth graphs.

-regular bipartite

1: Let

. Construct a sequence of -regular

bipartite graphs of large girth according to Algorithm 3.

2: Given a -regular bipartite graph with

vertices and

, let

be the bipartition

of the vertices. We have

.

3: Split each vertex in into new vertices of degree

each according to either version of Algorithm 2 to get

left vertices of degree .

4: Split each vertex in into new vertices of degree

each according to either version of Algorithm 2 to

get

right vertices of degree . The

resultant graph is a

-regular bipartite graph with

.

In this paper, we will only consider the creation of equal sized

partitions in Step 1 of Algorithm 2. Under this restriction, the

partitioning of

can be done in two ways.

• Deterministic version. Let

be a simple

ordering of the edges in . If

with

, let

,

, etc.

• Random version. The partitioning of

is done in a

random fashion.

Though the girth properties of the graphs obtained by both the

versions of Algorithm 2 are similar, it is easier to count graphs of

a particular configuration when we use the deterministic version

than when we use the random version.

Lemma 8: Given a graph , if is a graph obtained by

splitting an arbitrary vertex of according to either version of

Algorithm 2, then

.

Proof: Suppose does not have any cycles. In this case,

and the lemma is true.

We are now left with the case where has cycles. Consider

any cycle in . Let be the vertex of that is being split and

let

be the set of new vertices created.

By traversing along and identifying vertices with , we will

get a closed walk in . We show that contains a cycle.

If has less than two vertices from the set , then

is a cycle and we are done. Otherwise, has at least two of

these vertices. We can pick , such that while traversing

from one to the other along , we do not encounter any other

vertices from . Let this path (excluding , ) be denoted

by . Since and are not adjacent and

,

this path has at least two vertices. Therefore, is a cycle

in that is smaller than . Since contains the cycle ,

we have

, which shows that

.

Note that Algorithm 2 can sometimes create a disconnected

graph. That is, may be disconnected even if is connected.

However, we can see that Lemma 8 is valid regardless of any

D. Strong Secrecy Using Irregular LDPC Codes Based on Ramanujan Graphs

For a given DDP

, we can create a sequence of large-

girth

-irregular LDPC codes

of increasing block-

length using Algorithm 5.

Algorithm 5 Constructing large-girth graphs

irregular bipartite

1: Let be the LCM of all the left and right degrees. Let

be the smallest positive integer such that ,

for all , .

2: Let be the smallest natural number such that

is a prime number. Call this prime number . Choose

an arbitrary prime

. Construct an -regular

bipartite graph according to Algorithm 3. has

vertices and

.

3: Split each vertex of into vertices of degree by

successively applying Algorithm 2 (either version) and

denote the resulting -regular bipartite graph by . has

vertices on the left and vertices on the right, where

, and

.

4: Let

be some ordering of the “left”

vertices in and let

be some ordering of

the “right” vertices in . Also, let

be

some ordering of the edges in .

5: Let and be two randomly chosen permutation

functions over the set

.

6: Consider the ordered set

, where

. In this ordered set,

• split the first

vertices into

vertices of degree ,

• split the next

vertices into

vertices of degree

,

•

• split the last

vertices into

vertices of degree .

In the above, we split the vertices according to the

deterministic version of Algorithm 2.

7: Do a similar operation for the check nodes using the

ordered set

, where

, and the

distribution . The resulting graph is a

irregular

bipartite graph with

vertices and girth at least

.

We denote the large-girth graphs associated with by .

Theorem 9: For a given DDP

with minimum left

degree

, the sequence of large-girth

-irregular

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUBRAMANIAN et al.: STRONG SECRECY ON THE BINARY ERASURE WIRETAP CHANNEL

591

LDPC codes whenever

created using Algorithm 5 is such that we have

(2)

for some positive constants

.

Proof: See Appendix B.

The asymptotic decay of the bit-error probability achieved

by the codes in Theorem 9 is faster than the inverse cubic decay

required for strong secrecy. This directly implies that the duals

of our Ramanujan graph LDPC codes achieve strong secrecy on

the BEWC under the coset coding scheme.

E. Discussion

For a given DDP

, we have constructed a sequence

of large-girth LDPC codes based on Ramanujan graphs. For

minimum left degree at least three, we showed that for

,

we have

By Corollary 2, the dual sequence

achieves strong secrecy

on BEWC for

.

1) Difference Between Regular and Irregular Codes: For

any large-girth regular LDPC code sequence , we have

for

. This means that the dual sequence achieves strong

secrecy on BEWC for

.

For irregular codes constructed by Algorithm 5, we have

shown that

the maximum value of

is achieved by the DDP

,

. This means

that the duals of the LDPC codes constructed using Algorithm

5 will achieve a strong secrecy rate of 0.5 over BEWC for

all

. Note that for close to 0.5381, the secrecy ca-

pacity of the BEWC is close to 0.5381. Our coding scheme will

achieve a secrecy rate of 0.5 over this channel, which is about

7% less than the secrecy capacity.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

In this work, we have constructed LDPC codes whose girth

increases logarithmically in block-length using Ramanujan

graphs. In contrast to existing large-girth constructions, our

construction works for arbitrary irregular DDPs. To our knowl-

edge, this is the first such construction. We have shown that

the duals of these LDPC codes achieve strong secrecy on the

binary erasure wiretap channel (BEWC), when their minimum

left degree is at least three. To achieve secrecy capacity on

the BEWC, we require LDPC code ensembles with degree-2

variable nodes. Since our current proof does not apply to these

codes, we must look for new techniques to analyze them. A

multiedge-type construction, similar to the approach of [8]

and [9], might be required to achieve secrecy capacity on the

BEWC.

In addition, our LDPC code ensemble is interesting in the

general area of coding theory even without the secrecy appli-

cation. In particular, one can show (through the relationship be-

tween girth and stopping distance) that the minimum distance of

these codes grows at least as , for some such that

.

Further properties of this construction could be explored in fu-

ture work.

APPENDIX A

for

. This means that there exist codes in the dual se-

quence that achieve strong secrecy on BEWC ( ) for

.

For any

PROOF OF LEMMA 3 , we have

Moreover, most codes in the dual sequence are concentrated

around this average strong secrecy property. This is because the

Markov inequality guarantees that, with probability tending to

1, any LDPC code from the ensemble will have probability of

bit error smaller than

(for any positive integer ).

Our result for regular LDPC codes is stronger than that of

irregular LDPC codes. However, irregular LDPC codes are im-

portant because they have

very close to their rate. There-

fore, irregular codes are instrumental in achieving a secrecy rate

very close to the BEWC secrecy capacity.

2) Gap Between Achievable Region and Secrecy Capacity: where is the average check-node degree and For a secret information rate , we are interested in the min- maximum check-node degree. For imum value of Eve’s erasure probability for which we can en-

sure strong secrecy over the BEWC using our scheme. Since our

proof works only for

, this involves finding an optimal

DDP of rate and

for which the BEC threshold is

as high as possible. It can be noted that

. Most of the

capacity achieving DDP sequences require

(e.g., the

tornado sequence and the right regular sequence in [37]). There-

fore, there is a small gap between the strong secrecy rate achiev- Note that (a) follows from the monotonicity of

able by our technique and the secrecy capacity of the BEWC. follows from the given condition

For example, when we performed a search using the LDP- the notation easier, let us denote

COPT online tool [38] for

and

, we found that we are operating in the region

where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

is the
(3) , and (b) . To make
. Since converges

592

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2011

to zero, there exists an such that

and

. The first inequality will be used later in the proof.

Let us construct a sequence

with

. It is immaterial what takes when

. We then claim

that

for any nonnegative integer . We can prove

this by induction. The base case is when

and it is true by

our choice of . Assuming the claim is true for some integer

, we have

The first inequality is due to (3) and the second inequality is due to the monotonicity of and the induction hypothesis. This proves the claim.
We have

less than the probability of bit-error after a finite number of iterations. Therefore, (4) is true whenever

(5)

is true for some function . The role played by the quantity

is to ensure that we are able to upper bound the left-hand

side uniformly in . We pick

, where

is

such that

. We know that exists because

of the large-girth property of . Let

be the maximum

possible value for .

Proposition 10: For any

, there exists a natural

number such that for all

we have

(6)

where

is the quantity defined in Lemma 3.

We know from Lemma 3 that

Due to our choice of , is positive. For

Note that

. Therefore, we have

To prove the second half, we note that for

The above equation, along with Proposition 10, completes the

proof of the theorem.

Proof of Proposition 10: Consider the computation graph

of (we write for

to simplify notation). Clearly,

if and only if

.

Let be any valid level- tree in the sense that

. Let

be the probability that the root node of is in

error when the tree code associated with is transmitted over

BEC and decoded with iterations of the MP decoder. Note

the following two equations:

From the above, we can see that the proof is complete once we show that for all large enough , we have

Let be a valid level- tree with being the degree of the

root node. Let this tree have variable nodes of degree (in-

cluding the root node, but excluding the leaf nodes) and check

APPENDIX B

nodes of degree . We have

PROOF OF THEOREM 9

(7)

The only sources of randomness in Algorithm 5 for a given

large-girth graph (at the end of Step 3) are the permutation

functions and . The probability distribution of given

Now, consider . The probability that the root node has

is easier to analyze than that of when is not specified. degree is clearly . The edges incident with in

Clearly, (2) is true whenever

will correspond to edges in incident with , the parent

node of . Let

be the neighbors of in

(4) corresponding to those edges. Let

be

the daughter nodes in corresponding to the same edges.

is true uniformly for all possible in Step 3 of Algorithm 5. The number of ways of choosing the permutation function

Note that

denotes the probability of bit-error such that node

has degree is equal to the number of

after infinite iterations of the MP algorithm (or equivalently, ways of putting

into a slot that corresponds to degree

when a stopping set is encountered). This probability is clearly , which is . Note that these slots are numbered. Here,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUBRAMANIAN et al.: STRONG SECRECY ON THE BINARY ERASURE WIRETAP CHANNEL

593

is the number of left (right) vertices in

, where is the LCM of all the degrees in

.

In general, whenever is a valid level- tree, we have

We have

We note the following inequality:

The proof is complete once we show that

(8)

For this, we pick the constant

that

. Observe that for any

(14)

small enough so

and

, we have

(15)

Substituting

in the left hand side of (14), we have

(9)

which goes to 1 as

.

We also see that

REFERENCES

(10) Substituting (9) and (10) in (8), we get

(11) The proof is complete once we show that

First, we note that

and

Hence, there exist constants ,

(12)

grow exponentially in .

,,

such that

(13)

[1] C. Shannon, “Communication theory of secrecy systems,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 28, pp. 656–715, Oct. 1949.
[2] A. D. Wyner, “The wire-tap channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1355–1367, Oct. 1975.
[3] I. Csiszár and J. Körner, “Broadcast channels with confidential messages,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 339–348, May 1978.
[4] U. M. Maurer and S. Wolf, “Information-theoretic key agreement: From weak to strong secrecy for free,” in Advances in Cryptology-Eurocrypt 2000, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, B. Preneel, Ed. Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2000, vol. 1807, pp. 351–368.
[5] I. Csiszár, “Almost independence and secrecy capacity,” Problems of Information Transmission, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 40–47, Jan.–Mar. 1996.
[6] R. Liu, Y. Liang, H. V. Poor, and P. Spasojević, “Secure nested codes for type II wiretap channels,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2007, pp. 337–342.
[7] L. H. Ozarow and A. D. Wyner, “Wire-tap channel II,” Bell Labs Tech. J., vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 2135–2157, Dec. 1984.
[8] V. Rathi, M. Andersson, R. Thobaben, J. Kliewer, and M. Skoglund, “Two edge type LDPC codes for the wiretap channel,” in Proc. 2009 Conf. Record of the Forty-Third Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, 2009, pp. 834–838.
[9] V. Rathi, M. Andersson, R. Thobaben, J. Kliewer, and M. Skoglund, “Performance analysis and design of two edge type LDPC codes for the BEC wiretap channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2010, submitted for publication.
[10] M. Bloch and J. Barros, Physical-Layer Security: From Information Theory to Security Engineering. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011.
[11] C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Crépeau, and U. Maurer, “Generalized privacy amplification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1915–1923, Nov. 1995.
[12] A. Thangaraj, S. Dihidar, A. Calderbank, S. McLaughlin, and J.-M. Merolla, “Applications of LDPC codes to the wiretap channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2933–2945, Aug. 2007.
[13] A. T. Suresh, A. Subramanian, A. Thangaraj, M. Bloch, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Strong secrecy for erasure wiretap channels,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, 2010 (ITW 2010), Aug. 2010 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1004.5540
[14] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2011

[15] A. Lubotzky, R. Phillips, and P. Sarnak, “Ramanujan graphs,” Combinatorica, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 261–277, 1988.
[16] H. Mahdavifar and A. Vardy, “Achieving the secrecy capacity of wiretap channels using polar codes,” in Proc. 2010 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory Proceedings (ISIT), Jun. 2010, pp. 913–917.
[17] E. Hof and S. Shamai, “Secrecy-achieving polar-coding,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, 2010 (ITW 2010), 2010 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1005.2759
[18] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, and R. L. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms (MIT Electrical Engineering and Computer Science). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990.
[19] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[20] M. Lentmaier, D. Truhachev, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “An analysis of the block error probability performance of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3834–3855, Nov. 2005.
[21] S. B. Korada and R. L. Urbanke, “Exchange of limits: Why iterative decoding works,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2169–2187, Apr. 2011.
[22] P. Wong, “Cages—A survey,” J. Graph Theory, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 1982.
[23] P. Erdos and H. Sachs, “Reguläre graphen gegebener taillenweite mit minimaler knotenzahl (Regular graphs with given girth and minimal number of nodes),” Wiss. Z. Martin-Luther-Univ. Halle-Wittenberg Math. Natur. Reihe, vol. 12, pp. 251–257, 1963.
[24] N. Sauer, “Extremaleigenschaften regulärer graphen gegebener taillenweite (Extremal regular graphs of a given girth), I and II, sitzungsberichteosterreich,” Acad. Wiss. Math. Natur. Kl., SB II, vol. 176, pp. 9–25, 1967.
[25] B. Bollobas, Extremal Graph Theory. New York: Dover, 2004. [26] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1963. [27] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular pro-
gressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005. [28] L. S. Chandran, “A high girth graph construction,” SIAM J. Discret. Math., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 366–370, 2003. [29] K. M. Krishnan, R. Singh, L. S. Chandran, and P. Shankar, “A combinatorial family of near regular LDPC codes,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2007 (ISIT 2007), Jun. 2007, pp. 761–765. [30] F. Lazebnik and V. A. Ustimenko, “Explicit construction of graphs with an arbitrary large girth and of large size,” Discrete Appl. Math., vol. 60, no. 1–3, pp. 275–284, 1995. [31] F. Lazebnik, V. Ustimenko, and A. Woldar, “A new series of dense graphs of high girth,” Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 32, no. 1, 1995. [32] J.-L. Kim, U. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, V. Pless, and S. Friedland, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with no 4-cycles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2378–2388, Oct. 2004. [33] G. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982. [34] J. Rosenthal and P. Vontobel, “Constructions of regular and irregular LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2001, pp. 4–4. [35] G. Davidoff, P. Sarnak, and A. Valette, Elementary Number Theory, Group Theory and Ramanujan Graphs (London Mathematical Society Student Texts). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003. [36] T. M. Apostol, Introduction to Analytic Number Theory (Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics). New York: Springer, 1976. [37] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002. [38] R. Urbanke and A. Amraoui, LDPCOPT—A Fast and Accurate Degree Distribution Optimizer for LDPC Code Ensembles Jun. 2010 [Online]. Available: http://ipgdemos.epfl.ch/ldpcopt/
Arunkumar Subramanian (S’08) received the B.Tech. degree in electrical engineering from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras, India, in 2005, and the M.S. degree in electircal and computer engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, in 2008. Since August 2005, he is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, where he is currently a working toward the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests are in areas of coding theory and information-theoretic security.

Andrew Thangaraj (S’00–M’03) received the B.Tech. degree in electrical engineering from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Madras, India, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, in 2003.
He was a Postdoctoral Researcher at the GTL-CNRS Telecommunications Laboratory at Georgia Tech Lorraine, Metz, France, from August 2003 to May 2004. From June 2004, he has been with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Madras, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests are in information theory, coding theory and information-theoretic aspects of cryptography.
Matthieu Bloch (S’07–M’08) received the Diplôme d’Ingénieur from Supélec, Gif-sur-Yvettes, France, the M.S.E.E. degree from Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, in 2003, the Ph.D. degree in engineering from the Université de Franche-Comté, Besancon, France, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology in 2008.
From 2008 to 2009, he was a postdoctoral research associate at the University of Notre Dame, South Bend, IN. Since July 2009, he has been on the faculty of the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology, where he is currently an Assistant Professor based at the Georgia Tech Lorraine campus, Metz, France. His research interests are in the areas of information theory, error-control coding, wireless communications, and cryptography. Dr. Bloch currently serves as the Chair of the Online Committee of the IEEE Information Theory Society. He is the Cochair of the ICC 2011 Workshop on Physical-Layer Security and the coauthor of Physical-Layer Security: From Information Theory to Security Engineering, which will be published by Cambridge University Press in July 2011.
Steven W. McLaughlin (S’90–M’92–SM’99–F’06) received the B.S.E.E. degree from Northwestern University, the M.S.E. degree from Princeton University, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Michigan.
He joined the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, in September 1996. He is also a cofounder of Whisper Communications, a physical-layer security company established in 2009 to commercialize technologies developed in his research group. His research interests are in the general area of communications and information theory. His research group has on-going projects in the areas of turbo, LDPC, and constrained codes for magnetic and optical recording; FEC and equalization for wireless and optical networks; quantum key distribution, wireless and RFID security; and theory of error control coding. He has published more than 230 papers in journals and conferences and holds 28 U.S. patents. He has served as the research and thesis advisor to more than 50 students at the bachelors, masters, doctoral, and postdoctoral levels. He served as an Associate Editor for Coding Techniques for the IEEE TRANSACTION ON INFORMATION THEORY. He also served as the Publications Editor for that journal from 1995 to 1999. He coedited (with Sergio Verdu) Information Theory: 50 Years of Discovery (Wiley/IEEE Press, 1999). He has also served on the IEEE Publications Activities Board (1998–2001) and is a former Secretary of the IEEE Atlanta Section (2000).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

