Construction of IRA-like codes with cycle optimization-constraint and modified extended quasi-cyclic structure

Jing Lei
National University of Defense Technology ChangSha Hunan ,410073, P.R. China leijing@nudt.edu.cn

Bin Chen1,2 and Jianhui Wang1
National University of Defense Technology1
ChangSha Hunan ,410073, P.R. China lierbency@126.com2

Abstract—In this paper, a novel method is proposed for constructing irregular repeat accumulate like (IRA-like) codes with cycle optimization-constraint and modified extended quasicyclic (QC) structure. Analysis and simulation results show that the IRA-like codes not only achieve almost the same performance as the computer-generated random low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, but also have much lower encoding complexity.
Keywords-IRA-like codes; modified extended QC structure; low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes; lower encoding complexity

I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes are strong competitors with turbo codes for error control in many digital systems where high reliability is required, and have some advantages such as good error performance without long interleaver, lower error floor, and lower decoding complexity [1]. But LDPC codes do have an obvious problem that their encoding is very complex owing to the lack of structure. Therefore good LDPC codes are largely computer generated [2], and the construction of low encoding complexity and practical LDPC codes are the hot issues recently. Repeat accumulate (RA) codes [3] and irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) codes [4],[5] provide a good way to reduce the encoding complexity of LDPC codes. The LDPC codes, which are adopted in the standards of Digital Video Broadcasting Satellite-Second Generation (DVB-S2) [6] and wireless broadband standards IEEE 802.16e [7], are just some kind of IRA codes. IRA codes can be seen as a common subset [8] of Turbo and LDPC Codes. Turbo codes have linear encoding complexity and so do IRA codes. A novel method is proposed to construct LDPC codes with cycle optimizationconstraint and modified QC extending method are introduced in our construction of parity-check matrix H. This kind of LDPC codes is called IRA-like codes for their similarities with IRA codes. In this paper, we focus on reducing the number of low-weight codewords as more as possible while increasing the girth of parity-check matrix H of IRA-like codes to obtain better performance.
II. TANNER GRAPHS OF IRA-LIKE CODES
IRA-like codes are some kind of irregular LDPC codes since their column weight is not constant in the parity-check matrices. We analyze the Tanner graphs [9] of IRA-like codes in this section. Variable nodes (VN) of matrix H can be divided into two parts as shown in Fig. 1: information nodes (IN) and parity nodes (PN).

Figure 1. Tanner graph of IRA-like codes.
The structure of connections between PN and check nodes (CN) looks like letter Z and the degrees of PN are almost 2 except the last one whose degree is 1. So matrix H of IRA-like codes can be presented by two submatrices H1 and H2, as shown in (1), where H1 is a sparse m×k matrix corresponding to the connections between IN and CN and H2 is a sparse m×m matrix corresponding to the connections between PN and CN in Tanner graph.

H = [H1 H2 ]

(1)

The structure of submatrix H2 is shown in Fig. 2 and it’s a nonsingular matrix. Studies show that VN of degree 2 make it possible to achieve sparse and optimal irregular properties and simplify the encoding complexity while VN with low degree are bad for decoding performance and convergence.
Therefore, we should make a constraint to avoid obtaining bad or small girth introduced by VN of degree 2 and their CN only. And the constraint is that the maximum number of VN with degree 2 should satisfy the equation below:

Nν ,max (2) = n − k −1 = m −1

(2)

where m is the number of CN.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a6d2e5d2o-n0/J1u1ne/$2246,2.00026©a2t 0081:114I:E07EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2. Structure of submatrix H2 in IRA-like codes.

Figure 4. IN with degree 2.

Figure 5. Two IN with degree 3 connecting to the H2-link without overlapping edges.

Figure 3. H2-link corresponding to submatrix H2 in IRA-like codes.
It is also effective to make up for decoding performance by modifying and optimizing submatrix H1.
An equivalent conversion of Tanner graph corresponding to submatrix H2 is made in our new method and we call it H2-link showed in Fig. 3. H2-link is made up of PN and CN alternatively.
The construction of IRA-like codes is a process of selecting proper connections between IN and CN to obtain larger cycles, better structures of girth and optimal weight-distribution. Our emphasis is on the relation of connections between VN and CN in this paper.
III. CYCLE OPTIMIZATION-CONSTRAINT AND MODIFIED QUASI-CYCLIC EXTENDING METHOD
There are mainly two concerning aspects in the construction of a good parity-check matrix H for LDPC codes. One is to make the girth of H as large as possible to improve its decoding performance, and the other is to reduce the lowweight codewords to lower its error floor according to the construction principles of LDPC codes. And it’s more important to solve these two problems because of H2-link in the constructing of IRA-like codes.
A novel method called cycle optimization-constraint is proposed to obtain large cycles and reduce low-weight codewords with a considerate analysis of possible situations.
The construction of IRA-like codes is a process of selecting proper connections between IN and CN. Conclusions below offer a theoretical support to construct IRA-like codes with optimal weight-distribution and large cycles.

A. Conclusion 1 It’s easy to cause low-weight codewords when the number
of IN with degree 2, as shown in Fig. 4, is not small enough.
B. Conclusion 2 No low-weight codewords will be caused generally when
one IN with degree 3 or more is connected properly to the H2link.
C. Conclusion 3 Two IN with degree 3 connecting to the H2-link without
overlapping edges, as shown in Fig. 5, will cause low-weight codewords if the connections are not designed properly. But it will not cause low-weight codewords if the degrees of these two IN are not both 3.
There are two structures when the connections are overlapping, single cycle without common edges and cycle with common edges as shown in Fig. 6. No low-weight codewords will be caused when two IN with degree 3 or more are connected properly to different CN in H2-link corresponding to the single cycle situation. But it will cause low-weight codewords easily if the common edges are too short.
Figure 6. Situation for overlapping structure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

D. Conclusion 4
Low-weight codewords will be caused when one or more IN with degree 4 are connected to the H2-link and cycles with common IN are short.
E. Conclusion 5
VN in the cycles, containing two IN connected to the H2link without overlapping while one of the IN has even degrees, will not be able to make up of any legal codeword.
To summarize the conclusions above, intervals between any two CN connecting with IN should be large enough to avoid short cycles and low-weight codewords, and IN with even degrees should be connected to the H2-link without overlapping.
Let I(Si,j) be a p×p circulant permutation matrix, and the parity-check matrix H of (n, k) IRA-like codes can be formed as follows:

⎡

⎤

⎢ ⎢

I

(S1,1)

H

=

⎢I ⎢

(S2,1) #

I(S1,2) " I(S1,t )1 I(S2,2) " I(S2,t )1
# # ##

0 1 #

" 0⎥

"

⎥ 0⎥

% #⎥

(3)

⎢⎢⎣⎢I(Sl,1) I(Sl,2H)1 "I(Sl
,t )0"H2

⎥ 1 
1⎦⎥⎥

Where Si,j is the right shift number of I(Si,j) over identity matrix, -1≤Si,j≤p-1, and Si,j∈Z. I(-1) represents a p×p null matrix. I(0)
represents a p×p identity matrix. The number of IN k=tp and
the number of CN m=lp.

We find that many low-weight codewords will be caused if submatrix H1 connects with H2 directly, called direct QC extension [10]. Therefore, some modifications are made in our QC extending method to obtain better performance and we call it modified QC extension.

At first, we use normal QC extending method to construct a preliminary sparse matrix H1'. Then matrix H1 can be obtained by adjusting the row order of matrix H1' properly. Thirdly, matrix H1 should be connected with H2 to obtain the paritycheck matrix H of IRA-like codes finally.

IV. ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we present some simulation results to analyze the performance of IRA-like codes constructed with cycle optimization-constraint and modified QC extension. In all cases, sum-product algorithm (SPA) is used for decoding, and the maximum number of decoding iterations is 100. The SPA decoder stops when either a valid codeword is found or the maximum number of decoding iterations is reached. The code rates and block lengths in Fig. 7 and 8 are 0.5 and 1092.
Fig. 7 shows the bit error rate (BER) plots for direct QC extension and modified QC extension. The result shows that modified QC extending method has much better performance and lower error floor.

Figure 7. Performance of direct QC extension and modified QC extension.
Figure 8. The average number of decoding iterations for modified and direct QC extension.
Fig. 8 shows that the average number of decoding iterations for modified QC extension is much fewer than direct QC extension.
We compare the performance of IRA-like codes with the LDPC codes in [7] as shown in Fig. 9. The code rates of IRAlike codes and 802.16e-LDPC codes are both 0.5 and block lengths are 2054 and 2048. Fig. 9 also shows the performance of IRA-like codes whose code rate is 0.5 and block length is 4140, and it has a code gain of 0.3dB compared with 2054 IRA-like codes while the BER is 10-5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CONCLUSION
A novel method for constructing IRA-like codes with cycle optimization-constraint and modified QC extension has been presented. The construction of codes made by this method results in the reduction of low-weight codewords as more as possible while increasing the girth, and lower encoding complexity is obtained.

Figure 9. Performance of IRA-like codes with different block lengths and 802.16e-LDPC codes.

Figure 10. Performance of IRA-like codes and PEG-LDPC codes.

Performance of IRA-like codes and computer-generated random LDPC codes by PEG algorithm (PEG-LDPC codes) [11] are compared in Fig. 10. Their code rates and lengths are 0.5 and 1710. Fig. 10 shows that their bit/frame error rates are almost the same while the undetectable bit/frame error rate of IRA-like codes is lower than PEG-LDPC codes.

Parity bits of systematic IRA-like codes can be presented as following:

pT

=

H

−1 2

(H1sT

)

(4)

The inversion of submatrix H2 can be computed by an accumulator and it’s easy to compute H1sT which is a product of QC matrix H1 and column vector sT. We need only to store the first row of a QC matrix and many hardware storage resources can be saved. And the encoding complexity is much lower than the computer-generated random LDPC codes by the using of QC structure.

REFERENCES
[1] D.J.C. Mackay, and R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon-limit Performance of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Electron. Lett., Aug. 1996, vol. 32, pp. 1645-1646.
[2] Shu Lin and Daniel J.Costello, Error Control Coding, Second Edition. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ., 2004.
[3] Divsalar D, Jin H, McEliece R, “Coding theorems for Turbolike codes,” Proceedings of the 36th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication Control and Computing. Monticelo, IL, USA, 1998, vol. 9, pp. 201-210.
[4] Jin H, Khaudekar A, McEliece R, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” Proc 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Tonics. Brest, France, 2000, vol. 9, pp. 1-8.
[5] Jin H, “Analysis and design of Torbo-like codes,” Ph.D dissertation. California Institute of Technolgy, 2001.
[6] ETSI TR 102 376 V1.1.1(2005-02), Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) user guidelines for the second generation system for broadcasting,interactive services,new gathering and other broadband satellite applications.
[7] IEEE P802.16e/D12 draft IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks, part 16:air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems[S].[S.l.], IEEE, 2005.
[8] Aline Roumy, Souad Guemghar, Giuseppe Caire, Sergio Verdú, “Design Methods for Irregular Repeat–Accumulate Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2004, vol. 50(8), pp. 1711-1727.
[9] R.M.Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 1981, vol. 27(5), pp. 533-547.
[10] Jinghu Chen, R. Michael Tanner, Juntan Zhang, “Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes by Quasi-Cyclic Extension,” IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORM. THEORY, APRIL 2007, vol. 4(53), pp. 1479-1484.
[11] HU X.Y., Eleftheriou E., and AMOLD D.M., “Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs,” IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 995-1001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

