Modified APP-Based Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity Check Codes

Xinran Wang, Yan Zhang and Jinlei Chen Department of Electronic And Information Engineering Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen Graduate School
Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China wngxinran@gmail.com

Abstract—In this paper, a modified a posteriori probability (APP) based algorithm for the decoding of low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes is proposed. The modified APP-based algorithm utilizes an additional processing in the bit nodes to improve the accuracy instead of the check nodes normalization performed in normalized APP-based algorithm. The modified APP-based algorithm yields desirable trade-off between performance and decoding complexity.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, APPbased decoding, iterative decoding algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, first proposed by Gallager [1], are proved to achieve near Shannon limit error performance and represent a very promising prospect for error control coding. However, due to the fact that the iterative probabilistic decoding of LDPC codes Gallager originally proposed were too computational expensive for hardware implementation, it was not until recently that the LDPC codes were rediscovered by MacKay and Neal [2, 3] and various decoding methods with complexity reduction have been investigated. Among those iterative decoding algorithms, the iterative APP and APP-based decoding algorithms proposed by Fossorier and Imai [4], though with more degradation in performs than that in belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm, still show notable application value for the algorithms tremendously reduce the decoding complexity and storage requirement.
To improve the performance of APP-based decoding algorithm, a normalized APP-based decoding algorithm was proposed in [5]. By using a normalization factor at check node processing, the performance of the APP-based algorithm is considerably improved, while the trade-off between performance and complexity is good.
The main idea of this paper is to develop a modified APPbased decoding algorithm to further reduce the decoding complexity and achieve satisfactory performance. The proposed algorithm performs the scaling at bit node processing, rather than performing the normalization at check node processing as in traditional normalized APP-based algorithm does, and achieves even better performance than traditional normalized APP-based algorithm.

The paper is organized as follows. In section II, the modified APP-based algorithm is described in detail, and the complexity of the proposed algorithm is studied and compared with other algorithms. In section III, the simulation results are reported. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section IV.

II. MODIFIED APP-BASED ALGORITHM

A. Algorithm Description

In the following, we assume BPSK modulation which

maps a codeword of length N c= (c1, c2, ..., cN )T , with cn= 0 or 1, into a transmitted sequence x= (x1, x2, ..., xN )T ,
where xn = 2cn − 1, for n = 1, 2, ..., N . After modulation
x is transmitted over a channel corrupted by additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN) with zero mean and power spectral

density

No 2

W/Hz.The

received

vector

is

denoted

as

y

=

x+v,

where v= (v1, v2, ..., vN )T is the random AWGN with zero

mean and variance σ2 = (2RcEb/No)−1.

We denote the set of all bit nodes connected to check

node m by N (m) ={n : Hmn = 1}, where H is the parity-check matrix with m rows and n columns, and the

set of bit nodes connected to check node m with bit node n

excluded by N (m)\n. Similarly, M(n) ={n : Hmn = 1}

represents the set of all check nodes connected to bit node n,

and M(n)\m represents the set of check nodes with check

node m excluded.

The other notations associated with the iterative APP-based

decoding algorithm are defined as follows. Assume all the

messages passing between bit and check nodes are in the

form of log-likelihood ratios (LLR’s).

Pn: The a priori LLR of the bit node n derived from the received value yn.
Qn: The a posteriori LLR of the bit node n. Rmn: The LLR of bit n which is sent from check node m to n.

z: Hard decision vector, z= (z1, z2, ..., zN )T . max iter: A preset value for maximum number of itera-

tions.

γ: suppression factor γ at bit nodes, 0<γ<1.

The modified APP-based decoding algorithm can be de-

scribed as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a6d2e5d2o-n0/J1u1ne/$2246,2.00026©a2t 0081:108I:E04EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Initialization. For each bit node n,

Pn = yn,

(1)

Qn = yn.

(2)

Iterative processing. Step 1: Hard decision.

zn =

1 if Qn≥ 0; 0 if Qn< 0.

(3)

If Hz = 0, z is considered as a valid decoded word, and

the decoding process terminates; if the number of iterations

exceeds max iter, decoding process ends and a decoding

failure is declared. Otherwise, the decoding process contin-

ues.

Step 2: Processing in check nodes. For each check node

m,

Rmn = (−1)zm⊕zmn min |Qn | ,

(4)

n ∈N (m)\n

where zmn = 1 if Qn > 0; zmn = 0 otherwise. zm is defined as the modulo-2 sum of the hard decisions of all the bits of the check sum m,

zm = n∈N(m) zmn mod 2.

(5)

Step 3: Processing in bit nodes. For each bit node n,

Qn = γ · (Pn +

Rmn).

(6)

m∈M (n)

Go to Step 1. As mentioned in [5], one of the major causes for the relatively bad performance of APP-based algorithm, compared with BP-based algorithm, lies in the fact that the correlation between bit nodes tends to be significant. Hence, the modified decoding algorithm we propose in this paper is focused on the reduction of the fore-mentioned correlation and the overestimation by adjusting the a posteriori LLR of the each bit node. The processing in bit nodes of BP-based decoding algorithm provides an individual value Qnm, denoting the a posteriori LLR of bit n which is sent from the bit node n to check node m, and is used for obtaining Rmn, the LLR of bit n which is sent from check node m to n. However, Qnm is substituted by Qn in standard APP-based algorithm for complexity reduction,

Qn = Pn +

Rmn.

(7)

m∈M (n)

The modified APP-based algorithm proposed in this paper differs from the standard APP-based algorithm by substituting (6) for (7) to achieve the desirable performance improvement. By multiplying the suppression factor γ at bit node processing, two aspects are affected: (i) the LLR value of each bit node is more accurate and tends to be more close

to the Qnm value of BP-based algorithm, and (ii) the check node message passed to bit node is equivalently reduced, which has the same effect as the normalized APP-based algorithm. Thus, the fore-mentioned correlation of each bit node is successfully reduced.
B. Complexity of the Proposed Algorithm
To evaluate the complexity of the proposed algorithm, we first summarize the decoding complexity associate with BP, BP-based, APP-based, normalized APP-based and the proposed algorithms in Table I. In the table, all operations associated with modulo-2 arithmetic have been neglected as conventionally done. The computational complexity is calculated based on rate 1/2 (N, P, 2P ) LDPC code.

TABLE I DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR ONE ITERATION OF BP, BP-BASED, APP-BASED, NORMALIZED APP-BASED AND PROPOSED DECODING
ALGORITHMS AND A RATE—1/2 (N, P, 2P ) LDPC CODE

Algorithm
BP BP-Based APP-Based Normalized APP-Based Proposed

Number of Computations

Additions

Multiplications

N (3P + 1)

N (11P − 9)

4N (P −1)+N/2(log2 2P ) N (2P −1)+N/2(log2 2P )

Divisions N (P + 1)

N (2P −1)+N/2(log2 2P )

NP

N (2P −1)+N/2(log2 2P )

N

It is obvious that APP-based algorithm has the lowest com-

plexity for one iteration. To improve decoding performance,

normalized APP-based algorithm increases complexity by

performs a multiplication at each check node processing, the

total number of multiplications at check node processing is

calculated as

i=M −1

nmul =

dv,i,

(8)

i=0

where dv,i denotes the degree of check node i. In proposed

modified APP-based algorithm, we perform the multipli-

cation at bit node processing instead of at check node

processing, thus the total number of multiplication is reduced

to

nmul = N = M/(1 − r),

(9)

where r denotes the rate of the parity-check matrix H, 0 < r < 1. The complexity reduction tends to be more significant as the depth of check node dv,i increases for a fixed rate r. For LDPC codes, the degree of check node is usually larger than 6, whilst the highest rate used by IEEE 802.1x standard is 5/6. Therefore, comparing (8) with (9) we can conclude that the complexity of the modified algorithm is always less than normalized APP-based algorithm. If we choose the rate of parity-check matrix to be r = 1/2, the number of multiplications by proposed algorithm can be reduced by more than 2/3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) BER vs. different values of γ at Eb/No values from 0.5dB to 4dB for (504, 252, 6, 3) codes. Maximum number
of iterations is set to 50.

(a) BER vs. different values of γ at Eb/No values from 0.5dB to 3.5dB for (1008, 504, 6, 3) codes. Maximum number of
iterations is set to 50.

(b) Bit error performance for iterative decoding of the (504, 252, 6, 3) codes with APP, modified APP-based, normalized APP-based BP-based and BP algorithms.
Fig. 1. BER performance comparison for (504, 252, 6, 3) code.

(b) Bit error performance for iterative decoding of the (1008, 504, 6, 3) codes with APP, modified APP-based, normalized APP-based BP-based and BP algorithms.
Fig. 2. BER performances comparison for (1008, 504, 6, 3) code.

For the determination of the suppression factor γ, however, due to the unfortunate lacking of analytical results, a series of simulations are performed to obtain the optimum value of γ. The results are reported in the next section.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
In the following, the maximum number of iterations has been chosen as the smallest value for which near convergence performance of the algorithm considered is achieved. Fig. 1(a) shows the bit error ratio (BER) performance of the modified APP-based decoding algorithm with different suppression factor γ. The randomly constructed code is taken from [6] with parameters (N, K, dv, dc) = (504, 252, 6, 3).
Our simulation results show that the optimum value of γ minimizing BER is not sensitive to Eb/No values (also known as signal to noise ratio, SNR). By the inspection of Fig. 1(a), we select γ= 0.40 as the optimum value for bit node information suppression since the minimum BER is

achieved when γ is set to 0.40 regardless of the different channel SNR which varies from 0.5dB to 4.0dB.
Fig. 1(b) shows the BER performances of standard APPbased decoding algorithm, modified APP-based decoding Algorithm and BP-based decoding algorithm tested on the randomly constructed (504, 252, 6, 3) codes. For modified APP-based algorithm, γ is set to 0.40.
We conduct the same procedure for a randomly constructed (1008, 504, 6, 3) code and an irregular (1944, 1485) code taken from IEEE 802.11n standard. Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 3(a) show the BER performance of the proposed algorithm with various values of γ for both codes respectively. By the inspection of both figures, we can observe that the best BER performances are achieved when the value of γ is set to approximately around 0.40. Compare Fig.2(a) and Fig. 3(a) with Fig. 1, we can conclude that the optimum value of γ is not sensitive to rate or code length. Fig. 2(b) and Fig.3(b)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) BER vs. different values of γ at Eb/No values from 0.5dB to 4dB for (1944, 1485) codes. Maximum number of iterations
is set to 50.

(b) Bit error performance for iterative decoding of the irregular (1944, 1458) codes with APP, modified APP-based, normalized APP-based BP-based and BP algorithms.

Fig. 3. BER performances comparison for an irregular rate—3/4 (1944, 1458) code

show the BER performances of various decoding algorithms tested on the (1008, 504, 6, 3) code and the (1944, 1485) code respectively, where γ is set to 0.40 for proposed algorithm.
Our experiments show that the modified APP-based algorithm achieves very good performances. For all the three tested codes in our simulations, proposed algorithm performs better than normalized APP-based algorithm. Compare to APP-algorithm, the proposed algorithm achieves about 1dB improvement for (504, 252, 6, 3) and (1008, 504, 6, 3) codes, and more than 0.5dB improvement for irregular (1944, 1458) codes. For short code such as (504, 252, 6, 3) codes, the performance of proposed algorithm is even better than BP-based algorithm. Furthermore, the average number of iterations for each SNR of the proposed algorithm is also considerably small, Fig. 4 shows the average number of iterations of various decoding algorithms for the (504, 252, 6, 3) codes.
Fig. 4. Average number of iterations for (504, 252, 6, 3) code

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a modified APP-based decoding algorithm for LDPC codes to improve the decoding performance. The algorithm adjusts the bit nodes message rather than normalizing the check node message as the traditional algorithms do. The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm achieves very good performance for different rates and code lengths. For short codes, the performance of the proposed algorithm is even better than BP-based algorithm. By adding a suppression factor in bit nodes processing rather than in check nodes processing, the computational complexity and memory requirement of the algorithm is further reduced, which is very attractive in hardware implementation for that the reductions can be translated to lower area and power consumption in VLSI chips.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank D. J. C. MacKay for providing the generator matrices of the LDPC codes used in this paper by allowing access to his website.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp.399-431, Mar. 1999.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters 32(18), pp. 16451646, Aug. 1996.
[4] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´ and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEETrans.Commun.,vol.47, pp. 673-680, May1999.
[5] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Decoding low-density parity check codes with normalized APP-based algorithm,” Global Telecommunications Conf. 2001, pp. 1026-1030.
[6] Mackay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes, http://www.inference. phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.htmll25, Cited Sep 30 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

