Area- and Energy-Efficient High-Throughput LDPC Decoders with Low Block Latency

Matthias Korb, Tobias G. Noll
Chair of Electrical Engineering and Computer Systems, RWTH Aachen University Schinkelstr. 2, 52062 Aachen, Germany, korb, tgn@eecs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract— The challenge in designing LDPC decoders is the many parity checks the symbol participates in. For the next

efficient realization of the global communication between the decoding iteration the A-priori information considered in the

two basic component types of such a decoder. Tight timing parity check j is calculated as follows

constraints in high-performance applications demand for a dedicated interconnect, which in general negatively affects the decoder features, especially the silicon area. Various approaches

L(qij ) = L(ci ) + ∑ L(rij') = L(Qi ) − L(rij ).

(2)

∀j'\ j

to reduce this impact have been discussed in literature which

Both equations base on the extrinsic principle. In (2) for

typically consider only a few if not just one level of the CMOS example the new A-priori information for parity check j does

design process. However, for hardware efficient not contain the A-posteriori information from parity check j.

implementations a joint optimization on all design levels is

mandatory. In this work we exemplarily present such an

Tight timing constraints of high-performance applications

optimization for a (6, 32)-regular (2048, 1723) LDPC code require a parallel implementation of all m parity checks and a

ranging from an analysis of fix-point realizations of the decoding parallel calculation of the new A-priori values for all n

algorithm to an optimization on physical implementation level symbols limiting the block size to a few thousand. Therefore,

which can be applied to other codes, as well. The resulting m so called check- and n bit-nodes are instantiated in the

decoder was implemented in a 40-nm CMOS technology. Circuit decoder, which perform the calculation of eq. (1) and (2),

simulations of extracted netlists reveal an ATE-complexity respectively. These nodes are connected by a dedicated

reduction of more than one order of magnitude compared to realization of the complex global interconnect defined by the

known decoder implementations.

‘1’-entries in H. In 2002 the first decoder implementation was

I. INTRODUCTION

published ([2]) featuring a bit-parallel interconnect. In general

LDPC-Codes allow for an error correction capability the number of metal layers in a CMOS process is not almost reaching the Shannon Limit and, therefore, they are sufficient for a realization of a bit-parallel global interconnect.

applied in many actual and next generations’ communication For such a decoder the silicon area needs to be artificially standards. The code can be defined by a parity check matrix H expanded leading to a low utilization of the active silicon area in which each of the n columns represents one received (50 % in [2]). In the last decade various approaches to reduce

symbol and each of the m rows one parity check. Therein, the the silicon area requirements have been introduced varying distribution of the ‘1’-entries defines which symbol from a modification of the decoding algorithm [3] (departicipates in what parity check. Each iteration of the iterative gradation of decoding performance), reuse of the node logic in

decoding algorithm can be split into two phases: In the first combination with an extensive pipelining scheme [4] (increase

phase all parity checks are processed and new A-posteriori of block latency), and a bit-serial realization of the node information L(rij) is derived for each participating symbol i. communication [5] (degradation of throughput). All these Considering for example a Min-Sum-decoding algorithm [1] schemes perform a trade-off between silicon area and energy

the A-posteriori information is calculated as follows

[ ] [ ] L(rij ) = ∏ sign L(qi' j ) ∀i'\i

⋅ min ∀i'\i

L(qi' j )

per iteration and/or throughput/block latency, or even worse decoding performance. To break-through this trade-off a joint (1) optimization on all design levels ranging from algorithmic level down to the physical implementation level is mandatory.

with L(qij) representing the A-priori information of symbol

In [6] we already presented an architectural design space

i for check node j. The number dC of ‘1’-entries per row in H exploration which resulted in a new area and latency

defines the number of participating symbols in that parity- optimized high-throughput bit-serial architecture. Based on check. In the second phase all A-posteriori information L(rij) this architecture a combined optimization scheme including all and the received channel information L(ci) are combined to a design levels from the algorithmic down to the physical

new estimation L(Qi) of the received symbol i. Here, dV, being implementation level is introduced in the following. Although, the number of ‘1’-entries per column in H, defines in how exemplarily a (6,32)-regular (2048,1723) LDPC code is

This work was partially supported by DFG (grant NO 281/11-2)

978-1-4577-0704-9/10/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

75

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

considered, the presented concept obviously can be applied to other LDPC codes, as well.
II. ALGORITHMIC LEVEL: HARDWARE-EFFICIENT FIX-POINT
REALIZATION
The advantage of the Min-Sum in comparison to the SumProduct algorithm is the need for only basic arithmetic operations. However, the Min-Sum algorithm results in a reduced decoding performance. This is due to the comparatively large magnitudes of the A-posteriori information. To improve the decoding performance the magnitudes can be reduced by a post-processing function (ppf) [1] allowing for a decoding performance comparable to the one of the SumProduct algorithm for the considered block length range.

a)

b)

c)

Fig. 1 Post-processing functions

Mainly, there are two types of ppf’s: In the so-called offset correction the magnitudes are reduced by subtraction (see Fig. 1 a) and b) for two possible realizations). The other type is reduction by normalization (Fig. 1 c)). The decoding performance of the different post-processing types is illustrated in Fig. 2. Therein, the analytically derived optimal normalization factor for the considered code of 0.6 results in the best decoding performance [7]. On the other hand, from a hardware perspective the reduction by subtraction seems to be favorable as they avoid the need for a multiplier.

100

uncoded

no ppf

type a) β = 3, ε= 5

type b) β = 3, λ = 5

type c) factor 0.6

10-5

BER BER

10-10

3

3.25 3.5 3.75

4

SNR [dB]

a) (β, ε, λ in LSBs)

b)

Fig. 2 Decoding performance analysis of fix-point Min-Sum decoder

However, when comparing hardware-costs of the ppfs on physical implementation level it becomes obvious that some normalization factors can be realized in an even more hardware-efficient way. The decoding performance of some of such factors is shown in Fig. 2 b). Interestingly, the decoding performance of the normalization factor 0.5 is very close to the optimal decoding performance. Additionally, this factor even reduces the hardware-complexity as the multiplication is just a rewiring and the word length of the A-posteriori messages is reduced by one bit.

III. ARCHITECTURAL LEVEL: IMPROVEMENT OF LOW-LATENCY BIT-SERIAL DECODER ARCHITECTURE
Typically, as the ppf reduces the magnitudes of the Aposteriori information, it is realized at the output of the check-

nodes. From a hardware perspective this location is also preferable, as the information is compressed to a minimum here ([6]). However, the implementation of the normalization factor of 0.5 at the output of the bit-node reduces the effective word length of the messages in the decoder loop. As the ppf is strictly increasing, the realization before the minimum search results in the same A-posteriori information as for the realization after the minimum search and, thus, does not affect the decoding performance. The resulting decoder loop and the timing diagram for one iteration and a message word length of w are illustrated in Fig. 3. In comparison to the architecture in [6], which already allows for a small number of clock cycles per iteration, the number of clock cycles per iteration can even be reduced by one to w+2.

min search

ppf

storage element

012

w-2 w-1 w w+1 w+2

bit out [w-2:0 ]

check in

s

sat.

&

adder

ppf

check out

s

bit in [w-2:0 ]

Fig. 3 LDPC decoder loop and timing diagram
IV. ARITHMETIC AND CIRCUIT LEVEL: MSB-FIRST MULTI-
OPERAND ADDER
The proposed architecture contains a bit-parallel implementation of the multi-operand adder in the bit-node leading to a long critical path. The primary idea to reduce this path is to exploit the MSB-first bit-serial arrival of the messages and calculate the dV A-priori information L(qij) and the estimation L(Qi) bit-serially. Therefore, in each clock cycle the partial sums of L(Qi) and of the dV A-priori information are generated. Subsequently, these sums are accumulated in dV+1 accumulator units (AU). Such a bit-serial bit-node suffers from the following problems: While the received messages use a sign-magnitude representation a two’s complement representation would be preferable for the multi-operand adder. However, due to the MSB-first data-flow a conversion is not possible. Furthermore, the relatively short word-length reduces the achievable area improvement in comparison to a bit-parallel node. Without any optimization the silicon area would be increased. Finally, there still is a ripple path over the whole message word length in the AU which is comparable to the critical path in a bit-parallel implementation leading to a low clock frequency.
An optimization on arithmetic and circuit level to overcome these drawbacks results in the bit-node illustrated in Fig. 4. The multi-operand adder is realized using a one’s complement number representation. Therefore, the conversion is performed before the partial sum generation. In parallel two’s complement correction terms are derived based on the signs of the dV A-posteriori information and fed into the accumulator units in the following clock cycles. To reduce the complexity of the node reuse approaches on arithmetic and circuit level are applied: For example it can be exploited that only two different individual partial sums occur. If the bit of input L’(rij) is ‘0’ the individual partial sum is the partial sum of L(Qi), otherwise it is decremented by ‘1’. In the bit-node

76
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

only these two partial sums (ps und psDEC) are calculated and broadcasted to the accumulator units.

blocks. For certain problems the limited parameterization of commercial placers can lead to suboptimal placements. Therefore, also a custom simulated annealing (SA) process has been realized to support the design flow.
The available Manhattan length of the global interconnect can for example be increased by reducing the interconnect requirements of the internal node connections. A block diagram of the considered check-node is illustrated in Fig. 6 a). The logic can be clustered into 114 cells of only three different types: register cells (R) containing the in- and output registers, XOR-gates for the sign calculation (X), and bitserial compare-and-swap elements (CS) realizing the minimum operation of eq. (1). In a first step the Manhattan-length is reduced by optimizing the placement of the cells.

Fig. 4 MSB-first bit-node
The hardware in the decoder loop is not utilized in three clock cycles per iteration as can be seen for example for the bit-out registers in the timing diagram in Fig. 3. Thus, the utilization of the decoder is only (w-1)/(w+2). While the conversion from two’s complement into sign magnitude representation is for example done in clock cycle 0 the accumulation of the partial sums is performed in clock cycles 4 to w+1. Thus, the required half adders can be time-shared as shown in a more detailed illustration of an AU in Fig. 5. If selC is high, the four half adders perform the conversion, otherwise they are used to accumulate the partial sums. Additionally, a carry-select principle is applied in the AU to reduce the critical path. In total the proposed bit-serial bit-node reduces the critical path by about 30 % in comparison to a bit-parallel implementation using approximately the same silicon area.
Fig. 5 Optimized accumulator unit
V. PHYSICAL IMPLEMENTATION LEVEL: ROUTING OPTIMIZED
DESIGN FLOW
Bit-serial architectures feature a significantly reduced interconnect complexity. Nevertheless, the interconnect still has a negative impact on the decoder features. In [5] the area utilization is for example only 72 %, which is low even for a standard-cell design. To reduce this impact the interconnect complexity has to be reduced on the physical implementation level, as well. Therefore, a hybrid design flow combining a semi-custom design for the irregular logic such as the controller and an in-house data-path generator based design for the regular node array is applied. The latter especially allows for a routing optimization in which two approaches are considered: Increase the available routing resources and in parallel reduce the routing requirements of the global interconnect by optimizing the placement of the building

a) Block diagram

b) Check-node layout

Fig. 6 Check node and optimized placement

In comparison to the best of 100.000 random placements

with a Manhattan length of 4600 µm the SA optimized

placement (Fig. 6 b)) reduces this length by more than 70 %.

In comparison to a commercial placer the reduction is still

25 %. Subsequently, based on the optimized placement the

check-node layout was realized (see Fig. 6 b)) using the data-

path generator. While this optimization increases the available

routing resources for the global interconnect the placement of

the bit- and check-nodes affects the required Manhattan-

length. Here, the Manhattan length can be reduced by about

20 % in comparison to random placements. The nodes were

placed in the decoder macro based on this optimization and

the global message interconnect was realized by a commercial

VLSI router.

VI. DECODER IMPLEMENTATION AND BENCHMARKING
The decoder was designed in a 7-metal-layer 40-nm CMOS technology. The resulting bit-node and decoder layouts are depicted in Fig. 7. The decoder occupies a silicon area of 2.3 mm2 and consists of more than 18 million transistors. The average (maximum) wire length of the global interconnect between the nodes is 0.8 (2.3) mm. The minimal clock period and the maximal number of iterations for various supply voltages based on circuit simulations of extracted netlists under worst case timing conditions are shown in Fig. 8 a). For a block throughput rate of 3.125 million blocks per second the decoder performs 24 iterations at a supply voltage of 0.9 V yielding a block latency of 320 ns only. The corresponding power dissipation is 1.7 W in the typical corner @ 25°C and 2.3 W in the worst case fast corner @ 125°C with a back-bias voltage of VBS=-0.5 V. Targeting for 13 iterations

77
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the supply voltage can be reduced to 0.8 V leading to a power silicon area vs. ET-complexity trade-off which is done by all dissipation of 0.75 W (typical, 25°C). The power break down other implementations. for the typical case is depicted in Fig. 8 b).

Normalized energy per iteration [nJ]

Fig. 7 Decoder layout and zoom of bit-node layout

b) Power break-down @ 13

a)

decoding iterations

Fig. 8 Performance (slow, 0°C) and power (typ., 25°C) features

The decoder features are compared to other published

decoder implementations in ATE- and ET-charts (Fig. 9 and

Fig. 10). Besides the scaling of the technology feature size the

depicted figures are normalized with respect to the decoder

and technology parameters based on the models derived in [8].

To fairly compare implementations which trade-off decoding

performance for decoder complexity by applying

approximations a scaling with respect to decoding

performance is mandatory. As the required analysis of the

approximate algorithms is not within the scope of this work,

implementations with a significantly reduced decoding

performance [3, 5] are marked by open markers and are not

considered in the following.

Normalized area iteration-period complexity [mm2 ns]

Fig. 9 ATE Benchmarking
In comparison to the bit-true equivalent implementation presented in [4] and featuring (to the best of our knowledge) the lowest published ATE-complexity yet, ATE-complexity is reduced by more than a factor of 10. This factor nearly equally splits up into a reduction of silicon area: 1.8x, iteration period: 2x, and energy per iteration: 3x. As the block latency shrinks linearly with the iteration period our decoder additionally allows for a significant reduction of the block latency in comparison to [4]. Furthermore, it allows for a ET-complexity reduction by a factor of 2.8 in comparison to the fully parallel decoder presented in [2]. Thus, it even breaks through the

Fig. 10 ET Benchmarking
VII. CONCLUSION
Considering high-performance applications the global interconnect highly affects the implementation costs of LDPC decoders. As sole optimizations on single design levels result in a trade-off between silicon area and other decoder metrics, a joint optimization on all CMOS design level has been presented for an exemplary LDPC code to overcome this trade-off. An analysis of hardware-efficient realizations resulted in a post-processing factor which nearly allows for the optimal decoding performance and even reduces the hardware-complexity of the decoder. While optimizations on arithmetic and circuit level further increase the decoder throughput, the routing optimized design flow reduces the required silicon area. An optimized decoder was implemented in a 40-nm CMOS technology for an exemplary code. A benchmarking of high-throughput LDPC decoders reveals a reduction in ATE-complexity by a factor of 10 in comparison to the best known implementation. [9, 10]
REFERENCES
[1] A. Anastasopoulos: "A comparison between the sum-product and the minsum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution," in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001. GLOBECOM '01. IEEE, 2001, pp. 1021-1025 vol.2.
[2] A. J. Blanksby, C. J. Howland: "A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, Rate-1/2 LowDensity Parity-Check Code Decoder," Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 37, pp. 404-412, 2002.
[3] T. Mohsenin, B. M. Baas: "High-Throughput LDPC Decoders Using A Multiple Split-Row Method," in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2007. ICASSP 2007. IEEE International Conference on, 2007, pp. II-13II-16.
[4] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, et al.: "A 47 Gb/s LDPC Decoder With Improved Low Error Rate Performance," in VLSI Circuits, 2009 Symposium on, 2009, pp. 286-287.
[5] A. Darabiha, A. Chan Carusone, et al.: "Power Reduction Techniques for LDPC Decoders," Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 43, pp. 1835-1845, 2008.
[6] M. Korb, T. G. Noll: "Area and Latency Optimized High-Throughput MinSum Based LDPC Decoder Architectures," in ESSCIRC, 2009, pp. 408411.
[7] G. Lechner, J. Sayir: "Improved Sum-Min Decoding for Irregular LDPC Codes," in 4th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Munich, Germany, 2006.
[8] M. Korb, T. G. Noll: "Towards a Scaling Model for Fair Benchmarking of LDPC Decoder Architectures," www.eecs.rwth-aachen.de.
[9] L. Chien-Ching, L. Kai-Li, et al.: "A 3.33Gb/s (1200,720) low-density parity check code decoder," in Solid-State Circuits Conference, 2005. ESSCIRC 2005. Proceedings of the 31st European, 2005, pp. 211-214.
[10] C. Chih-Lung, L. Kao-Shou, et al.: "A 11.5-Gbps LDPC decoder based on CP-PEG code construction," in ESSCIRC, 2009. ESSCIRC '09. Proceedings of, 2009, pp. 412-415.

78
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:14:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

