ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008
Sparse Representations for Codes and the Hardness of Decoding LDPC Codes
Nandakishore Santhi∗ Theoretical Division, CCS Division and the Center for Non Linear Studies
LANL, PO 1663, MS B213, Los Alamos, NM 87545. nsanthi@lanl.gov

Abstract— The Maximum Likelihood Decoding problem is known to be NP-hard for binary linear codes, while belief propagation decoding is known to work well in practice for several LDPC codes. In this paper we give a polynomial time reduction from the Maximum Likelihood Decoding (MLD) problem for binary linear codes to the Weighted MLD problem for (3, 3)LDPC codes. The reduction proves the NP-hardness of Weighted MLD for (3, 3)-LDPC codes. It also provides a method which can be used to transform the decoding problem for dense codes to the decoding of sparse codes. The later problem is often more amenable to the use of belief propagation algorithm. For ease of presentation, we have organized the total reduction in several intermediate reductions, most of which are elementary and easy to follow.
I. INTRODUCTION
We consider the MLD problem for general binary linear codes. We give a series of polynomial time reductions which transform this hard problem to the weighted MLD of sparse codes. The parity check matrix of the resulting sparse codes have row and column weights 3.
After the preparation of this note, we became aware of the results of McGregor and Milenkovic [5] and Xu and Hassibi [6]. Our reduction technique is completely independent of and totally different from the aforementioned results. In [5], the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets in LDPC codes is considered. The following is also proved:
Theorem 1 (MAXLD-LDPC is NP-hard[5]) Maximum Likelihood Decoding of LDPC codes with parity-check matrices of column weight 3 and row weight bounded from above by some (unspecified) constant 3 is NP-hard.
In [6], the authors show that the exact ML-decoding of certain expander graph based LDPC codes is NP-hard. The objective of our polynomial reduction on the other hand is entirely different: we transform the MLD of any binary linear code to the weighted MLD of some sparse code with both column and row weights bounded from above by 3. Thus our reduction could be directly employed in a preprocessing step to transform decoding of dense codes to that of related sparse codes. This can potentially be advantageous in certain instances as dense parity check matrices usually do not do well with the computationally efficient belief propagation algorithm.
∗ Document: LA-UR-08-0210.

II. POLYNOMIAL REDUCTION FROM MLD OF GENERAL LINEAR CODES TO MLD OF (3, 3)-LDPC CODES
In this section we give a polynomial time reduction from MLD to MLD-(3, 3)-LDPC. That is, we show that every instance of Maximum Likelihood Decoding of a linear code C can be reduced to the Maximum Likelihood Decoding problem for a (3, 3)-LDPC code. Here, by an (r, c)-LDPC, we mean a binary linear code with a generalized (redundant) low density parity check matrix having row weight r and column weight c.
The total reduction proceeds through several intermediate reductions – some steps reduce to classical hard problems found for example in Garey and Johnson [2], while some steps have been constructed to make full use of the structure in the problem. Our reduction is shown schematically in Figure 1. To simplify the overall reduction, we give intermediate reductions

MLD

WEIGHTED−MAX−XORSAT

WEIGHTED−MAX−3XORSAT

WEIGHTED−MAX−3SAT

WEIGHTED−MAX−2SAT

MAX−CUT

MLD−CUTSETCODE

MLD−(3,3)−LDPC

Figure 1: Polynomial reduction from MLD to MLD-(3, 3)-LDPC

from MLD to various well known problems – that is, solving any of these problems in polynomial time implies a polynomial solution to the MLD problem. We rely on the specific form of the weighted MAX-CUT graph which results after our reduction from the MLD problem – this aspect will be clear in the subsection which deals with this part of the reduction.
MLD is a well known NP-hard problem. The corresponding decision problem was shown to be NP-complete by a reduction from THREE-DIMENSIONAL-MATCHING by Berlekamp, McEliece and van Tilborg in [1]:
MLD
Problem: Maximum Likelihood Decoding of Linear Codes Instance: An m × n matrix H over F2, a target vector s ∈ Fm2 , and an integer WML > 0. Question: Is there a vector v ∈ Fn2 of Hamming weight WML, such that H vT = sT ?

U.S. Government Work Not Protected by U.S. Copyright 290
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:48:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

In what follows, a step by step polynomial time reduction from MLD to MLD-(3, 3)-LDPC is given. We demonstrate the hardness of the search problem associated with MLD-(3, 3)LDPC by showing that the corresponding decision problem is NP-complete. This will be accomplished by a polynomial time reduction from the decision problem corresponding to MLD.
A. Maximum Likelihood Decoding as an instance of the Weighted Maximum XOR Satisfiability problem
We convert the MLD problem to an instance of a WEIGHTED-MAX-XORSAT problem with polynomial effort. The decision version of the later problem is: WEIGHTED-MAX-XORSAT Problem: Maximum Weighted XOR Satisfiability Instance: A set UX of variables, a collection CX of XOR clauses over UX , a set of positive integer weights w j corresponding to each clause Cj ∈ CX and a non-negative integer WX ∑ j w j. Question: Is there a truth assignment for UX such that the total weight of the satisfied clauses is at least WX ?
Theorem 2 MLD ≤P WEIGHTED-MAX-XORSAT
Proof: Every row of the matrix condition H vT = sT is in one of the two forms:
∑ hi jv j = 0 if si = 0 j
∑ hi jv j = 1 if si = 1 j
where the sum is over F2 and corresponds to XOR. If si is 0, then by negating the last v j which participates in the ith parity check, we can convert the conditions to a common form:
∑ j=1 j
where j denotes a literal (either vl or a negated ¬vl). The set of m such XOR clauses we call the code clauses, denoted KX . Similarly form n simple clauses, each consisting of the single literal ¬v j : j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n} and call this set the radius clauses, R.
Let CX d=ef KX ∪ R be the set of XOR clauses. Assign a weight of (n + 1) to each of the code clauses KX and a weight of 1 to each of the radius clauses, R. Every word a, such that HaT = sT satisfies all the m code clauses. There are 2n−m such words for every target vector s. In addition an MLD word a also satisfies at least (n − WML) of the radius clauses. The total weight of the satisfied clauses is therefore at least m(n + 1) + (n −WML) for the MLD word a. On the other hand, let us consider a non-MLD word a˜. Such a word will either satisfy the matrix condition H a˜T = sT or not. If it does satisfy the matrix condition, then it satisfies less than (n − WML) of R. If it does not satisfy the matrix condition, then it satisfies at most (m −1) of KX . In both cases, the word a˜ satisfies clauses with a total weight less than m(n + 1) + (n − WML). The set of variables UX d=ef {v j : j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}}, the set of clauses CX , the set of weights w j associated with the clause CX and

the target weight of WX d=ef m(n + 1) + (n −WML) together form an instance of a WEIGHTED-MAX-XORSAT problem, solving which solves the MLD problem.
B. Maximum Likelihood Decoding as an instance of the Weighted Maximum 3-XOR Satisfiability problem
We transform MLD problem to an instance of the WEIGHTED-MAX-3XORSAT problem, the decision version of which is as follows: WEIGHTED-MAX-3XORSAT Problem: Maximum Weighted 3-XOR Satisfiability Instance: A set U3X of variables, a collection C3X of XOR clauses over U3X such that each clause has 3 literals, a set of positive integer weights w j corresponding to each clause Cj ∈ C3X and a non-negative integer W3X ∑ j w j. Question: Is there a truth assignment for U3X such that the total weight of the satisfied clauses is at least W3X ?
Proposition 1 Let C d=ef ( 1 + 2 + · · · + t ). Then there exists a truth assignment which satisfies C iff there exists an auxiliary variable u and a truth assignment such that both the clauses C1 and C2 are satisfied, where C1 d=ef ( 1 + 2 + · · · + t−2 + u) and C2 d=ef (¬u + t−1 + t ).
Proof: C = 1 iff either ( 1 + 2 + · · · + t−2) ∧ ¬( t−1 + t ) or ¬( 1 + 2 + · · · + t−2) ∧ ( t−1 + t ). In the first case, setting u = 0, and using the truth assignment for the literals j which satisfies C, both C1 and C2 are satisfied, while setting u = 1 satisfies neither C1 nor C2. In the second case, reversing the assignment for u has the same effect. Conversely, if setting u = 0 satisfies both C1 and C2, then this must imply the first case and if setting u = 1 satisfies both C1 and C2, then this must imply the second case.
Theorem 3 MLD ≤P WEIGHTED-MAX-3XORSAT
Proof: Let the weight of the ith parity check row be w(hi). If w(hi) = 2 we do not have to add any auxiliary variables for that parity check. Else if w(hi) > 2, applying Proposition 1 and using exactly w(hi) − 3 auxiliary variables uil, we can convert the ith code clause into a conjunction of 3-XOR code clauses. Assign each of the clauses in this conjunction a weight of (n + 1) and pool all the 3-XOR code clauses belonging to the different parity checks together to form a collection of 3-XOR code clauses, K3X . Let C3X d=ef K3X ∪ R and U3X d=ef UX ∪ A , where A is the set of all auxiliary variables introduced. A truth assignment satisfying the maximum weight for the original WEIGHTED-MAX-XORSAT problem now corresponds to a maximum weight W3X = |C3X |(n + 1) + (n − WML) satisfying truth assignment for the WEIGHTED-MAX-3XORSAT problem with a variable set U3X . Also, |U3X | = O(w(H ) + n) and |C3X | = O(w(H ) + n).
C. Maximum Likelihood Decoding as an instance of the Weighted Maximum 3-OR Satisfiability problem
The decision version of WEIGHTED-MAX-3SAT is:

291
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:48:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

WEIGHTED-MAX-3SAT Problem: Maximum Weighted 3-OR Satisfiability Instance: A set U3S of variables, a collection C3S of OR clauses over U3S such that each clause has 3 literals, a set of positive integer weights w j corresponding to each clause Cj ∈ C3S and a non-negative integer W3S ∑ j w j. Question: Is there a truth assignment for U3S such that the total weight of the satisfied clauses is at least W3S?
The following two results are elementary:
Proposition 2 (a) A truth assignment satisfies C d=ef (α + β + γ) iff it satisfies C1, C2, C3 and C4, where: C1 d=ef (α ∨ β ∨ γ), C2 d=ef (α ∨ ¬β ∨ ¬γ), C3 d=ef (¬α ∨ β ∨ ¬γ), C4 d=ef (¬α ∨ ¬β ∨ γ)
(b) A truth assignment satisfies C d=ef (α + β ) iff it satisfies C1 and C2 where: C1 d=ef (α ∨ β ), C2 d=ef (¬α ∨ ¬β )
Now MLD can be transformed into WEIGHTED-MAX-3SAT:
Theorem 4 MLD ≤P WEIGHTED-MAX-3SAT
Proof: Substitute every 3-XOR clause in K3X of weight (n + 1) with a set of four 3-OR clauses each of weight (n + 1) and every 2-XOR clause of weight (n + 1) with two 2-OR clauses each of weight (n + 1) using Proposition 2. Let this new set of 3-OR clause be K3S. Now let C3S d=ef K3S ∪ R.
D. Maximum Likelihood Decoding as an instance of the Weighted Maximum 2-OR Satisfiability problem
We will now transform the MLD problem into an instance of WEIGHTED-MAX-2SAT. This well known problem has the following decision version: WEIGHTED-MAX-2SAT Problem: Maximum Weighted 2-OR Satisfiability Instance: A set U2S of variables, a collection C2S of OR clauses over U2S such that each clause has 2 literals, a set of positive integer weights w j corresponding to each clause Cj ∈ C2S and a non-negative integer W2S ∑ j w j. Question: Is there a truth assignment for U2S such that the total weight of the satisfied clauses is at least W2S?
Trevisan, Sorkin, Sudan and Williamson [3] give the following gadget which may be verified using truth tables:
Proposition 3 A truth assignment satisfies C d=ef (α ∨ β ∨ γ) iff it satisfies exactly 7 out of the following 8 2-OR clauses:
(α ∨ γ), (¬α ∨ ¬γ), (α ∨ ¬η), (¬α ∨ η), (γ ∨ ¬η), (¬γ ∨ η), (β ∨ η), (β ∨ η)
where η is an auxiliary variable. Moreover, any assignment which fails to satisfy C satisfies 5 of these 2-OR clauses.
Theorem 5 MLD ≤P WEIGHTED-MAX-2SAT

Proof: Earlier we reduced MLD to an instance of WEIGHTED-MAX-3SAT. Any 2-OR code clauses (α ∨ β ), are first converted to a 3-OR form (α ∨ β ∨ β ). Now each of the 3-OR code clauses Cl are replaced with eight 2-OR clauses as in Proposition 3 with a weight of (n + 1) each. This introduces an auxiliary variable ηl each time. Let this set of 2-OR code clauses be K2S and let C2S d=ef K2S ∪ R. The clauses C2S and the corresponding weights so obtained along with the target weight of W2S d=ef |K2S|(n + 1) + (n − WML) is an instance of WEIGHTED-MAX-2SAT, which solves MLD.
E. Maximum Likelihood Decoding as an instance of the MultiGraph Maximum Cut problem
Any graph with positive integer edge weights can be considered a multi-graph with unit edge weights and vice-versa. Therefore we interchangeably use a graph with positive integer edge weights and its corresponding multi-graph. We transform the MLD to an instance of the MAX-CUT problem, the decision version of which is: MAX-CUT Problem: Maximum 2-way Multi-Graph Cut Instance: A multi-graph G = (V , E ) and a non-negative integer K |E |. Question: Is there a partition of V into disjoint subsets V1 and V2 such that the subset of edges in E with one vertex in V1 and the other vertex in V2 has cardinality at least K?
Theorem 6 MLD ≤P MAX-CUT
Proof: Earlier we transformed MLD to an instance of the WEIGHTED-MAX-2SAT problem. Now we take this instance and convert it into a multi-graph max-cut problem. We construct a multi-graph conforming to the set of 2-XOR clauses C2S with integer weights assigned to each clause. The graph construction is similar to the one by McCormick, Rao and Rinaldi [4].
For every variable appearing in various literals within the clauses Cl ∈ C2S, we create two nodes, one for the variable and the other for the negated version of the variable. We also add 3 ∑l|C=21S| wl edges between each of these node pairs, where wl is the positive integer weight of clause Cl.
Now introduce a special node F (meaning logic FALSE). For every 2-OR clause Cl ∈ C2S, such that Cl d=ef ( 1 ∨ 2), we add a sub-graph connecting ( 1, 2), ( 1, F) and ( 2, F) with wl edges each. For every trivial one-literal clause Cl ∈ C2S such that Cl = , we construct a sub-graph by adding 2wl edges connecting ( , F). See Figure 2 for a depiction of the multi-graph construction. Now a maximum cut in this graph has K d=ef 2W2S + 3|U2S| · (∑|lC=21S| wl) edges and corresponds to a truth assignment to the variables in U2S which maximizes the weight of the satisfied 2-OR clauses in C2S.
Indeed the max-cut corresponds to the maximum-weight 2OR assignment – when a 2-OR clause is satisfied, at least one of the up to two associated literals are logic TRUE. Similarly any cut on G will either cut the sub-graph corresponding to clause Cl or not. If it does cut the sub-graph, then exactly 2wl

292
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:48:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

3 ∑l|C=21S| wl

wl

1

2

x1

¬x1

wl

wl

x2

¬x2

3 ∑|lC=21S| wl

F

x|U2S|

¬x|U2S|

2wl

3 ∑|lC=21S| wl

F

Figure 2: Constructing a max-cut graph from the 2-OR clauses.

edges are added to the cut, otherwise no edges of the sub-graph are in the cut. A maximum cut will cut all the variable edges, contributing 3|U2S| · (∑l|C=21S| wl) edges to the cut. See Figure 3. In addition it will cut the maximum number of clause-subgraphs which could be simultaneously satisfied thus having

0

2wl

0

1

2

wl

2wl

2wl

wl

wl

wl

wl

2wl

F

F

Figure 3: All possible cuts through the clause sub-graphs.

the largest total weight and adding an additional 2W2S edges to the cut.
Conversely, every such maximal cut induces a logically valid assignment to the variables in U2S – assign logic value FALSE to all the literals in the vertex partition in the cut which includes the special node F. To all other literals assign logic value TRUE. This is a valid assignment as the nodes corresponding to a variable and its negation always appear in the two distinct partitions of V . Furthermore, this particular variable assignment simultaneously satisfies a set of clauses with the maximum total weight.
F. Maximum Likelihood Decoding as an instance of Graph Cut Set Code MLD problem
Let w ∈ Q+n be a vector of non-negative rational weights and let dw(·, ·) denote the Hamming distance between two vectors in Fn2 weighted in co-ordinate l with wl. Also let 1 denote an all-ones vector of suitable dimension. The cutset code corresponding to a multi-graph G is denoted by C(G ) –

a cutset code is the linear span of the incidence matrix of the graph. Cutset code maximum likelihood decoding is known to be NP-complete by a reduction from the MAX-CUT problem. Here we give a sketch of this reduction, in turn showing a reduction from MLD to MLD-CUTSETCODE. The decision version of the later problem is:
MLD-CUTSETCODE Problem: Integer Weighted Maximum Likelihood Decoding of the Cut Set Code of a Multi-Graph Instance: A multi-graph G = (V , E ), a vector r ∈ F2|E |, a vector of integer weights w ∈ Z+|E | and an integer WCS 0. Question: Is there a vector c ∈ C(G ) such that dw(c, r) WCS?

Theorem 7 MLD ≤P MLD-CUTSETCODE
Proof: Let the incidence matrix of the multi-graph constructed in Theorem 6 be M. The columns of M correspond to the edges and the rows to the nodes. Associate with each column of M the integer number of multiple edges with same end nodes. Let this vector of edge weights be w. Consider the cutset code which is the linear span of the rows of M. Finding the max-cut of the graph is clearly equivalent to finding the codeword c in the cutset code such that dw(c, 1) in lowest.
Remark: The integer weighted Hamming distance can be replaced with the usual (unweighted) Hamming distance: simply replace each column ml in M with wl copies. All other steps in the reduction remains the same.

G. Maximum Likelihood Decoding of a binary linear code as an instance of (3, 3)-LDPC code MLD problem
Let 0 denote an all-zeros vector of suitable dimension.
MLD-(3, 3)-LDPC Problem: Rational Weighted Maximum Likelihood Decoding of (3, 3)-LDPC Codes Instance: An m × n matrix H over F2 with column weight and row weight at most 3, a vector r ∈ F2n, a vector of rational weights w ∈ Qn+, and a rational WLD 0. Question: Is there a vector c ∈ Fn2 such that H cT = 0T and dw(c, r) WLD?

Theorem 8 MLD ≤P MLD-(3, 3)-LDPC

Proof: Let us consider the incidence matrix M of Theorem 7. By construction, the special node F is connected to every other literal node in the graph G . Also the rows of M are linearly dependent, since every column has exactly two 1’s. Arrange the rows of M in such a manner that the node F corresponds to the last row. By arranging the columns of M, it is possible to put it in the following form:

I |P 1| b

(1)

This means that the rows of M excluding the last row forms a linearly independent generating set for C(G ). So let M d=ef
[I | P] be the generator matrix obtained after removing the last

293
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:48:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

row of M. Let H d=ef [PT | I] be the corresponding systematic

parity check matrix. The rows of H have three 1’s each. The columns of PT have arbitrary number of 1’s. Let the
number of 1’s of the lth column of PT be cl. Also let the integer
weight associated with this column in the metric dw(·, ·) be wl. If cl > 3 we can replace the lth column with cl − 2 columns

with three 1’s each. The weight of each of the new columns

in is

the weighted rational. This

Hamming metric will be also requires us to include

now cl −

3clw−ald2diwtiohnicahl

rows to enforce equality constraints for the newly introduced

column variables. In the example of (2), the equality constraint

is enforced by the new row marked with a ∗:

⎡

⎤

···

⎡

⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢····

· · · ·

· · · ·

··· 1 1 1 1 ···

· · · ·

· · · ·

⎤ ····⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

→

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣····0···· ····

1
1 1 0 0

0 ...

1
0 0 1 1

····0···· ····⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥ ∗

(2)

···

Since the original column had four 1’s, the weights associated

with

the

newly

formed

columns

are

wl 2

each,

where

wl

was

the weight associated with the original column.

Let H be the parity check matrix so obtained. Clearly

the number of 1’s in each row and each column of H is

3. Furthermore, the weighted maximum likelihood decoding

of r = 1 w.r.t. H is equivalent to the maximum likelihood

decoding of the dense parity check code.

Remarks:

(a) By construction, the columns of PT have at most O(n)

1’s. Therefore, with a different weight assignment to the

code-clauses, and a more careful analysis one can easily

replace the weighted Hamming distance with the usual

unweighted Hamming distance. However the length of

the LDPC code so obtained is much larger, though still

polynomial in n.

(b) The LDPC matrix H which results after our reduction

has O(w(H )) columns and O(w(H )) rows, where H is

the parity check matrix of the original binary code.

The dimensions of the matrix H determine the complexity of belief propagation decoding of the sparse code.
III. CONCLUSIONS
We gave a polynomial time reduction which took the Maximum Likelihood Decoding (MLD) problem for binary linear codes to an equivalent Weighted Maximum Likelihood Decoding problem of (3, 3)-LDPC codes. The reduction gives a proof for the NP-hardness of Weighted Maximum Likelihood Decoding of (3, 3)-LDPC codes. While the Maximum Likelihood Decoding problem is known to be NP-hard for binary linear codes in general, belief propagation decoding is known to work well in practice for several LDPC codes.
In addition to showing the computational hardness of decoding (3, 3)-LDPC codes, our reduction method provides a way to transform the MLD of dense codes to the decoding of sparse codes. We expect that the use of belief propagation decoding algorithm on the so formed sparse codes will be the subject of a future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Financial support in the form of LDRD ER/DR funds from the Los Alamos National Laboratory and the US Department of Energy (DoE) is gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] E. R. BERLEKAMP, R. J. MCELIECE, and H. C. A. VAN TILBORG, ”On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 24, pp. 384-386, May. 1978.
[2] M. R. GAREY and D.S. JOHNSON, Computers and Intractability: Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness, San Francisco: Freeman, 1979.
[3] L. TREVISAN, G. B. SORKIN, M. SUDAN, and D. P. WILLIAMSON, ”Gadgets, Approximation, and Linear Programming”, SIAM J. on Computing, 29(6), pp. 2074-2097, 2000.
[4] S. T. MCCORMICK, M. R. RAO, and G. RINALDI ”Easy and difficult objective functions for max cut”, Math. Program., Ser. B, 94, pp. 459466, 2003.
[5] A. MCGREGOR and O. MILENKOVIC, ”On the Hardness of Approximating Stopping and Trapping Sets in LDPC Codes,” IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), 2007, Tahoe City, CA, USA, 2-6 Sept. 2007.
[6] W. XU and B. HASSIBI, ”On the Complexity of Exact MaximumLikelihood Decoding for Asymptotically Good Low Density Parity Check Codes,” IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), 2007, Tahoe City, CA, USA, 2-6 Sept. 2007.

294
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:48:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

