ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

Error Rate Estimation of Finite-Length Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Decoded by
Soft-Decision Iterative Algorithms

Hua Xiao and Amir H. Banihashemi SCE Dept., Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada, Email: huaxiao, ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca

Abstract— This paper describes a combinatorial approach to estimate the error rate performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes decoded by (quantized) soft-decision iterative decoding algorithms. The method is based on efficient enumeration of input vectors with small distances to a reference vector whose elements are selected to be the most reliable values from the input alphabet. Several techniques, including modified cycle enumeration, are employed to reduce the complexity of the enumeration. The error rate estimate is derived by testing the input vectors of small distances and estimating the contribution of larger distance vectors. We demonstrate by a number of examples that the proposed method provides accurate estimates of error rate with computational complexity much lower than that of Monte Carlo simulations, especially at the error floor region.

practical interest to efficiently estimate the performance of different quantization schemes in the error floor region. Also, from the operational point of view, our combinatorial approach is based on enumerating the input vectors to the decoder and quantization is required to transform a continuous alphabet space to a finite discrete one. Unlike the approaches of [2], [3], [4], [5], our method does not require the identification of trapping sets and is thus much simpler. Our approach is not only applicable to the error floor region, but also provides good estimates in the waterfall region. The computational complexity of our technique can be much less than that of the Monte Carlo simulation, especially at the error floor region.

I. INTRODUCTION
Performance analysis of finite-length LDPC codes, particularly in the low error rate region (error floor region), is of great practical and theoretical interest. The average performance of ensembles of regular finite-length LDPC codes over a binary erasure channel (BEC) has been studied in [1]. The performance of a given code, however, can be quite different from the ensemble average, especially in the low error rate region [1]. More research [2], [3], [4], [5] has been performed to estimate the performance of a given LDPC code based on identifying and enumerating dominant trapping sets in the Tanner graph (TG) of the code. Inspired by statistical physics, the authors of [6], [7], [8] estimated the frame error rate (FER) of min-sum (MS) algorithm for a given code using the concept of “instanton”, which is the most probable configuration of the noise to cause a decoding error. In an earlier paper [9], we proposed a method to estimate the performance of LDPC codes decoded by hard-decision iterative decoding algorithms over a binary symmetric channel (BSC). This method provides very accurate estimates of both the FER and the bit error rate (BER) over the whole range of crossover probabilities of practical interest. To reduce the computational complexity of the direct enumeration used in [9], we proposed a cycle enumeration algorithm in [10] which reduced the computational complexity by up to several orders of magnitude.
In this paper, we extend the approach of [9] to the performance estimation of (quantized) soft-decision iterative decoding algorithms. In practice, iterative algorithms are implemented in (quantized) fixed-point arithmetic. It is wellknown that the error floor behavior of coding systems depends strongly on the quantization scheme [2]. It is therefore of great

II. ERROR RATE ESTIMATION AND MODIFIED CYCLE ENUMERATION

A. Error Rate Estimation

In this paper, we assume the decoder is implemented in

the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain. Also, the decoders

considered here are symmetric [11]. We thus assume that the

all-zero codeword is transmitted. The channel model is binary

input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with 0

and 1 mapped to +1 and −1, respectively.

For a q-bit quantized iterative decoder, the received values

are first clipped symmetrically at a threshold Cth and then uniformly quantized into 2q − 1 quantization intervals within

the range [−Cth,Cth]. Each interval is represented by q quantization bits. Integer numbers {−(2q−1 − 1), · · · , 2q−1 − 1}

are assigned to the intervals. Thus, the input alphabet of the

decoder is given by: Aq = {−(2q−1 − 1), · · · , 2q−1 − 1}. Operations in variable and check nodes are performed on

integers. The outgoing messages passed along each edge of

the TG are clipped to −(2q−1 − 1) or 2q−1 − 1, for negative

or positive values, respectively.

If the block length of the code is n, we use V = Aqn to denote the set of all possible input vectors of the decoder.

For each input vector r = (r1, · · · , rn) ∈ V, there is a corresponding probability P (r) that r appears at the input of

the decoder. Due to the memoryless nature of the channel, the

elements of the input vector to the decoder are independent

and identically distributed (i.i.d) discrete random variables

with probability mass function (pmf) p(r). Thus, P (r) =

n i=1

p(ri).

The

pmf

p(r)

depends

on

the

signal-to-noise

ratio

(SNR) and the quantization scheme. For example, for the

quantization scheme described above, if the variance of the

978-1-4244-2571-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

439

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

noise is σ2 and if integer r ∈ Aq corresponds to the interval [x1, x2], then we have:

p(r)

=

Q(

1

− x2 σ

)

−

Q(

1

− x1 σ

),

(1)

where the Q function is defined by: Q(z)

√1 2π

∞ z

e−x2 /2 dx.

In [9], for hard-decision algorithms, the set of error patterns

(input vector set) is partitioned according to the Hamming

weight of the vectors, or equivalently, the Hamming distance

between the vectors and the all-zero vector. In this work, for

a q-bit (q ≥ 2) iterative decoder, we use Euclidean distance instead of Hamming distance. Let R = (2q−1 − 1, · · · , 2q−1 −

1). Since we assume that the all-zero codeword is transmitted,

R is the most reliable input vector, and intuitively, the larger

the Euclidean distance between an input r and R, the higher

the probability that r cannot be corrected by the decoder.

Let Sd denote the set of all input vectors whose Euclidean distance to R is d, and Ed be the subset of Sd whose elements cannot be correctly decoded by the decoder. Since the set of

possible values for d is discrete and finite, the FER can be

expressed as:

F

ER

=

dM
P
d=dm

(Ed)

=

dM d=dm

P P

(Ed) (Sd)

P

(Sd

),

(2)

where dm is 0 (i.e., |Ed|

the =

0m, i∀nidm<umdEmu)c, liadnedanddMist=anc(e2qsu−ch2t)h√atn|Eisd

|= the

maximum Euclidean distance between an input vector and

R. P (Sd) is the probability of having an input vector with

distance

d

to

R

and

P (Ed) P (Sd)

is

the

conditional

probability

that

the decoding fails given that the input vector has Euclidean

distance d to R. Following a similar approach as in [9], we

first obtain the set Edm as accurately as possible. We then estimate the contributions of vectors of distance larger than

dm to the total FER based on the information of Edm . We define the following partial ordering of the input vectors. Definition 1: An input vector r is below another vector t

(denoted by r≤t), iff ri ≤ ti, 1 ≤ i ≤ n. From the definition, it is clear that if r is below t, the

Euclidean distance between r and R is larger than or equal

to the one between t and R. Our experiments show that the

following assumption is valid with high probability.

Assumption (1): If an input vector r cannot be corrected by

the decoder, then all the vectors below r cannot be corrected

either.

For each r ∈ V, we define V(r) = {t ∈ V : t ≤ r}, i.e.,

V(r) contains all the vectors in V which are below vector r.

Let D be the set of all possible distances, i.e., D = {d : dm ≤
d ≤ dM }. We partition Sd as Sd Sd , where Sd contains
vectors in Sd which are below some vector in Edm and Sd is the complementary set of Sd in Sd. By applying Assumption (1) to the set Sd, we have :
Assumption (2): All vectors in the set Sd, d ∈ D \ dm, cannot be corrected by the decoder.

We also make the following assumption about Sd .

Assumption (3): All vectors in the set Sd, d ∈ D \ dm, can be corrected by the decoder.
Although the above assumptions are not always correct, our
results show that they are statistically viable. Assumptions (2) and (3) imply that Ed = Sd, d ∈ D \ dm.
Thus, the FER is estimated based on Equation (2) by:

F ER ≈ P (Sd) = P ( Sd) = P (U (Edm )), (3)

d∈D

d∈D

where U (S) r∈S V(r), for a set S.1 Equation (3) usually provides a good estimate at high SNR

region. To improve the estimate in the low SNR region, we

partition the input vectors according to their distances to R.

In general, if an input vector has a large enough distance to

R, it cannot be corrected with high probability regardless of

whether it belongs to any set V(r), r ∈ Edm , or not. We

assume there exists a certain threshold dth such that all input

vectors with Euclidean distance larger than dth to R cannot

be correctly decoded. In fact, dth plays a similar role as N0

does in the “Upper” estimate of [9]. Let Sd>dth the FER estimate can then be modified as:

d>dth Sd,

F ER ≈ P (U (Edm )) + P (Sd>dth ).

(4)

Note that, there is overlap between the two terms in (4), i.e., some vectors in the set Sd>dth are also in the set U (Edm ) and the contributions to the FER from those vectors are over-counted. Our experimental results however show that the probability of overlapped vectors is negligible. Similar to the approach taken in [9] for the determination of N0, the value of dth can be also determined by performing Monte Carlo simulations at the high FER region.
To search for the vectors in the set Edm, direct enumeration of input vectors is infeasible for practical codes. In the next subsection, we propose a search technique which looks for vectors in sets Ed for small values of d. We also propose modified estimation equations which incorporate the information obtained by the search technique to improve the accuracy of the estimates.

B. Modified Cycle Enumeration Algorithm and Modified Es-
timation Equation
Let Cl denote the set of cycles of length l, l = g, g + 2, ... (g is the girth of the graph). In cycle enumeration [10], we enumerate cycles of different lengths starting from those in Cg. For a q-bit decoder, for each cycle, input vectors are generated by setting the vector elements equal to 2q−1−1 in all positions except those involved in the cycle. For the positions involved
in the cycle, we consider all the permutations associated with the 2q − 1 possible values in each position. For a cycle of length l, this process generates (2q − 1)l/2 test vectors. Note that, these vectors have different values of d. By passing the (2q − 1)l/2 vectors to the decoder, we obtain vectors in sets Ed for different distances.

1It can be easily shown that the “Upper” estimate of [9] is a special case of (3), where the alphabet size is two and the Euclidean distance is replaced by the Hamming distance.

440
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

Since we are interested in sets Ed with small values of d, we do not need to pass all the (2q − 1)l/2 vectors to the decoder. In fact, instead of testing all possible vectors corresponding to
one cycle set and then going to the next larger cycle set, we take a different approach called modified cycle enumeration
algorithm which is summarized in Algorithm 1.
In the modified cycle enumeration algorithm, the input
vectors are generated based on their distance to R in increasing order. For a given distance, we enumerate all possible
vectors corresponding to the cycles under consideration. We
first generate cycle sets of different lengths. We use the set Tk {Cg, Cg+2, · · · Cg+2k} as possible error location sets. We then create a list PLk, which stores error patterns corresponding to all possible number of locations in the set Tk (i.e., g/2, · · · , (g + 2k)/2) in increasing order of the distance. Let D denote the set of distances corresponding to the error patterns in PLk. For a given distance d ∈ D , PLk stores error patterns of distance d with the number of locations g/2, · · · , (g +2k)/2. After creating Tk and PLk, the algorithm starts generating input vectors to the decoder from the smallest distance d1 ∈ D . If there are patterns in PLk of distance d1 which correspond to g/2 locations, the input vectors are generated by having 2q−1 − 1 in all positions except those in Cg. The positions in Cg use the corresponding error patterns in PLk as their values. After testing all locations in Cg, the algorithm repeats this process for locations corresponding to
the set Cg+2 and so on. If at least one of the input vectors with distance d1 cannot be corrected, the algorithm estimates dm as d1. The algorithm also updates the set Ed1. If all the error patterns of distance d1 are corrected by the decoder, dm is set to ∞. The algorithm continues by repeating the process for patterns in PLk with the next larger distance. If dm = ∞, the estimate for FER is obtained. The algorithm continues by
examining the next larger distance error patterns in PLk until dm = ∞ and at least one estimate for the FER is available. As error patterns with larger distances are examined the estimates
improve. Similar to the approach of [10], one can in fact stop
the algorithm when two successive estimates are close together
indicating a convergent behavior.
We use Ed to denote the estimate of the set Ed obtained by the algorithm. It is clear that, the more cycle sets are included
in the set Tk, the more accurate the information about dm and sets Ed will be. However, the computational complexity increases as well. Our experiments show that for codes with
block lengths of several hundreds to around a thousand, the first 3 or 4 cycle sets, i.e., Cg, · · · , Cg+6 are enough for an accurate estimate.
Consider the case where Algorithm 1 is at Step 5 and for the first time dm = ∞ and is estimated as d1 ∈ D . The algorithm also returns the set Ed1 . The error rate estimates are then obtained by replacing Edm in Equation (4) by Ed1. By continuing the algorithm at Step 6 and examining the patterns of the next larger distance d2 ∈ D , we would find vectors in the set Ed2 ⊆ Ed2. We should use this information to improve our estimates. Ideally, we would like to estimate the FER by Equation (4) as: F ER ≈ P (U (Ed1 Ed2 )) + P (Sd>dth ).

Algorithm 1 Modified Cycle Enumeration
1) Create Tk, PLk, and D . 2) d = min{x : x ∈ D }, dm = ∞. 3) Decode all patterns in PLk of distance d corresponding
to locations in Tk. 4) If there are patterns that cannot be corrected, dm =
min{d, dm} and update set Ed. 5) If dm = ∞, d = the next larger distance in D , go to
step 3; else generate the error rate estimate. 6) If estimates converge, stop;
else d = the next larger distance in D , go to step 3.

For practical codes however, it is very hard to enumerate

vectors in the set U (Ed1 Ed2 ). Let D1 denote all the distances corresponding to the sets obtained by the algorithm

(in this case, D1 = {d1, d2}). Let L denote all the locations

corresponding to the vectors in the set Ed1 Ed2. Clearly, L is a subset of Tk. We refer to each element l ∈ L as a location.

It turns out that many vectors in the set Ed1 Ed2 have the same locations. Let Ed,l, d ∈ D1, l ∈ L be the set of vectors of distance d and having the same location l. For each l ∈ L,

ED1 ,l

d∈D1 Ed,l is the set of vectors in Ed1 Ed2 , which

have the same location l. Set Ed1 Ed2 can be partitioned

based on the locations as: Ed1 Ed2 = l∈L ED1,l. Thus,

we have U (Ed1 Ed2 ) = U ( l∈L ED1,l) = l∈L U (ED1,l).

Therefore, P (U (Ed1 Ed2 )) can be calculated as:

P (U (Ed1 Ed2 )) = P ( U (ED1,l)) ≈ P (U (ED1,l)).

l∈L

l∈L

(5)

P (U (ED1,l)) can be calculated efficiently as shown later in the paper. Note that, although there are overlaps between

sets with different locations, the computational complexity of

removing the overlaps is high. Moreover, our results show that

the overlapped vectors have very small probabilities and do not

affect the accuracy of the estimates in any significant way. We

thus use the following modified FER estimate:

F ER ≈ P (U (ED1,l)) + P (Sd>dth ).

(6)

l∈L

As the algorithm progresses and vectors of larger distances are examined, we will have new sets of Ed available. This information can be easily incorporated into the estimation equations following the same approach used in deriving (6) to obtain more accurate estimates for error rates.

C. Estimation for Decoders with Large q Based on the Results for Small q
The number of input vectors increases exponentially with the value of q as |V| = (2q−1)n. Although Algorithm 1 greatly reduces the search space, the computational complexity is still high for many practical cases where the block length and the value of q are large. Due to the relatively low computational complexity for the cases with small q (e.g., 2, 3), we would like to obtain the estimates for larger values of q based on

441
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

Algorithm 2 Performance Estimation of q2-bit Decoder Based on Results for q1-bit Decoder (q2 > q1)
Input: Edq,1l, d ∈ Dq1 , l ∈ L; Edq,2l = ∅, Dq2 = ∅; for each r ∈ Edq,1l, d ∈ Dq1 , l ∈ L
Generate set S(r, q2); for each t ∈ S(r, q2)
Decode t with the q2-bit decoder and update Edq,2l, Dq2; end
end
Generate the estimate for the q2-bit decoder.

the estimates for small values of q so that we do not need to repeat Algorithm 1 for different values of q.
Consider the application of Algorithm 1 to a q1-bit decoder. The algorithm returns vector sets Edq,1l, d ∈ Dq1, l ∈ L, where Dq1 is the set of distances and L is the set of locations. To obtain estimates for a q2-bit decoder (q2 > q1), we use L as the location set. Since cycles in the set L are found to be problematic structures for the q1-bit decoder, with high probability, they are problematic structures for the q2bit decoder as well. For each location l ∈ L, error patterns corresponding to l for the q2-bit decoder are generated based on the vectors in sets Edq,1l, d ∈ Dq1. Each quantization interval in the q1-bit case is divided into several intervals in the q2-bit case, which means that, each integer r ∈ Aq1 corresponds to several integers in Aq2 . Thus, for each r ∈ Edq,1l, we generate a set of input vectors S(r, q2) for the q2-bit decoder. Each vector t ∈ S(r, q2) has value 2q2−1 − 1 in all positions except for those in l. The value of each position in l in vector t is an integer in Aq2 corresponding to the value (an integer in Aq1 ) in the same position of r.
By decoding vectors in sets S(r, q2), r ∈ Edq,1l, we find vectors which cannot be corrected by the q2-bit decoder and belong to sets Edq,2l, d ∈ Dq2 , l ∈ L (note that, the location set L is the same as that of the q1-bit case, the distance set Dq2 is however different). We then generate the error rate estimate based on sets Edq,2l following the same approach used in deriving (6).
The algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2.
If each integer in Aq1 corresponds to K integers in Aq2 and there are |l| positions corresponding to the location l, the number of input vectors generated for the q2-bit decoder based on a vector r ∈ Edq,1l is |S(r, q2)| = K|l|. In practice, the values of K and |l| are usually small, which translates to a small number of iterative decoding instances for each vector
r.

D. Calculation of Probabilities of Different Sets

In Equation (6), we need to calculate the probabilities of

different input vector sets, namely, sets U (ED,l), l ∈ L

and the set Sd>dth. By definition, we have P (U (ED,l)) =

r∈U(ED,l) P (r) and P (Sd>dth ) merating the vectors in these sets

= and

carl∈cuSlda>tdinthg

P (r). their

Enuprob-

Algorithm 3 Calculation of P (Sd), d = 0, · · · , dM
for i=1 to n if i==1 for each r ∈ Aq dnew = r − (2q−1 − 1) 2 ; Add dnew to DL, and P (Sdnew ) = p(r); end
else for each r ∈ Aq for each d ∈DL dnew = d + r − (2q−1 − 1) 2; if dnew ∈DL: P (Sdnew ) = P (Sdnew ) + P (Sd) · p(r); else: Add dnew to DL, P (Sdnew ) = P (Sd) · p(r); end
end
end

abilities is however too complex due to the large number of

vectors in these sets. In this subsection, we propose efficient

ways to calculate these probabilities.

To calculate P (U (ED,l)) for a given l ∈ L, we consider

two cases. If there is only one vector r in ED,l, then

P (U (ED,l)) = P (V(r)). By definition, we have: P (V(r)) =

P (t ≤ r) =

n i=1

P (ti

≤

ri)

=

i∈l

Q(

1−xi σ

)

,

where

xi

is

the largest real value corresponding to the quantized value ri.

For the case where ED,l has multiple vectors, let W = Aq|l|,

and let r(l) denote the sub-pattern of r ∈ V corresponding to

the location l. Clearly, r(l) ∈ W. For x = (x1, · · · , x|l|) ∈ W, W(x) {y ∈ W : y ≤ x}, i.e., W(x) contains all the

|l|-tuples in the set W which are below x. Let V (ED,l) r∈ED,l W(r(l)). In practice, V (ED,l) can be enumerated
efficiently due to the small value of |l|. The probability of

the set U (ED,l) is then calculated by the following lemma.

Lemma 1: For a given location l, P (U (ED,l)) =

x∈V (ED,l)

|l| i=1

p(xi

)

, where p(x) is given by (1).

To obtain P (Sd>dth), we propose an algorithm which

computes P (Sd) for all possible distances d ∈ {0, · · · , dM }.

P (Sd>dth ) is then calculated as d>dth P (Sd). For a code with block length n and a q-bit decoder, although the number

of input vectors is an exponential function of n, i.e., (2q −1)n,

the number of possible Euclidean d√istances between an input

vector and by 2(2q−1

R −

1in)√crnea. sTesheonallygowriitthhm

n and is upper bounded creates and updates two

lists: the distance list DL and the corresponding probability

list P (Sd), d ∈ DL. To simplify the algorithm, we consider power two of the Euclidean distance. The algorithm starts from

the cases where the input vector differs only in one position

from R and continues to the cases where the difference is

in increasingly larger number of positions and finally in all

n positions. The pseudo code of the algorithm is given in Algorithm 3.2

2With small modification, Algorithm 3 can also be used to generate the list PLk needed in Algorithm 1.

442
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In our experiments, we consider quantized MS. We have used two LDPC codes from [12]: a (273, 82) code with variable node degree 3 and check node degree 10, and a (1008, 504) code with variable node degree 3 and check node degree 6. Both codes have girth 6.
Figure 1 shows the simulation results and the estimation results of the two codes for 3-bit, 4-bit and 5-bit MS decoders. For the (273, 82) code, Algorithm 1 is used to obtain the estimate for the 3-bit √decoder. By using the cycle set C8, dm is estimated to be 38, and 24 vectors in the set E√3 38 are obtained. The estimates of 4-bit and 5-bit decoders are obtained by using Algorithm 2 based on the results of 3-bit and 4-bit decoders, respectively. For the (1008,504) code, the computational complexity is high even for the application of Algorithm 1 to the 3-bit decoder. We thus apply Algorithm 1 with the cycle set T3 to a 2-bit decoder first, and obtain |E√2 9| = 10 and |E√2 10| = 100 when the algorithm stops. We then use Algorithm 2 to obtain the estimates for the 3-bit, 4bit and 5-bit decoders based on the results of 2, 3, and 4-bit decoders, respectively. As can be seen in Figure 1, for both codes and for all the three decoders, based on Equation (6), we can have very accurate estimates for the FER in the whole SNR range of interest. For the (273, 82) √code, th√e values of d√th for the 3, 4, and 5-bit decoders are: 790, 47√00, and √22300, respe√ctively. The corresponding values are: 3450,
20060, and 94000 for the (1008, 504) code. Note that, for both codes, the 5-bit decoder performs almost the same as the floating-point MS algorithm.
Table I gives the number of iterative decoding instances we need to perform to generate the estimates for each case. In the table, a number with a plus sign means the extra number of iterative decoding instances that Algorithm 2 needs to perform to generate the estimate if the results of the previous q-bit decoder is available. From Table I, one can see that the proposed approach is more efficient than the Monte Carlo simulation, especially at high SNR region.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this paper, we proposed an algorithm to estimate the performance of a given finite-length LDPC code decoded by a q-bit (soft-decision) iterative decoder. The proposed method can be applied in principle to any q-bit implementation of different soft-decision iterative decoding algorithms. We showed by examples that the proposed method can provide accurate FER estimates for the whole SNR region of practical interest. The computational complexity of the proposed method can be much less than that of the Monte Carlo simulation, especially at low FER region (error floor region). Several techniques including modified cycle enumeration and Algorithm 2 were proposed to reduce the computational complexity. For codes with block lengths larger than about 1000, the computational complexity of the proposed technique is still relatively high. Thus, it is of great practical interest to investigate more efficient techniques to estimate sets Ed for small values of d.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570-1579, June 2002.
[2] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annual Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control and Computing, 2003.
[3] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, May 2006.
[4] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, B. Vasic, "Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel," in Proc. IEEE Inter. Conf. on Comm. (ICC), Istanbul, Turkey, June 11 -15, 2006.
[5] S. Sankaranarayanan, S. K. Chilappagari, R. Radhakrishnan, B.Vasic, "Failures of the Gallager B decoder: analysis and applications," Information Theory and Applications Workshop, University of California, San Diego, Feb. 6-10, 2006.
[6] M. Stephanov, V. Chertkov, M. Chertkov and B. Vasic, “Diagnosis of weakness in modern error correction codes: a physics approach,” Phy. Rev. Lett. 95, 228701, 2005.
[7] M. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of low-density paritycheck codes in the error-floor regime,” in Proc. ISIT, 2006.
[8] M. Chertkov and M. Stepanov, “Pseudo-codeword landscape,” in Proc. ISIT, 2007.
[9] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Estimation of bit and frame error rates of low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, pp. 2234-2239, Dec. 2007.
[10] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error rate estimation of finite-length low-density parity-check codes on binary symmetric channels using cycle enumeration,” in Proc. ISIT, 2007.
[11] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.
[12] http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html

TABLE I NUMBER OF ITERATIVE DECODING INSTANCES .

(273, 82) (1008, 504)

2-bit
4.27 × 107

3-bit 7.36 × 106
+45272

4-bit
+1124 +819264

5-bit
+11688 +3136281

100 10−2 10−4 10−6

(1008,504)

Simulation, 3−bit Estimation, 3−bit Simulation, 4−bit Estimation, 4−bit Simulation, 5−bit Estimation, 5−bit
(273,82)

FER

10−8

10−10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 1. Simulation and estimation results of the two codes decoded by 3, 4 and 5-bit MS decoders.

443
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

