ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008
Interior Point Decoding for Linear Vector Channels based on Convex Optimization
Tadashi Wadayama Nagoya Institute of Technology, Gokiso, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan
Email: wadayama@nitech.ac.jp

Abstract— In this paper, a novel decoding algorithm for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes based on convex optimization is presented. The decoding algorithm, called interior point decoding, is designed for linear vector channels. The linear vector channels include many practically important channels such as inter symbol interference channels, partial response channels and MIMO channels. It is shown that the maximum likelihood decoding (MLD) rule for a linear vector channel can be relaxed to a convex optimization problem, which is called a relaxed MLD problem. Approximate variations of gradient descent and Newton methods are used to solve the convex optimization problem.
I. INTRODUCTION
Development of a decoding algorithm for binary linear codes has been one of the central research themes in coding theory. Recent research activities on message passing decoding algorithms are showing remarkable progress and bringing a shift in design principle of a decoder from algebraic algorithms to probabilistic ones. Sum-product algorithm for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes is a distinct example. The combination of the LDPC codes and sum-product algorithm achieves high trade-off between decoding performance and decoding complexity. Especially, for memoryless channel, this combination offers almost satisfactory solution.
In this paper, a possibility of optimization approach to decoding problems for channels with memory, will be discussed. Most of conventional decoding algorithms designed for binary linear codes can be regarded as algorithms for solving a combinatorial optimization problem. Let us consider the following example to make the succeeding discussion concrete. A codeword x in a binary code C ⊂ F2n (F2 is the binary Galois field) is sent over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel after binary (0,1) to bipolar (+1, -1) conversion r = (1 − 2x) + z, where z represents a Gaussian noise vector and 1 denotes the vector with all-1 elements1. The maximum likelihood decoding (MLD) rule for this channel model is given by xˆ = arg minx ∈C ||r − (1 − 2x )||2, where || · || is the Euclidean norm. The rule is, indeed, a combinatorial optimization problem because the feasible set C is a discrete set with a combinatorial and also algebraic structure. In general, the MLD problem is a computationally intractable problem when the code length is large. Thus, we need approximation algorithms which yield sub-optimal solution with reasonable amount of computation cost.
1In this paper, the elements in F2, i.e., {0, 1}, can also be regarded as elements in R. Thus, the appropriate arithmetic (e.g., mod-2 sum or addition of real numbers) depend on the context.

As an approach to a hard combinatorial optimization, a technique called relaxation has been well known in the field of combinatorial optimization. The basic idea of the relaxation is to relax the definition of the feasible set from a discrete set (such as set of integers) to a subset of n-dimensional Euclidean space Rn. Elimination of the constraint such that “a feasible point is integral” often leads to a linear programming (LP) problem which can be efficiently solved by a simplex algorithm or an interior point algorithm. Although the solution of the relaxed problem may be different from the solution of the original problem, the approximate solution can be used to find the optimal solution.
The work on LP decoding due to Feldman [1] may be the first application of the idea of relaxation in coding theory. One of the important implications obtained from the work on LP decoding is that the MLD problem can be relaxed to a linear optimization problem defined on Rn. Once a decoding problem is relaxed to an optimization problem, we can exploit an efficient numerical optimization technique to solve the relaxed problem.
So far, most of research activities on LP decoding focuses on the memoryless binary-input output-symmetric (BIOS) channels. This may be because the formulation of the LP decoding is strongly dependent on the memoryless property and the BIOS assumption. Therefore it is challenging and meaningful to consider a relaxed MLD problem for channels with memory. Development of an efficient decoding algorithm for such a channel is one of the important problems in coding theory. Recently, Taghavi and Siegel [4] showed a new relaxation method for PR channels which converts the MLD problem for PR channels to a linear programming problem. This work indicates that the relaxation approaches are effective not only for memoryless channels but also for channels with memory.
In this paper, a novel decoding algorithm for LDPC codes based on convex optimization is presented. The decoding algorithm, called interior point decoding, is designed for linear vector channels. It is shown that the MLD rule for a linear vector channel can be relaxed to a convex optimization problem, which is called a relaxed MLD problem. Approximate variations of gradient descent and Newton methods can be used to solve the convex optimization problem.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, the definition of the linear vector channel and the MLD problem for the linear vector channels are firstly

978-1-4244-2571-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

1493

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

introduced and then the relaxed decoding problem is discussed.

A. Linear vector channels and MLD rule
Suppose that H is a binary m × n matrix and C(H) is
the binary linear code defined based on H such as C(H) = {x ∈ F2n : Hx = 0}. The matrix H is a row-regular sparse matrix whose rows have row weight wr ≥ 3. In this paper, a bold-face letter, like x, denotes a column vector.
The linear vector channel, which is the main target channel of this paper, is defined as follows.
Definition 1 (Linear vector channel): A sender chooses a codeword x ∈ C(H) according to a message that the sender wishes to send. The codeword is transmitted to the channel and then a receiver obtains a received vector r ∈ Rn such that r = Ax + b + z, where A is a non-singular n × n real matrix2 (called an interference matrix) and b is a real column vector with length n (called an offset vector). It is assumed that both A and b are known at the receiver. The vector z denotes an additive noise vector. This channel model is called a linear vector channel. The offset vector b represents the offset resulting from the conversion from the code-representation (on F2) to the signalrepresentation (on R). Strictly speaking, the channel defined above should be called an affine vector channel because the transmitted signal s is generated by an affine transformation
s = Ax + b from a codeword x. However, we use more conventional name for this channel since the offset vector is not essential for the following discussion and it can be seen as a part of noises or mean of the noises.
If the vector z is an additive white Gaussian noise vector where the ith element zi(i ∈ [1, n]) is an i.i.d. Gaussian random variable with mean 0 and variance σ2, the channel is called a Gaussian linear vector channel. Note that the notation [a, b] denotes the set of consecutive integers from a to b.
The class of the linear vector channels is fairly wide and it includes many practically interesting channels such as AWGN channels, ISI channels, PR channels and MIMO channels. In order to achieve the best decoding performance with respect to the block error probability, we need to perform MLD for this channel. The following definition gives the MLD rule for linear vector channels.
Definition 2 (MLD rule for linear vector channel): Assume that the sender transmits a codeword in C(H) and the receiver observed r ∈ Rn as a received word. The MLD rule for a linear vector channel is given by

xˆ = arg x∈mCi(nH) d((Ax + b), r).

(1)

The function d(·, ·) is a distance function defined on Rn which matches the probability density function of the noise vector. The vector xˆ ∈ C(H) is the estimated word obtained from the MLD process.

2In general, there is no need to restrict A to be a square matrix to define the linear vector channel. However, we assume a non-singular square matrix in this paper from some technical reasons which will be discussed in the forthcoming full paper version.

Example 1: In the case of Gaussian linear vector channel, the noise vector z is distributed according to n-dimensional Gaussian distribution and its covariance matrix is diagonal (i.e., each noise entry is i.i.d. Gaussian random variable). In this case, we have the following MLD rule:

xˆ = arg x∈mCi(nH) ||r − (Ax + b)||2,

(2)

where || · || represents the Euclidean norm defined by
||(x1, x2, . . . , xn)|| = x12 + x22 + · · · + xn2 . If the noise samples are correlated (i.e., colored Gaussian noise), we can derive the MLD rule for such a channel which includes the (inverse of) covariance matrix of noises3.
Although the MLD rule (1) gives us an optimal estimation, its computational complexity is exponential in the code length n. This prevents the use of MLD in a practical application. We need an approximation of the MLD rule in order to reduce the computation cost.

B. Relaxed MLD rule
We here introduce a relaxed MLD rule which is an approximation of the MLD rule (1). This relaxed rule is the basis of the interior point decoding to be presented in the latter sections. The basic idea of the relaxed rule is to relax the domain of x from C(H) to the fundamental polytope [1] [2] defined based on the parity check matrix H. The fundamental polytope is a polytope contained in Rn and it is a relaxed polytope of the convex hull of C(H). Thus, the set of vertices of the fundamental polytope contains all the codewords of C(H). This relaxation provides a possibility to use a minimization algorithm working on Rn (e.g., a gradient descent algorithm or Newton method) as a decoding algorithm. In the following discussion, we assume that the distance function d(x, y) is a convex function with respect to the variable x and it is a differentiable function as well.
The definition of the fundamental polytope is given as follows4.
Definition 3 (Fundamental polytope and its interior set): Let
Ai = {j ∈ [1, n] : hij = 1}, i ∈ [1, m],
where hij is the (i, j)-element of H. The set Ti(i ∈ [1, m]) is the set of all the subsets with odd size in Ai, namely

Ti = {S ⊂ Ai : |S| is odd}. The constraints for x = (x1, . . . , xn) ∈ Rn:

∀i ∈ [1, m], ∀S ∈ Ti, 1 + (xt − 1) −

xt ≤ 0, (3)

t∈S

t∈Ai \S

and

∀j ∈ [1, n], 0 ≤ xj ≤ 1

(4)

3For such a channel, the appropriate distance function takes a quadratic form.
4The definition of the fundamental polytope given here appears somewhat different from that given in [1] at a glance. However, the two definitions are equivalent.

1494
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

are called the parity constraints and the box constraints, respectively. The fundamental polytope P is the polytope
defined by P = {x ∈ Rn : x satisfies both (3) and (4)}. The interior set of P, denoted by P∗, consists of the points satisfying

∀i ∈ [1, m], ∀S ∈ Ti, 1 + (xt − 1) −

xt < 0, (5)

t∈S

t∈Ai \S

and

∀j ∈ [1, n], 0 < xj < 1.

(6)

These constraints are also called the parity constraints and the box constraints, respectively. A point x ∈ Rn is called a feasible point5 iff x ∈ P∗.
As described before, the set of vertices of the fundamental polytope contains all the codewords of C(H). Such vertices are called codeword vertices. Note that, in general, the set of vertices contains non-codeword vectors as well, which are called non-codeword vertices. These non-codeword vertices become the main source of sub-optimality in decoding performance of a decoding algorithm based on the fundamental polytope such as LP decoding. The fundamental polytope P is a convex set defined by a set of m2wr−1 parity inequalities and n box inequalities.
We are now ready to discuss a relaxation of the MLD rule for linear vector channels. The relaxed MLD rule based on the fundamental polytope is given in the following definition.
Definition 4 (Relaxed MLD rule for linear vector channel): Let r = Ax + b + z be a received vector from a linear vector channel. A relaxed MLD rule is defined by

xˆ = arg xm∈inP d((Ax + b), r).

(7)

As shown in (7), the domain of x is changed from C(H) to P. Since the fundamental polytope P is convex and the objective function d((Ax + b), r) is a convex function, the optimization problem (7) can be regarded as a convex optimization problem [3]. This observation motivates the use of numerical optimization techniques for convex optimization such as the interior point algorithm [3] as a decoding algorithm.
Of course, the solution of the relaxed MLD problem may not be the solution of the original MLD problem because the fundamental polytope has vertices which do not belong to C(H). Moreover, the optimal point may not be a vertex of P. However, this compromise on the sub-optimality of the relaxed MLD rule leads to large amount of reduction on computational complexity for decoding.

optimization techniques to this problem. The proposed decoding algorithm is based on the idea of the interior point algorithm for convex optimization.

A. Objective and merit functions for interior point decoding
We here apply the interior point algorithm based on the barrier function method to the relaxed MLD problem (7). In the following, we assume a Gaussian linear vector channel in order to make presentation simple. The objective function to be minimized is, therefore, ||r − (Ax + b)||2.
Definition 5 (Objective function): The objective function f (x)(x ∈ Rn) for the relaxed MLD problem is defined by

f (x) = ||r − (Ax + b)||2 ⎛⎛

⎞⎞2

=

⎝ri − ⎝

aijxj + bi⎠⎠ , (8)

i∈[1,n]

j∈[1,n]

where ri and bi are ith element of r and b, respectively. The symbol aij denotes the (i, j)-element of the interference matrix A. The function f (x) is a convex function and it is differentiable. These properties are suitable for the gradient descent and the
Newton methods. In the case of non-Gaussian linear vector
channels, we can also define an appropriate objective function.
In many cases, such an objective function becomes a convex function since any norm function defined on Rn is a convex function [3].
There are some choices on the type of the barrier functions.

In this paper, we adopt b(x) = − ln(−x) as a basis of the

barrier function, which is called a log-barrier function. It is

clear that b(x) = ∞ holds when x = 0; on the other hand,

b(x) takes a finite value if x < 0. Furthermore, b(x) is a

convex function. Moreover, the derivative of b(x), namely,

d dx

b(x)

=

−1/x

is

simple

enough.

This

simplicity

helps

the implementation of a decoding algorithm. The log-barrier

function including the parity constraints and box constraints

is given below.

Definition 6 (Log-barrier function for P): The log-barrier

function for fundamental polytope B(x)(x ∈ Rn) is defined

by

B(x)

⎡⎛

⎞⎤

=−

ln ⎣− ⎝1 + (xt − 1) −

xt⎠⎦

i∈[1,m] S⊂Ti

t∈S

t∈Ai \S

−

ln [−(−xj)] −

ln [−(xj − 1)] .

(9)

j∈[1,n]

j∈[1,n]

III. OVERVIEW OF INTERIOR POINT DECODING
The relaxed MLD problem is still a computationally difficult problem and we need a method for solving it efficiently. Since the relaxed MLD problem can be seen as a convex optimization problem, it is reasonable to apply conventional
5In a decoding process of the interior point decoding, a point in the interior set of the fundamental polytope is only allowed. This is the reason why we call x ∈ P∗ a feasible point.

The log-barrier function B(x) inherits the properties of b(x); B(x) is a convex and differentiable function. Furthermore, if x ∈/ P∗, then B(x) = ∞ holds; otherwise B(x) < ∞.
The definition of the merit function including both the
objective function and the log-barrier function is as follows. Definition 7 (Merit function): The merit function for the
relaxed ML decoding problem is given by ψ(t)(x) = tf (x) + B(x), where t is a positive real number.

1495
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

The first term of ψ(t)(x) is a scaled version of the objective function. The second term is the log-barrier function corresponds to the fundamental polytope. Since the sum of convex functions is also a convex function, ψ(t)(x) is a convex function. The parameter t is called the scale parameter which controls the relative softness of the constraints represented by the log-barrier function.
The aim of the interior point decoding is to solve the relaxed MLD problem by using an interior point algorithm based on the barrier function method. The interior point decoding consists of the two nested loops: the outer loop and the inner loop. The inner loop corresponds to an approximate gradient descent method or an approximate Newton method which tries to minimize the merit function ψ(t)(x). The main task of the outer loop is scaling of t. Namely, the scale parameter t is gradually increased from a small initial value to large values while the iteration of a decoding process proceeds. The details of the structure of the interior point decoding are omitted in this paper due to limitation of space6.
After the execution of the inner loop, built-in min-sum decoding7 is performed to obtain an estimate of the transmitted word. This means that the proposed decoding algorithm can be regarded as a hybrid type decoding algorithm based on the interior point algorithm and the conventional normalized minsum algorithm. The roles of the min-sum decoding are the following; (i) it accelerates the speed of convergence which leads to faster decoding, (ii) it enlarges the decision regions of a relaxed ML decoder (the related discussion can be found in the companion manuscript arXiv:0705.3990), (iii) it can save a stacked search point which occurs due to the approximated gradient descent or the approximated Newton process used in the proposed algorithm.
IV. BEHAVIORS OF INTERIOR POINT DECODING
In this section, behaviors of the interior point decoding is discussed based on some simulation results. A regular LDPC code with parameters n = 204, m = 102, wc = 3, wr = 6 is assumed where wc and wr denote column and row weight, respectively. The code is due to MacKay [5].
A. Partial Response Channels
The PR channels are in a class of the ISI channels. In the field of magnetic recording, the channel model is often exploited as a basis of system design. Interferences coming from the neighboring symbols are linearly superimposed to the current symbol and the interferences make decoding process complex. The PR channels can be regarded as linear vector channels with a sparse interference matrix A. Thus, the PR channel is an ideal target of the interior point decoding. Throughout the paper, this channel will be used as an example of a Gaussian linear vector channel.
6The companion manuscript arXiv:0705.3990 contains the details. 7In the first version of the manuscript in arXiv:0705.3990, the sumproduct algorithm was used for a build-in decoder. However, the normalized min-sum algorithms has been proved to be better in terms of the performance/complexity trade-off.

Let δ + 1-real numbers {h0, h1, . . . , hδ} be the partial response coefficients. The parameter δ is called the degree of

the PR channel. The definition of PR channel is given below.

Definition 8 (Partial response channel): A binary vector

x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn) ∈ C(H) is transmitted to the partial

response channel defined by rj =

δ d=0

hd(1

−

2xj−d)

+

nj, j ∈ [1, n], where nj(j ∈ [1, n]) is an independent

Gaussian random variable with mean 0 and variance σ2. For

convention, we assume that x−(δ−1) = x−(δ−2) = · · · = x−1 = x0 = 1/2, which simplifies the treatment of the
boundary condition.

In this paper, the signal to noise ratio snr of the PR channel is

defined by snr =

δ d=0

h2d

/σ2, where σ2 is the variance

of the additive white Gaussian noise.

B. Objective function values as a function of number of iterations
Figure 1 presents the average values of the objective function f (x) as the function of the number of iterations. The two curves in Fig.1 correspond to the proposed scheme with the gradient descent-inner loop and with the Newton-inner loop, respectively. The number of iterations is defined as the number of executions of the inner loop in a decoding process. These curves have been obtained by taking the average of 1000 trials (1000 codewords). The parameters of the decoder are as

500

400

Values of objective function

300

/FXUPO

200

(SBEJFOUEFTDFOU

100

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

Number of iterations

Fig. 1. Average values of objective function: comparison between gradient descent and Newton

follows: Imax = 5 (number of inner iterations), Omax = 10 (number of outer iterations). The channel is the dicode channel (i.e., h0 = 1.0, h1 = −1.0) with SNR 8dB.
It is observed that the average objective function values decreases rapidly in the first few iterations. The curve of the gradient descent shows faster decrement when the number of iterations are small (such as 1–3) . However, the Newton method gives smaller objective function values after 4th iteration. This results suggest that the proposed decoding algorithm with the Newton method may require fewer iterations compared with that with the gradient descent.

1496
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT 2008, Toronto, Canada, July 6 - 11, 2008

Bit error probability Bit error probability

C. Bit error probability of the interior point decoding
In this subsection, some simulation results on the BER performance of the proposed algorithm are presented. As a reference decoding algorithm, we used the joint message passing decoding (abbreviated as joint MPD) in this paper. The joint MPD consists of two parts: the BCJR algorithm for the PR channel and the normalized min-sum algorithm (with dumping factor 0.7) for an LDPC code. The BCJR algorithm computes extrinsic information in the standard way and passes them to the min-sum algorithm. The min-sum algorithm uses the output from the BCJR algorithm as a priori information. The extrinsic information generated from the min-sum algorithm is treated as a priori information to the BCJR algorithm. The two parts are iteratively executed in turn. We assume the maximum number of iterations in the min-sum decoder is 10 and overall iterations are limited to 20. For each iteration, parity check procedure is executed.
Figure 2 presents the BER curves of gradient (20,5), Newton (5,5), and the joint MPD for 1−D channel (h0 = 1, h1 = −1). The notation “gradient (20,5)” means the gradient descent based interior point decoding with Imax = 20 and Omax = 5 (Newton (5,5) is defined in a similar way.). In this figure, decoding performances of the interior point decoding with gradient descent and Newton method are compared. From Fig.2, firstly, we can see that the interior point decoding yields better decoding performance than that of the joint MPD. The difference is approximately 1.5dB (Newton v.s. joint MPD) at bit error probability 10−4. Secondary, it is observed that the Newton method gives smaller bit error probabilities than those of the gradient descent method. This may be due to the faster convergence property of the Newton method.
100 gradient (20,5) Newton (5,5) Joint
10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

8

SNR (dB)

Fig. 2. Bit error probability curves of interior point decoding for 1 − D channel (h0 = 1, h1 = −1)

Figure 3 shows BER curves for a long tail PR channel (δ = 16). Note that the joint MPD cannot be applied to such a PR channel with large number of states (i.e., a PR channel with long tail PR coefficients) because of its computation cost for the BCJR computation. Thus, Fig.3 does not include the BER curve of the joint MPD. The coefficients {h1, . . . h16}

are samples of a Gaussian random variable with mean 0 and variance 1. We can see that the interior point decoding certainly has capability to decode an LDPC code sent via such a long tail PR channel. This can be considered as an advantage of the interior point decoding. Compared with gradient (20,5), Newton (5,5) achieves approximately 1.5 dB gain at bit error probability 10−5.

100 gradient (5,5)

gradient(20,5)

Newton (5,5)

10-1

Newton(20,5)

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 SNR (dB)
Fig. 3. Bit error probability curves of interior point decoding for a long tail PR channel (δ = 16)

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the interior point decoding for linear vector channels is presented. It may be too early to conclude that the optimization approach is superior to the message passing approach. There are some cases where the joint MPD overcomes the proposed algorithm (e.g, EPR4 case). Furthermore, there exist other configurations of a joint MPD which have not been tested in this paper. However, the simulation results presented in the previous section (and other results) are encouraging and they show the potential of the optimization approach. Compared with the conventional joint MPD, the proposed decoding algorithm achieves better BER performance with less decoding complexity in the case of PR channels in many cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Japan, Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas 180790091 and a research grant from SRC (Storage Research Consortium).
REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman,ʠDecoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,ʡ Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Ph. D. thesis, 2003.
[2] R.Koetter and P.O.Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” Proceedings of International Symposium on Turbo codes, 2003.
[3] S.Boyd and L.Vandenberghe, “Convex optimization,” Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[4] M.H.Taghavi and P.H.Siegel, “Equalization on graphs: linear programming and message passing,” Proceedings of International Symposium on Information Theory, Nice, 2007.
[5] D.J.C. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes,” http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html

1497
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:54:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

