2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC)

2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC) | 978-1-6654-4385-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCC52777.2021.9580304

Deep Learning Methods for Channel Decoding: A Brief Tutorial

Kai Niu, Jincheng Dai, Kailin Tan, and Jian Gao Key Laboratory of Universal Wireless Communications, Ministry of Education Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China 100876
Email: {niukai, daijincheng, tankailin, jiangao}@bupt.edu.cn
(Invited Paper)

Abstract—The recent development of deep learning methods demonstrates a new insight to optimize the decoding of linear codes. In this paper, we survey the typical neural network decoding methods, including data-driven and model-driven schemes. We investigate the design principle, algorithm mechanism, parameter assignment, and training process of these neural decoders for high-density parity check (HDPC), low-density paritycheck (LDPC), and polar codes. Finally, we summarize the advantages of neural network decoding and point out some research directions in the future.
Index Terms—Neural belief propagation decoder, Neural minsum decoder, High-density parity check (HDPC) codes, Protograph LDPC codes, Polar codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, deep learning becomes a hot direction in signal processing and communication system. Especially, machine learning (ML) or deep learning (DL) approaches have been applied in physical layer communications [1], [2] and demonstrate impressive performance, e.g., signal detection, channel estimation, and channel decoding, etc.
As one key module of communication systems, linear codes and channel decoding play an important role to improve the transmission reliability over the noise channel. For an example, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and polar codes have been selected as the coding schemes in the 5G new radio (NR) system [3]. Both LDPC and polar codes are linear codes. Theoretically, maximum a posterior (MAP) or maximum likelihood (ML) decoding algorithms can achieve the optimal error performance. However, due to the high complexity of MAP/ML decoding, in practical application, linear channel codes utilize the algebra or probability decoding to correct the channel errors.
In the past three decades, iterative algorithms become the mainstream decoding methods of linear codes, such as LDPC and high-density parity-check (HDPC) codes. Among these decoding algorithms, the standard sum-product (SP) algorithm [4], also called the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [5], can achieve the optimal performance whereas it has a high decoding complexity. Instead of the SP algorithm, the min-sum (MS) algorithm [6] and its variants, such as the normalized
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 92067202, 62071058, and 62001049.

min-sum (NMS) and the offset min-sum (OMS) [7]–[9], have been developed to achieve the approximate performance of the BP algorithm with a much lower complexity, and thus they have been widely employed in practical systems.
On the other hand, as the first capacity-approaching and constructive codes, the decoding algorithms of polar codes mainly include the classical successive cancellation (SC) decoding [10] and BP decoding [11]. However, the error performance of these classical algorithms are not satisfied and the CRC-aided SC list (CA-SCL) decoding algorithm [12] is more desirable to improve the performance of polar codes with the short and medium code length. In a word, how to make a tradeoff between the decoding complexity and the error performance still is a core issue of channel decoding algorithm.

Model-Driven

Data-Driven

HDPC

LDPC

Polar

Random code

Polar

Neural Min-Sum

Neural BP

Neural SC

Full-connected NN

Fig. 1. Categories of deep learning decoding.

Guided by the deep learning or machine learning, we can use a new viewpoint to consider the decoding of linear codes. In this paper, we investigate the main advances of deep learning decoding and summarize the basic features of DL decoding. As shown in Fig. 1, the DL decoding can be divided into two categories, that is, data-driven scheme and model-driven scheme. For the former, the channel decoding is regarded as a classification task and the full-connected neural network is used to complete such task. In the data-driven decoding scheme, the channel decoding can be treated as a simple extension and application of neural network models. So the decoding details of the specific linear codes can be neglected. On the contrary, the model-driven scheme should consider the algebraic structure and decoding constraint of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-6654-4385-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

144

2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC)

the linear codes. In this sense, the latter scheme is a custommade decoding for the given linear code. Generally, the datadriven scheme is only suitable for the short-length code and the training complexity is very high. On the other hand, the modeldriven scheme can be applied for an arbitrary codelength and become a competitive scheme compared with the traditional decoding algorithms.
In this paper, we investigate the deep learning decoding of three linear codes, that is, HDPC, LDPC and polar codes. For the data-driven decoding scheme, Gruber et al. designed a neural network decoder for polar codes in [13] and showed that it is possible to achieve the MAP bit error rate (BER) perforamnce for short codelength. For the model-driven decoding scheme, some typical decoding algorithms of three codes based on neural networks are analyzed and compared.
For HDPC codes, in [14], a BP algorithm with learnable weights, namely neural BP decoder, was proposed to efficiently mitigate the negative impact caused by the short cycles in the Tanner graph and obtain the performance gain over the conventional BP algorithm. Then, in [15] and [16], the NMS/OMS decoders with learnable normalizing/offset factors were designed to facilitate hardware implementation. However, all these existing works [14]–[16] are only suitable for shortlength (less than 200 bits) codes and cannot extend to longer length due to the increasing of the parameter array and high training complexity.
In order to overcome the limitation of codelength, we proposed a neural decoding method in [18] for protograph LDPC codes by using the lifting structure. The proposed neural decoder is constructed by the parameter-sharing mechanism, that is to say, only a small parameter array of the base graph is shared by the entire network so as to efficiently reduces the training complexity and memory cost.
Finally, for polar codes, two types of decoding algorithms, neural BP and SC decoding, are mainly concerned. The deep learning (DL) BP decoders, such as weighted BP (WBP) algorithms and their variants [21]–[24], assign weight to each edge of the factor graph (FG) and then optimized by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) methods. Furthermore, the ResNet-like BP decoding was proposed in [25] to improve the performance of the standard BP decoding. Similarly, weighted SC decoding [26] were designed to improve the performance of SC decoding under the LLR quantization.
II. DATA-DRIVEN DECODING
In [13], Gruber et al. introduced the idea of neural network (NN) for channel decoding. An NN decoder consists of multiple full-connected layers with the weights and biases of the neurons as parameters. At the transmitter, k information bits are encoded into a codeword of length N . Then, these coded bits are modulated and transmitted over a noisy channel. At the receiver, the NN decoder uses the one-shot strategy to recover the information bits, that is, the received signals pass through each layer only once and estimate the final bit value. Given the training set of known codeword-signal mapping and the loss function, the weights of the NN decoder can be

optimized by using the gradient descent method and the back propagation algorithm.
Since the NN decoder is a full-connected network and not dependent on a specific code, it can learn to decode any channel code. Therefore, the NN decoder is a reconfigured and generalized decoder. This is a desired property for the practical application. The main limitation of NN decoding is that it requires an entire codebook training in order to achieve the MAP performance. Since the size of codebook 2k grows exponentially with the increase of information bits k, this limitation restricts the NN decoding can only be applied in very short code, e. g. (16, 8) polar codes.

III. HDPC DECODING
In this section, we review the neural decoding of HDPC codes, which are a type of linear algebraic codes with highdesity parity check matrix. Some well-known linear codes, such as BCH code and Hamming code, are HDPC codes. Since the factor graph (Tanner graph) of HDPC codes has many short-length cycles, the standard BP algorithm obtains poor performance compared to the ML decoding. Recall that the NN decoder is only suitable for very short code due to the high complexity of the entire codebook training. Therefore, for HDPC codes with short to medium length, model-driven decoding scheme is more desirable. Among the existing researches, the neural BP and MS decoders proposed in [14]–[16] are the representative schemes.

A. Neural BP and MS Decoders

The basic idea of model-driven NN decoder is to introduce the weighted parameters on the edges of dual factor graph of HDPC codes and extend the standard BP or MS algorithm. So this scheme depends on the graph structure of linear codes.
The standard BP decoding is performed over the factor graph, which is a graphical representation of the parity check matrix of the linear code. Messages are calculated on the variable and check nodes and transmitted over the edges with L full iterations. In [16], dual graph is used to model the neural BP decoder, that is, the decoder network has 2L hidden layers and the odd (even) hidden layer corresponds to variable (check) nodes respectively. Given the code length N and the number of edges in the factor graph E, the input layer is fed into the channel log-likelihood ratio (LLR) vector and the LLR of the v-th variable node (v = 1, 2, · · · , N ) is given by

λv

=

log

P P

(cv (cv

= =

1 0

|yv |yv

) ,
)

(1)

where cv is the the v-th codebit and yv is the corresponding received signal.
Let e = (v, c) denote the edge of variable node v connected to check node c. So the output message xi,e of the even layer can be calculated as

xi,e=(v,c) =





1

(2)

tanh  2 wi,vλv +

wi,e,e xi−1,e  ,

e =(v,c ),c =c

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
145

2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC)

where e = (v, c ) denotes an edge connected to any associated check node c except c. Similarly, the output message xi,e of the even layer can be calculated as





xi,e=(v,c) = 2 tanh−1 

xi−1,e  , (3)

e =(v ,c),v =v

where e = (v , c) denotes an edge connected to any associated

variable node v except v. Further, the message of output layer

is written as





ov = σ w2L+1,vλv +

w2L+1,v,e x2L,e  , (4)

e =(v,c )

where σ(x) = (1 + e−x)−1 is a sigmoid function. The weighted coefficients {wi,v, wi,e,e , wi,v,e } in (2), (3),
and (4), are the training parameters of neural BP decoder and can be optimized by using the gradient descent algorithm. Specifically, the loss function in neural BP decoding is evaluated by the cross entropy between the transmitted codeword yv and the neural network output ov, that is,

1N

D(o, y) = − N

yv log (ov) + (1 − yv) log(1 − ov). (5)

v=1

Since the network architecture of neural BP decoder is sparse and structural, we can use an all zero codeword as the training sequence. Unlike the data-driven scheme, the neural BP decoder only need an all-zero codeword rather than an entire codebook training. This is an obvious advantage of the neural BP decoder over the NN decoder.

The principle behind the neural BP decoder is that the proper weights will compensate the effect of small cycles in the factor graph of HDPC codes. That is, if a message generated by a check node is less reliable due to a large number of small cycles in its local neighbourhood, this message can be weighted and reduce the corresponding impact.

In order to simplify the calculation and facilitate the implementation, two types of neural min-sum decoders are introduced in [16], named as the neural normalized min-sum (NNMS) decoder and the neural offset min-sum (NOMS) decoder, respectively. The check-to-variable messages in NNMS are computed as

xi,e =





wi,e ·  min |xi−1,e |

sign (xi−1,e ) .

e =(v ,c),v =v

e =(v ,c),v =v

(6)

Similarly, the check-to-variable messages in NOMS are

computed as

xi,e = ReLU min |xi−1,e | − βi,e ·

sign (xi−1,e ) ,

e ,v =v

e ,v =v

(7)

where ReLU (x) = max (x, 0) is one of the most commonly

used activation functions in deep learning studies.

Fig. 2. BER performance for BCH (63,36) code (data source from [16]).
Here, wi,e and βi,e are the learnable weight or learnable offset in layer i. These parameters can compensate the minsum approximation and mitigate the effect of small cycles in the factor graph.
B. Performance Evaluation
For BCH (63,36) code, Fig. 2 shows the BER performance under various standard and neural decoders, including BP, MS, neural BP (NBP), NOMS and NNMS. It can be seen that neural decoders have better performance than the standard counterparts. The weighted NMS decoders (NNMS) can achieve almost the same performance as those weighted BP decoders, such as NBP. Furthermore, the weighted OMS decoders (NOMS) are inferior to the weighted NMS decoders, although they outperform the standard BP or MS decoders.
Commonly, the advantages of NN decoding for HDPC codes can be listed as follows.
• Beyond the standard iterative decoding: For the HDPC codes, the performance of standard iterative decoding algorithms, such as BP or MS, are limited by the effect of small cycles in the factor graph. On the contrary, since the weighted BP or MS decoders can mitigate the impact of such effect, they can outperform the standard algorithms and approach the ML performance.
• Low training complexity: Since the neural network of the BP or MS decoder is sparse and not full-connected, we can use only the all-zero codeword to train this network. Compared with the data-driven decoding scheme, the training complexity of such decoder can be dramatically reduced.
However, as the codelength increase, the parameter size of NN decoding will quickly grow. Moreover, the slow convergence rate of decoding long code will result in the vanishing gradient problem in the training process. So these NN decoding schemes of HDPC codes cannot be straightforward extended to LDPC code with long codelength.
IV. LDPC DECODING
In this section, we discuss the NN decoding of the protograph LDPC codes, which is a subclass of multi-edge type LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
146

2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC)

Given an (N, K) protograph LDPC code, it can be defined in an (Nb, Kb) base code, where Nb and Nb − Kb denote the number of variable nodes and check nodes in the component factor graph, namely the base graph. So this protograph code is generated by taking Z = N/Nb = K/Kb replicas of the base graph and permuting the edges among the same type edges. This operation is named as lifting. Therefore, neural network decoder can use this structural property and assign the same parameter for a bundle of edges of each edge-type. In our work [18], we use this property to simplify structure of the NN decoder and reduce the training complexity.
A. Neural Network Decoding for Protograph LDPC Codes
The NN decoder of protograph LDPC codes can also be designed as a neural BP or MS decoder. From the viewpoint of the practical application, the neural MS decoder is more desirable than the neural BP decoder. Both decoders have multiple hidden layers and the odd (even) layer is corresponding to variable (check) node.
According to the protograph structure, all the E processing elements (PEs) or neurons in each hidden layer can be decomposed into Z groups whereby Eb elements of each group are relative to the edges of the base graph, thus we have E = ZEb. Given an (Nb, Kb) base code Cb, for the Z-lifted code, we define the set Eeb denoting the Z-bundle of edges derived from eb = (vb, cb) as
Eeb =(vb ,cb )
e = (v, c) v = vb + svNb, c = cb + sc (Nb − Kb) , . sv, sc = 0, 1, · · · , N − 1 (8)
Thus, the PEs or neurons in each group belong to a different set Eeb=(vb,cb).
For the neural MS decoding, the output message of neuron e = (v, c) in the i-th layer is written as

The proposed neural MS decoding method can be easily extended to the neural SP decoding method by changing the message update rule in (9) as follows:





xi,e = wi,e · 2tanh−1 

tanh xi−1,e 2

e =(v ,c),v =v

 + βi,e. (10)

The network structure of neural BP or MS decoder for the

protograph LDPC codes is shown in Fig. 3. The basic structure

is similar to the neural decoder of HDPC codes. However,

in each hidden layer, the PEs are clustered into groups and

the parameter size can be dramatically reduced due to the

parameter-sharing mechanism.

Output layer

...

...

CN update layer Group 1
(Eb neurons)
Group Z (Eb neurons)
VN update layer
Group 1 (Eb PEs)
Group Z (Eb PEs)

...

...

CN update layer Group 1
(Eb neurons)
Group Z (Eb neurons)
VN update layer
Group 1 (Eb PEs)
Group Z (Eb PEs)

...

...

...

CN update layer Group 1
(Eb neurons)
Group Z (Eb neurons)
VN update layer
Group 1 (Eb PEs)
Group Z (Eb PEs)

Channel LLR input

Channel LLR input

Channel LLR input

Fig. 3. Neural network structure for the protograph LDPC codes.

B. Performance Evaluation
Fig. 4 shows the SNR required for various decoders with a certain number of iterations to achieve BLER = 10−2 or 10−4 under the AWGN channel. We observe that neural MS decoders present gains with respect to the original MS/BP decoder.

xi,e =ReLU wi,e × min |xi−1,e | − βi,e
e =(v ,c),v =v





(9)

×

sign (xi−1,e ) .

e =(v ,c),v =v

Due to the protograph structure, for any e ∈ Eeb=(vb,cb), we can derive that e ∈ Eeb=(vb,cb) with vb = vb.
Compared with the message calculation in (7), equation (9) adds both the normalizing and offset factors to the message calculation. This metric form is indeed consistent with the neuron calculation in the classical neural network, that is, both weight and bias are considered. Similarly, wi,e and βi,e are the learnable parameters in layer i. For the protograph structure, the same parameters can be shared by a bundle of edges derived from the same edge in the base graph. Accordingly, the parameter size only depends on the number of edges in the base graph. Moreover, the same parameter settings can be applied for many decoders deduced from the same base graph. This is the parameter-sharing mechanism [18].

@ BLER 104
@ BLER 102
Fig. 4. SNR required to achieve BLER = 10−2 or 10−4 under the AWGN channel for the (800, 160) code with Z = 16, (data source from [18]).
To sum up, the advantages of NN decoding for protograph LDPC codes can be concluded as follows.
• Parameter-Sharing Mechanism: For the protograph LDPC codes, the same parameters can be shared by a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
147

2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC)

bundle of edges so as to dramatically reduce the training complexity. Moreover, multiple code configurations can share the same parameter settings and significantly improve the generalization of neural network decoding. This parameter-sharing mechanism makes it much more memory-efficient for the practical implementation. • Codelength/Rate Compatible Training: Thanks to the parameter sharing mechanism, we can design a training process that randomly selects samples from a set of codes (from the same base code) with different lengths or rates. This training process mitigates the overfitting problem to a certain code length or code rate and improve the length/rate compatibility of a trained neural decoder.
V. POLAR DECODING
In this section, we review the neural network decoding of polar codes, such as the neural BP and SC decoder. Weighted BP (WBP) algorithms and their variants [21]–[24] are the current mainstream of neural BP decoding, where trainable weights are assigned to each edge of the factor graph. We proposed the ResNet-like BP decoder in [25] so as to further reduce the number of trainable weights. In addition, we also designed a neural SC decoder [26] to improve the performance of SC decoding under the quantization.
A. ResNet-like BP Decoding
Unlike the NN decoder based on the full-connected network in [13], the neural BP decoders of polar codes are also modeldriven and defined on the factor graph. For an (N, K) polar code, the corresponding factor graph contains m = log2N + 1 stages, and each stage contains N nodes. An example of the factor graph of the (8,4) polar code is shown in Fig. 5 (a). Each node is associated with a left-to-right and a right-to-left message, and these messages are updated and propagated by processing elements (see Fig. 5 (b)).


XÖ

XÖ

XÖ XÖ 

XÖ  
XÖ   
XÖ

XÖ

       

       
D


[ 

[ 

[  
[  
[  
[ 

[ 

[ 

U V L
O
V L
U V L  V
O
V L  V

E

Fig. 5. Factor graph of (8,4) polar code.

U VL
O
VL
U VLV
O
VL V

For the BP decoding, after many iterations, the LLR information may trend to vanish. In order to solve this information loss problem, we propose a ResNet-like BP architecture as shown in Fig. 6. The architecture is a feedforward neural network with multiple replicas of the polar factor graph. The crossover edges connect two stages with same index in iteration t and t − 1 respectively.

input stage n stage 1 stage 0 stage 1 stage n stage 1 stage 0 Ă output

only right-to-left

skip connection starts here

Ă

Ă

Ă

Ă

1st iteration

2nd iteration

channel LLR

  current

message

s

l2
1,

i

D 2, l 1, i

historical messages l1

summed messages l 2 1, i

1, i

1



D 2, l 1, i

i ^0,1,..., N

1`

neuron

Estimated source word

Fig. 6. The architecture of the ResNet-like BP decoder.

Similar to the relation technique, the output messages ˜lst,i and r˜st,i of each neuron are the filtered results of the historical message lst−,i1 rst−,i1 and the current message lst,i rst,i . These messages can be expressed as follows:

˜lst,i = αst,,li · lst,i + 1 − αst,,li · lst−,i1, r˜st,i = αst,,ri · rst,i + 1 − αst,,ri · rst−,i1,

(11)

where αst,,li and αst,,ri are the trainable damping factors. Recall that the NN decoder needs an entire codebook
training to approach MAP decoding performance. In [24], we proved that the messages calculated on the polar factor graph possess a symmetrical structure. So the neural (ResNetlike) BP decoders can be trained by using only the all-zero codeword. This is a obvious merit of neural BP decoder compared to the NN decoder with full-connected network.

B. Neural SC Decoding
In [26], we designed a neural successive cancellation algorithm to improve the decoding performance of polar codes with the quantized LLR. Let λs,i (s (i) corresponding to the index of stage(row)) denote the messages propagated over the factor graph and they can be written as

λs,i =

g(λs+1,i, λs+1,i+2s ),

if Bs,i = 0,

(12)

f (λs+1,i, λs+1,i−2s ; uˆs,i−2s ), if Bs,i = 1,

where uˆ is a modulo-2 partial sum of decoded bits, Bs,i =∆

i 2s

mod

2,

0

≤

s

<

n

and

0

≤

i

<

N.

Here,

the

function

g

and f in the LLR domain are defined as follows

g(a, b) = w · sign(a)sign(b) min(|a|, |b|) (13)
f (a, b, uˆ) = w · (a + (1 − 2uˆ)b).

where w and w are the weighted parameters.

C. Performance Evaluation
The decoding performances of standard BP and ResNetlike BP are give in Fig. 7. We can observe that ResNet-like BP can outperform the standard BP with the same iteration number T . Due to the ResNet structure, the weighted factors can be simplified as a single damping factor α. Meanwhile, the ResNet-like BP with T = 10 can achieve almost the same performance as that of standard BP with T = 40. Therefore, the former dramatically reduces the decoding complexity compared to the latter.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
148

2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC)

Fig. 7. Performance of neural BP decoing for (256,128) polar code.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE TRENDS
In this paper, we survey the neural network decoding for linear codes, including the data-driven and model driven scheme. Table I gives the comparison of the full-connected NN decoder and the neural decoders of HDPC, protograph LDPC and polar codes. In these algorithms, the full-connected NN decoder has the highest generalization and can be suitable for any code. However it can only be used to decode very short code due to the high training complexity. On the contrary, model-driven decoders have obvious performance gain over the standard decoders yet limited generalization. For HDPC, protograph LDPC and polar codes, adding the weights or biases to the edges of the (dual) factor graph will mitigate the impact of short cycles in iterative decoding so as to improve the error performance. Furthermore, the structure of the factor graph is important to reduce the parameter size of NN decoder. By exploiting the lifting structure of protograph LDPC codes, the same parameter can be shared by a bundle of edges to dramatically reduce the parameter size.

TABLE I COMPARISON FOR VARIOUS NEURAL DECODERS.

Decoder
Fully-connected NN NBP and NMS of
HDPC codes NBP and NMS of protograph LDPC
codes NBP and NSC of
polar codes

Codelength very short short to medium
arbitrary
arbitrary

Parameter size large large
small
flexible

Performance
approach MAP beyond MS (BP)
beyond MS (BP)
beyond BP

Generalization
any codes
specific code
rate/length compatible
code
specific code

For neural network decoding, there are many open issues to be investigated in the future. One of them is the quantization of neural decoder parameters, we can analyze the influence of quantized parameters on the neural BP/MS/SC decoder. In addition, how to further improve the performance of polar neural decoder and approach that of powerful CA-SCL algorithm is worth to be studied.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Qin, H. Ye, G. Y. Li, and B. F. Juang, “Deep learning in physical layer communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 93–99, Apr. 2019.

[2] H. He, S. Jin, C. Wen, F. Gao, G. Y. Li, and Z. Xu, “Model-driven deep learning for physical layer communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 77–83, Oct. 2019.
[3] Multiplexing and channel coding, Release 16, 3GPP Standard TS 38.212, V16.0.0, Dec. 2019.
[4] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error control coding (2nd ed.). Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2004.
[5] J. Pearl, Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems, San Mateo, CA, Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[7] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X. Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[8] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[9] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-normalized/offset min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667–669, Jul. 2010.
[10] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[11] E. Arikan, “A performance comparison of polar codes and Reed-Muller codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 447–449, June 2008.
[12] K. Niu and K. Chen, “CRC-aided decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1668–1671, Oct. 2012.
[13] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis and S. t. Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding”, in Proc. Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. and Syst. (CISS), pp. 1–6, Baltimore, MD, 2017.
[14] E. Nachmani, Y. Beery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., pp. 341–346, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2016.
[15] L. Lugosch and W. J. Gross, “Neural offset min-sum decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Info. Theory, pp. 1361–1365, Aachen, Jun. 2017.
[16] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Beery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[17] M. Lian, F. Carpi, C. Hager, and H. D. Pfister, “Learned beliefpropagation decoding with simple scaling and SNR adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Info. Theory, pp. 161–165, Paris, France, Jul. 2019.
[18] J. Dai, K. Tan, Z. Si, K. Niu, M. Chen, H. Vincent Poor, and S. Cui, “Learning to decode protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983-1999, July 2021.
[19] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Belief propagation decoding of polar codes on permuted factor graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), pp. 1–6, Apr. 2018.
[20] W. Xu, X. You, C. Zhang, and Y. Be’ery, “Polar Decoding on Sparse Graphs with Deep Learning,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., and Comput., pp. 599–603, Pacific Grove, CA, USA, 2018.
[21] W. Xu, Z. Wu, Y. Ueng, X. You, and C. Zhang, “Improved polar decoder based on deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), pp. 1–6, Lorient, 2017.
[22] N. Doan, S. A. Hashemi, E. N. Mambou, T. Tonnellier, and W. J. Gross, “Neural Belief Propagation Decoding of CRC-Polar Concatenated Codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), pp. 1–6, Shanghai, China, 2019.
[23] W. Xu, X. Tan, Y. Be’ery, Y.-L. Ueng, Y. Huang, X. You, and C. Zhang, “Deep learning-aided belief propagation decoder for polar codes,” IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 189–203, Jun. 2020.
[24] J. Gao, K. Niu, C. Dong, “Learning to decode polar codes with one-bit quantizer,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 27210-27217, Jan. 2020.
[25] J. Gao, D. Zhang, J. Dai, K. Niu, C. Dong, “ResNet-like beliefpropagation decoding for polar codes,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., Early Access, Jan. 2021.
[26] J. Gao, J. Dai, K. Niu, “Learning to decode polar codes with quantized LLRs passing,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC, pp. 1-6, Istanbul, Turkey, Sep. 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:17:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
149

