2420

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2025

RXO-LDPC: A Physics-Inspired Relaxation Oscillator-Based Solver Leveraging Six-Body
Spin Interactions for Soft Decoding of LDPC Codes
Evangelos Dikopoulos , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Luke Wormald , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Ying-Tuan Hsu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Wei Tang , Member, IEEE,
Po-Shao Chen , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Zhengya Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Michael P. Flynn , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— Physics-inspired computing harnesses continuoustime (CT) operation, massive parallelism, and direct compute load mapping to coupled CMOS-based spins to accelerate solving complex optimization problems. This work advances the field by introducing relaxation oscillator (RXO)-low-density parity check (LDPC), a combinatorial optimization problem (COP) engine that natively supports six-body spin interactions for efficient, robust, and one-shot oscillator-based soft decoding of LDPC codes. The proposed RXO spins feature a capacitorDAC-based initialization structure, allowing precise mapping of soft information to initial spin phases for high-performance decoding. A crossbar-based feedback system facilitates six-body spin interactions by directly coupling spins based on the COP graph. Implemented in 28-nm CMOS technology, the prototype achieves a frame error rate (FER) and bit error rate (BER) of 1.36 × 10−6 and 1.89 × 10−7, respectively, at 7-dB SNR. The measured BER is more than three orders of magnitude lower than for belief propagation (BP) decoding, for channels with 2–5-dB SNR. The measured energy efficiency of 7.28 pJ/bit exceeds the normalized efficiencies of state-of-the-art decoders. Evaluated with more than 100 million decoding cycles, the system demonstrates reliable performance across a wide range of SNRs, supply voltages, temperatures, and for different dies. These measurement results highlight the RXO-based architecture’s potential as an accelerator for directly solving COPs with multi-body spin interactions.
Index Terms— Combinatorial optimization, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) decoding, physics inspired, relaxation oscillator (RXO), soft information.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE current trend in computation hardware focuses on developing custom accelerators to tackle the growing energy-efficiency and throughput demands of modern workloads such as combinatorial optimization problems (COPs),
Received 29 November 2024; revised 7 March 2025; accepted 9 April 2025. Date of current version 1 July 2025. This article was approved by Associate Editor Mahmut Ersin Sinangil. This work was supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. (Corresponding author: Evangelos Dikopoulos.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA (e-mail: vangelis@umich.edu).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/JSSC.2025.3561780.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2025.3561780

artificial intelligence (AI), and advanced communication systems. While traditional digital architectures, including von Neumann-based processors and digital application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs), constitute the main paradigm of conventional computing, they impose significant limitations. The inherent constraints of digital architectures stem from their reliance on clocked synchronous operation, restricted parallelism, and excessive data movement, leading to increased latency, high energy costs, and limited adaptability for specialized tasks. These factors significantly constrain system throughput, scalability, and energy efficiency, particularly in memory-intensive and high-performance applications. Alternative paradigms such as analog computing [1] have been explored to address such challenges.
Recently, novel computing paradigms, such as quantum computing [2], have emerged as potential solutions to these challenges. Quantum computers use superposition, entanglement, and interference to process data in ways classical computers cannot. Quantum annealers, such as the D-Wave system [3], solve COPs by mapping them onto a quantum system’s energy landscape. However, quantum computers and annealers face fundamental limitations that hinder their practical application. These include limited coherence times [4], which restrict the duration of quantum effects, hardware constraints like sparse and local qubit connectivity that limit scalability, as seen in D-Wave’s Chimera graph architecture [5], and limitations in qubit error rates [6], which limit their ability to solve complex optimization problems efficiently. Moreover, limited qubit coupling strength, the need for cryogenic temperatures, and substantial energy (kW-level) overhead further hinder the deployment of quantum computers and annealers.
Physics-inspired computers offer a promising alternative, emulating key features of quantum systems: 1) direct mapping of compute loads to physical compute elements; 2) spin interactions that implement a dynamical system with an engineered energy landscape; 3) massive parallelism; 4) continuous-time (CT) asynchronous operation; and 5) flexibility in representing complex interactions, such as higher order and non-linear couplings. The potential of physics-inspired solvers is shown

0018-9200 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIKOPOULOS et al.: RXO-LDPC: A PHYSICS-INSPIRED RELAXATION OSCILLATOR-BASED SOLVER

2421

Fig. 1. Workflow of the proposed physics-inspired solver with direct mapping of higher order spin interactions.

in [7], where a coherent Ising machine outperforms D-Wave’s quantum annealer time-to-solution (TTS) by several orders of magnitude for Sherrington–Kirkpatrick and dense Max-Cut problems.
Coherent Ising machines [7], [8], [9] show promise for solving COPs but face several limitations. The scalability and design of coherent Ising machines become increasingly challenging in larger systems due to the complexity of implementing optical components, such as optical parametric oscillators [7], [8], [9]. Additionally, coherent Ising machines are sensitive to thermal and quantum noise, which affect stability and performance consistency. In contrast, CMOS technology offers a more robust and scalable alternative for implementing physics-inspired solvers, given its technological maturity, resilience to process–voltage– temperature (PVT) variations, and well-established supply chain.
CMOS-based solvers provide a practical realization of physics-inspired computing, by substituting quantum spin with the phase of oscillators, typically set at 0◦ and 180◦ to represent binary 0 and 1. These solvers map complex optimization problems directly onto physical hardware, where interactions between oscillators define the problem’s objective function and energy landscape. Once initialized, the oscillator compute elements interact and evolve dynamically toward a global extremum, ultimately converging on the problem solution. The operational principle of physics-inspired solvers contrasts with that of digital accelerators for combinatorial optimization, which have shown promising results by using techniques such as in-memory computation [10] or controlled annealing [11] to accelerate solving COPs.
First principles suggest that solving optimization problems on physics-inspired platforms employing coupled oscillators has the potential to accelerate the computation.
1) CT Operation: By leveraging real-valued asynchronous compute elements, oscillator-based systems eliminate the inefficiencies and timing margins associated with clocked serial operations. The benefits of CT analog computation were noted in the 1980s [1] and demonstrated by recent systems that target Boolean satisfiability [12] and Ising machine COPs [13].
2) Massive Parallelism and No Data Movement: The highly interconnected network of oscillator-based spins enables massive parallelism without the need for data movement. Once a COP problem is loaded onto a solver, no data is moved until the system converges to a solution. The removal of data movement has the potential to reduce energy

expenditure1 and improve parallelism compared to traditional digital accelerators.
3) Direct Physical Mapping Leveraging Natural Computation: Non-deterministic polynomial-time (NP) problems are computationally intractable to solve optimally and do not easily map to deterministic hardware. Physics-inspired platforms implement computation by directly mapping optimization problems onto hardware systems, such as oscillator arrays that mimic physical processes. By leveraging the dynamics of these systems, they naturally evolve toward optimal solutions. This direct mapping eliminates the need for complex algorithms typically used in digital COP solvers [10] and allows the hardware to compute solutions efficiently [7].
4) Analog Computation: As demonstrated by Eric Vittoz in the seminal 1994 ISSCC paper [14], analog processing is fundamentally more power-efficient than digital processing for low-resolution processing.
In this work, we advance physics-inspired computing by introducing relaxation oscillator (RXO)-low-density parity check (LDPC), the first, to the authors’ knowledge, ASIC implementation of a COP engine that leverages six-body spin interactions and performs soft decoding of LDPC codes (see Fig. 1). LDPC decoders are the leading method for error correction in communication channels and are typically implemented in digital systems [15]. With the widespread deployment of technologies like 5G, there is a growing need to address energy efficiency and throughput constraints. The use of combinatorial optimization for accelerating LDPC decoding has been explored for decades [16], [17], [18]. Recent advancements with the D-Wave quantum annealer [19] and the Fujitsu digital annealer [20] have demonstrated the potential of implementing LDPC decoding as a COP. However, as discussed earlier, quantum annealers face significant limitations in scalability and practicality. Meanwhile, digital annealers, such as Fujitsu’s, avoid extreme cooling and quantum implementations but operate synchronously, which can result in higher power consumption and constrained throughput.
Recent oscillator-based solvers [21], [22] are constrained by their reliance on quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) formulations since they are based on
1Our reference to the absence of data movement for computing a COP solution pertains to the solver’s direct physical mapping (no preprocessing or decomposition) and its continuous-time operation, which eliminates frequent processing element-memory interactions typical of digital systems. Digital COP solvers require substantial data movement since algorithms such as simulated annealing iteratively adjust spin states and track objective function changes, requiring frequent exchanges between memory and processing units [10].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2422

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2025

ring oscillator-based (ROSC) implementations that support only two-body spin interactions and lack precise spin state initialization. As seen in [23], this restriction necessitates the software-based decomposition of problems with higher order2 interactions. In detail, a COP involving three [24] or more-body interactions requires decomposition to a QUBO formulation to be embedded in the hardware. Such decomposition introduces additional computational overhead on top of an already suboptimal two-body framework. Furthermore, the quantum LDPC decoder in [19] requires additional system variables and spins to encode soft information due to its inability to set precise initial spin states. These drawbacks make QUBO-based engines less suitable for solving more complex optimization problems, like LDPC decoding, where system variables couple through many-body interactions and soft information is required for optimal performance.
To address the challenges of limited spin coupling and to expand the scope of physics-inspired COP solvers, we propose RXO-LDPC, which comprises the RXO spin architecture and a spin feedback system that enables higher order spin coupling.
1) Arbitrary spin phase initialization for soft LDPC decoding, enabled by intra-spin capacitor DACs (CDACs), provides enhanced functionality.
2) High-precision dual-capacitor RXO compute nodes designed for higher order coupling provide programmable analog coupling weights, accurate frequency control, and robust performance across PVT variations.
3) A robust digital twin-crossbar-based feedback system supports arbitrary coupling and native six-body spin interactions.
4) One-shot computation eliminates the need for iterative processing, with the proposed solver reliably converging to solutions 99.989% of the time.
5) Enhanced connectivity through digital signaling and in-oscillator DACs overcomes the limitations of analog connections in range and accuracy.
6) A reliable phase sampling system enables consistent and accurate measurements.
The remainder of this article expands on the oscillator-based LDPC decoder chip presented in [25] and is organized as follows. Section II provides background on the proposed dynamical system for soft LDPC decoding. Section III covers the solver system architecture, while Sections IV and V describe the oscillator spin and feedback system implementations, respectively. Sections VI and VII detail the sampling system and digital controller, respectively. Section VIII presents the measurement results of the prototype and Section IX concludes this article.
II. DYNAMICAL SYSTEM BACKGROUND
A. LDPC Decoding Background
LDPC codes are widely used for efficient error correction in noisy communication channels such as in Ethernet and 5G.
2The order of spin interactions refers to the number of spins coupled in a system. Two-body interactions involve pairs, while higher order interactions (three-body, four-body, and so on) involve three or more, adding complexity and allowing higher order graphs to be solved natively in hardware.

Fig. 2. Example of an LDPC H-matrix.

LDPC decoding involves finding the most likely transmitted codeword, x, given a noisy received signal, r . In this work, we consider binary phase shift keying (BPSK) or PAM-2 modulation, where a binary codeword, w, is converted to symbols by: x = −1 + 2w. LDPC codes are defined by a sparse parity-check H-matrix, where each row corresponds to a parity-check equation, and each column relates to a bit in the codeword. The H-matrix encodes the relationships (i.e., paritychecks) between different codeword bits, ensuring that certain combinations of bits must satisfy the parity-check constraints. Fig. 2 shows an example of a small, 4 × 8 H-matrix, that defines a code of length 8. This H-matrix specifies four paritycheck constraints: C0, C1, C2, and C3.
Given a received signal, r , the decoding problem is essentially to solve for the most likely, w, such that

HwT = 0

(1)

where w is the sent binary codeword and x = −1 + 2w the corresponding sent symbol with xi ∈ {−1, +1}. The received signal r, is

ri = xi + ni

(2)

where ni is the noise term added to a transmitted bit, xi . The objective in LDPC decoding is to estimate w based on r, leveraging parity-check constraints to correct errors due to
noise.

B. Belief Propagation
Belief propagation (BP) [26] is the dominant decoding algorithm for LDPC codes and operates by exchanging messages between received symbols (variable nodes) and parity checks (check nodes) in the Tanner graph of the LDPC code. Each variable node is initialized with the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the received signal, indicating its likelihood of being +1 or −1. In an iterative loop, variable nodes send updated likelihoods to check nodes, which process them to enforce parity-check constraints and return their refined likelihoods. The process terminates once all parity checks are satisfied or a maximum iteration count is reached.
While BP in conventional digital hardware benefits from technology scaling, it has challenges meeting high throughput and low error rates. Achieving high decoding parallelism and large LLR precisions incurs significant hardware overheads. Additionally, BP’s iterative nature hampers throughput due to the need for multiple iterations to converge. Section VIII compares BP performance with measured results from the prototype.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIKOPOULOS et al.: RXO-LDPC: A PHYSICS-INSPIRED RELAXATION OSCILLATOR-BASED SOLVER

2423

Fig. 3. Proposed solver natively supports six-body spin couplings, enabling higher order interactions with fewer hardware resources for a given graph.

Fig. 4. Energy function ELDPC exhibits equal global minima, each corresponding to one valid LDPC codeword.

C. Higher Order Spin Interactions
Recent efforts map LDPC decoding and other higher-k problems to dynamical systems by first reducing them into Ising QUBO formulations. In [19], the LDPC decoding problem is reduced to an Ising model with two-body interactions using the Chimera graph topology, enabling mapping to the D-Wave quantum annealer. However, this reduction from higher order to lower order graphs introduces inefficiencies, requiring nearly five physical spins per LDPC variable in [19], compared to just one physical spin per variable in this work. A promising approach is seen in other dynamical systembased solvers, such as [23], where an all-to-all Ising machine tackles 20-variable 3-SAT problems. Nevertheless, since the Ising machine in [23] (with 50 physical spins) can only directly solve problems with two-body interactions, it requires the 3-SAT problem, which includes three-body interactions, to be decomposed into smaller QUBO-based sub-problems and solved iteratively.
Ising machines that rely on two-body interactions were originally inspired by spin interactions in ferromagnetism (i.e., spin glass). The relevant energy function, the Ising Hamiltonian, describes how spins interact with their neighbors

EQUBO(σ ) = − i,j Ji, j si s j

(3)

where σ = [s1, s2,...,sN ] denotes the vector of N spins and, si ∈ {−1, +1} represents the spin of the ith element, corresponding to the discrete variables in an optimization problem. The coupling strength Ji, j dictates whether two spins si and s j tend to align (positive Ji, j ) or adopt opposite orientations (negative Ji, j ) in equilibrium.
The proposed COP engine is not derived from the Ising Hamiltonian but instead utilizes an energy function specifically designed for LDPC decoding. The system directly maps the COP graph (H-matrix) to implement native CT sixth-order spin interactions, improving upon the three-body interactions demonstrated in both CT [24] and discrete-time [27] solvers. Neither preprocessing nor decomposition is required for solving higher order COPs with this architecture. The order of the spin interactions, k, is defined by the row weight (i.e., the number of ones in each row) of the H-matrix, which is usually much larger than two for LDPC decoding (k = 6 in this work, Fig. 3).

Fig. 5. Precise solver initialization with soft information improves the likelihood of a correct solution. The LDPC solver’s energy function quantifies the distance of the system state from a valid codeword. For the same received code, including soft information allows the system to reach the correct solution.

We propose a new LDPC-based system energy function to convert LDPC decoding to a COP problem that can be directly and efficiently mapped to a dynamical system of spins. The number of parity checks associated with each spin encodes the key metric of how far the dynamical system’s state is from a correct solution for an error-corrupted data frame. This system state is captured by the proposed energy function for an LDPC code with M parity checks and a block length of N

ELDPC(σ ) = i=1:M 1 − j,Hi j ̸=0s j

(4)

where si ∈ {−1, +1} represents the spin of the ith element that directly maps one LDPC variable. It needs to be noted that the energy function exhibits equal global minima for all valid LDPC codewords (see Fig. 4).

D. Soft Decoding
While the system supports hard spin initialization, precise soft spin initialization significantly improves the solver’s performance, as confirmed by measurement results. The system aims to identify the most likely transmitted binary codeword from a received initial state, r . Initializing spins with the best available prior information significantly enhances convergence accuracy. In this work, the solver spins initialize with soft information (i.e., the analog value of r ) rather than hard information (i.e., the sign of r ). We leverage our hardware’s unique ability to precisely set initial spin phases by mapping the analog information from the error-corrupted data frame

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2424

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2025

to the initial oscillator spin phases for soft decoding. This initialization specifies the likelihood of spins being either a +1 or −1. As shown in Section VIII, initializing the solver with soft information, compared to hard binary initialization, improves error-rate performance and throughput significantly as it initializes the solver closer to the ground state that corresponds to the transmitted codeword.
Fig. 5 illustrates a compute run example comparing soft and hard information initialization in the solver. When initialized with soft information, the solver assigns analog-valued initial spin phases, which accurately represent the likelihood of each bit being 0 or 1. This soft information enables the system to begin evolution closer to the correct solution, significantly increasing the probability of successful convergence to the transmitted LDPC codeword. In contrast, hard information initialization assigns binary values, without fully preserving the confidence level of the received signal. Using only hard information positions the solver further from the correct solution within the energy landscape, increasing the likelihood of convergence to an incorrect codeword that does not match the transmitted one.
E. Mapping LDPC Decoding
The N RXO spin nodes each have binary states Q j ∈ {0, 1}N and internal phases corresponding to the capacitor voltages Vj ∈ [0, VREF, j ] (see Fig. 6). Each RXO uses the same fixed, charging current, IRXO. The oscillator reference voltage, VREF, j , determines an oscillator’s spin frequency by setting the threshold voltages for the two capacitors. We enable soft decoding by representing both the signs and the analog values of the received signals in the initial spin states. We initialize the oscillator SR latches to store these signs. We initialize capacitor voltages (i.e., V0 or V1) to map the initial spin phases that correspond to the received signal’s analog values. Once released, the oscillator spins rapidly evolve from the initial state toward the nearest minimum of the LDPC energy function. This evolution occurs through the modulation of the instantaneous spin frequencies f j , according to the energy function ELDPC, j
f j (σ )∝VREF, j = Vnom − m ELDPC, j (σ )
= Vnom − m i,Hi j ̸=0 1 − k,Hik ̸=0sk . (5)
Each spin’s state s j corresponds to the SR latch value s j = 1 − 2Q j . f j changes proportionally to the sum of the associated parity-check violations, as described by ELDPC, j . For no parity-check violations, spins oscillate at a nominal frequency corresponding to the nominal reference voltage Vnom. The spin injection gain, m, is tunable.
Directly mapping LDPC as a COP problem to the proposed dynamical system consists of the following (see Fig. 7).
1) N oscillator spins with the capability of setting arbitrary initial phases and facilitating higher-k CT spin injections.
2) M digital logic-based clauses for directly computing satisfiability of LDPC check nodes in CT.
3) A crossbar-based feedback system enabling k-body spin couplings. The crossbar connection points between spins and clauses directly reflect the locations of ones in the sparse Hmatrix.

Fig. 6. RXO-based spin and relevant spin variables.
F. System Dynamics
The dynamical system of coupled spins directly maps the proposed energy function ELDPC. This function exhibits an energy landscape with multiple equal global minima, each representing a valid LDPC codeword. The initialization of spins maps the received LLR signs to binary spin states, while the analog LLR values directly map to initial spin phases φ ∈ [0, π]. Soft initialization positions the system closer to the correct LDPC codeword’s ground state. After initialization, spins interact and rapidly converge to a ground state, leveraging natural system dynamics without requiring annealing. Spins increase frequency proportionally to the number of violated parity checks. For example, a spin with more parity-check violations will oscillate at a higher frequency at that moment. This interaction ultimately results in spins resolving their relative phases to either 0 or π, representing 0 and 1. Annealing is unnecessary, as spins continuously adjust their frequency and phase if clauses are violated, ensuring that the system converges to a ground state.
III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
A. Solver Macro Architecture
Fig. 8 illustrates the solver architecture. The array of RXO-based spins directly maps COP variables, while the feedback system implements six-body interactions among groups of spins with shared LDPC clauses. Each spin directly represents an LDPC variable, and each XOR-6 gate represents an LDPC clause. The feedback system directly maps the H-matrix. An error-sense circuit flags the completion of a compute run once all parity checks are satisfied. Run completion initiates the sampling of the spin phases to read out the decoded message. The controller handles only configuration and interfacing, while the entire compute runs within the analog core.
We demonstrate the solver architecture by implementing a decoder for a regular (96, 48) code [28]. We selected the (96, 48) LDPC code as a representative rate-1/2 code for an initial hardware demonstration. Rate-1/2 codes are widely used in practical applications, including Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11n/ac/ax). Additionally, behavioral simulations confirm that the solver operates correctly across various LDPC codes (e.g., Wi-Fi and ten GBASE-T) and code rates, even at higher code rates, where constraints become more tightly coupled.
We introduce a twin-crossbar architecture that facilitates bidirectional connectivity between spins and clauses for six-body spin couplings. The crossbar structure enables oneto-one variable-to-spin mapping. The input crossbar connects

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIKOPOULOS et al.: RXO-LDPC: A PHYSICS-INSPIRED RELAXATION OSCILLATOR-BASED SOLVER

2425

Fig. 7. Mapping LDPC decoding as an optimization problem to a dynamical system of spins. Soft information initializes oscillator spins, and the H-matrix defines higher order spin coupling realized by crossbar connections and clauses.

Fig. 8. LDPC solver macro with key compute blocks: oscillator spin array, feedback system, XOR-based clauses, and DLL-based sampling system.

spin outputs to the 48 six-input XOR gates, which are responsible for executing the parity checks. The output crossbar routes the clause outputs back to the corresponding spins. This architecture fundamentally differs from systems supporting two- or three-body spin interactions, as it enables native solving of higher order COPs (k = 6). Further extending the interaction order requires increasing XOR gate inputs and modifying the twin-crossbar structure to accommodate additional interconnects between spins and clauses.
An advantage of the proposed RXO-based spins is that they allow for digital signal coupling, which does not load the oscillators, enabling long-range and high-order coupling. In contrast, resistive coupling [21], [22] directly loads sensitive oscillation nodes, limiting both the range and the order of coupling. In addition, digital feedback is resilient to noise since it operates with well-defined digital signal levels.
The feedback system monitors clauses in CT and provides feedback signals that push the oscillators to the most likely state. The architecture is highly adaptable, allowing reconfiguration of the input and output crossbars, as well as scaling of the spin and clause arrays, to support different codes and H-matrices. Additionally, features such as precise spin phase initialization (i.e., with soft initialization), optimal mapping (i.e., one COP variable corresponds to one physical spin), full parallelism, and robust feedback enhance scalability, enabling support for longer codes.
B. Solver Compute Framework
A custom compute framework (see Fig. 9) manages the compute process. At initialization, after the oscillators are reset, their spin states are precisely set based on the received LLRs. Subsequently, once the spins are released, they interact and evolve rapidly toward a global energy minimum (solver convergence). Once convergence is reached, all parity checks are satisfied, and the sampling system registers the final solution. The final solution is encoded in the locked oscillator phases, which have either relative phases of 0◦ or 180◦. In our compute framework (see Fig. 9), the digital controller handles configuration and interfacing during the “Compute setup” and “Solution readout” steps, while the entire LDPC compute runs within the solver core, without pre- or post-processing.

Fig. 9. Asynchronous compute framework.
IV. RXO-BASED COMPUTE NODES
A. RXOs as Spins
One of the key design considerations is the use of a twin-capacitor RXO (proposed as a standalone oscillator in [29]) as the core of the proposed CT spin (see Fig. 10). The twin-cap RXO alternately integrates current on one capacitor while resetting the other (see Fig. 11). A CT comparator detects when the charging capacitor exceeds a reference voltage and sets (or resets) a latch, which stores the oscillator’s binary state. The RXO provides crucial advantages for physics-inspired computing, especially when compared to ring oscillators used in Ising machines with two-body interactions [21], [22].
1) Spin injection based on the manipulation of comparator threshold voltages enables accurate coupling with higher order interactions. ROSC-based spins typically rely on resistive interconnects, which allow for configurable coupling coefficients, as shown in [21] and [22] yet remain constrained to two-body interactions.
2) The ability to set the latch state and capacitor voltages (soft information) offers unprecedented capabilities. In most COP problems, the solution is fully encoded in spin couplings, whereas in our solver, it is determined by both soft initial conditions and the energy function, leveraging precise control over the initial state.
3) Current source charging in the RXO significantly reduces sensitivity to PVT and supply variation, a common issue with ROSCs.
4) A digital spin feedback interface, incorporating a feedback DAC, (FDAC) enables CT spin injection with six-body spin interactions and purely digital spin coupling that is robust and does not load the oscillator. Adjusting the RXO reference allows precise control of spin dynamics, distinguishing it from ROSC-based spins. While ROSC-based spins traditionally do

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2426

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Fig. 10. RXO-based spin with feedback and SDACs. err0, err1, and err2 correspond to the outputs of the clauses related to a given spin.

Fig. 12. Details of the SDAC and Feedback DAC integrated within each RXO spin circuit. For each spin, the SDAC sets the initial phase while the FDAC sums parity-check violations and modulates the relaxation threshold.

Fig. 11. Oscillator comparator input voltages for an example compute run.

FDACs modulate the spin frequencies. The nominal frequency corresponds to zero parity-check violations, and each additional parity-check violation results in a positive increment in the frequency. The proposed FDAC is resource-efficient and allows for precise tuning of the analog spin injection weights.

not require D/A conversion [21], [22], they remain limited to two-body spin interactions.
5) The symmetric oscillator structure delivers a stable frequency and duty cycle, which enhances the accuracy of the system. A large frequency or duty cycle error can impede convergence to solutions and phase readout.
The proposed spin implements the three key variables essential to the dynamical system: the spin’s internal phase with the capacitor voltage, the binary spin state with the SR latch state, and the spin frequency with the comparator threshold voltage. The soft DACs (SDACs) set the initial spin phases to match the received channel LLRs. The feedback system utilizes the binary spin states to generate CT spin injection signals. For each spin, this feedback drives its feedback interface (FDAC), which integrates the summation of feedback signals to modulate the oscillator frequency in CT. Modulating the comparator threshold with the FDAC facilitates six-body interactions. The CDAC and the FDAC occupy 23% and 5% of the spin’s area, respectively. Moreover, this design’s primary custom analog component is the oscillator spin core, which requires only a one-time design, as all spins are identical.
B. In-Oscillator DACs
During initialization, the SDAC connects to the RXO capacitors to set the initial phase of each spin (see Fig. 12). The 3-bit CDAC implementation allows efficient loading of the LLR values to the oscillator. The CDAC’s binary-weighted capacitors are initially reset to VSS and then connected to VDD or VSS based on the quantized LLR value. Finally, the CDAC and RXO capacitors charge-share to establish the initial phase.
The FDACs sum digital spin injection signals to enable six-body coupling and generate corresponding relaxation thresholds. After the spins are released, the CT spin injection signals from the feedback system drive the integrated FDACs for each spin to correct bit errors. Avoiding full adders, which incur a larger footprint, the feedback signals and their complements directly drive switches to connect the comparator threshold with voltages corresponding to the sum of the parity-check violations of each spin. In this way, the

C. Spin Nonidealities
The primary nonidealities affecting the RXO spin relate to oscillation-frequency mismatch. Behavioral simulations indicate an upper limit to inter-spin frequency and duty-cycle mismatch, beyond which spins fail to lock into a stable equilibrium state. To mitigate this performance degradation, we identify the primary sources of spin frequency mismatch: the current source and the comparator. The transistors in both spin circuits are carefully sized with sufficient matching margins to minimize inter-spin frequency mismatch. We also sized the RXO twin-capacitors with sufficient matching margin to alleviate duty-cycle mismatch. The bias circuitry for the entire oscillator array was also carefully sized to minimize mismatches in the oscillator charging current and comparator biases.
V. FEEDBACK SYSTEM
A. Design Considerations
The feedback system generates CT feedback to the RXO spins, directly implementing the LDPC energy function described in Section II (see Fig. 13). The fully digital design ensures compactness and scalability, making it suitable for larger codes. The system directly maps the sparse H-matrix onto a pair of crossbars, where each vertical and horizontal intersection represents an H-matrix cell. The system effectively encodes the six-body spin interactions by placing vias at intersections corresponding to matrix entries with ones.
The crossbar design is tailored for scalability. We note that the input crossbar has three times more horizontal wires than vertical, while the output crossbar has six times more vertical wires than horizontal. This configuration allows each clause to receive six distinct inputs from different spins and route its output back to those same spins. For this solver, we implement a fixed crossbar architecture as an initial prototype. However, the system can adapt to variable-rate LDPC codes for different channel conditions by using programmable switches in place of fixed connections.
To streamline the design process, a custom SKILL script automates the layout generation. The script accepts an arbitrary H-matrix as input, instantiates the twin crossbars and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIKOPOULOS et al.: RXO-LDPC: A PHYSICS-INSPIRED RELAXATION OSCILLATOR-BASED SOLVER

2427

Fig. 14. Layout of a conventional crossbar (left) and layout of the proposed crossbar with alternating metal layers and equal wire lengths (right).

Fig. 13. Feedback system with twin crossbars facilitates six-body spin couplings.
clause structures, and places vias at the corresponding crossbar intersections. This allows full automation of the feedback system design, reducing design effort while ensuring accuracy, robustness, and scalability for longer LDPC codes. To scale the design to longer codes, the number of oscillator spins and XOR gate inputs must be increased, while the twin crossbars need to be expanded to accommodate additional spin-clause interconnects. Furthermore, since the feedback system is purely digital, it should scale well to advanced technology nodes like FinFET technologies, where propagation delay significantly reduces.
In the current implementation, increasing the number of variables (N ) causes the feedback system to scale as N 2, making it the primary bottleneck in scaling, whereas clauses and feedback DACs scale as N . The SDAC resolution does not need to increase for larger decoders, as the 3-bit soft information resolution provides sufficient performance improvement. To enhance the scalability of future iterations of this design, another approach would be to instantiate two adjacent spin arrays, each with its dedicated crossbar system placed below them. The clauses can be implemented at their vertical boundary. This structure improves scalability, as each crossbar and the corresponding feedback delay scale now on the order of N 2/2.
B. Feedback Delay Optimization
The propagation delay of the feedback system is the main limitation of throughput. Above a certain amount, delay has a detrimental effect on the ability of the system to solve input problems correctly. A large feedback delay prohibits the spins from locking to correct states and results in chaotic oscillations. From behavioral simulations, we estimate the upper limit of feedback delay to be approximately 10% of the nominal oscillation period. Feedback delay variation also prevents the system from reliably converging to solutions. Large delay variations cause some spins to receive feedback much faster than others, leading to chaotic behavior.
We introduce a layout technique (see Fig. 14), specifically designed for the twin crossbars, to optimize the delay and

delay variation of the feedback system. First, to improve the delay of the crossbars, instead of using just two metal layers for the crossbars (one for the vertical and one for the horizontal wires), we use alternating metal layers for the horizontal lines to reduce the coupling capacitance between adjacent horizontal wires. This reduction is verified by extracting the crossbar parasitics. Since we place multiple parallel vias at intersection points, there is no significant change in the effective resistance when comparing the two approaches. Furthermore, all crossbar wires are extended to balance propagation delays. The via placement within the crossbars introduces mismatch in each path’s RC load. However, extending metal wires reduces RC load variation and, thus, delay variation compared to designs with variable wire lengths. These layout techniques effectively reduce the maximum delay of the data paths in the feedback system by 22% and the maximum delay variation between different paths by 40%.
VI. SAMPLING SYSTEM
A. Design Considerations
The integrated sampling system (see Fig. 15) provides a robust, noise-free readout of the oscillator array’s state at the end of each compute cycle. Due to non-idealities such as frequency variation and loop delay, even at equilibrium, the spin phases exhibit slight deviations from ideal 0◦ or 180◦ differences between them, causing variations in edge transition times. To prevent sampling at noisy edge transition points, we introduce redundancy by capturing six samples in one oscillation period. The sampling system comprises a delay-locked loop (DLL), a sampling controller, and output data registers. The DLL generates six clock phases to enable sampling at six distinct points in an oscillation period. We derive the reference from a dummy nominal-frequency RXO to closely match the DLL frequency with the nominal array frequency. (The DLL accommodates a broad frequency range from 0.1 to 300 MHz.) A custom clock tree evenly distributes the clock phases to the 96 6-bit samplers (one for each spin).
The error-sense circuit determines whether all 48 clauses are satisfied by performing an OR operation on their outputs, generating a 1-bit error flag. After initial convergence, it takes several cycles for the spin phases to fully align to 0◦ or 180◦ differences. During this transitory process, the error-sense flag is asserted but with a decreasing duty cycle (i.e., the more aligned the spin phases are, the shorter the duty cycle

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2428

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Fig. 15. Integrated sampling system for robust noise-free readout of final spin phases.

Fig. 17. Prototype micrograph, summary, and power breakdown for SNR = 7 dB, Freq = 20 MHz, and at room temperature.

Fig. 16. Digital controller.

VIII. MEASUREMENT RESULTS AND COMPARISON
We performed extensive evaluations of the prototype to assess its performance accurately for a wide range of SNRs, for temperature, supply variation, and for different dies. The chip was evaluated with more than 100 million frame decoding cycles. The measured performance metrics are compared with state-of-the-art BP-based LDPC decoders and recent solvers. As mentioned earlier, LDPC is formulated as a COP and solved natively in the prototype, without the need for preor post-processing. The prototype (see Fig. 17) was fabricated in 28-nm CMOS technology and consumes 7.38 mW.

of the error-sense flag). We use a pulse counter integrated with the sampling controller to prevent early sampling before spin phases align to 0◦ or 180◦ with sufficient margin. The counter initiates the sampling process only after detecting a programmable number of rising error-sense transitions. After sampling is triggered, the controller waits for all six DLL rising edges before locking the 96 registers for data readout.
VII. DIGITAL CONTROLLER
A digital controller (see Fig. 16) enables a fully autonomous solver by managing the oscillator array configuration, loading initial soft values, controlling operations, retrieving results from the sampling system, and measuring the solution time. The controller is only responsible for configuring and interfacing with the solver, while all LDPC decoding computations occur entirely within the solver. We designed an instruction-based architecture to optimize memory usage and reduce the circuit footprint. We designed the controller’s instruction set for flexible flow control, accommodating both chip testing and application needs. The controller accurately measures compute time and supports loop iterations, allowing the solver to re-run if convergence fails before timeout. For a compute run, the controller generates waveforms for launching the decoding process, managing loop iterations, pausing when required, and terminating once decoding is complete. A sequence of up to 256 instructions is used to execute the decoding process. A Quad-SPI (QSPI) interface links the system to a host Teensy microcontroller for efficient communication.

A. Error-Rate Performance
The prototype’s decoding performance was extensively evaluated to quantify bit error rate (BER) and frame error rate (FER) metrics. We compare the solver’s converged solution during compute cycles with the ideal sent codeword to calculate both metrics. Mismatches in specific bits correspond to bit errors, while mismatches in one or more bits of a frame correspond to frame errors. As is typical for testing decoder performance, we use a zero-codeword and add noise from an AWGN noise source, whose noise power reflects a given channel SNR level, to generate the solver inputs. We also tested the solver for randomly generated non-zero codewords, and it exhibits identical performance. The dataset is generated in MATLAB, and the whole measurement process is fully automated. A Teensy microcontroller orchestrates the measurement process by iteratively configuring test runs on the on-chip digital controller and then retrieving the solver’s solution and the precise solution time. We evaluated FER and BER across varying channel SNRs, observing higher error rates at lower SNRs, as expected, due to increased noise in the channel. Additionally, higher SNR measurements require more decoding cycles since decoding error occurrences decrease as SNR increases.
We simulated BP for the same (96, 48) LDPC code used in the prototype chip to benchmark the proposed oscillator-based decoder heuristic against the state-of-the-art LDPC decoding algorithm. Since error-rate performance depends on both the code and decoding algorithm, comparing the measured BER/FER of our solver against the simulated BP decoder provides a direct benchmark against the leading digital decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIKOPOULOS et al.: RXO-LDPC: A PHYSICS-INSPIRED RELAXATION OSCILLATOR-BASED SOLVER

2429

Fig. 18. Measured prototype vs. simulated BP FER/BER.

Fig. 20. Measured prototype convergence rate with soft and hard initialization.

Fig. 19. Measured prototype FER/BER with soft and hard initialization.

Fig. 21. Measured prototype time-to-solution with soft and hard initialization.

method. We set the maximum iterations of BP to 10, a commonly used threshold. The measured FER and BER results are illustrated in Fig. 18 and compared with the BP decoding metrics. The prototype consistently outperforms BP, especially in the low-SNR region. For 2–5 dBs of SNR, the solver demonstrates more than three orders of magnitude improved BER compared to BP.
To demonstrate the advantage of soft decoding, we measured results using a hard decoder configuration of the prototype. For the hard-decision solver initialization, the soft-information bits loaded to the RXO spins were set to zero, effectively disabling the SDACs. The RXO latches were initialized to zero or one based on a binary hard decision of the received LLR. Soft decoding significantly outperforms hard decoding across the entire SNR range for both FER and BER metrics (see Fig. 19). This comparison underlines the benefit of initializing the solver with soft information. The chosen 3-bit LLR resolution provides substantial performance improvement. Further increasing LLR resolution beyond 3 bits could further reduce error rates.
Moreover, we attribute the significantly improved BER/FER results in this article compared to [25] to the correction of

a high-resistance connection issue in the PCB measurement platform. Fixing this issue also led to a 25% increase in power consumption, primarily related to the increased power consumption of the feedback system. The compromised feedback system supply in the original evaluation increases the signal propagation delay between spins and clauses, degrading performance. Resolving this issue enables faster signal transitions, resulting in the significant error-rate improvement reported in this article.
B. CR and TTS
For COP solvers, two key performance metrics are the convergence rate (CR) and TTS. CR and TTS were also measured across a range of SNRs. At lower SNRs, TTS increases slightly as the solver requires more time to correct the growing number of channel-induced parity-check violations, while CR degrades for the same reason. The CR is defined as the percentage of times the solver successfully finds a solution that satisfies the clauses defined by the COP problem, such as the H-matrix in LDPC decoding. In our measurements, we allocate 117 ns of compute time (Tcomp) for the solver. If the system fails to converge to a solution within this time,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2430

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Fig. 24. Measured CR for different dies with 6-dB SNR.

Fig. 22. Prototype performance variation across different temperatures with 6-dB SNR.

relationship can be expressed by the following equation:

TTS = Tconv + Tcomp

1 −1
CR

.

(6)

The measured TTS is shown in Fig. 21. While soft initialization enables stable TTS across the entire SNR range, hard solver initialization results in significantly worse TTS for lower SNR values. The comparison between soft and hard decoder configurations highlights the important role of soft initialization. TTS includes the compute setup (three clock cycles), the asynchronous compute, and the readout time (see Fig. 9).

Fig. 23. Prototype performance variation across different supply voltages with 6-dB SNR.
the solver is re-initialized with the same codeword, and the compute cycle restarts.
Fig. 20 illustrates the CR, comparing the soft-decision and hard-decision solver configurations. In both cases, the CR improves as the SNR increases, eventually saturating at high SNR levels. As with the BER/FER measurements, soft decoding significantly improves performance, with the soft CR being more than eight times higher than the hard CR at an SNR of 2 dB. Soft CR saturates near one at an SNR of 5 dB, while hard CR requires an SNR of 8 dB for saturation.
The solver’s TTS is derived from extensive measurement results. While the system’s accuracy is represented by the error-rate metrics, its TTS reflects the time it takes to reach a valid LDPC solution. To calculate TTS, we account for both scenarios: when the solver converges to a solution with an average solution time, Tconv, and when the solver fails to converge, leading to wasted compute time equivalent to the allocated solver compute time Tcomp. To calculate the total time required to reach a valid LDPC solution, we add the number of restarts required, given by Tcomp((1/CR)−1), to the average solution time Tconv, when the solver converges.3 This
3For example, if the solver converges 10% of the time (CR = 0.1), it must be restarted nine times to reach a valid LDPC solution. In this example, the total compute time is Tconv + 9T comp.

C. PVT Variation
The proposed solver performance was evaluated across variations in temperature, supply voltage, and with different die. Fig. 22 depicts the solver performance over a temperature range of −20 ◦C to 70 ◦C, demonstrating stable operation across the entire range, with improved performance observed at −20 ◦C. Similarly, Fig. 23 shows the measured performance under supply voltage variations, maintaining stability with a notable improvement at 0.85 V. Moreover, Fig. 24 highlights the consistent performance across different dies, showcasing the stable operation. Overall, these results confirm the robustness of the oscillator-based system against PVT variations. Additionally, since process variations (i.e., transistor mismatch) are better controlled, we expect the solver’s performance to be even more resilient in FinFET technologies.
D. Decoder Performance and Comparison
In this section, we present the measured decoder performance metrics and compare them with recent state-of-the-art digital BP-based decoders (see Table I). To account for variations in code lengths across reported systems, we provide normalized energy and area efficiencies. RXO-LDPC achieves a normalized energy efficiency of 7.28 pJ/bit, outperforming state-of-the-art decoders [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35]. The measured area efficiency is 4.82 Gb/s/mm2, second only to [33] and [34].
E. Comparison With Other Solvers
Table II compares the proposed COP engine with other solvers. Our solver is the first COP engine to leverage six-body interactions with arbitrary spin couplings in a commercial CMOS process implementation. Furthermore, the prototype is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIKOPOULOS et al.: RXO-LDPC: A PHYSICS-INSPIRED RELAXATION OSCILLATOR-BASED SOLVER
TABLE I COMPARISON WITH OTHER LDPC DECODERS

2431

TABLE II PERFORMANCE SUMMARY AND COMPARISON WITH OTHER COP SOLVERS

the only system that allows for precise spin initialization, thus enabling the direct implementation of soft LDPC decoding. In comparison, Kasi and Jamieson [19] decompose LDPC decoding to a QUBO formulation and add a term in the system’s energy to encode the received soft information. This results in the requirement of almost five physical spins per LDPC variable, in contrast to just one physical spin per variable in this work. This work surpasses [19] in terms of FER significantly. A potential future enhancement to our solver is to further integrate soft information into the system dynamics without altering the energy landscape. This could be achieved by disabling feedback for spins with a strong likelihood of being 0 or 1, allowing computation to focus on uncertain spins, while those with strong LLRs remain unchanged. Compared with oscillator-based and other solver systems with twoor three-body interactions [21], [22], [24], RXO-LDPC has substantially lower TTS and a very competitive power per node.
IX. CONCLUSION
This work introduces RXO-LDPC, a CT probabilistic combinatorial optimization engine that directly maps a higher order graph with six-body interactions onto a dynamical

system of coupled oscillator spins. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this represents the first CMOS physics-inspired implementation of LDPC decoding. By utilizing a one-toone mapping of oscillator spins to variables with arbitrary coupling, the design overcomes inefficiencies found in locally connected solvers [21] or those limited to two- and three-body interactions [21], [22], [24]. The unprecedented precision in controlling the initial spin phases enables high-performance soft LDPC decoding that surpasses the BER performance of BP by more than three orders of magnitude in the lowSNR region (2–5 dB). With a 95-ns TTS and a 7.38-mW power dissipation, the prototype achieves superior normalized energy efficiency compared to recent state-of-the-art digital LDPC decoders [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], leveraging CT operation and massive parallelism. The proposed solver paves the way for wider adoption of CT, physics-inspired computing platforms, enabling direct mapping of COPs to CMOS-based dynamical systems with higher order spin interactions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Dr. Hsiang-Wen Chen for layout support and the reviewers who helped improve the quality of this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2432

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2025

article. Evangelos Dikopoulos acknowledges partial support from the Onassis Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Mead, Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[2] P. W. Shor, “Algorithms for quantum computation: Discrete logarithms and factoring,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., Santa Fe, NM, USA, 1994, pp. 124–134.
[3] M. W. Johnson et al., “Quantum annealing with manufactured spins,” Nature, vol. 473, no. 7346, pp. 194–198, 2011.
[4] O. Ezratty, “Perspective on superconducting qubit quantum computing,” Eur. Phys. J. A, vol. 59, no. 5, p. 94, May 2023.
[5] S. Okada, M. Ohzeki, M. Terabe, and S. Taguchi, “Improving solutions by embedding larger subproblems in a D-Wave quantum annealer,” Sci. Rep., vol. 9, no. 1, p. 2098, Feb. 2019.
[6] K. L. Pudenz, T. Albash, and D. A. Lidar, “Error-corrected quantum annealing with hundreds of qubits,” Nature Commun., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 3243, Feb. 2014.
[7] R. Hamerly et al., “Experimental investigation of performance differences between coherent ising machines and a quantum annealer,” Sci. Adv., vol. 5, no. 5, p. 0823, May 2019.
[8] Y. Yamamoto et al., “Coherent ising machines—Optical neural networks operating at the quantum limit,” npj Quantum Inf., vol. 3, no. 1, p. 49, Dec. 2017.
[9] T. Honjo et al., “100,000-spin coherent ising machine,” Sci. Adv., vol. 7, no. 40, p. 0952, Oct. 2021.
[10] S. Xie et al., “Snap-SAT: A one-shot energy-performance-aware all-digital compute-in-memory solver for large-scale hard Boolean satisfiability problems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid- State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2023, pp. 420–422.
[11] K. Yamamoto et al., “Statica: A 512-spin 0.25 m-weight annealing processor with an all-spin-updates-at-once architecture for combinatorial optimization with complete spin-spin interactions,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 165–178, Jan. 2021.
[12] Q. Zhang et al., “A stochastic analog SAT solver in 65 nm CMOS achieving 6.6µs average solution time with 100% solvability for hard 3-SAT problems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Technol. Circuits (VLSI Technol. Circuits), Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2024, pp. 1–2.
[13] J. Song et al., “30.5 a variation-tolerant in-eDRAM continuous-time ising machine featuring 15-level coefficients and leaked negativefeedback annealing,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2024, pp. 490–492.
[14] E. A. Vittoz, “Low-power design: Ways to approach the limits,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, San Francisco, CA, USA, Apr. 1994, pp. 14–18, doi: 10.1109/ISSCC.1994.344744.
[15] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1 Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[16] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[17] T. Wadayama, “Interior point decoding for linear vector channels based on convex optimization,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 4905–4921, Oct. 2010.
[18] A. Hareedy, R. Wu, and L. Dolecek, “A channel-aware combinatorial approach to design high performance spatially-coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 4834–4852, Aug. 2020.
[19] S. Kasi and K. Jamieson, “Towards quantum belief propagation for LDPC decoding in wireless networks,” in Proc. 26th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw., Sep. 2020, pp. 1–14.
[20] M. Tawada, S. Tanaka, and N. Togawa, “A new LDPC code decoding method: Expanding the scope of ising machines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. (ICCE), Las Vegas, NV, USA, Jan. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[21] I. Ahmed, P.-W. Chiu, and C. H. Kim, “A probabilistic self-annealing compute fabric based on 560 hexagonally coupled ring oscillators for solving combinatorial optimization problems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits, Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–2.

[22] H. Lo, W. Moy, H. Yu, S. Sapatnekar, and C. H. Kim, “An Ising solver chip based on coupled ring oscillators with a 48-node all-toall connected array architecture,” Nat. Electron., vol. 6, pp. 771–778, Aug. 2023.
[23] H. Cılasun et al., “3SAT on an all-to-all-connected CMOS ising solver chip,” Sci. Rep., vol. 14, no. 1, p. 10757, May 2024.
[24] M. Chang, X. Yin, Z. Toroczkai, X. Hu, and A. Raychowdhury, “An analog clock-free compute fabric base on continuous-time dynamical system for solving combinatorial optimization problems,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf. (CICC), Newport Beach, CA, USA, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–2.
[25] E. Dikopoulos et al., “A relaxation oscillator-based probabilistic combinatorial optimization engine for soft decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Solid-State Electron. Res. Conf. (ESSERC), Bruges, Belgium, Sep. 2024, pp. 717–720.
[26] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[27] Y. Su, T. T.-H. Kim, and B. Kim, “A reconfigurable lsing machine for Boolean satisfiability problems featuring many-body spin interactions,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf. (CICC), San Antonio, TX, USA, Apr. 2023, pp. 1–2.
[28] D. J. C. MacKay. (2001). Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes, Version 1.0. [Online]. Available: https://www.inference.org.uk/ mackay/codes/data.html
[29] M. P. Flynn and S. U. Lidholm, “A 1.2-µm CMOS current-controlled oscillator,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 982–987, Jul. 1992.
[30] B.-S. Su, C.-H. Lee, and T.-D. Chiueh, “A 58.6/91.3 pJ/b dual-mode belief-propagation decoder for LDPC and polar codes in the 5G communications standard,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Lett., vol. 5, pp. 98–101, 2022.
[31] M. Milicevic and P. G. Gulak, “A multi-Gb/s frame-interleaved LDPC decoder with path-unrolled message passing in 28 nm CMOS,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1908–1921, Oct. 2018.
[32] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[33] M. Li et al., “An energy efficient 18Gbps LDPC decoding processor for 802.11ad in 28nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf. (A-SSCC), Xiamen, China, Nov. 2015, pp. 1–5.
[34] H. Lopez, H.-W. Chan, K.-L. Chiu, P.-Y. Tsai, and S.-J. J. Jou, “A 75-gb/s/mm2 and energy-efficient LDPC decoder based on a reduced complexity second minimum approximation min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 926–939, Apr. 2020.
[35] M. Weiner, M. Blagojevic, S. Skotnikov, A. Burg, P. Flatresse, and B. Nikolic, “A scalable 1.5-to-6Gb/s 6.2-to-38.1 mW LDPC decoder for 60 GHz wireless networks in 28 nm UTBB FDSOI,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2014, pp. 464–465.
Evangelos Dikopoulos (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the Diploma degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Patras, Patras, Greece. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science with the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, with a focus on developing physics-inspired mixed-signal architectures for combinatorial optimization problem solvers.
His research interests include VLSI and mixed-signal design, analog, and physics-inspired computing. Mr. Dikopoulos received the 2024 Qualcomm Innovation Fellowship for North America.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DIKOPOULOS et al.: RXO-LDPC: A PHYSICS-INSPIRED RELAXATION OSCILLATOR-BASED SOLVER

2433

Luke Wormald (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree (summa cum laude) in electrical engineering from the University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA, in 2020, and the M.S. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include analog/mixed-signal computing, machine learning, and combinatorial optimization problem-solving.
Ying-Tuan Hsu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2018 and 2021, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering with the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
His research interests involve analog computing circuits and mixed-signal SRAM designs.

Zhengya Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.A.Sc. degree in computer engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2003, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of California at Berkeley (UC Berkeley), Berkeley, CA, USA, in 2005 and 2009, respectively.
He has been a Faculty Member with the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, since 2009, where he is currently a Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. His research interests include low-power and high-performance VLSI circuits and systems for computing, communications, and signal processing. Dr. Zhang was a recipient of the University of Michigan College of Engineering Neil Van Eenam Memorial Award in 2019, the Intel Early Career Faculty Award in 2013, the National Science Foundation CAREER Award in 2011, and the David J. Sakrison Memorial Prize from UC Berkeley in 2009. He has served on the Technical Program Committee of the IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conference (CICC) since 2019. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS from 2015 to 2022, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS from 2013 to 2015, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS from 2014 to 2015. He served on the Technical Program Committee of the IEEE VLSI Symposium on Technology and Circuits from 2019 to 2022. He was an IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society Distinguished Lecturer from 2023 to 2024.

Wei Tang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from the National Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2011, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 2019.
He has previously worked as a Visiting Ph.D. at Lund University, Lund, Sweden, and a Graduate Research Intern at Intel Labs, Hillsboro, OR, USA. He is currently an Assistant Research Scientist with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan. His research interests include high-speed, energy-efficient, and flexible VLSI designs for communications, machine learning, and robotics.
Po-Shao Chen (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2018, and the M.S. degree in electronics engineering from the Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
His research interests include hardware architecture and VLSI design for digital signal processing.

Michael P. Flynn (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, in 1995.
From 1988 to 1991, he was with the National Microelectronics Research Center, Cork, Ireland. From 1993 to 1995, he was with National Semiconductor, Santa Clara, CA, USA. From 1995 to 1997, he was a member of Technical Staff with Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, USA. From 1997 to 2001, he was with Parthus Technologies, Cork. He joined the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 2001, where he is currently the Fawwaz T Ulaby Collegiate Professor of electrical and computer engineering and a Professor of electrical engineering and computer science. His research interests include data conversion, biomedical systems, RF circuits, and analog computing. Dr. Flynn received the 2024 Semiconductor Industry Association University Researcher Award, the Rackham Distinguished Graduate Mentoring Award in 2020, the University of Michigan Faculty Achievement Award in 2016, the Outstanding Achievement Award from the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science in 2006, and the NSF Early Career Award in 2004. He was a recipient of the Intel Outstanding Researcher Award in 2020. He received the Education Excellence Award in 2011 and the College of Engineering Ted Kennedy Family Team Excellence Award from the College of Engineering, University of Michigan, in 2010. He was the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS from 2013 to 2016. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS. He served on the Technical Program Committee of ISSCC, the Symposium on VLSI Circuits, European Solid-State Circuits Conference (ESSCIRC), and Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (ASSCC). He was the Sub-Committee Chair for Data Conversion at the International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC) from 2018 to 2022. He is a former Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:35:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

