IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 7, JULY 2025

11461

A High Performance and Low Complexity LDPC Decoding Strategy for Space-Air–Ground-Sea Integrated Communication Networks
Xinyuan Ren , Jiahao Zhang , Chao Chen, Shuai Wang , Member, IEEE,
Gaofeng Pan , Senior Member, IEEE, Xiaqing Miao , Member, IEEE,
and Jianping An , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In the coming sixth-generation era, space-air–ground-sea integrated (SAGSI) communication networks will be rapidly developed, with broader coverage, connectivity, security, and so on. The various communication requirements call for a decoding algorithm with lower complexity and higher coding gain for the channel code. Inspired by this point and based on the fifth-generation networks standard, this paper proposes a high-performance and low-complexity Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) decoding strategy for SAGSI communication networks. Based on a twodimensional self-corrected min-sum algorithm (2D-SCMSA), the message reliability can be improved by the proposed Enhanced 2D-SCMSA (E-2DSCMSA) while considering the erasure range of the variable node message. For given LDPC codes, the simulation results show that the proposed E2D-SCMSA can achieve a performance gain of approximately 0.1 dB at bit error rate (BER) of 10−4 compared to 2D-SCMSA with a negligible increase in computational complexity. Moreover, the performance gap between the proposed E-2D-SCMSA and likelihood ratio belief-propagation algorithm is less than 0.1 dB at BER of 10−4 .
Index Terms—LDPC codes, SAGSI communication networks, selfcorrected min-sum, iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the large-scale application of the fifth-generation (5G) cellular communication networks, research on sixth-generation (6G) communication has gradually entered the exploration stage. In contrast to 5G, 6G communication aims to create space-air–ground-sea integrated (SAGSI) communication networks. Then the 6G networks can bridge the digital divide across the globe and fulfill the surging demands for flexible communications [1], providing global seamless coverage and ubiquitous connectivity [2]. Based on the fifth-generation new radio (5G NR), a high-performance and low-complexity Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) [3] codes decoding strategy is essential in the SAGSI communication networks.
For the decoding algorithms of LDPC codes, the belief-propagation algorithm (BPA) or the likelihood ratio BPA (LLR-BPA) [4] can approach the Shannon limit by iteratively processing messages between check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs). Unfortunately, BPA
Received 8 July 2024; revised 22 October 2024; accepted 4 December 2024. Date of publication 9 December 2024; date of current version 18 July 2025. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFC3331102. The review of this article was coordinated by Dr. Qiang John Ye. (Corresponding author: Shuai Wang.)
Xinyuan Ren, Jiahao Zhang, Shuai Wang, Gaofeng Pan, Xiaqing Miao, and Jianping An are with the School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: rxy@bit.edu. cn; jiahaozhang@bit.edu.cn; swang@bit.edu.cn; gfpan@bit.edu.cn; xqmiao@ bit.edu.cn; an@bit.edu.cn).
Chao Chen is with the School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: birdchs@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3514313

or LLR-BPA requires a lot of multiplication and nonlinear operations, which is unsuitable for hardware implementation. To reduce the complexity of LLR-BPA and obtain near error performance, Ref. [5] presented an approximate-min algorithm, and Ref. [6] proposed to use linear approximation to simplify the nonlinear operations of LLR-BPA. Although the error performance of these algorithms is very close to LLR-BPA, they will increase the decoding delay and consume more storage resources.
Since the above algorithms are unsuitable for hardware implementation, Ref. [7] proposed a min-sum algorithm (MSA) to simplify the CNs updating process of LLR-BPA. It can greatly reduce the computational complexity. In addition, normalized MSA (NMSA) and offset MSA (OMSA) were proposed in Ref. [8] to further optimize the error performance of MSA and became the primary decoding algorithms in practical applications. However, NMSA or OMSA cannot achieve excellent performance for irregular LDPC codes. Based on NMSA, Ref. [9] proposed an effective self-corrected MSA (SCMSA) to ensure quasi-optimal decoding performance by erasing unreliable VN messages in each iteration. For the 5G NR LDPC codes, the authors of Ref. [10] proposed a two-dimensional SCMSA (2D-SCMSA). It selectively deletes the unreliable VN message and amplifies the magnitude of the extrinsic messages sent to CNs according to the structure of the parity-check matrix.
Although SCMSA can significantly improve over MSA and perform very close to LLR-BPA, SCMSA requires sufficient iterations. Similarly, there is still a performance gap between 2D-SCMSA and LLR-BPA. Although an enhanced quasi-maximum likelihood decoding method was proposed to further optimize performance [10], it is unsuitable for hardware implementation. Therefore, to approach the performance of LLR-BPA for SAGSI communication networks, this paper proposes Enhanced-2D-SCMSA (E-2D-SCMSA). Based on the 2D-SCMSA, the proposed algorithm further improves the message reliability by considering the erasure range of the VN message. For the given 5G NR LDPC codes, E-2D-SCMSA can achieve about 0.1dB performance gain over 2D-SCMSA and less than 0.1dB performance gap over LLR-BPA at bit error rate (BER) of 10−4 .
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief overview of the characteristics of 5G NR LDPC codes. Section III introduces the proposed E-2D-SCMSA. Section IV presents the simulation results and complexity analysis. Finally, Section V concludes this work.

II. BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARIES

A. 5G NR LDPC Codes

LDPC codes can be described by a sparse parity-check matrix H of size M × N , where M and N represent the number of CNs and VNs,

respectively. There are two base graphs (BGs) for 5G NR LDPC codes,

BG1 and BG2, which have a similar structure. Parity-check matrix H

can be derived by replacing each element of BG with a Z × Z matrix,

where Z represents the lifting size. According to the 5G NR [11], the

basic structure of H can be represented with four parts, namely, Hcore, 0, Hex and I, as

H = Hcore 0 ,

(1)

Hex I

where Hcore denotes the core check matrix of size Mcore × Ncore, the rows of which correspond to the first 4 rows of BG1 or BG2, the columns

0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

11462

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 7, JULY 2025

of which correspond to the first 26 columns of BG1 or the first 14 columns of BG2. It should be noted that Mcore and Ncore represent the number of CNs and VNs in Hcore, respectively. Hex is defined as the extension check matrix, whose rows correspond to the remaining rows of BG1 or BG2 besides those of Hcore, and whose columns are same as Hcore. 0 represents the zero matrix, whose rows are same as Hcore and whose columns correspond to the remaining columns of BG1 or BG2 besides those of Hcore. I represents the identity matrix, whose rows are equal to Hex and whose columns correspond to the remaining columns of BG1 or BG2 besides those of Hex.
Equation (1) represents the lowest code rate achievable with this
check matrix and higher code rates can be attained by truncating this
matrix. A more detailed description of BG can be found in Ref. [11].

B. Conventional Decoding Algorithm

Typically, the encoder generates a codeword c = (c1, c2, . . . , cN ),

which is then modulated and transmitted through the channel. Also, the

binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation scheme and the additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel are considered in this work.

Then the received signal y = (y1, y2, .., yN ) is sent to the decoder for

iterative decoding.

Let L(pn) denote the initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) for VN n,

namely L(pn)

log(

P P

r(yn |cn =0) r(yn |cn =1)

).

Then

we

define

H(m)

and

H(n)

as the set of VNs connected to the CN m and the set of CNs connected

to the VN n, respectively. Furthermore, H(m)\n denotes set H(m)

with the nth VN excluded, while H(n)\m refers to the the set H(n) with mth CN excluded.
Additionally, we define L(rlm) n and L(qln)m as the CN message from CN m to VN n and the VN message from VN n to CN m in the lth

iteration, respectively. In the context of conventional MSA, the CN

message is calculated by

⎧

⎫

⎨

⎬

L(rlm) n = ⎩

sign(L(qln−m 1)

)⎭

·

n

min
∈H(m)\n

n ∈H(m)\n

Lq(ln−m 1)

, (2)

where m = 1, 2, . . . , M . And in the first iteration, L(q0n)m = L(pn). Then the VN message in the lth iteration is given by

L(qln)m = L(pn) +

L(rlm) n ,

(3)

m ∈H(n)\m

where n = 1, 2, . . . , N . Therefore, the posterior LLR of VN n in every iteration is updated

by

L(qln) = L(pn) +

L(rlm) n ,

(4)

m∈H(n)

We use cˆ = (cˆ1, cˆ2, . . . , cˆN ) to express the decoding result, and thus the posterior LLR will be sent to perform a hard decision, if L(qln) < 0, cˆn = 1, else cˆn = 0. In the iterative process, (2), (3), and (4) will be
executed cyclically until a valid codeword is found or the maximum

iteration number is reached.

In the MSA, the CN message is overestimated compared to the LLR-

BPA, which will degrade the performance. To get closer to the error

performance of the LLR-BPA, for the NMSA in Ref. [8], (2) can be

modified as

⎧

⎫

⎨

⎬

L(rlm) n = α · ⎩

sign(Lq(ln−m 1)

)⎭

·

n

min
∈H(m)\n

Lq(ln−m 1)

,

n ∈H(m)\n

(5)

where α is the normalized factor that is used to lower the effect of

overestimation in MSA, then the NMSA can perform better than MSA.

III. PROPOSED HIGH-PERFORMANCE ALGORITHM
A. Self-Corrected MSA
Although NMSA exhibits excellent performance for regular LDPC codes, there remains a non-negligible performance gap compared to LLR-BPA for irregular LDPC codes, especially when considering 5G LDPC codes.
Regarding the updating process of VNs, Ref. [9] proposed a simple but effective approach for MSA decoding of LDPC codes, which erases the unreliable VN message by comparing the sign changes of VN messages between successive iterations. This method can accelerate the convergence of the iterative process and improve the overall performance. In the following, we will discuss the main differences between MSA and SCMSA.
The CN updating process of the SCMSA is the same as the MSA, but the VN updating process can revised as

eˆ(nlm) =

∼ eˆn(lm−1), 0,

if sign Lˆ(qln)m = s(l−1); , else

(6)

L(qln)m =

0, Lˆ(qln)m ,

if eˆ(nlm) = 1; elseif eˆ(nlm) = 0

,

(7)

where eˆ(nlm) decides whether to set the VN message from VN n to CN m to 0 or not in the lth iteration, Lˆ(qln)m is the temporary VN message that can be calculated by (3), s(l−1) denotes the sign of the corresponding VN message from the last iteration.
The SCMSA assumes that the sign-changing VN message is unre-
liable and prevents it from spreading incorrectly by setting it to 0. It
then speeds up the iteration with a negligible increase in computational
complexity.

B. 2D-Self-Corrected MSA for 5G NR LDPC Codes

To further enhance the decoding efficiency of SCMSA, Ref. [10]

introduced a 2D-SCMSA for LDPC codes in 5G NR.

Given the construction of the parity check matrix for 5G NR LDPC

codes, it becomes evident that there are a lot of degree-1 VNs whose

presence can significantly degrade decoding performance due to their

limited protection and increased susceptibility to decoding errors. First,

Ref. [10] proposed a partial self-correction (PSC) method for 5G

NR LDPC codes, which implements self-correction in Ref. [9] for

VNs in Hcore. Simulation results demonstrate that this method can

significantly minimize the number of sign flips, thereby improving

the decoding performance. Second, Ref. [10] suggested enhancing the

message reliability by amplifying the VN message in the Hex.

Subsequently, the 2D-SCMSA was proposed by integrating the PSC

method with the message amplification technique, and (6) and (7) can

be modified as

⎧

⎪⎨∼ e˜(nlm−1), if sign L˜(qln)m = s(l−1)

e˜(nlm) = ⎪⎩0,

and 1 ≤ n ≤ Ncore;

,

(8)

else

L(qln)m =

0, L˜(qln)m ,

if e˜(nlm) = 1; elseif e˜(nlm) = 0

,

(9)

respectively, where

L˜(qln)m =

β · Lˆ(qln)m , Lˆ(qln)m ,

if Mcore + 1 ≤ m ≤ M ; , else

(10)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 7, JULY 2025

11463

β is a scaling factor with a range of (1, ∞], and L˜(qln)m represents the temporary VN message in the 2D-SCMSA.
Although the 2D-SCMSA erases certain unreliable messages based on the fundamental structure of the parity-check matrix in 5G NR LDPC codes, there is still a potential for further optimization. Therefore, building upon the foundation of 2D-SCMSA, the E-2D-SCMSA is proposed in the subsequent part.

C. Proposed Algorithm
It is widely accepted that the amplitude of a message indicates its reliability; larger amplitudes indicate greater reliability. Building on this premise, we assume that both the sign-changing VN message and the near-zero with the same signs VN message are unreliable. During the execution of the PSC in 2D-SCMSA, both the sign-changing VN message and the near-zero with the same signs VN message are set to 0in case of the propagation of an unreliable message.
This paper proposes to dynamically adjust the erasure range of the VN message based on the amplitude of the corresponding CN message during VN updating in 2D-SCMSA. Subsequently, the VN updating process can be modified as follows.
First, compute the sign of the VN message from the last iteration s(l−1) and the correction value of the erasure range

Lcv = λ · L(rlm) n ,

(11)

where the correction factor λ falls within the range [0, 1]. Second, employing (11) and s(l−1), e˜(nlm) within the core check region
can be calculated as

⎧ ⎨∼

e˜(nlm) ,

e˜(nlm) = ⎩0,

if sign(Lˆ(qln)m − s(l−1) · Lcv) = s(l−1) and 1 ≤ n ≤ Ncore;
else

,(12)

Finally, VN message L(qln)m can be calculated by utilizing (9). It should be noted that the amplitude of the CN message gradually
increases with the number of iterations. Therefore, if only one correction factor is used in the iterative process, some reliable messages will be erased, thus degrading the decoding performance. Therefore, it is necessary to divide the entire iteration process into two parts, each of which employs a different correction factor. If the current iteration number is less than the predetermined iteration number Iset, λ1 is employed; otherwise λ2 is used.
Then, (11) can be modified as

⎧

Lcv

=

⎨λ1 ⎩λ2

· ·

L(rlm) n L(rlm) n

, ,

if l < Iset; ,
else

(13)

where both λ1 and λ2 are correction factors, with λ2 is far smaller than λ1. Similarly, the normalized factor α of NMSA is also utilized in our algorithm.
We assume that the maximum iteration number is denoted by Imax. Then, the E-2D-SCMSA can be summarized in Algorithm 1, based on the above statement.
It should be pointed out that the parameters for our algorithm, such as Iset, λ1, λ2, α and β, can be obtained by simulation.

Algorithm 1: E-2D-SCMSA.
Initialize: l = 0; For each n, m, set L(q0n)m = L(pn)
Iteration: while l ≤ Imax do l = l + 1; for m = 1, 2, .., M and n ∈ H(m) do Update L(rlm) n as in (5); end for for n = 1, 2, . . . , N and m ∈ H(n) do Calculate Lcv as in (13); Compute e˜(nlm) as in (12); Renew L(qln)m as in (9); end for for n = 1 : N do Update L(qln)as in (4); if L(qln) < 0 then cˆn = 1; else cˆn = 0; end if end for if H · cˆT = 0 or l = Imax then break and output cˆ; end if end while
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Simulation Results
In this section, we will compare the BER performance of various algorithms across different code rates using BG2 to validate the error performance of our proposed algorithm. Further, the BPSK modulation scheme and the AWGN channel are utilized in our floating-point simulations.
The maximum number of iterations Imax is set to 50in each algorithm. In NMSA, based on empirical evidence, the normalized factor α is set to 0.6 for Rate = 1/5, 1/3 and 0.7125 for Rate = 1/2, 2/3 to achieve better BER performance. In 2D-SCMSA, the normalized factor α is set to 0.75, and the scaling factor β is set to 1.25, as suggested in Ref. [10].
The parameters for our algorithm are determined by simulation, as detailed: The predetermined iteration number in our algorithm Iset is set to 15 and β is set to 1.1, respectively. There are four simulation parameter settings: For Rate = 1/5, α = 0.7125, λ1 = 0.18, λ2 = 0.02; for Rate = 1/3, α = 0.8125, λ1 = 0.20, λ2 = 0.03; for Rate = 1/2, α = 0.8125, λ1 = 0.10, λ2 = 0; for Rate = 2/3, α = 0.8, λ1 = 0.10, λ2 = 0.
Fig. 1 illustrates the comparison of BER performance between the proposed E-2D-SCMSA and other decoding algorithms over four typical code rates, with an information bit length of K = 400. Although the normalized factor decreases the impact of overestimation in MSA, simulation results show that a significant BER performance gap remains between NMSA and LLR-BPA. For the low code rates, i.e., Rate = 1/5, 1/3, the BER performance gap between these two algorithms is at least 0.3 dB at BER of 10−4. For high code rates, specifically, Rate = 1/2 and 2/3, this gap is still approximately 0.25 dB at BER of 10−4 . Moreover, 2D-SCMSA enhances the BER performance by erasing certain unreliable messages according to the structure of 5G NR LDPC codes. This improvement is particularly noticeable for low code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

11464

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Fig. 3. The number of operations for a single iteration, where BG2 and lifting size Z = 40 are considered.

Fig. 1. BER decoded by different algorithms vs. Eb/N0, where Rate = 1/5, 1/3, 1/2, 2/3 and information bit length K = 400 are considered.

lower BER compared to NMSA, it exhibits slower convergence in the initial iterations. In contrast, our algorithm exhibits slightly faster convergence than NMSA in the early iterations. As the number of iterations increases, the convergence of the four algorithms is gradual. Moreover, our algorithm converges to almost the same BER as LLR-BPA for high code rates. Specifically, in the consideration of Rate = 1/5 and Eb/N0 = 1.2 dB, our algorithm requires approximately 8 fewer iterations compared to 2D-SCMSA at BER of 10−4. Therefore, our algorithm can perform similarly with a lower decoding delay. Based on the partially parallel implementation architecture, complete decoding takes about 2 × Z × I clocks, where I is the number of iterations required. Therefore, the decoding delay of our algorithm is about 640 clocks less than that of 2D-SCMSA for Rate = 1/5 and Eb/N0 = 1.2 dB.

B. Complexity Analysis

Fig. 2. BER decoded by different algorithms vs. number of iterations, where two points are considered for every code rate. (a) Rate = 1/5. (b) Rate = 1/3. (c) Rate = 1/2. (d) Rate = 2/3.
rates, the performance gap between LLR-BPA and 2D-SCMSA is only about 0.2 dB at BER of 10−4. By erasing more unreliable messages, our proposed E-2D-SCMSA can obtain around 0.1 dB performance gain at BER of 10−4 over 2D-SCMSA for given LDPC codes. Furthermore, the performance gap between the proposed E-2D-SCMSA and LLR-BPA is less than 0.1 dB at BER of 10−4. For high code rates, specifically, Rate = 1/2 and 2/3, our algorithm’s BER performance closely approaches that of LLR-BPA.
Moreover, without the loss of generality, we select two points for each code rate from Fig. 1 and compare the convergence speed of the four algorithms. It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the BER of LLR-BPA drops fastest among these four algorithms in the initial iterations. Furthermore, although the 2D-SCMSA can ultimately converge to a

In this subsection, we analyze the decoding complexity of these four algorithms for a single iteration. Let dv and dc denote the average degree of CN and VN of 5G NR LDPC codes, respectively. Table I presents the number of nonlinear operations, logical calculations, and memory requirements per iteration for the four algorithms. Note that the nonlinear operations are substituted by look-up tables in the implementation of the decoder, and the complexity analysis of NMSA, 2D-SCMSA, and LLR-BPA was conducted in Ref. [10].
From Table I, it is evident that our proposed algorithm does not require look-up tables to perform nonlinear operations, similar to NMSA and 2D-SCMSA, unlike LLR-BPA. Based on the above description of our algorithm, during the self-correction operations, we must first to confirm the current iterations before calculating the new value to determine whether to erase the VN message. As a result, the number of comparisons and additions in our algorithm is slightly higher than that in 2D-SCMSA. Additionally, the signs of the VN message from the last iteration must be stored due to self-correction operations requiring more storage resources than NMSA.
Further, we employ specific values to compute the number of operations for a single iteration to provide a more detailed analysis of algorithm complexity. BG2 and an information bit length of K = 400 are considered in our simulation. Based on 5G NR [11], the parameters in Table I are as follows: M = 1680, N = 2080, Ncore = 560, dc ≈ 5, dv ≈ 4. Fig. 3 illustrates the specific number of operations for 2D-SCMSA and E-2D-SCMSA. It is evident that our E-2D-SCMSA requires more operations than 2D-SCMSA for a single iteration due to the adjustment of the erasure range. For comparisons, E-2D-SCMSA requires approximately 16% more operations than 2D-SCMSA. For additions, E-2D-SCMSA requires about 26% more than 2D-SCMSA.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 74, NO. 7, JULY 2025
TABLE I COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS

11465

Moreover, these two algorithms’ xors and memory requirements are the same.
To sum up, no nonlinear operations are involved in our algorithm. The decoding complexity is much lower than that of LLR-BPA. Compared to 2D-SCMSA, the variable node processing unit (VNPU) in Hcore is modified in our algorithm. According to the partially parallel implementation architecture and 5G NR [11], there are only 26 VNPUs for BG1 or 14 VNPUs for BG2 to execute the proposed algorithm, that is, only these modules need more comparison and addition operations. It is well known that 26 or 14 is much less than Ncore; therefore, the increase in decoding complexity compared to 2D-SCMSA can be ignored in the context of the performance optimization, and our algorithm has the characteristics of low complexity.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed an E-2D-SCMS decoding algorithm for SAGSI communication networks based on 5G NR LDPC codes. Initially, it is assumed that both the sign-changing VN message and near-zero with the same signs VN message are unreliable and this message would be set to 0 during iterative decoding. Subsequently, the amplitude of the corresponding CN message is used to set the erasure range dynamically. Finally, the entire iteration process is divided into two parts, and different factors are applied. Thus, the BER performance of our algorithm can be brought closer to LLR-BPA with a negligible increase in complexity. For the given LDPC codes, the proposed algorithm can achieve approximately a 0.1dB performance gain at BER of 10−4 compared to 2D-SCMSA, and the performance gap with LLR-BPA is less than 0.1 dB at BER of 10−4.

REFERENCES
[1] D. Han et al., “Two-timescale learning-based task offloading for remote IoT in integrated satellite-terrestrial networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 10131–10145, Jun. 2023.
[2] J. Zhang et al., “Learning-assisted dynamic VNF selection and chaining for 6G satellite-ground integrated networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., early access, Sep. 30, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2024.3454438.
[3] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. TIT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] C. Jones, E. Valles, M. Smith, and J. Villasenor, “Approximate-min constraint node updating for LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. MILCOM, 2003, pp. 157–162.
[6] K. Sun and M. Jiang, “A hybrid decoding algorithm for low-rate LDPC codes in 5G,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process., Hangzhou, China, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May. 1999.
[8] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[9] V. Savin, “Self-corrected min-sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2008, pp. 146–150.
[10] P. Kang, Y. Xie, L. Yang, and J. Yuan, “Enhanced Quasi-maximum likelihood decoding based on 2D modified min-sum algorithm for 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 11, pp. 6669–6682, Nov. 2020.
[11] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

