2518

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 7, JULY 2025

Multiple-Masks Error Correction Code Transformer for Short Block Codes

Seong-Joon Park , Member, IEEE, Hee-Youl Kwak , Member, IEEE, Sang-Hyo Kim , Member, IEEE, Sunghwan Kim, Senior Member, IEEE, Yongjune Kim , Member, IEEE, and Jong-Seon No , Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—With the broadening applications of deep learning, neural decoders have emerged as a key research focus, specifically aimed at improving the decoding performance of conventional decoding algorithms. In particular, error correction code transformer (ECCT), which utilizes the transformer architecture, has achieved state-of-the-art performance among neural network-based decoders. We present three technical contributions to significantly enhance the performance of ECCT. First, we propose a novel transformer architecture of ECCT, termed the multiple-masks ECCT (MM ECCT). We employ multiple masked self-attention blocks with different mask matrices in a parallel manner to learn diverse relationships among the codeword bits. Second, we discover that constructing mask matrices based on systematic parity check matrices (PCMs) can make the attention maps sparse, which not only enhances the decoding performance but also reduces computational complexity. Finally, we propose using complementary mask matrices derived from cyclic permutations of the systematic PCM. These complementary mask matrices are specifically designed to enhance the decoding of cyclic codes. Our extensive simulation results show that the proposed MM ECCT architecture with carefully designed mask matrices outperforms the original ECCT by a large margin, achieving state-of-the-art decoding performance among neural decoders. The source code is available at https://github.com/iilpostech/mm-ecct.
Received 15 May 2024; revised 13 December 2024; accepted 15 January 2025. Date of publication 10 April 2025; date of current version 19 June 2025. This work was supported in part by the Institute of Information and Communications Technology Planning and Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by Korean Government (MSIT) (Network Research Center: Advanced Channel Coding and Channel Estimation Technologies for Wireless Communication Evolution) under Grant RS-2024-00398449, in part by IITP grant funded by Korean Government (MSIT) (MPU/Connectivity/TinyML SoC Solution for IoT Intelligence with Foundry-Based eFLASH) under Grant RS-202300229849, and in part by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by Korean Government (MSIT) under Grant RS-2023-00212103. (Corresponding authors: Yongjune Kim; Sang-Hyo Kim.)
Seong-Joon Park is with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 37673, South Korea (e-mail: joonpark2247@gmail.com).
Hee-Youl Kwak is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 44610, South Korea (e-mail: ghy1228@gmail.com).
Sang-Hyo Kim is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, South Korea (e-mail: iamshkim@skku.edu).
Sunghwan Kim is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Kyonggi University, Suwon 16227, South Korea (e-mail: skim@kyonggi.ac.kr).
Yongjune Kim is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 37673, South Korea, and also with the Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, South Korea (e-mail: yongjune@postech.ac.kr).
Jong-Seon No is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea (e-mail: jsno@snu.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2025.3559154

Index Terms—Channel coding, error correcting code, error correction code transformer, mask matrix, transformer.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, deep learning methods have experienced rapid advancements and achieved phenomenal success in various tasks such as natural language processing (NLP), image classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation. Among the myriad of deep learning architectures, the transformer [1] has consistently yielded state-of-the-art performances in numerous tasks. Initially pivotal in NLP, transformers have been adapted to computer vision tasks [2], [3] and other domains.
This versatile transformer architecture has been employed in the field of error correction codes (ECCs) [4], [5]. ECCs have played a pivotal role in ensuring data reliability in communication and storage systems, especially in correcting errors for noisy environments. Recent research on ECCs has increasingly leveraged deep learning architectures, particularly focusing on neural decoders that offer superior error correction performance. With the advancement of deep learning techniques, a novel class of decoders based on neural networks has emerged [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9].
The transformer-based ECC decoder, termed error correction code transformer (ECCT) [4], incorporates a mask matrix within its self-attention blocks to learn the noise in the communication channel. Since not all bits in a codeword are equally related, the performance of ECCT can be improved by using a mask matrix that omits less important relationships and focusing on critical parts to facilitate more efficient learning. In the original ECCT, the mask matrix is derived from the parity check matrix (PCM), which explicitly defines the direct relationships between codeword bits based on parity check equations. ECCT has been reported to achieve state-of-the-art performance among neural decoders [4].
One crucial aspect to consider is that multiple PCMs can represent a single code, enabling a corresponding variety of mask matrices in ECCT. In belief propagation (BP) and neural BP algorithms, it is well known that different PCMs can lead to variations in decoding performance [10], [11], [12], [13]. This principle is leveraged to improve decoding performance by utilizing multiple PCMs. In particular, [10] and [11] leverage multiple PCMs for multiple parallel BP decoders to achieve diversity gain for Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes and extended Golay codes. In line with this

0733-8716 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: MULTIPLE-MASKS ERROR CORRECTION CODE TRANSFORMER FOR SHORT BLOCK CODES

2519

approach, we explore how ECCT can achieve diversity gain by utilizing multiple PCM (or mask matrix) configurations.
A. Main Contributions
In this paper, inspired by this approach to enhancing decoding diversity, we introduce a novel transformer architecture of multiple-masks ECCT (MM ECCT). This architecture consists of multiple parallel masked self-attention blocks, each employing a distinct mask matrix constructed from different PCMs. Each PCM and its corresponding mask matrix define a unique set of relations between codeword bits. Thus, leveraging multiple distinct mask matrices in MM ECCT is instrumental in extracting diverse bit relationships within codewords. This ability to capture varied bit relationships significantly improves the decoding performance of MM ECCT compared to the original ECCT.
In the MM ECCT, we utilize a systematic mask matrix derived from the systematic PCM. The systematic mask matrix has more masking positions than the non-systematic mask matrix, enhancing decoding performance while reducing computational complexity. From the perspective of coding theory, all PCMs for a given code contain an equivalent set of relations between codeword bits, and all mask matrices derived from these PCMs preserve these relationships. This equivalence implies that a sparser attention map provides a more compact representation of critical information at the unmasked positions, thereby focusing on the essential relations among codeword bits. Interestingly, although systematic PCMs are traditionally used for efficient encoding rather than decoding [14], in the context of ECCT, they can enhance both decoding performance and computational efficiency.
Lastly, to further improve the decoding performance of MM ECCT, we propose a complementary mask matrix that remains systematic while being distinct from the original systematic mask matrix. We focus on the property of cyclic codes, where cyclic permutations of the PCM remain valid PCM but offer a different perspective on bit relationships for the same code. This property has been used for decoding cyclic codes [15], [16]. The proposed complementary mask matrices are constructed from the cyclic permutations of the original systematic PCM, and we integrate the systematic mask matrix and its complementary mask matrices within MM ECCT. The motivation for this integration stems from the observation that decoded bit error rates (BERs) are lower for the identity matrix part of the systematic PCM compared to its denser remaining parts. By cyclically shifting this identity part, the complementary mask matrix can compensate for the dense part of the original systematic mask matrix, providing complementary attention while maintaining the same level of sparsity. Consequently, our novel MM ECCT architecture, incorporating systematic and complementary mask matrices, achieves substantial improvements in decoding performance.
We evaluate the decoding performance of the proposed MM ECCT for four representative codes: BCH codes, polar codes, turbo codes, and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Through comprehensive simulations across a range of code parameters, we first demonstrate that the systematic mask matrix leads to improved decoding performance while

also reducing decoding complexity. Furthermore, our MM ECCT with m = 2, integrating both systematic and nonsystematic mask matrices, significantly improves the decoding performance compared to the original ECCT. Finally, decoding performance is further enhanced by paring the systematic and complementary mask matrices. Our approach achieves stateof-the-art results among neural network-based decoders [4], [17], [18], [19], [21] for both BCH and polar codes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to incorporate multiple mask matrices into ECCT, introducing diversity that improves its decoding performance.
B. Related Work
We briefly review deep learning approaches to ECC decoding, specifically neural network-based ECC decoders. These approaches can be broadly classified into two categories: model-based and model-free.
1) Model-Based Approach: The first approach is to implement conventional decoding methods, such as the BP decoder and min-sum (MS) decoder, within a neural network framework. These neural decoders unfold the iterative decoding process on the Tanner graph into a deep neural network. Nachmani et al. [17] proposed a neural decoder based on a recurrent neural network for BCH codes, achieving improved decoding performance over the standard BP decoder. Dai et al. [20] modified the neural MS decoder for protograph LDPC codes, introducing a parameter-sharing mechanism that enhances scalability for long codes. Furthermore, several studies exhibited that neural network-based BP and MS decoders can outperform the traditional decoders [12], [18], [19], [21], [22], [23]. However, these model-based neural decoders might face restrictive performance limits due to architectural constraints.
2) Model-Free Approach: The second approach is a modelfree approach, which employs neural network architectures without relying on prior knowledge of conventional decoding algorithms. This approach is not restricted to the conventional decoding models but initially encounters the overfitting problem, as it is impractical to train on all possible codewords. To address this, Bennatan et al. [24] proposed a preprocessing that enables model-free decoders to overcome the overfitting problem. They leveraged the syndrome to learn noise using only all-zero codeword and incorporated a recurrent neural network architecture with this preprocessing step. ECCT further advanced this concept by implementing a transformerbased decoder while avoiding overfitting through the same preprocessing method. It achieved state-of-the-art decoding performance among neural decoders by utilizing the masked self-attention mechanism. However, despite the importance of the mask matrix in ECCT, its impact has not been thoroughly investigated.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly explain the preliminaries of ECCs, as well as the preprocessing and postprocessing steps of ECCT. Section III introduces our proposed MM ECCT architecture with the systematic mask matrix and the complementary mask matrix. In Section IV, we evaluate the decoding performance of the proposed MM ECCTs on BCH codes and polar codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2520

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 7, JULY 2025

We then analyze computational complexity, investigate the impact of using the systematic mask matrix and distinct mask matrices in ECCT, and extend our work to other types of ECCs. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.
II. BACKGROUND In this section, we provide a concise overview of the background of the ECCs along with the preprocessing and postprocessing techniques used in the original ECCT [4].

A. Error Correction Codes
Let C be the set of codewords of a linear code. A codeword x ∈ C ⊂ {0, 1}n can be generated as a linear combination of the rows of the generator matrix G of size k × n. The PCM H, which satisfies the condition GHT = 0 over GF (2), is used to verify codewords as Hx = 0 for all x ∈ C. Importantly, multiple distinct PCMs can exist for a given code, as long as they define the null space of the code. For example, applying elementary row operations to a given PCM can also generate other valid PCMs. Let xs = (xs,1, . . ., xs,n) be a binary phase shift keying modulation (BPSK) of x (i.e., xs,i = +1 if xi = 0 and xs,i = −1 if xi = 1) and let y be a channel output of xs after passing the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, i.e., y = xs + z, where z denotes random Gaussian noise with z ∼ N (0, σ2).
The objective of the decoder is to recover the original transmitted codeword x by correcting errors. Upon receiving y, the decoder first determines if the received signal has errors by checking the syndrome s(y) = Hyb, where yb = bin(sign(y)). Here, sign(a) represents +1 if a ≥ 0 and −1 otherwise and bin(−1) = 1, bin(+1) = 0. If s(y) is a non-zero vector, it indicates that y is distorted during transmission, and the decoder initiates the error correction process.

B. Error Correction Code Transformer
ECCT [4] employs the transformer architecture to correct errors. The preprocessing method in [24] enables training using only the all-zero codeword without overfitting problems. The preprocessing conducts input embedding as y˜ = [|y|, s(y)], where |y| = (|y1|, . . ., |yn|) is the element-wise magnitude of y, s(y) = (s(y)1, . . ., s(y)n−k) is the syndrome of y and [·, ·] denotes the concatenation of two vectors. The objective of ECCT is to estimate the multiplicative noise ˜zs, which is defined by

y = xs + z = xs˜zs.

(1)

Let the output of ECCT be f (y), then f (y) = ˆzs and the estimation of x is xˆ = bin(sign(y · f (y))). If the multiplicative noise is correctly estimated, then sign(˜zs) = sign(ˆzs) and sign(˜zsˆzs) = 1. Hence, xˆ is obtained by

xˆ = bin(sign(yf (y))) = bin(sign(xs˜zsˆzs)) = x.

After obtaining y˜, each element of y˜ is projected into the following d dimension embedding vector Ψi:

Ψj =

|yj |Wj s(y)j−nWj

for j = 1, . . ., n, for j = n + 1, . . ., 2n − k,

Algorithm 1 Mask matrix construction [4]

1 def g(PCM):

2

nrow, ncol = PCM.size

3

mask_size = ncol + nrow

4

mask = eye(mask_size, mask_size)

5

for ii in range(nrow):

6

idx = where(PCM[ii] > 0)[0]

7

for jj in idx:

8

for kk in idx:

9

mask[jj, kk] = 1

10

mask[kk, jj] = 1

11

mask[N + ii, jj] = 1

12

mask[jj, N + ii] = 1

13 mask[mask == 0] = ∞

14 return mask

where Wj ∈ R1×d for j = 1, . . ., 2n − k denote the trainable positional encoding vector. The query Q, key K, and value V are assigned as

Q = ΨW Q, K = ΨW K , V = ΨW V ,

where Ψ = Ψ1 · · · Ψ2n−k ∈ R(2n−k)×d denotes the input embedding and W Q, W K , W V ∈ Rd×d denote the weight matrices of query, key, and value. Then, we employ the scaled dot-product attention:

QKT + g(H)

Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax

√

V,

d

where g(H) is the mask matrix generated by H, using the function g(·), as described in Algorithm 1.

III. PROPOSED METHODS
We first propose a novel MM ECCT architecture incorporating multiple distinct mask matrices. Then, we investigate effective mask matrices for MM ECCT, which are the systematic mask matrix and its complementary mask matrices. MM ECCT architecture, the systematic mask matrix, and complementary PCM are shown in Figs. 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

A. Multiple-Masks ECCT
In MM ECCT, we utilize multiple mask matrices derived from multiple PCMs in the masked self-attention module. The overall architecture of MM ECCT is shown in Fig. 1. Let Hi and Mi denote the ith PCM and mask matrix, respectively, used in MM ECCT. During the initial embedding of MM ECCT, we first generate the magnitude vector |y| = (|y1|, . . ., |yn|) and m different syndrome vectors si(y) = (si(y)1, . . ., si(y)n−k), where si(y) = Hiyb for i = 1, . . ., m. Here, Hi can be any valid PCM for a given code. We then obtain m different embeddings y˜i = [|y|, si(y)] for i = 1, . . ., m. Finally, each element of y˜i is projected into the following d dimension embedding vector Ψi,j:

Ψi,j =

|yj |Wj si(y)j−nWj

for j = 1, . . ., n, for j = n + 1, . . ., 2n − k,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: MULTIPLE-MASKS ERROR CORRECTION CODE TRANSFORMER FOR SHORT BLOCK CODES

2521

Fig. 2. Two different types of mask matrices: (a) The non-systematic mask is derived from the non-systematic PCM [4], (b) the systematic mask matrix is derived from the systematically transformed PCM. Colored boxes indicate the non-zero entries in the PCMs and the masked positions in the corresponding mask matrices. The systematic mask matrix masks more positions than the non-systematic mask matrix, resulting in sparser self-attention maps.

Fig. 1. The proposed architecture of MM ECCT.

where Wj ∈ R1×d for j = 1, . . ., 2n − k denotes the trainable positional encoding vector.
MM ECCT architecture has a decoder layer, which is repeated N times. Each decoder layer consists of m parallel masked self-attention blocks, where each block utilizes its own distinct mask matrix. The output from the attention blocks is then processed by a normalization layer and a feed-forward neural network (FFNN) with a residual connection.
In the ith masked self-attention block, the query Qi, key Ki, and value Vi are assigned as follows:

Qi = ΨiWiQ, Ki = ΨiWiK , Vi = ΨiWiV ,

where Ψi = Ψi,1 · · · Ψi,2n−k

∈ R(2n−k)×d and

WiQ, WiK , WiV ∈ Rd×d. Then, we employ the masked self-

attention, using m different mask matrices generated by m

different PCMs.

The output layer processes the concatenated embeddings

from all m output embeddings of the decoder layer. It com-

prises three fully connected (FC) layers, applied after a

normalization layer. The first FC layer reduces the m(2n −

k) × d dimensional embedding to an m(2n − k) × 1 vector.

The second FC layer further reduces it to (2n−k)×1. Finally,

the third FC layer transforms the (2n−k)×1 vector to an n×1

Fig. 3. The systematic PCM and its complementary PCMs.
vector. The output represents an estimate of soft multiplicative noise f (y) = ˆzs, which is subsequently used for decoding through bit flipping.
A key feature of MM ECCT lies in its utilization of m distinct PCMs (or mask matrices) to generate m input embeddings. Unlike conventional approaches that rely on a single

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2522

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 7, JULY 2025

PCM (or a single mask matrix), the proposed MM ECCT architecture effectively captures the relationships between codeword bits corresponding to different PCMs. These embeddings are then concatenated and and processed by the FC layers in the output layer.
B. Systematic Mask
Considering that different choices of PCM result in different mask matrices, we aim to identify a suitable mask matrix for the ECCT architecture. Since each mask matrix is uniquely determined by the PCM, there exists a one-to-one correspondence between the PCM and the mask matrix. We define the systematic mask matrix as one derived from a systematic PCM. To construct the systematic mask matrix, we first transform the PCM into systematic form (i.e., reduced row echelon form) using Gaussian elimination method. The systematically transformed PCM Hsys is expressed as Hsys = [In−k P ], where In−k is the identity matrix of size (n − k) × (n − k) and P is a matrix of size (n − k) × k. Then, we can construct the systematic mask matrix g(Hsys) by Algorithm 1 [4]. The non-systematic mask matrix and the systematic mask matrix for (31, 11) BCH code are compared in Fig. 2. We refer to ECCT that employs a single masked self-attention block with a systematic mask matrix as systematic mask (SM) ECCT and one that uses single attention with a non-systematic mask as non-systematic mask (NSM) ECCT.
SM ECCT has lower computational complexity then NSM ECCT due to the identity part of the systematic PCM. The identity part of the systematic PCM directly translates to the identity part in the mask matrix, significantly increasing the sparsity of the attention map. For low-rate codes, as the number of rows in PCM increases, the identity matrix becomes larger, further amplifying the sparsity difference between SM ECCT and NSM ECCT.
An interesting observation in Section IV is that SM ECCT achieves better decoding performance than NSM ECCT. This improvement stems from the fact that, in general, the systematic mask matrix has more masked positions than the non-systematic mask matrix. Since the mask matrix in ECCT is derived from the PCM, mask matrices corresponding to the same code inherently attempt to focus on an equivalent set of relations between codeword bits. This equivalence implies that a sparse attention map concentrates denser information at the unmasked positions, facilitating more efficient training. Consequently, the sparse systematic mask matrix, which includes an identity matrix as part of its initial (n−k)×(n−k) submatrix, improves decoding performance.
The decoding performance improvement of SM ECCT is not limited to specific code lengths or code rates. It achieves performance improvement accross a wide range of coding parameters for various ECCs. Furthermore, since only unmasked positions in the self-attention map contributed to decoding, a mask matrix with a large portion of masked positions leads to lower computational complexity.
C. Complementary Mask Matrix
To further enhance decoding performance in MM ECCT, it is important to identify effective counterparts to the systematic

mask matrix. A key observation when employing the system-

atic mask matrix in ECCT is that the bit error rate (BER)

of positions corresponding to the identity matrix In−k of the PCM tends to be lower than that of other positions. In other

words, ECCT employing the systematic PCM is more effective

at correcting errors in received words with high input noise

power in the first n − k bits, which correspond to the identity

matrix part of the PCM. Conversely, the denser part of the

PCM is more susceptible to channel noise, leading to a higher

BER compared to the identity matrix part of the PCM. Thus,

constructing new PCMs that place an identity matrix in the

dense part of the original systematic PCM could effectively

complement the systematic PCM when employed together in

MM ECCT.

Based on this observation, we construct what we term a

complementary PCM, which includes an identity matrix of size

(n−k)×(n−k) spanning from bit positions n−k+1 to 2n−k.

If an identity matrix cannot be formed using row operations,

we aim to diagonalize the matrix as much as possible. When

the systematic and complementary PCMs are utilized in MM

ECCT, the first n − k bits are covered by the identity matrix

of the systematic PCM, while the subsequent n − k bits are

covered by the identity matrix of the complementary PCM.

To ensure that the identity parts cover all n bits, a total of

n/(n − k) PCMs are required.

For cyclic codes, cyclic permutations of each codeword

become another codeword of the same codebook. Based on this property, the complementary PCM Hcp(i, j) can be defined as

Hcp(i, j) = Hsys(i, (j − p(n − k))mod n),

(2)

where p = 1, . . ., n/(n − k) − 1, 0 ≤ i < n − k, and 0 ≤ j < n. By applying cyclic permutations to the systematic PCM, a complementary PCM can be readily obtained for cyclic codes. For non-cyclic codes, we apply Gaussian elimination to diagonalize the last n−k columns of the PCM to the extent possible. Fig. 3 shows an example of the systematic PCM and its complementary PCMs.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Training
The output of MM ECCT is f (y), which estimates the true multiplicative noise ˜zs. The true multiplicative noise is given by ˜zs = ˜zsxs2 = yxs and its target multiplicative noise for binary cross-entropy loss function ˜z can be obtained by ˜z = bin(sign(yxs)). Thus, the cross-entropy loss function for a received codeword y is defined as
n
L = − {˜zi log(1 − σ(f (y)i)) + (1 − ˜zi) log σ(f (y)i)}.
i=1
We adopt the same training setup as used in the previous work [4]. All simulations were conducted by NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU and AMD Ryzen 9 5950X 16-Core Processor CPU. All-zero codewords are used for training. The training sample y is generated by y = xs + z, where z denotes the additive Gaussian noise in the normalized signal-to-noise ratio SNR (Eb/N0) range of 3 dB to 7 dB. Our training

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: MULTIPLE-MASKS ERROR CORRECTION CODE TRANSFORMER FOR SHORT BLOCK CODES

2523

Fig. 4. The BER performance of (a) (31, 11) BCH code, (b) (31, 16) BCH code, (c) (63, 30) BCH code, and (d) (64, 22) polar code for N = 2 and d = 128.

Fig. 5. The BER performance of (a) (31, 11) BCH code, (b) (31, 16) BCH code, (c) (63, 30) BCH code, and (d) (64, 22) polar code for N = 6 and d = 128.

process utilized the Adam optimizer [25] and spanned 1,000 epochs. Each epoch consists of 1,000 minibatches, where each minibatch is composed of 128 samples. The learning rate starts from 10−4 down to 5 × 10−7 applying a cosine decay scheduler.
B. Decoding Performance of NSM ECCT, SM ECCT, and MM ECCT
To evaluate the efficacy of our proposed methods, we assess the BER performance of NSM ECCT, SM ECCT, and m = 2 MM ECCT for BCH codes and polar codes. For the testing, we collect at least 500 frame errors at each Eb/N0 for at least 105 random codewords. The results of MM ECCT in all tables and figures have m = 2 since it is enough for MM ECCT to enhance the BER performance compared to the NSM ECCT or SM ECCT. The implementation of ECCT is taken from [4], and the performances of SM ECCT are the same as in [4]. All PCMs are obtained from [26].
Tables I and II show the BER performances of NSM ECCT, SM ECCT, and the proposed MM ECCT with m = 2 for N = {2, 6} and d = {32, 64, 128}. The first, second, and third rows of each code correspond to the BER performances at Eb/N0 4 dB, 5 dB, and 6 dB, respectively. For MM ECCT,

we employ the systematic mask matrix for one attention block and the non-systematic mask matrix for the other. For the same N and Eb/N0, the proposed MM ECCT achieves the best BER in most cases, except for (63, 30) BCH code when N = 6 and d = 128. SM ECCT outperforms the NSM ECCT despite its lower computational complexity. Figs. 4 and 5 show the decoding performance of BCH codes and polar codes for N = 2, d = 128 and N = 6, d = 128, respectively. MM ECCT, notably at a low code rate, significantly outperforms the NSM ECCT by more than 1 dB for high Eb/N0. Furthermore, the performance graphs for both SM ECCT and MM ECCT show steeply declining slopes, whereas the curve for the NSM ECCT begins to flatten. This implies that the proposed MM ECCTs achieve enhanced performance at higher Eb/N0. Since SM ECCT outperforms the conventional ECCT and other neural network-based decoding algorithms, our work can be recognized as a new state-of-the-art solution for neural decoding.
C. Decoding Performance of MM ECCT With the Complementary Mask Matrix
Table III compares the decoding performance of various neural decoders for short-length codes. The results are pre-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2524

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 7, JULY 2025
TABLE I A COMPARISON OF BER FOR N = 2 AND d = {32, 64, 128} (BEST RESULTS ARE IN BOLD)

TABLE II A COMPARISON OF BER FOR N = 6 AND d = {32, 64, 128} (BEST RESULTS ARE IN BOLD)

sented by the negative natural logarithm of the BER as in [4]. MM ECCT with complementary double-masks (CDM) in Table III refers to MM ECCT featured with the pair of systematic and complementary mask matrices (Hsys for M1,

Hc for M2, or vice versa, in Fig. 1). Without loss of generality,
as decoding performance remains consistent regardless of the complementary mask, we select Hc = Hcn/(n−k) −1, whose
last (n − k) × (n − k) submatrix is an identity matrix.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: MULTIPLE-MASKS ERROR CORRECTION CODE TRANSFORMER FOR SHORT BLOCK CODES

2525

TABLE III A COMPARISON OF THE NEGATIVE NATURAL LOGARITHM OF BER FOR PREVIOUS WORKS AND THE PROPOSED ECCTS (HIGHER IS BETTER)

and boosted NBP [21] have the maximum iteration number of 50. The table shows that the proposed MM ECCTs consistently outperform other neural decoders by a large margin. As reported in [28]], the complexity of the original ECCT is typically higher than the neural BP decoder. However, it is worth noting that the proposed ECCTs achieve state-of-the-art performance among existing neural network-based decoders for short-length codes. While this work primarily focuses on maximizing decoding performance, addressing the challenge of reducing computational complexity is an important direction for future research.

Fig. 6. The BER performances of NSM ECCT, SM ECCT, MM ECCT with m = 2, and MM ECCT with CDM. (a) (31, 16) BCH code and (b) (63, 30) BCH code for N = 6 and d = 128.
The improved BER performance of MM ECCT with CDM validates that the complementary mask matrix effectively complements the systematic mask matrix.
Moreover, since the identity matrices of the systematic and complementary mask matrices collectively span all n bit positions when the code rate is 0.5, the performance gains become more pronounced as the code rate approaches 0.5. Fig. 6 shows the BER performance of various decoders for (31, 16) BCH codes and (63, 30) BCH codes, where N = 6 and d = 128. Fig. 6(a) compares NSM ECCT, SM ECCT, MM ECCT (m = 2), and MM ECCT (CDM) with BerlekampMassey (BM) decoder and the maximum likelihood (ML) decoding performance for (31, 16) BCH codes. The proposed MM ECCT with CDM nearly achieves the optimal maximum likelihood (ML) performance. For (63, 30) BCH codes as shown in Fig. 6(b), MM ECCT (CDM) enhances the BER performance of MM ECCT (m = 2) by more than an order of magnitude.
Table III also compares the proposed MM ECCT with various neural decoders. The original neural BP (NBP) [17]

V. DISCUSSION
In this section, we provide a complexity analysis and an ablation study, comparing the effects of using two identical mask matrices versus two different mask matrices in MM ECCT with m = 2. We also evaluate the decoding performance of LDPC and turbo codes in the NSM ECCT and compare it to MM ECCT. Finally, we analyze the impact of using a complementary mask matrix in terms of the bitwise BER performance.
A. Complexity Analysis
As shown in Fig. 1, MM ECCT has m times the number of parameters and floating point operations (FLOPs) in the decoder layer compared to the original ECCT, along with an additional FC layer in the output layer. Since the self-attention modules account for the majority of the parameters and FLOPs in the entire model, the number of parameters and FLOPs in MM ECCT is nearly m times that of ECCT. As shown in Table IV, the number of parameters for m = 2 nearly doubles compared to ECCT (results are obtained for N = 6 and d = 128). However, in terms of decoding latency, MM ECCT remains comparable to the original ECCT due to its parallel processing of the m self-attention modules.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2526

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 7, JULY 2025

TABLE IV
NUMBER OF PARAMETERS AND FLOPS OF ECCT AND MM ECCT WITH m = 2 (N = 6, d = 128)

Fig. 8. Comparison of BER of NSM ECCT, SM ECCT, and MM ECCT with m = 2. (a) (31, 16) BCH code and (b) (63, 30) BCH code for N = 2 and d = 128.
TABLE V ABLATION STUDY FOR EMPLOYING TWO SAME MASK MATRICES
AND TWO DIFFERENT MASK MATRICES

Fig. 7. Sparsity comparison of the self-attention map employing nonsystematic and systematic mask matrices for different codes.

Fig. 7 shows the sparsity levels of self-attention map for non-systematic and systematic masks compared to a full selfattention map without masking. Utilizing the systematic mask, the sparsity levels increase from 72% to 74% for (31, 11) BCH code, from 56% to 67% for (63, 30) BCH code, and significantly from 52% to 82% for (64, 22) polar code. This increased sparsity in the self-attention maps contributes to a reduction in computational complexity.
B. Training Convergence
Fig. 8 compares the BER performances of NSM ECCT, SM ECCT, and MM ECCT with m = 2 over each epoch. We observe that the BER of each model stabilizes after a certain number of epochs, nearly converging after 1,000 epochs. Consistent with previous results, MM ECCT converges to the lowest BER upon convergence, followed by SM ECCT and NSM ECCT.
C. Ablation Study
Table V summarizes the decoding performance of MM ECCT with m = 2 employing either two identical mask

matrices or two distinct mask matrices for N = 6 and d = 128. The column labeled ‘NSM+NSM’ represents MM ECCT with two non-systematic mask matrices, while ‘SM+SM’ corresponds to MM ECCT with two systematic mask matrices. Additionally, ‘NSM+SM’ shows the BER result of the proposed MM ECCT. The comparative results indicate that employing distinct mask matrices for the same codebook enhance decoder training and improves decoding performance compared to using identical mask matrices.
D. Effects of Sparse Submatrices of PCM in MM ECCT With CDM
To demonstrate the effects of sparse submatrices of PCM on MM ECCT with CDM, we compare the bitwise BER performances for three different types of ECCT. For MM ECCT with CDM, we employ two mask matrices in Fig. 9. The results in Fig. 10 indicate that the bit positions corresponding to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: MULTIPLE-MASKS ERROR CORRECTION CODE TRANSFORMER FOR SHORT BLOCK CODES

2527

TABLE VI
THE NEGATIVE NATURAL LOGARITHM OF BER OF LDPC AND TURBO CODES (BEST RESULTS ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD)

Fig. 9. Two PCMs of (63, 45) BCH codes utilized in MM ECCT with CDM.

NSM ECCT shows a nearly uniform BER across bit positions due to its implementation of the non-systematic PCM for the mask matrix. However, in SM ECCT, where the identity matrix is located on the left side of the systematic PCM, the bitwise BER of left (n − k) bits is notably lower than that for right k bits. Similarly, in MM ECCT with CDM, whose PCMs are shown in Fig. 9, the left (n − k) bit positions and right (n − k) bit positions exhibit comparably lower BER than other bit positions. This phenomenon is consistently observed across various code parameters.

E. Generalization to Other Types of ECCs
Table VI show the decoding performances of LDPC and turbo codes using the original ECCT [4] and MM ECCT (m = 2) with parameters N = 6 and d = 128. MM ECCT with m = 2 achieves improved decoding performance than the original ECCT for short-length LDPC codes. However, unlike other classes of codes, LDPC codes inherently have highly sparse PCMs, where the use of the systematic mask matrix can increase the density of the attention map rather than enhancing sparsity. For turbo codes, MM ECCT with m = 2 significantly enhances decoding performance over the original ECCT. These results supports the potential of MM ECCT enhancements for broader applicability across various ECCs.

Fig. 10. The bitwise BER performance of NSM ECCT, SM ECCT, and MM ECCT with CDM. The bitwise BER performance of (a) (63, 30) BCH code, (b) (63, 36) BCH code, and (c) (63, 45) BCH code.
identity matrix of the PCM generally exhibit lower BER than those associated with the dense part of the PCM. For example,

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduces a novel ECCT architecture aimed at improving ECC decoding performance. We found out that a systematically constructed mask matrix is more suitable for ECCT than a non-systematic mask matrix. We proposed MM ECCT, which captures diverse features of different PCMs and identifies a suitable counterpart to the systematic mask matrix for MM ECCT. Through extensive simulations, we showed that the proposed MM ECCT architecture contributes to significant improvements in decoding performance. We utilized multiple distinct mask matrices in a parallel manner, which provided diversity gains to the decoder. The systematic mask matrix, in particular, contributes to improved performance by increasing the sparsity of the attention map, allowing the model to focus on critical positions. This effect is especially pronounced in low-rate codes.
In addition, we proposed MM ECCT with CDM, which pairs the systematic mask matrix with a complementary mask

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2528

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 43, NO. 7, JULY 2025

matrix specifically designed to enhance MM ECCT. For cyclic codes, the complementary PCM can be simply derived as a cyclic permutation of the systematic PCM. The systematic and complementary mask matrices effectively complement each other to enhance the performance of MM ECCT. Our results clearly showed that utilizing distinct multiple mask matrices for the same codebook contributes to better decoder training. MM ECCT notably enhanced decoding performance over the original ECCT for both BCH codes and polar codes, achieving state-of-the-art decoding performance among neural networkbased decoders with considerable margins.
REFERENCES

[22] H.-Y. Kwak, J.-W. Kim, Y. Kim, S.-H. Kim, and J.-S. No, “Neural min-sum decoding for generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2841–2845, Dec. 2022.
[23] L. Lugosch and W. J. Gross, “Neural offset min-sum decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2017, pp. 1361–1365.
[24] A. Bennatan, Y. Choukroun, and P. Kisilev, “Deep learning for decoding of linear codes–A syndrome-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2018, pp. 1595–1599.
[25] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[26] M. Helmling. (2019). Database Channel Codes ML Simul. Results. [Online]. Available: https://rptu.de/en/channel-codes
[27] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Burlington, MA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[28] M. Levy, Y. Choukroun, and L. Wolf, “Accelerating error correction code transformers,” 2024, arXiv:2410.05911.

[1] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[2] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2021, pp. 1–22.
[3] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 10012–10022.
[4] Y. Choukroun and L. Wolf, “Error correction code transformer,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Jan. 2022, pp. 38695–38705.
[5] Y. Choukroun and L. Wolf, “Denoising diffusion error correction codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2022, pp. 1–18.
[6] H. Kim, Y. Jiang, R. Rana, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Communication algorithms via deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Jan. 2018, pp. 1–17.
[7] H. Kim, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Physical layer communication via deep learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–18, May 2020.
[8] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2016, pp. 341–346.
[9] S. Do¨rner, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. Ten Brink, “Deep learning based communication over the air,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 132–143, Feb. 2018.
[10] T. Hehn, J. B. Huber, S. Laendner, and O. Milenkovic, “Multiple-bases belief-propagation for decoding of short block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 311–315.
[11] T. Hehn, J. B. Huber, O. Milenkovic, and S. Laendner, “Multiple-bases belief-propagation decoding of high-density cyclic codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 1–8, Jan. 2010.
[12] A. Buchberger, C. Ha¨ger, H. Pfister, L. Schmalen, and A. I. Amat, “Pruning and quantizing neural belief propagation decoders,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1957–1966, Jul. 2020.
[13] A. Buchberger, C. Ha¨ger, H. D. Pfister, L. Schmalen, and A. G. Amat, “Pruning neural belief propagation decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2020, pp. 338–342.
[14] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[15] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland, 1978.
[16] T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, S. Laendner, and J. B. Huber, “Permutation decoding and the stopping redundancy hierarchy of cyclic and extended cyclic codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5308–5331, Dec. 2008.
[17] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[18] E. Nachmani and L. Wolf, “Hyper-graph-network decoders for block codes,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Dec. 2019, pp. 2326–2336.
[19] E. Nachmani and L. Wolf, “Autoregressive belief propagation for decoding block codes,” 2021, arXiv:2103.11780.
[20] J. Dai et al., “Learning to decode protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983–1999, Jul. 2021.
[21] H.-Y. Kwak, D.-Y. Yun, Y. Kim, S. Kim, and J. No, “Boosting learning for LDPC codes to improve the error-floor performance,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Jan. 2023, pp. 22115–22131.

Seong-Joon Park (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Sogang University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2019, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, in 2024. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Research Associate with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, South Korea. His current research interests include machine learning, error-correcting codes for wireless communication and storage, and DNA-based data storage.
Hee-Youl Kwak (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2013 and 2019, respectively. He was a Staff Engineer with Samsung Electronics, South Korea, from 2019 to 2021, and was a Senior Researcher with the Faculty of Institute of New Media and Communications, Seoul National University, from 2021 to 2022. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, University of Ulsan, South Korea. His area of research interests include error-correcting codes, coding for memory/storage, quantum error correction codes, and machine learning.
Sang-Hyo Kim (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 1998, 2000, and 2004, respectively. From 2004 to 2006, he was a Senior Engineer with Samsung Electronics. From 2006 to 2007, he visited the University of Southern California as a Visiting Scholar. In 2007, he joined the College of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea, where he is currently a Professor. In 2015, he had a one-year visit to the University of California at San Diego. Since 2024, he has been the Head of the Network Research Center for Next Generation Channel Coding Technologies funded by IITP, South Korea. His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and deep-learning-inspired communication systems. Since 2013, he has been serving as an Editor for Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies and Journal of Communications and Networks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: MULTIPLE-MASKS ERROR CORRECTION CODE TRANSFORMER FOR SHORT BLOCK CODES

2529

Sunghwan Kim (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 1999, 2001, and 2005, respectively. From 2005 to 2007, he was a Post-Doctoral Visitor with Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. From 2007 to 2011, he worked as a Senior Engineer with Samsung Electronics, Suwon, South Korea. From 2011 to 2024, he was a Professor with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Computer Engineering, University of Ulsan, Ulsan, South Korea. He is currently a Professor with the School of Electronic Engineering, Kyonggi University, Suwon. His research interests include 5G/6G communications, multiple access, the IoT communications, deep learning, transformers, error correction codes, and DNA-based storage.
Yongjune Kim (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. (Hons.) and M.S. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 2002 and 2004, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, in 2016. From 2016 to 2018, he was a PostDoctoral Research Associate with the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Urbana, IL, USA. From 2018 to 2020, he was with Western Digital Research, Milpitas, CA, USA. From 2020 to 2022, he was an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu, South Korea. Since 2022, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, South Korea, where he is currently an Assistant Professor. He is also affiliated with the Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University, Seoul. His research interests include semantic communications, information theory, and machine learning. He received the IEEE Data Storage Best Student Paper Award, the Best Paper Award of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Communications, the Best Paper Award (Honorable Mention) of the 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, and the Best Paper Award of the 31st Samsung Semiconductor Technology Symposium. He is an Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS.

Jong-Seon No (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S.E.E. degrees in electronics engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea, in 1981 and 1984, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 1988. He was a Senior MTS with Hughes Network Systems from 1988 to 1990. He was an Associate Professor with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, from 1990 to 1999. In 1999, he joined as the Faculty Member with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, where he is currently a Professor Emeritus. His current research interests include sequences, LDPC codes, post-quantum cryptography, fully homomorphic encryption, and privacy-preserving machine learning. He became a fellow of IEEE through the IEEE Information Theory Society in 2012. He became a member of the National Academy of Engineering of Korea (NAEK) in 2015, where he served as the Division Chair for Electrical, Electronic, and Information Engineering, from 2019 to 2020. He has been serving as an IEEE Fellow Committee Member since 2024. He was a recipient of the IEEE Information Theory Society Chapter of the Year Award in 2007. From 1996 to 2008, he served as the Founding Chair for the Seoul Chapter of the IEEE Information Theory Society. He was the General Chair of the Sequence and Their Applications 2004 (SETA 2004), Seoul. He also served as the General Co-Chair for the International Symposium on Information Theory and its Applications 2006 (ISITA 2006) and the International Symposium on Information Theory 2009 (ISIT 2009), Seoul. He served as the Co-Editor-inChief for Journal of Communications and Networks from 2012 to 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:40:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

