2021 19th International Conference on Optical Communications and Networks (ICOCN) | 978-1-6654-2446-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICOCN53177.2021.9563893

The research of probabilistic shaping signal transmission scheme based on neural network LLR calculation
Pandi Pang1, Huan Chang4, Qi Zhang1,2,3, Xiangjun Xin1,2,3,Ran Gao4,Feng Tian1,2,3,Qinghua Tian1,2,3, Yongjun Wang1,2,3,Dong Guo4
1 School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing 100876, China
2 Beijing Key Laboratory of Space-round Interconnection and Convergence, BUPT, Beijing 100876, China
3 State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications, BUPT, Beijing 100876, China
4 The School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China Contact author: Chang Huan, 7520200099@bit.edu.cn

Abstract—In order to improve the decoding accuracy and the BER performance of probabilistic shaping optical fiber transmission system, a scheme of probabilistic shaping signal transmission utilizing neural network based LLR calculation is proposed in this paper. Compared with the traditional transmission scheme based on the maximum logarithmic approximation LLR (ALLR) calculation, the mean square error ratio of LLR between the proposed transmission scheme and the scheme based on the exact LLR (ELLR) is reduced by about 100 times. And the BER of the system is improved by at least 0.1dB. In addition, the computational complexity of the proposed scheme is significantly lower than that of the transmission scheme based on the exact LLR computation method (ELLR).
Keywords-neural networks; optical communications; high order modulation; LDPC; decode
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid growth of the demand for capacity enhancement of optical fiber communication system, the traditional high-order modulation scheme become left behind, as its uniform distribution lead a loss of SNR about 1.53dB relative to the Shannon limit [1]. By reducing the probability of high-power constellation points, the probability shaping (PS) technology can better close to the Shannon limit. Besides, by the application of soft decision and error correction coding, the error performance of PS system will be further improved. For soft decision decoding, the LLR algorithm is used in high-order modulation schemes [2]. However, the calculation of the exact log likelihood ratio (ELLR) involves a large number of exponential and logarithmic operations, which means the operation costs are particularly high. Therefore, the approximate maximum logarithm LLR (ALLR) calculation method is mostly used in the actual communication system.
By deducing and simplifying LLR calculation formula, several simplified algorithms have been proposed by researchers. For examples, Zhang et al. proposed an effective logarithmic likelihood ratio (LLR) calculation scheme for

LDPC soft decision decoding of probabilistic shaping coherent optical communication system [3]. Cao et al. put forward a simplified algorithm for calculating LLR of MQAM demodulation through formula derivation [4].
In recent years, the rapid development of Machine Learning has opened up a new direction for the evolution of optical fiber communication systems. Artificial neural network has a strong ability of data fitting, and can realize highly accurate fitting through training. So it can be regarded as an effective method to approximate the exact value of LLR by introducing the neural network into the calculation of LLR [5].
In order to improve the LLR calculation accuracy of the probabilistic shaping transmission system, and further improve the BER performance of the system, a scheme of probabilistic shaping signal transmission based on neural network LLR calculation is proposed in this paper. Compared with the traditional transmission scheme based on the maximum logarithmic approximation LLR calculation (ALLR), the mean square error ratio between the approximation and exact value of LLR in the proposed transmission scheme is reduced by about 100 times, and the bit error rate of the system is improved by at least 0.1dB. In addition, the computational complexity of the proposed scheme is significantly lower than that of the transmission scheme based on the exact LLR computation method (ELLR).
II. THE SCHEME OF PROBABILISTIC SHAPING SIGNAL TRANSMISSION BASED ON NEURAL NETWORK LLR
CALCULATION
The transmission scheme of probabilistic shaping signal based on neural network LLR calculation proposed in this paper is shown in Figure 1. After the binary bits pass through the distribution matchers, amplitude signals with nonuniform distribution are generated. Then, after binary labeling and forward error correction (FEC) coding, constellation mapping is completed generating QAM signals

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:24:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with probability shaping as shown in Fig.1. At the receiving end, after the DSP processing, the signals are sent into LLRNN module (LLR calculation module of probability Shaping system based on neural network), namely the LLR value calculation module based on neural network as shown in Fig. 2, to complete the calculation of soft information LLR.
The signal processed by DSP is divided into training signals and test signals. The training signals, denoted as S$ ,
where, S$ = (Sˆ1, Sˆ2 ,..., SˆN ) ,are used for the training of LLRNN. And the other part is used for the performance test of LLRNN. Meanwhile, the ELLR of training signals S$ with
prior probability p ( s) is calculated as the expected output of
neural network and the parameter of loss function [3]. Such a loss function which is evidently a function of the trainable set of parameters could be, for instance, the mean-squared error (MSE) or alternatively the cross-entropy function. In this scheme, we choose the mean square error (MSE) function as the loss function. The specific training process can be divided into forward propagation and back propagation. At the beginning of training, training parameters (weights of neurons in each layer, etc.) should be randomly initialized. After the input trainning signal S$ is calculated in the hidden layer, LLR after the first calculation is obtained in the output layer, denoted as l1 . Then l1 is sent into the loss function to calculate the output error with the ELLR of S$ . If the error meets the requirements, the training is over; otherwise, the reverse propagation process of the steering error signal will be carried out. According to the output error, the weights of LLRNN in each layer will be reversely adjusted, and the training signal will be calculated again under the new parameters. Through the alternation of these two processes, the error function gradient decline strategy is carried out in the weight vector space, and a set of weight vectors are searched dynamically iteratively to make the error function reach the minimum value to completing the training process. At this time, the weights, thresholds and other parameters of neurons at each layer are saved, recorded as LLRnet. Subsequently, the test signal is also divided into the real part and the imaginary part as the input data of LLRnet. After LLRnet’s calculation, the corresponding LLR value is obtained and sent to FEC decoder to complete the decoding. The decoded data is processed by inverse distribution matching and so on, then the final binary bit sequence is obtained.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In order to test the performance of the proposed scheme, we take the PS 16QAM signal as an example to carry out the system simulation as shown in Fig.1. In this system simulation, we set the bit rate as 5.6Gbit/s, and the transmission fiber length as 50km, with dispersion of 16.75ps/(nm km). For comparison purposes, we denote the proposed scheme as scheme N, in which we using the BP neural network with the number of hidden layers of 8. Under the same simulation parameters, we also simulate two other

sets of transmission schemes, the probabilistic shaping signal transmission scheme based on the ALLR and the ELLR, called scheme A and scheme E respectively. For the quantitative analysis of the LLRNN, we define RMS (Root Mean Square) as follow.

( L-E )2

(1)

RMS =

E2

where E represents the exact value of LLR calculated by

the scheme E, and L represents the approximate LLR

calculated by scheme A or scheme N.

Utilizing the calculation formula shown in (1), we obtain

the RMS between scheme N and scheme E and between

scheme A and scheme E, donated as RMSN and RMSA,

respectively. To intuitively demonstrate the difference

between RMSN and RMSA, we illustrate the RMS values of

partial sequences under different SNRs in Fig. 3. Here note

that we used sufficient sequences in the actual simulation to

ensure the accuracy of results. Although for intuitive

purposes we only selected part of the sequences to be

displayed in the figure, the differences shown in Fig. 3 were

generally existed across all sequences.

Fig.3 shows the RMSN and RMSA under different SNR.

It can be seen that RMSA is about 10-0.8, and the RMSN is

about 10-3. That is to say, compared with scheme A, the

mean square error ratio of LLR between scheme N we

proposed and the scheme E, is reduced by about 100 times.

Under different SNRs, RMSN values are all smaller than

RMSA, that is to say, the LLR of LLRNN is more accurate

than the ALLR, closer to the ELLR of testing signal.

Laser Tx PS Module

Binary Data

Distribution Matching

Binary Label

FEC Encoder

Constellation Mapping

MZM

In-Phase Component Quadrature Component

Quadrature Component In-Phase Component

Binary Data

Inverse Distribution Matching

Symbol Mapping

FEC Decoder

Rx PS Module

LLRNN

DSP

PD

Figure 1. The scheme of probabilistic shaping signal transmission based on neural network LLR calculation

Figure 2. structure diagram of LLRNN

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:24:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In order to further test the performance of the scheme we proposed, the LDPC soft demodulation error rate of PS16QAM signals with different reshaping parameters is simulated, denoted as PS1and PS2. The entropy of PS1and PS2 is 3.6226 and 3.9419 respectively.

Figure 3. Performance comparison of LLRNN and ALLR

(a)PS1

(b) PS2

Figure 4. PS-16QAM signal with SNR bit error rate under different shaping parameters

TABLE I.

THE COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF THE LLR SCHEMES

Schemes Operators
Muluplication & division Addition & subtraction Exponent & logarithm
Comparator Total

Log-MAP
68 104 20 0 192

LLRNN (hiddenlayers = 8)
40 40 0 8 88

The simulation results are shown in Fig. 4. Fig.4 (a) and Fig.4 (b) show the change curve of bit error rate of PS-

16QAM signal (denoted as PS1 and PS2) with SNR under different shaping parameters, where BER (bit error rate) is the bit error rate of scheme E, BERA is the bit error rate of scheme A, and BERN is the bit error rate of scheme N. It can be seen that under the same shaping parameters and the same SNR, the BERN is almost the same as the BER, and lower at least 0.1dB than the BERA, proving the BER performance of the scheme we proposed is superior to scheme based on the ALLR.
In order to further analyze the computational complexity of the scheme we proposed, Table 1 lists respectively the operand required for executing log-Map algorithm (ELLR) and LLRNN for 16QAM. As can be seen from Table 1, under the same modulation format, the total operand of logMAP is 192 and the total operand of LLRNN is 88, so the scheme we proposed has significantly lower computational complexity than the scheme based on ELLR.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a scheme that probabilistic shaping signal transmission based on neural network LLR calculation is proposed. Compared with the current transmission scheme based on the ALLR calculation, the simulation results show that under the same modulation format, the LLR calculation accuracy of the proposed scheme is higher, and the error performance is improved by more than 0.1dB.At the same time, compared with the scheme based on the ELLR, the scheme proposed in this paper has lower computational complexity, and can be used as a better choice of the probabilistic shaping signal transmission scheme.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partly supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos.61835002,61727817), The National Key Research and Development Project of China under Grant 2019YFB1803701, China Postdoctoral Science Foundation No. 2020M680385, project funded by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation 2020M680384.
REFERENCES
[1] FORNEY G, GALLAGER R, LANG G, et al. Efficient modulation for band-limited channels[J]. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 1984, 2(5): 632–647.
[2] LIN Shu, COSTELLO D J. Eorror Control Coding[M]. YAN Shu, HE Yuan-zhi, PAN Ya-han, et al, transl. Beijing: Mechanic Industry Press, 2007.
[3] ZHANG Wen-jing, HU Shao-hua, ZHANG Jing, et al. A simplified LLR of SD-LDPC for probabilistically shaped QAM constellation[C]. OECC/ PSC, 2019, TuP4-B14.
[4] CAO Xian-le, LIU Yi, HU Dong-fang. Simplified LLR algorithm for m-QAM demodulation[C]. IRC, 2019.
[5] SHENTAL Ori, HOYDIS Jakob. “Machine LLRning”:Learning to Softly Demodulate[C]. IEEE Globecom Workshops, 2019.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:24:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

