2021 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) | 978-1-6654-4908-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/BMSB53066.2021.9547073

DE-aided ANMSA with edge classification and its application for 5G-NR LDPC codes
Ziqi Zhou1, Kewu Peng2, Jian Song3 and Zhitong He4 Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Electronic Engineering Department,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 2,3Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China Email: 1zhouzq19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {2pengkewu, 3jsong}@tsinghua.edu.cn, 4hezt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract—Belief propagation (BP) provides the basis for the design of 5G new radio low density parity check (5G-NR LDPC) codes, which in turn require a BP-based decoding algorithm. The min-sum algorithm (MSA), the simplification of sum-product algorithm (SPA), should hardly be regarded as a BP-based decoding algorithm because of its minimization. To remedy this, this paper adopts the multi-edge-type density evolution (MET-DE) as the main analysis tool, and introduces the concept of KullbackLeibler divergence. Then the least Kullback-Leibler divergence criterion is proposed to identify the optimal normalization factors. Finally, Density-Evolution-aided Adaptive Normalization Min-Sum Algorithm (DE-aided ANMSA) with edge classification is further proposed for the decoding implementation of 5G-NR LDPC codes. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed decoding algorithm can achieve excellent performance, while the greatest advantage is that its factors could be obtained more flexibly and accurately than traditional training methods. In addition, the optimal factors for base graph 2 in 5G-NR LDPC codes are provided as well.
Index Terms—5G new radio, low-density parity check codes, iterative decoding algorithm, belief propagation algorithm, multiedge-type density evolution, Kullback-Leibler divergence, adaptive normalization min-sum algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC) code [1], which used to be regarded as a prohibitive coding method due to its high implementation complexity, has been playing a role in emerging communications theory and technology. Different from traditional LDPC code, 5G new radio (5G-NR) LDPC code, a capacity-approaching coding mode, has rate-compatibility and length-scalability, with the feature that both the check bits and information bits could be scalable [2]. It belongs to a kind of typical multi-edge-type (MET) LDPC code [3], [4]. In order to work with above features, as well as high-throughput and high-flexibility for 5G-NR, a more flexible, robust but less complicated decoding algorithm is required.
The iterative decoding algorithm, based on belief propagation (BP), could be excellent in terms of performance, but its implementation would be prohibitive due to its high complexity and scale-variance [1], [5]. This algorithm is called the sumproduct algorithm (SPA) as well. Another simplified method, also known as min-sum algorithm (MSA), could reduce the implementation complexity effectively [6], [8]. However, this algorithm might result in performance degradation, especially
Corresponding Author: Kewu Peng (pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn)

when it applied to LDPC codes—a coding mode designed for iterative BP decoding. And even more performance loss will be released if MET LDPC codes get involved.
Compared with SPA, MSA replaces the tanh operations with minimalization during its row operation. As the result, the output of that will deviate from its real probability distribution. In other words, the output will not be real likelihood ratio any more. Due to its deviation, the belief can not be propagated correctly in the following iteration and the performance will degrade finally. Besides, the MSA should hardly be regarded as a kind of BP. For this reason, the normalization factor will be necessary. All in all, it is the top priority of normalization to transform the output of MSA row operation into the real likelihood ratio.
This paper will focus on two issues, quantifying the output deviation and calculating the normalization factors. And specifically speaking, this paper comprises error quantification principle, asymptotic analysis, optimal normalization factors and its simplification. On the basis of above components, the density-evolution-aided adaptive normalization min-sum algorithm (DE-aided ANMSA) with edge classification is proposed.
Firstly, the issue is how to define the deviation between the outputs of BP and non-BP. And some measures should be taken to quantify it. In consideration of the deviation, we would adopt Kullback divergence, also called relative entropy, for quantification. This criterion will describe the difference between BP and MSA at each iteration, that is, the deviation between the probability density function (PDF) of real likelihood ratio and that of the output of MSA row operation.
Secondly, it used to be difficult to analyze and predict the performance of MET LDPC codes. Single-edge type density evolution (SET-DE), or gaussian approximation of DE, might be considered as a solution. But the inaccuracy introduced by them could also lead to unpredictable consequences. Multiedge type density evolution (MET-DE) might be a potential remedy for this, which would also conduce to the calculation and its simplification of adaptive normalization factor [3], [4].
And above all, we need to identify the optimal normalization factors and illustrate the relationship between the normalization factors and the decoding conditional variables.
As far as the improvement of MSA is concerned, normalized

978-1-6654-4908-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:23:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MSA (NMSA), proposed by Chen [7], [9], introduces a fixed normalization factor by training, while adaptive NMSA (ANMSA) involves look-up tables of factors which could be more flexible [10]. To select the most optimal factors, the number of iterations used to be regarded as the index of look-up tables in most papers [12]- [18]. It will point to the corresponding factor during the period of decoding. However, for different SNRs and channels, the iteration number might be same while different factors should be chosen. Besides, all the factors are based on training, implying inevitable errors.
To remedy those two problems, we pay more attention to the output PDF, the basis of MET-DE. At each iteration, the PDF of decoder output could derive from that of input with METDE analysis. Then the failed parity-check equation proportion, also known as check ratio, and the real likelihood ratio will be obtained. And the normalization factors can be calculated directly.
In this paper, we use the check ratio to select specific factors at each iteration. Beyond Monte Carlo simulation and training, the normalization factor identified by MET-DE can also keep the virtue of excellent performance.In addition, it requires a tradeoff between performance and complexity when the normalization factors are applied to MSA. This paper proposes a concept—edge classification, analyzing different parameters of edges and classifying them according to different criterions. And the DE-aided ANMSA with edge classification is proposed to keep the virtue of excellent performance and low complexity. Due to the flexible classification criterions, the normalization factors could be simplified, and the most appropriate look-up tables will be adopted for each specific application.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, the error quantification principle is proposed and the details of asymptotic analysis, that is MET-DE, is presented. Then the calculation of normalization factors is introduced and the DE-aided ANMSA with edge classification is proposed in section III. Subsequently, Some simulations are conducted and the results are provided in section IV. And finally, section V concludes the paper.
II. DENSITY EVOLUTION AND ERROR QUANTIFICATION PRINCIPLE
A. Review of SPA and MSA
The sum-product algorithm (SPA), also known as iterative decoding algorithm, is based on belief propagation theory [1]. It could achieve excellent performance while the tanh operation prevents its broad application. The MSA uses minimalization as a substitute for the tanh [6], [8]. This replacement saves decoding algorithm from high complexity and scale-variance, but it also results in performance loss.
The SPA iterative decoder is composed of two different decoders, row decoder and column decoder, both of which are based on belief propagation theory. The outputs of them are likelihood ratio or its logarithmic, also called log-likelihood ratio (LLR).

However, the outputs of MSA are more complicated due to its replacement. And specifically, so is the output of column decoder if the input is likelihood ratio. But this conclusion could not be applied to the row decoder of MSA. For the minimalization is not a kind of BP, the distribution of its output does not follow the original distribution of the BP output, and the output is not likelihood ratio anymore, which implies the fact that MSA should not be regarded as a kind of BP. Then the input of column decoder will not be likelihood ratio in the next iteration. Contrary to above assumption, the output of column decoder will also deviate from likelihood ratio, and the deviation will be piling up during each iteration. Finally, the performance degradation emerges with the error accumulating.
B. Density Evolution
To analyze the iterative decoding of MSA, density evolution (DE) is an effective solution. DE was proposed by Richardson and his colleague, helping to analyze and design the capacityapproaching irregular LDPC codes [3], [17]. In this paper, we pay more attention to the analysis rather than coding design. As its name suggests, the changes of probability density functions (PDF), known as the evolution of density, describe the transformation of the decoding outputs at each iteration. Due to this theoretical analysis, the PDFs of the outputs for different decoders and iterations could be obtained directly.
Another simplified method is the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart [18]. Based on the gaussian approximation of DE, it could analyze the mutual information of the outputs for those soft in/soft out decoders and describe the convergence trajectory of iterative decoding. As Richardson has discovered, the EXIT chart is a helpful visualization of the asymptotic performance under BP decoding.
However, traditional DE and its gaussian approximation, EXIT chart, fail to cope with MET LDPC codes such as 5GNR LDPC codes. To remedy that, multi-edge type density evolution (MET-DE) was proposed [3], [4], [19]. On the basis of classic density evolution, also called single-edge type density evolution (SET-DE), the MET-DE classifies the edges into several types, and tracks the PDF changes of each types simultaneously. Compared with SET-DE, it will result in a more acute analysis. This paper takes this method in order to better describe the transformation of PDFs at each iteration. Besides, it will conduce to the following error analysis and play a role in obtaining the normalization factors without training.
For the illustrative purpose, we define N (i) \ j as the set of variable nodes N (i) without variable node j where N (i) means for ∀j ∈ N (i) : hij = 1 and M (j)\i as the set of check nodes M (j) without check node i where M (j) means for ∀i ∈ M (j) : hij = 1. P DFi(,nj) denotes the PDF of n-th decoding output. Since the iteration decoding contains both horizontal decoding and vertical decoding, also known as check node decoding and variable node decoding, P DFi2,jn denotes the PDF after n-th iteration. P DFj(ch) for AWGN channel could be calculated according to following function, denoting the

978-1-6654-4908-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:23:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PDF of a-priori log-likelihood ratio (LLR) deriving from the

received signal over AWGN channel for j-th variable node.

P

DFj(ch)(x)

=

√ σ2 8π

exp

( (x
−

−

2 σ2
8

)2σ2

)

.

(1)

For the variable node decoding after n-th iteration, the PDFs

are updated as

∑

P DFi(,2jn+1) = P DFj(ch) +

P DFe(,2jn), (2)

e′∈N (i)\j
∑ where the + and denote convolution operations. For the

check node decoding after n-th iteration, the PDFs are updated

as

P DFi(,2jn+2) =

∏

P DFi(,2en+1),

(3)

e′∈M (j)\i
∏ where denotes the new convolution operations proposed by

Richardson.

After several iterations, the PDFs of decoding output for all

edges could be obtained in this way. Finally, the PDFs of a

posteriori LLRs for all variable nodes can be calculated as

∑

P DFj(2n) = P DFj(ch) +

P DFe(′2,nj ).

(4)

e′∈N (i)

where P DFj(2n) denotes the PDF of a posteriori LLRs of j-th variable node. The PDFs will be involved in further analysis
and operations in the rest of this paper.

C. Error Quantification Principle
In the part A, we have analyzed the outputs of MSA and explained the reason why the performance degradation emerges. But again, the outputs of MSA do not follow the distribution of the counterpart in SPA. Furthermore, those outputs should not even be regarded as a kind of likelihood ratio.
It is a trivial conclusion that the output PDFs vary between SPA and MSA, but the non-likelihood-ratio outputs might require more details. Assuming the above variables, the PDFs of the decoder outputs at certain iteration could be obtained directly by MET-DE. If we calculate the LLR of each PDF, then an absurdity will be inevitable that the LLRs of row operation decoders based on their output conditional probability will not equal to the output LLRsłthe false LLRs. For the row operation decoders at certain iteration, in other words, the real LLRs of the output PDFs will deviate from the corresponding sample spaces which should have been sets of output LLRs.
According to DE, the PDFs are discrete. Assuming that certain density is on the points −δN, −δ(N − 1), ..., , δ(N − 1), δN together with +∞, then for ∀i ∈ Z, −N ≤ i ≤ N , P r(Yj = δi|Xj = 0) = p0 and P r(Yj = −δi|Xj = 0) = p1 could be obtained directly by MET-DE, where Xj is the jth transmitting bit, and Yj is a random variable denoting the output values of j-th check node after horizontal decoding. Due to the properties of the binary symmetric channel (BSC), it is trivial that

P r(Yj = −δi|Xj = 0) = P r(Yj = δi|Xj = 1) = p1. (5)

Referring to the definition of the log-likelihood ratio (LLR), LLR(Y = y) in the BSC could be obtained as follows.

LLR(Y

P r(Y = y) = log(

= y|X

= 0) )

P r(Y = y|X = 1)

P r(Y = y|X = 0)

(6)

= log(

).

P r(Y = −y|X = 0)

If the output Y is real LLR, then y should be equal to

LLR(Y = y). Contrary to the theo(retic)al analysis, however,

the LLR of p0 and p1, that is log

p0 p1

, is not equal to δi,

implying that for Yj the PDF of it is deviated from that of

real LLRs.

Assuming that Yj denotes the real LLR values correspond-

ing to Yj, the PDF of real LLRs P r could be calculated as follows.

(

)

Pr

Yj

=

log(

p0 p1

)|Xj

=

1

= P r(Yj = δi|Xj = 1).

(7)

(

)

Pr

Yj

=

log(

p0 p1

)|Xj

=

0

= P r(Yj = δi|Xj = 0).

(8)

The PDF of normalized output Yj will be consistent with that of real LLRs.
To characterize the deviation between the output PDF and the PDF of corresponding real LLRs, this paper introduces the Kullback-Leibler divergence, also called relative entropy, to measure how a PDF is different from another reference PDF [20]. According to its definition, for discrete probability distribution P and Q defined on the same probability space χ, the Kullback-Leibler divergence DKL from Q to P is defined to be

∑

() P (x)

DKL(P ||Q) =

P (x) log

.

Q(x)

(9)

x∈χ

At each iteration, the output PDFs of row operation decoders will be companied with their rectifications, and the deviation of them could be quantified by above criterion. This criterion will be the fundamental criterion of calculating normalization factors in next section.

III. DENSITY-EVOLUTION-AIDED ADAPTIVE NORMALIZED MIN-SUM ALGORITHM WITH EDGE
CLASSIFICATION
This paper is ultimately about the application of new normalization factors in practice. Beyond the analysis and quantification of the deviations, this section would focus on how to calculate better factors and how to apply them to decoding.

978-1-6654-4908-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:23:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Review of Adaptive Normalization MSA
To compensate for the performance loss in MSA, the offset MSA (OMSA) and the normalized MSA (NMSA) were proposed [7], [9]. Due to the fact that OMSA has no advantage over others, we prefer the discussion about NMSA and its improvements, adaptive normalized MSA (ANMSA) [9]–[11].
Different from the fixed factor in NMSA, a normalization factors look-up table is applied to ANMSA. After each horizontal decoding, the most appropriate factor will be selected according to various criterions, such as check ratio ρ and check node degree dh. One example of this is enhanced ANMSA, the factors will be selected as follows.

specific iteration, the check ratio could be calculated with all the output PDFs and the parity check matrix. For this reason, the normalization factors and the relationship between factors and check ratios are definitely identified.
Repeat above steps for each iteration, and the set of normalization factors corresponding to each edge and various check ratios will be obtained finally.

Lmn = α(ρ, dc) × Lm msn,

(10)

where Lm msn is the original output of horizontal decoders in MSA, and Lmn is the corrected one.
Compared with MSA, NMSA and ANMSA could achieve better performance, keeping the virtue of low implementation complexity. It is obvious that, however, both the fixed factor and the factor look-up tables are based on the Monte Carlo simulation and training, implying predictable inaccuracy. Besides, the training involves the outputs of SPA. It is difficult to obtain the correct values in practice. Last but not least, the normalized output is not a real LLR as well, with the PDF deviation remaining. Consequently, after the output normalization, the input of column decoder should hardly be regarded as real LLR at next iteration.

B. New Normalization Factors
Since the column decoders and LDPC codes are based on BP, the optimal performance bound of MSA will hardly be achieved without BP-based row decoders. As the main operation of row decoders, the minimization should hardly be regarded as a BP-based operation. However, if the output of row decoders could be amended and the updated result would be close to the real LLR, then the equivalent row decoder will also be identified as a BP-based component. The amendment, along the same name, should be called as normalization as well.
In order to determine the optimal factors, the least KullbackLeibler divergence is proposed. Similar to the training process, this criterion is the counterpart of the minimum mean square error (MMSE).
Due to MET-DE, the output PDF of each edge during specific iteration could be obtained directly. Then the PDF of real output LLR could be calculated according to the equation (5).
Subsequently, the normalization factor α for specific edge and specific LLR value could be obtained by the following inverse function.

α = arg min{DKL(P (α × x)||P (xj))}.

(11)

α

In order to select correct factors, the check ratio is considered as an index, implying various decoding conditions. At

Fig. 1. Fitting function of ρ versus α.
C. Edge Classification and the proposed algorithm
All the edges are treated as the same type in NMSA, while ANMSA and Enhanced ANMSA, the improvement of ANMSA, classify the edges into different types according to check ratio, check-node degree or other parameters. Fig. 1 illustrates the difference between the fitting functions of normalization factor corresponding to different check-node degrees. It indicates the classification of edges according to the check node degree and the adoption of its own look-up table for a specific type. Although more types should have promised better performance, they may also result in less samples for each type. Because of the limitation of Monte Carlo, Insufficient samples indicate the large margin of error. Consequently, it requires a tradeoff between the number of types and the number of samples.
To remedy this, DE-aided ANMSA with edge classification is proposed. Contrary to the Monte Carlo training, this METDE-based method could achieve the factors for each edge, escaping the limitation of insufficient samples. If necessary, all the factors could be applied to the decoding process. Otherwise, the edges could be clustered by their parameters

978-1-6654-4908-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:23:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

such as check node degree, variable node degree or others. This procedure is called edge classification. The classifying parameters could be determined flexibly, depending on specific application.
As shown in Fig. 1, for example, the factors for the edges with same check node degree are similar, then those edges could be clustered together, applying the same look-up tables. In fact, this illustration is equivalent to so-called ANMSA. And more generally, the classifications adopted by ANMSA or its improvement could be regarded as the special cases of clustering. In a word, the normalization factors with METDE and clustering could expect broad application in decoding process.

of the gap between new algorithm and SPA is 0.3344dB and 0.0085dB for rate-1/4 and rate-5/6 respectively.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulations have been carried out to calculate the exact values of normalization factors for each edge. The based graph 2 (BG2) of 5G-NR LDPC codes is employed, as well as BPSK modulation and AWGN channel are assumed for simplification. For the illustrative purpose, edges are divided into six types according to their check-node degrees and the corresponding samples are presented in Fig. 1. On the basis of those α and check-ratio samples, fitting functions of normalization factors for the edges with different check-node degree are obtained. Fig. 2 depicts the aforementioned fitting functions, showing the difference among the factors of six types distinctly. Then the final look-up tables will be obtained after sampling on each fitting function.

Fig. 3. BI-AWGN, k = 10, b = 384 for 5G-NR LDPC BG2.
For the curve fitting method is still common smooth spline, numerical error will be inevitable. Further optimization could be expected with some specific fitting methods employed, especially the innovations on basis of DE. Although the performance gap exists right now, new algorithms with better factors whose performance could be more near-capacity will be promising.

Fig. 2. Fitting function of ρ versus α.
Fig. 3 depicts the block error ratio (BLER) performance of the rate-1/5, rate-1/4, rate-1/3, rate-1/2, rate-2/3 and rate5/6 5G-NR LDPC codes with different decoding algorithms. DE-MSA1 is the proposed algorithm where each edge has its own factors, while the factors for different check node degrees are employed in DE-MSA2. According to Fig. 3, the performance of the proposed algorithm is close to the optimal boundłłthe same as that of SPA and its simplification, AdjMSA. At the BLER of 10−3, the maximum and minimum

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we employ MET-DE as the main tool to analyze the decoding process of 5G-NR LDPC codes. Then we introduce a method—the Kullback-Leibler divergence—to measure the difference between the PDF of original output and that of the corresponding real LLR. Subsequently, the least Kullback-Leibler divergence is proposed as the criterion, determining the optimal normalization factors. And a new algorithm, DE-aided ANMSA with edge classification, is further proposed. It could expect an excellent performance with the virtue of low implementation complexity. But it is not the main advantage of the proposed algorithm. Due to its great flexibility, in fact, the ANMSA and its improvements could be regarded as the special cases of it. Besides, in the proposed algorithm, the look-up tables are obtained by METDE rather than Monte Carlo training, expiring the contradiction between the number of types and samples. In summary, this algorithm could expect broad application in both 5G and broadcasting areas for its implementation facility and excellent performance.
ACKNOWLEDGE
This work was supported by the funding under the contract number of PCL2021A10. This work was also supported by Tsinghua University (Department of Electronic Engineering) - Yunnan Mobile Digital TV Co., Ltd. Joint Research Center for DTMB and 5G Broadcasting Integration.

978-1-6654-4908-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:23:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, USA, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, ”Design of Low-Density Parity Check Codes for 5G New Radio,” in IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28-34, March 2018.
[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Multi-edge type LDPC codes, in Proc. Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece 60th Birthday California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, USA, 2002, pp. 24C25.
[4] S. Chen, K. Peng, J. Song and Y. Zhang, ”Performance Analysis of Practical QC-LDPC Codes: From DVB-S2 to ATSC 3.0,” in IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 172-178, March 2019.
[5] R1-1610140, ”LDPC decoding with adjusted min-sum”, Qualcomm, Incorporated, RAN1 #86bis, Lisbon, Portugal, 10thC14th October 2016
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic and H. Imai, ”Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673-680, May 1999.
[7] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, ”Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406-414, March 2002.
[8] D. E. Hocevar, ”A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Workshop onSignal Processing Systems, 2004. SIPS 2004., Austin, TX, 2004, pp. 107-112.
[9] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, ”Density evolution for two improved BPBased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208-210, May 2002.
[10] L. Fan, C. Pan, K. Peng and J. Huang, ”Adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoding,” 2013 9th International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Sardinia, 2013, pp. 1081-1084.
[11] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. Chen and J. Song, ”Construction of RateCompatible Raptor-Like Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Code With Edge Classification for IDMA Based Random Access,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 30818-30830, 2019.
[12] Y. Liu, K. Peng, C. Pan and L. Fan, ”Genie-aided adaptive normalized min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoding,” 2015 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Dubrovnik, 2015, pp. 221-225.
[13] Ming Jiang, Chunming Zhao, Li Zhang and Enyang Xu, ”Adaptive offset min-sum algorithm for low-density parity check codes,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 483-485, June 2006
[14] P. Poocharoen and M. E. Maga?a, ”Different perspective and approach to implement adaptive normalised belief propagation-based decoding for low-density parity check codes,” in IET Communications, vol. 6, no. 15, pp. 2314-2325, 16 October 2012
[15] N. E. Maammar, S. Bri and J. Foshi, ”Layered Offset Min-Sum Decoding for Low Density Parity Check Codes,” 2018 International Symposium on Advanced Electrical and Communication Technologies (ISAECT), Rabat, Morocco, 2018
[16] X. Wu, Y. Song, M. Jiang and C. Zhao, ”Adaptive-Normalized/Offset Min-Sum Algorithm,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 667-669, July 2010
[17] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, ”The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb 2001.
[18] S. ten Brink, ”Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727-1737, Oct. 2001
[19] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, March 2008.
[20] Solomon Kullback, Information Theory and Statistics, Dover Publications Inc., Mineola, New York, 1968.
978-1-6654-4908-3/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:23:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

