472

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 3, MARCH 2017

Reduced Complexity Node-Wise Scheduling of ADMM Decoding for LDPC Codes
Xiaopeng Jiao, Jianjun Mu, and Haoyuan Wei

Abstract— Similar to the belief propagation decoder, linear programming decoding based on the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) can also be seen as an iterative messagepassing decoding algorithm. How to schedule messages efficiently is an important aspect since it will influence the convergence rate of iterative decoders. In this letter, we investigate the node-wise scheduling for ADMM decoders, named NS-ADMM. In particular, we propose a reduced-complexity method for the NS-ADMM decoder by avoiding Euclidean projections involved in the calculation of message residuals. Simulation results show that the proposed method converges much faster than the flooding and layered scheduling while keeping a lower complexity when compared with the NS-ADMM decoder.
Index Terms— Alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM), message scheduling, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, convergence rate.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, Barman et al. proposed an efficient algorithm to solve the linear programming (LP) decoding problem using alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM), which yields a low-complexity LP decoder for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]. The complexity of ADMM decoder is reduced by various methods [2]–[5]. Generally, the ADMM decoder can be seen as an iterative message-passing algorithm performed over Tanner graphs [1]. For messagepassing decoders, the scheduling of messages is important to improve the convergence speed. The message scheduling schemes are intensively investigated for the belief propagation (BP) decoders. Initially, sequential scheduling with a sequence of check-node or variable-node updates are shown to converge twice as fast as the flooding scheduling [6]–[8]. Later, the information dynamic scheduling (IDS) based on message residuals are investigated to improve the convergence rate further [9]. Since then, a number of advanced dynamic selection strategies based on IDS are proposed [10]–[15].
Layered scheduling, proposed in [7] for BP decoder, is applied to ADMM decoding recently [1]. Simulations show that though the layered ADMM converges faster than the flooding scheduling, it is not like the layered BP which doubles the convergence rate. It is well known that the IDS converges
Manuscript received September 16, 2016; revised December 2, 2016; accepted December 19, 2016. Date of publication December 22, 2016; date of current version March 8, 2017. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under 61471286, and Grant 61271004. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was J. Li.
X. Jiao and J. Mu are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071 China (jiaozi1216@126.com; jjmu@xidian.edu.cn).
H. Wei is with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa ON K1S 5B6, Canada (haoyuanwei@ sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2016.2643629

faster than the layered scheduling for the BP decoding [9]. This motivates us to investigate the IDS for ADMM decoders. Firstly, we note two differences between the ADMM and BP decoders: (1) For ADMM decoders, the messages sent from a variable node to different check nodes are the same. While for BP decoders, these messages are different. (2) The messages sent from a check node to different variable nodes are calculated simultaneously for ADMM decoders. These messages are calculated independently by BP decoders. The first difference implies that the scheduling based on variable-to-check (V2C) residuals, which are used in BP decoders [10], [11], is not suitable for ADMM decoders. This is because all neighbor check nodes should be considered for each variable node in the ADMM decoder. While for the BP decoder, only one of the neighbor check nodes is considered. This will increase the complexity burden for the ADMM decoder. The second difference suggests that we should use node-wise scheduling for the ADMM decoder instead of using the edge-based residuals such as the RBP [9] and the Q-RBP [13].
In this letter, we investigate the node-wise scheduling of ADMM (NS-ADMM) decoders with reduced complexity. Note that the algorithmic framework used for NS-ADMM is similar to the node-wise scheduling of BP decoding (NS-BP) in [9]. However, the idea of the reduced-complexity NS-ADMM (RC-NS-ADMM) is different from that of the BP decoding. For the NS-BP decoding, the message residual calculation is simplified by using the min-sum algorithm, which is an approximate BP decoding with low complexity. Unfortunately, there does not exist an approximate ADMM decoding at present which resembles the min-sum approximation of BP decoding. We therefore propose a simplified method to calculate the message residuals for the NS-ADMM decoding.

II. PRELIMINARIES Consider a binary LDPC code C of length N specified by

an M × N parity-check matrix H. Let I = {1, 2, · · · , N}

denote the index set of variable nodes and J = {1, 2, · · · , M}

denote the index set of check nodes. Let di be the degree of variable node vi and Nv (i ) denote the set of neighbors of vi . Similarly, let d j be the degree of check node c j and Nc( j )
denote the set of neighbors of c j . Suppose that a codeword c ∈ C is transmitted over a memoryless binary-input symmetricoutput channel, and the received vector is r. Let γ ∈ Rn be

the vector of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) defined as γi =

log

Pr(ri |0) Pr(ri |1)

for all i ∈ I . Let f (x) = γ Tx +

i∈I g(xi ),

where g(x) is the penalty function. The (k + 1)th iteration

for the ADMM penalized decoding of LDPC codes can be

described as follows [16]

xk+1 : = argmin
x

f (x) + ρ 2

T j x − zkj + ykj

2 2

,

j ∈J

(1)

1558-2558 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:27:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIAO et al.: REDUCED COMPLEXITY NODE-WISE SCHEDULING OF ADMM DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

473

Algorithm 1 Calculating the Residual r (c j )

1: Input: xk+1: obtained by x update at the current iteration

2:

ykj : Lagrange multipliers at the previous iteration

3:

Lkj : stored in advance at the previous iteration

4: Compute zkj+1 = PPd j T j xk+1 + ykj

5: Compute ykj+1 = T j xk+1 + ykj − zkj+1

6: Compute Lkj+1 = zkj+1 − ykj+1

7:

r (c j ) = max
i∈Nc ( j )

L

k+1 j →i

−

L

k j

→i

zkj+1 : = PPd j T j xk+1 + ykj ,

(2)

ykj+1 : = ykj + T j xk+1 − zkj+1,

(3)

where T j is a d j × n binary matrix that selects out the d j components of x that participate in the j th check node, ykj ∈ Rd j denotes the scaled dual variables from iteration k, ρ > 0 is

a penalty parameter that is optimized according to the method
in [1], PPd j is the parity polytope defined as the convex hull of all binary vectors of length d j with an even number of 1’s and PPdj (u) denotes the Euclidean projection of a vector u onto PPd j .
The iterations of ADMM decoding can also be interpreted

by a message-passing algorithm [1]. The message Li→ j from variable node vi to check node c j is calculated as follows

1

1

Li→j ←

[0,1] di

L j→i − ρ (∇x f )i
j ∈Nv (i)

,

(4)

where ∇x f denotes the differential of f with respect to x
and L j→i denotes the message passed from check node c j to variable node vi . The values of L j→i can be calculated as

L j →i

←

z

(i) j

−

y (ji ) ,

(5)

where z j and y j are calculated by using (2) and (3), respec-

tively.

The

variables

z

(i) j

and

y

(i j

)

denote

entries

in

zj

and

y j that correspond to vi . The variables L j→i for all i ∈ I

and j ∈ J are initialized as 0.5 for the ADMM penalized

decoder [16].

III. REDUCED-COMPLEXITY NODE-WISE SCHEDULING

A. Node-Wise Scheduling for ADMM Decoder

The IDS schemes use message residuals to indicate which message should be updated first. For the ADMM decoder, the residual corresponds to each check node c j is defined as

r (c j ) = max L j →i new − L j →i old ,

(6)

i∈Nc ( j )

where L j→i new denotes the candidate message waiting to be propagated in the current iteration and L j→i old denotes the message that has been propagated in the last iteration. Let L j denote the messages of L j→i with i ∈ Nc( j ). The calculation of r (c j ) at the (k+1)th iteration is shown in Algorithm 1.
The scheduling steps of the NS-ADMM are described as

follows. Firstly, the residuals correspond to each check node

are calculated. Suppose the maximum residual is attained

at cm. Secondly, the following three steps need to be done:

Algorithm 2 NS-ADMM Decoding for LDPC Codes

1: Initialization: z j ← 0, y j ← 0, count = 0. 2: Compute x based on γ

3: Compute all residuals r (c j ) using Algorithm 1

4:

Find

m

=

ar

g

max
j ∈J

r

(c

j

)

5: Compute zm ← Pdm Tm x + ym

6: Compute ym ← ym + Tmx − zm

7: Generate and propagate Lm→s for all s ∈ Nc(m)

8: Set r (cm)=0

9: for each variable node v p ∈ Nc(m) do

10: Generate and propagate L p→s for all s ∈ Nv ( p)

11: for each check node cq ∈ Nv ( p)\cm do

12:

Compute r (cq ) based on Algorithm 1

13: end for

14: end for

15: count = count + 1 16: if count%M = 0 then

17: if Stopping rule is not satisfied then

18:

go to line 4.

19: end if

20: end if

(1) check-to-variable (C2V) message update: generate and propagate the message passed from check node cm to its neighborhood variable nodes; (2) V2C message update: for each neighborhood variable node v p of cm , generate and propagate the message passed from v p to its neighborhood check nodes; (3) recalculate the corresponding residual when the V2C message is updated. The NS-ADMM decoding is formally described in Algorithm 2. The stopping rule can be similar with that in [1] or uses the early termination scheme based on the property of LDPC codes such as HxT = 0.
B. Reduced-Complexity Approximation for NS-ADMM
To obtain residuals for the NS-ADMM decoding, we need to compute z j by calling the Euclidean projection which is a time-consuming operation in the ADMM decoder. To reduce the computational complexity, we propose a simple approximation method to calculate the residual. Suppose we are calculating the residual of check node c j at the (k + 1)th iteration. Let w j = T j x + y j . Then the difference between Lkj+1 and Lkj can be calculated as follows
Lkj+1 −Lkj = zkj+1 − ykj+1 − zkj − ykj = zkj+1 − zkj − ykj+1 − ykj = zkj+1 − zkj − wkj+1 − zkj+1 − wkj + zkj = 2 zkj+1 − zkj − wkj+1 − wkj = 2 PPd j wkj+1 − PPd j wkj − wkj+1 − wkj (7)
Now we assume that the order of the point-wise difference between the given two vectors is preserved when the projection operation is applied to these two vectors separately. It means that in (7) the order of elements in wkj+1 − wkj is the same as the order of elements in PPd j wkj+1 − PPd j wkj .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:27:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

474

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 3, MARCH 2017

TABLE I COMPLEXITY COMPARISON OF MESSAGE UPDATES AND RESIDUAL CALCULATIONS PER ITERATION FOR DIFFERENT SCHEDULING SCHEMES

Fig. 1. Empirical results for the estimated values of Pr( ) for four LDPC codes at different SNR values over AWGN channel.
Note that in the NS-ADMM algorithm we only need to find the maximum residual of the check nodes, and it is not necessary to calculate the exact value of residuals. Therefore, we can use wkj+1 − wkj to approximate PPd j wkj+1 − PPd j wkj in (7). Then we have
Lkj+1 − Lkj ≈ 2 wkj+1 − wkj − wkj+1 − wkj = wkj+1 − wkj . (8)
Finally, the residual r (c j ) can be obtained as the largest absolute value of the components in wkj+1 − wkj . By inspecting Algorithm 2, the residual calculation can be simplified further as follows. When computing the residual r (cq ) in Line 12 of Algorithm 2 based on (8), all the V2C messages Lv→q , v ∈ Nc(q) are unchanged except L p→q if the Tanner graph dose not have 4-cycles. This implies that only one component in Tq x is changed. Thus wqk+1 − wqk has only one non-zero component which is associated with v p. The absolute value of this non-zero component is the residual. In a word, the residual calculation based on (8) using vector subtraction followed by a maximum operation is reduced by simple scalar calculations.
The assumption we used to derive (8) does not hold indeed. To see this, we define an event to represent the index of the maximum element in PPd j wkj+1 − PPd j wkj equals to the index of the maximum element in wkj+1 − wkj . Then we use the Monte Carlo simulation to estimate the probability Pr( ) for the NS-ADMM decoding. Fig. 1 shows the estimated values of Pr( ) for four LDPC codes at different SNR values over AWGN channel. It can be seen that the estimated values of Pr( ) for all the simulated LDPC codes are close to 90% as SNR increases. From the perspective of selecting the maximum residual in the NS-ADMM, the results in Fig. 1 implies that the proposed method becomes more reliable to approximate the residual calculation as SNR increases.
C. Computational Complexity Per Iteration
For the NS-ADMM and RC-NS-ADMM, one iteration includes M running of the procedure line 4–14 in Algorithm 2. The complexity of the proposed method is evaluated by

two parts: the message updates and the residual calculations. The message updates are analyzed by evaluating the number of x, z and y updates. The residual calculations are analyzed by evaluating the number of addition/subtractions (noted additions) and the number of projections. Let the average degree of variable and check nodes be dv and dc, respectively. Table I shows the number of message updates and residual calculations per iteration for four scheduling schemes. The number of message updates for the four schemes are clear. For the residual calculations, one running of the procedure line 4–14 in Algorithm 2 needs dv (dc − 1) residual calculations. For the NS-ADMM, one residual calculation needs one Euclidean projection and four vector additions with length dc. For the RC-NS-ADMM, one residual calculation needs two additions. For comparisons, line 4 in Algorithm 2 needs M −1 comparisons. For the NS-ADMM, each residual calculation needs dc − 1 comparisons. While for the RC-NS-ADMM, the residual calculation does not need comparisons. From Table I we can see that the RC-NS-ADMM saves all Euclidean projections and a large number of additions when compared to the NS-ADMM. When compared to the LADMM, the RC-NS-ADMM needs extra additions for residual calculation. However, the RC-NS-ADMM converges several times faster than the LADMM as shown in the next section.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Two LDPC codes are chosen for simulations: a (576,288) rate-0.5 code C1 and a (1152,288) rate-0.75 code C2. Both of the codes are constructed based on the IEEE 802.16e standard [17]. As for the page limitations, we only present simulation results for C1. Similar results are observed for C2. To accelerate simulations, all the ADMM decoders use overrelaxation and early termination. The over-relaxation parameter is set to 1.9 [1]. The l1 penalty function g(x) = −β |x − 0.5| [16] is used throughout simulations. The parameters ρ and β are optimized based on [1] and we choose ρ = 4.0 and β = 0.8.
The frame error rate (FER) performances vs. number of iterations for ADMM decoder with different scheduling schemes are shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen that (1) The convergence behavior of RC-NS-ADMM is similar to that of NS-ADMM. (2) The convergence rate for the RC-NS-ADMM is much faster than the flooding and layered scheduling. The reason behind this is that the IDS strategy used in the RC-NSADMM focuses on the part of the Tanner graph that has not converged [9]. Fig. 3 shows FER performances of ADMM decoder with various scheduling schemes when the maximum number of iterations is set to 20. It can be seen that the performance gap between the NS-ADMM and the flooding or LADMM increases with the value of Eb/N0. This is because at low SNRs, the error frames can not be corrected by all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:27:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIAO et al.: REDUCED COMPLEXITY NODE-WISE SCHEDULING OF ADMM DECODING FOR LDPC CODES

475

Fig. 2. FER vs. number of iterations for C1 using ADMM decoders with various scheduling schemes at Eb/N0=2.8dB.
Fig. 3. FER vs. Eb/N0 for C1 using ADMM decoders with various scheduling schemes. The maximum number of iterations is set to 20.
Fig. 4. Average number of iterations for ADMM decoders with various scheduling schemes.
the decoders within 20 iterations. While at high SNRs, some frames that can not be corrected by the flooding or LADMM within 20 iterations can be corrected by the NS-ADMM due to its fast convergence rates. The observation that the RC-NS-ADMM performs closely to the NS-ADMM especially at high SNRs can be explained by Fig. 1 where the probability of the two decoders selecting the same update nodes increases as SNR increases.
Since the computational complexity is determined by the actual number of iterations, we compare the average number of iterations (ANI) for different schemes in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the ANI for RC-NS-ADMM is about 2.3 times less than the LADMM and 3.5 times less than the flooding scheduling as SNR increases. In particular, when SNR=4.0dB, the ANI is 2.0 for the RC-NS-ADMM, while it is 4.5 for the LADMM. Combined with the complexity analysis in Section III-C, it means that the RC-NS-ADMM saves 2.5Mdc x updates, 2.5M z updates and 2.5M y updates at the cost of 4Mdv (dc − 1) additions and 2(M − 1) comparisons. In view of the complexity of z updates with Euclidean projections, the extra computation of residuals for the RC-NS-ADMM is acceptable.

V. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a reduced complexity node-wise scheduling method, i.e., RC-NS-ADMM, for the ADMM decoding
of LDPC codes. Simulations show that the RC-NS-ADMM
performs similar to the NS-ADMM in terms of convergence rate and FER performance. Meanwhile, the proposed method
converges significantly faster than the flooding and layered scheduling. As the IDS schemes introduce extra computations
for residuals, this will slow down the ADMM decoding. In [18], a fixed scheduling without residual computations is
proposed for BP decoding by using the mutual information method. However, the mutual information analysis is not avail-
able for the ADMM decoding so far. Therefore, one interesting topic for future work is the investigation of fixed scheduling
schemes for ADMM decoding with similar convergence rates
when compared with our proposed method.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. C. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7870–7886, Dec. 2013.
[2] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient iterative LP decoding of LDPC codes with alternating direction method of multipliers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 1501–1505.
[3] G. Zhang, R. Heusdens, and W. B. Kleijn, “Large scale LP decoding with low complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 2152–2155, Nov. 2013.
[4] H. Wei, X. Jiao, and J. Mu, “Reduced-complexity linear programming decoding based on ADMM for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 909–912, Jun. 2015.
[5] I. Debbabi, B. L. Gal, N. Khouja, F. Tlili, and C. Jego, “Fast converging ADMM-penalized algorithm for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 644–647, Apr. 2016.
[6] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding,” Phys. A, Statist. Mech. Appl., vol. 330, nos. 1–2, pp. 259–270, Dec. 2003.
[7] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Signal Process. System, Lausanne, Switzerland, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[8] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[9] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470–3479, Dec. 2010.
[10] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, and H. Y. Song, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 117–118, Jan. 2009.
[11] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Ye, and G. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[12] G. Han and X. Liu, “An efficient dynamic schedule for layered beliefpropagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 950–952, Dec. 2009.
[13] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, and W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[14] X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and R. Cui, “Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–150, Feb. 2015.
[15] X. Liu, Z. Zhou, R. Cui, and E. Liu, “Informed decoding algorithms of LDPC codes based on dynamic selection strategy,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1357–1366, Apr. 2016.
[16] X. Liu and S. C. Draper, “The ADMM penalized decoder for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 2966–2984, Jun. 2016.
[17] LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY, IEEE Standard C802.16e-05/0066r3, 2005.
[18] H.-C. Lee and Y.-L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104–3113, Sep. 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:27:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

