Lowering Error Floors of Irregular LDPC Code on
Fast Fading Environment with and without Perfect
CSI
Satoshi Gounai † Tomoaki Ohtsuki ††
†Graduate School of Electrical Engineering, Tokyo University of Science ††Department of Electrical Engineering, Tokyo University of Science 2641 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278–8510 Japan E-mail :†j7304629@ed.noda.tus.ac.jp ††ohtsuki@ee.noda.tus.ac.jp

Abstract— Irregular LDPC codes can achieve better error rate performance than regular LDPC codes. However, irregular LDPC codes have higher error floors than regular LDPC codes. The Ordered Statistic Decoding (OSD) algorithm achieves Maximum Likelihood (ML) decoding. The ML decoding is effective to lower error floors. However, temporal estimates obtained by the OSD algorithm satisfy the parity check equation of the LDPC code. The OSD algorithm can not lower error floors due to the temporal estimates satisfying the LDPC parity check equation. We proposed the concatenated code constructed with an inner irregular LDPC code and an outer Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC). Due to CRC we can detect errors from the codeword estimated by the OSD algorithm. Our proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding can lower error floors in an AWGN channel. However, in wireless access environments, we can not neglect the effects of the channel. The OSD algorithm needs the ordering of each bit based on the reliability. The Channel State Information (CSI) is used for deciding reliability of each bit. In this paper, we evaluate the BLock Error Rate (BLER) of the proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding in a fast fading channel with and without perfect CSI where ‘without perfect CSI’ means that only the average of the fading amplitudes is known at the receiver. From the computer simulation, we show that the proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding can lower error floors than the conventional LDPC code with the OSD algorithm in the fast fading channel with and without perfect CSI.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [?] with Belief Propagation (BP) can achieve the very good performance near Shannon limit. Particularly, irregular LDPC codes with optimum weight distribution achieve the better performance than regular LDPC codes and turbo codes [?]. To obtain the optimum weight distribution, we can use Density Evolution (DE) [?] or EXIT chart [?]. However, these tools assume infinite code length. In practice, finite length irregular LDPC codes with the optimum weight distribution obtained by DE or EXIT chart have error floors as same as turbo codes. Short or middle length irregular LDPC codes with a high degree column weight have short cycles and small stopping sets. Small stopping sets lead to high error floors and small minimum distance of the codeword [?]. It is known that the Maximum Likelihood (ML) decoding is effective to lower error floors.

The decoding algorithm combining the Log-Likelihood Ratio Belief Propagation (LLR-BP) decoding algorithm and the Ordered Statistic Decoding (OSD) algorithm [?] can achieve the excellent performance. The OSD algorithm with LLR-BP decoding algorithm achieve the approximate ML decoding. In the OSD algorithm, we reencode using only reliable bits referred to as Most Reliable Basis (MRB). The advantage of the OSD algorithm is that when all the bits in MRB are estimated correctly, we can obtain the correct codeword by the OSD algorithm. However, because all the temporal estimates obtained by the OSD algorithm satisfy the LDPC parity check equation, we can not detect errors in the temporal estimate obtained by the OSD algorithm. Thus, when the correct codeword has been obtained by the OSD algorithm, we can not pick out the correct codeword. Only if the LLRBP decoding algorithm can not generate the final estimate that satisfies the parity check equation, we regard the estimate of the OSD algorithm as the final estimate. Although the ML decoding is effective to lower error floors, the small minimum distance causes the error floor due to the wrong codeword satisfying the parity check equation. Thus, when the errors of wrong codewords that satisfy the parity check equation are dominant, the OSD algorithm can not lower error floors.
We proposed the encoding/decoding scheme using an irregular LDPC code. In the proposed encoding scheme, information bits are encoded by Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) and the LDPC code in order. By using CRC, we can detect errors in a temporal estimate obtained by the LLR-BP decoding algorithm and the OSD algorithm. In the proposed decoding scheme, the received codewords are first decoded by the LLR-BP decoding algorithm, which generates the temporal estimate from the received codeword. Only if this temporal estimate satisfies both the LDPC parity check equation and the CRC syndrome, we regard the temporal estimate as the final estimate and stop the decoding. If this temporal estimate does not satisfy both the LDPC parity check equation and the CRC syndrome, we perform the OSD algorithm using this temporal estimate. A temporal estimate generated by the OSD algorithm always satisfies the LDPC parity check equation, thus we detect errors in this temporal estimate by CRC only. If no errors are detected in the temporal estimate generated by the OSD algorithm, we regard this temporal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:11:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
0-7803-8887-9/05/$20.00 (c)2005 IEEE

Information i CRC w

codeword

encoder

LDPC x encoder

Channel

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the proposed encoding scheme

the temporal estimate xˆ from the sign of zn. If xˆ satisfies the parity check equation HxˆT = 0, then we regard xˆ as the final estimate. If HxˆT =6 0, then decoding restarts using zmn. The decoding proceeds until HxˆT = 0 is satisfied or the number of iterations reaches the maximum iteration set up beforehand.
• Initialization

Decoding restart

y Channel

LLR-BP ^x CRC ^x
decoder check
^x

OSD

^c

CRC check

^c

Final estimate

Fn

=

2hˆnyn σ2

,

(1)

wherehˆn is the channel estimate of nth bit, and σ2 is the variance of channel noise.

• Horizontal step

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the proposed decoding scheme
estimate as the final estimate and stop the decoding. Otherwise, we restart the LLR-BP decoding algorithm. The proposed encoding/decoding scheme can detect errors in the codeword that can not be detected by the LDPC parity check equation and pick out the correct codeword generated by the OSD algorithm by CRC. The proposed encoding/decoding scheme can lower the error floor of irregular LDPC codes in an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel.
In wireless communications, we can not neglect the effect of the channel. The Channel State Information (CSI) is used for soft decision decoding algorithm to deciding the reliability of each bit. The performance of the soft decision decoding algorithm without perfect CSI is inferior to that with the perfect CSI. In particular, the OSD algorithm needs the ordering of each bit based on the reliability. The error rate performance of the OSD algorithm is more sensitive to the accuracy of CSI than that of the LLR-BP decoding algorithm. Although the error rate performance of the OSD algorithm without the perfect CSI deteriorates, the OSD algorithm can achieve ML decoding.
In this paper, we evaluate error rate performance of the proposed encoding/decoding scheme in a fast fading channel with and without perfect CSI where ‘without perfect CSI’ means that only the average of the fading amplitudes is known at receiver. From the computer simulation, we show that our proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding lowers the error floors and outperforms the conventional LDPC code with the OSD algorithm and the LLR-BP algorithm and turbo codes with Maximum A Posterior (MAP) decoding algorithm in high Eb/N0 region in the fast fading channel with and without perfect CSI.
II. DECODING ALGORITHM
A. LLR-BP Decoding Algorithms
Let y = (y1, y2, ... yn) denote the received codeword from the channel. First, we derive the initial LLR Fn from yn. In the horizontal step we derive the LLR of the nth bit obtained by the mth check sum Lmn. In the vertical step, we derive the posteriori LLR of the nth bit zn and the LLR of the nth bit sent to the mth check sum zmn using Lmn. We generate

Tmn

=

Y
n0∈N (m)\n

1 1

− +

exp(zmn0) , exp(zmn0 )

(2)

Lmn

=

ln

1 1

− +

Tmn Tmn

.

(3)

• Vertical step

X

zn = Fn +

Lmn,

(4)

mX∈M(n)

zmn = Fn +

Lmn.

(5)

m0 ∈M(n)\m

We denote the set of check sums including the nth bit by M (n) and the set of bits including the mth check sum by N (m). In addition, we denote the set of check sums M (n) excluding the mth check sum by M (n) \ m and the set of bits N (m) excluding the nth bit by N (m) \ n.

B. Ordered Statistic Decoding (OSD) Algorithm

In the OSD algorithm, at first we determine the reliability
of each bits based on the magnitude of APP-LLR |zn| for the temporal estimate xˆ. In this paper, we use the parity
check matrix H for the OSD algorithm so that we permute
the temporal estimate xˆ in the ascending order based on the
reliability. Let xˆ and xˆ0 denote the estimate obtained by the LLR-BP
decoding algorithm and the codeword obtained by permuting xˆ based on the reliability, respectively. Let Γ1 and Γ1−1 denote the functions of this first permutation and the inverse permutation, respectively. We apply Γ−1 1 to xˆ and the column of H, and then obtain xˆ0 and H0. Next we perform a Gaussian elimination on H0 from left to right. Then we obtain H00 as
a new generator matrix. During a Gaussian elimination, we
might have to permutate some columns to obtain an uppertriangular matrix. Let Γ2 and Γ−2 1 denote the functions of this second permutation and inverse permutation, respectively. Applying Γ2 to xˆ0, we get xˆ00. The following equations are satisfied between those permutation functions.

xˆ00 = Γ2(Γ1(xˆ)),

xˆ = Γ1−1(Γ−2 1(xˆ00)).

(6)

The reencoding is performed using xˆ00 and H00. The K bits in xˆ00 used for the reencoding are referred to as Most Reliable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:11:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Channel

LLR-BP xˆ
LDPC parity and
CRC check xˆ HxˆT= 0
and
s = 0?
xˆ Yes
output xˆ

No

xˆ

OSD

cˆ

CRC check
cˆ
s = 0 ? No d(y, c) > d(y, ˆc) ?

cˆ Yes output cˆ

No

Yes

c = cˆ

c

OSD

No

maximum

iteration?

c Yes

LLR-BP

No

maximum

iteration?

c Yes

output c

Fig. 3. Flow chart of the proposed decoding scheme

Basis (MRB). The reencoding using xˆ directly is referred to

as the phase-0 reprocess. In the phase-l reprocess, l bits in

¡MklR¢ Bfliaprpeinflgipppaetdte.rnWs.heInn

MRB consists of K bits, there are the phase-l reprocess, we generate

temporal estimates ˆc for all the flipping patterns of l bits

in MRB. In addition, the OSD algorithm that performs all

the phase-l reprocesses with 0 ≤ l ≤ i is referred to as the

oXrideµr-Ki O¶SD algorithm. The order-i OSD algorithm generates temporal estimates. We regard the codeword ˆc
l
l=0
nearest to the received codeword y as the most likelihood

estimate c. If the temporal estimate satisfying the parity

check equation can not be obtained by the LLR-BP decoding

algorithm until the decoding reaches the maximum iteration,

we regard c as the final estimate.

If there are no errors in MRB, we can obtain the correct

estimate by the OSD algorithm. However, all the estimates

obtained by the OSD algorithm satisfy the parity check equa-

tion so that we can not pick up the correct one by the parity

check equation of the LDPC code.

III. PROPOSED ENCODING/DECODING SCHEME
A. Encoding/Decoding
Fig. 1 shows the block diagram of the proposed encoding scheme. First, we encode the information codeword i by CRC and generate the codeword w. Next, we encode the codeword w by the LDPC code and generate the codeword x. Fig. 2 shows the block diagram of the proposed decoding scheme. The decoder receives the noisy codeword y. First, the temporal estimate xˆ is generated by the LLR-BP decoding algorithm. We regard xˆ as the final estimate and stop the decoding, only when xˆ satisfies both the LDPC parity check equation Hxˆ = 0 and the CRC syndrome s = 0. When xˆ does not satisfy both the LDPC parity check equation and the CRC syndrome, the OSD algorithm is performed using xˆ. When the estimate ˆc obtained by the OSD algorithm satisfies the CRC syndrome s = 0, we regard ˆc as the final estimate and stop the decoding.

If ˆc does not satisfy the CRC syndrome, we restart the LLRBP decoding algorithm with LLR obtained in the previous LLR-BP decoding algorithm. If we can not generate either xˆ or ˆc that satisfies both the LDPC parity check equation Hxˆ = 0 and the CRC syndrome s = 0 until the decoding reaches the maximum iteration, we regard the codeword c nearest to the received one y as the final estimate. We show the flowchart of our proposed decoding scheme. In the flowchart, d (y, ˆc) denotes the distance of the received codeword y and the estimated codeword ˆc. Once the estimated codeword is output, the decoding stops.
B. Proposed OSD Algorithm
Although CRC can perform excellent error detection, CRC can not detect errors from the wrong codeword including many wrong bits. In addition when the temporal estimate obtained by the OSD algorithm is the wrong codeword, the temporal estimate includes many wrong bits. Thus, we use a modified OSD algorithm in the proposed decoding scheme. We set the iteration number when the OSD algorithm starts. When the iteration number is small, LLR is not propagated enough and the temporal estimate includes many errors. In addition we flip only unreliable bits. The probability that the high reliable bit is correct is high. Thus, the probability that the temporal estimate obtained by flipping the high reliable bit is the correct codeword is low.
IV. SOFT DECISION DECODING ALGORITHM FOR LDPC CODES WITH CHANNEL STATE INFORMATION
If CSI of each bit is perfect, the worse the channel is, the smaller the reliabilities of bits passing through the channel are. In the LLR-BP decoding algorithm, the CSI is used for deciding the initial LLR of each bit. In the OSD algorithm, if wrong bits are used for reencoding, we can not obtain the correct codeword. In the OSD algorithm, we order the bits based on their reliabilities. In the OSD algorithm the difference of reliability of each bit is important rather than reliability of each bit. If CSI is not perfect, in the OSD algorithm we cannot order each bit correctly based on the reliability. In particular, the OSD algorithm is performed based on the reliability obtained by the LLR-BP decoding algorithm. If the LLR-BP decoding algorithm cannot derive the a posteriori probability due to the incorrectness of CSI, in the following OSD algorithm it is difficult to obtain the correct codeword. In practice it can happen that the LLR-BP decoding algorithm fails decoding due to the incorrectness of CSI. The OSD algorithm without perfect CSI is not effective for LDPC code in the region where channel errors are dominant. Although the OSD algorithm can not improve the LLR-BP decoding algorithm well, the OSD algorithm achieves approximate ML decoding. The ML decoding is effective for the error floor caused by the small minimum distance of the codeword. The wrong codeword caused by the small minimum distance of the codeword satisfies the parity check equation. When the wrong codeword satisfies the parity check equation, most bits are estimated correctly. When the bits used for reencoding are estimated correctly, we can obtain the correct codeword by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:11:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the OSD algorithm. Without perfect CSI, the OSD algorithm is effective for LDPC code in the error floor region.
However, the codeword estimated by the conventional OSD algorithm satisfies the LDPC parity check equation. We cannot detect wrong codewords and cannot stop the decoding. In addition, when the wrong codewords satisfying the LDPC parity check equation is obtained by the LLR-BP decoding algorithm, the decoding stops and fails. In this paper, we evaluate our proposed encoding/decoding scheme in the fading channel with and without perfect CSI.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
Figs. 4 and 5 show the BLER of the turbo code, the conventional LDPC code, and the proposed LDPC code in the fast fading channel where the fading gains vary from symbol by symbol. In Fig. 4 we assume the perfect CSI at the receiver. In Fig. 5 we assume only the average of the fading amplitude E[h] = 0.8862 to be known at the receiver. The turbo code is encoded by (31, 27) in the octal notation Recursive Systematic Convolutional encoder with S-random interleaver. The decoding algorithm of the turbo code is the MAP algorithm with maximum 8 iteration. The conventional LDPC code is encoded by (800, 384) irregular LDPC code. The proposed LDPC code is encoded by (800, 400) LDPC code and CCITT-CRC with the generator matrix G(x) = x16 + x12 + x5 + 1. We denote the BLER of the turbo code by “turbo”, that of the conventional LDPC code with the LLRBP decoding algorithm by “LLR-BP”, that of the conventional LDPC code with the LLR-BP decoding algorithm and the order-1 OSD algorithm by “Order-1 OSD”, and that of the proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding scheme by “Proposed”, respectively. The proposed OSD algorithm starts when the number of iteration is 5 and flips unreliable 5 bits. These values are the optimum values obtained by the computer simulations. In Fig. 4, we can see that in the high Eb/N0 region, the proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding can lower the error floor more than the conventional LDPC code with the conventional OSD algorithm in the fast fading channel with perfect CSI.
In Fig. 5, we can see that in the high Eb/N0 region, the proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding can lower the error floor than the conventional LDPC code with the OSD decoding algorithms in the fast fading channel without perfect CSI . On the other hand, in the low Eb/N0 region, the conventional LDPC code and the proposed LDPC code achieves almost the same BLER.
We showed that the proposed LDPC code with proposed decoding can lower error floors compared to the conventional LDPC code with OSD algorithm and LLR-BP decoding algorithm and the turbo code with MAP decoding algorithm in the fast fading channel with and without perfect CSI. We also showed that in the fast fading channel without perfect CSI, the proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding achieves almost the same BLER as the conventional LDPC code with the OSD algorithm and LLR-BP decoding algorithm in the low Eb/N0 region. In the OSD algorithm, the reliability of each bit is the most important. The CSI is an important factor to decide

100

LLR-BP

Order-1 OSD

10-1

Turbo

Proposed

10-2

BLER

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. BLER versus Eb/N0 (dB) for (800, 384) turbo code with MAP decoding and conventional LDPC codes with LLR-BP decoding algorithm and order-1 OSD algorithm, and (800, 400) proposed LDPC code with proposed encoding/decoding scheme in the fast fading channel with perfect CSI.

reliability of each bit. Thus, without perfect CSI, the OSD algorithm can not outperform the LLR-BP decoding algorithm. In the error floor region where the received signal is more reliable, our proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding can exploit the nature of the ML decoding of the OSD algorithm. In addition CRC can detect the wrong codeword satisfying the parity check equation of the LDPC code. In the fast fading channel without CSI, the proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding can lower the error floor as same as in the fast fading channel with perfect CSI. Thus, we can say that our proposed LDPC code with the proposed decoding is effective in practical wireless access environments
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we evaluate error rate performance of the proposed encoding/decoding scheme in a fast fading channel with and without perfect CSI where ‘without perfect CSI’ means that only the average of the fading amplitude is known at receiver. From the computer simulation, we show that our proposed LDPC code with proposed decoding lowers the error floors and outperforms the conventional LDPC code with the OSD algorithm and LLR-BP algorithm and turbo codes with Maximum A Posterior (MAP) decoding algorithm in high Eb/N0 region in the fast fading channel with and without perfect CSI.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.IT-8, pp.21–28, Jan. 1962
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol.32, no. 18, pp. 1645-1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 339–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, R. L. Uranke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637. Feb. 2001.
[5] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp.599–618, Feb. 2000.
[6] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1727 – 1737, Oct. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:11:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

LLR-BP

Order-1 OSD

10-1

Turbo

Proposed

10-2

BLER

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6 3456789

E /N b0

(dB)

Fig. 5. BLER versus Eb/N0 (dB) for (800, 384) turbo code with MAP decoding and conventional LDPC codes with LLR-BP decoding algorithm and order-1 OSD algorithm, and (800, 400) proposed LDPC code with proposed encoding/decoding scheme in the fast fading channel without perfect CSI.

[7] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: turbo codes,” ICC 1993.
[8] C. Di., D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urvanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[9] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” ICC 2003.
[10] M. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check code,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 19, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[11] J. Chen and M. Fossorier “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. on Commun. vol. 50, No.3, Mar. 2002.
[12] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenbeg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2173–2181, Sept. 1999.
[13] L. Ping, W. K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, “Low-density parity-check codes with semi-random parity-check matrix,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 3839, Jan. 1999.
[14] M. Rashidpour and S. H. Jamali, “Low-density parity-check codes with simple irregular semi-random parity-check matrix for finite-length application,” IEEE PIMRC 2003, vol.1 pp. 17–10 Sept. 2003
[15] A. Ohhashi and T. Ohtsuki, “Performance Analysis of BP-based Algorithms for Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes on Fast Rayleigh Fading Channel, IEEE VTC2004Fall, LA, USA, Sep. 2004.
[16] L. Yin, J. Lu, K. B. Letaief and Y. Wu, “Modified beliefpropagation algorithm for decoding of irregular low-density parity-check codes,”Electron. Lett., vol. 38 Nov. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:11:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

