2005 IEEE 6th Workshop on Signal ProcessingAdvances in Wireless Communications
The Factor Graph EM Algorithm: Applications for LDPC codes

Andrew W. Eckford
The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of ECE, University of Toronto 10 King's College Road, Toronto, Ontario, Canada MSS 3G4 E-mail: andrew.eckford@utoronto.ca

Abstract-The factor graph EM (FGEM) algorithm is introduced, which is a way of describing the EM algorithm as a message-passing algorithm over a factor graph. Some interesting properties of this algorithm are discussed, such as its ability to
break certain cycles in factor graphs, Systems with LDPC codes are used as a starting point for practical appkations of the FGEM algorithm. In particular, in channels with an unknown channel state, FGEM-based estimation-decoding algorithms can be straightforwardly obtained, and specific examples are given using the block fading channel, Applications for LDPC-based source coding, especially the Slepian-Wolf coding problem, are
also given.

multiuser detection [61, adaptive sequence estimation 171, and ohers.
Integration of inference algorithms and the EM Algorithm
has been explored in recent work. In [SI,a Kalman smoother
and maximum a posrerion' probability detector were combined
using the EM Algorithm; Kalman smoothing is a special case of the sum-product algorithm. In 191, this idea was advanced
to include soft input, soft output (SISO) demodulation, which can also be expressed using the sum-product algorithm. As
well, [IO] has applied the EM algorithm to the problem of

I. INTRODUCTION

synchronization in Turbo coded systems. At the same time, [I 11 noted that the SPA could be adapted to calculate one step

Factor graphs are powerful tools for visualizing complicated of the Baum-Welch algorithm, which is a special case of the

probabilistic systems, while the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) EM Algorithm. The EM algorithm has also found applications

is an efficient way to calculate marginal densities by passing in the closely related field of probabilistic inference.
messages over the factor graph 111. The SPA is used to perform In this paper, we use systems with block characteristics,

inference over the factor graph, by marginalizing over any where continuous-valued channel states persist over constant-

random variables in the model that are unobserved, or hidden. sized blocks. One example of this model is block fading,

Many applications have been found for factor graphs and the originally introduced in [12], which is n useful model to

SPA, including LDPC decoding, representation of complicated describe such systems as orthogonal frequency division mul-

channels 121, and joint channel estimation and decoding 131. tiplexing (OFDM) and frequency-hopped spread spectrum

Although the SPA is useful and efficient when the hidden (FHSS). We show that the FGEM algorithm is particularly

variables have alphabets that are discrete and small, many appropriate for this sort of system for two reasons. Firstly,

practically interesting problems in channel estimation require continuous variables present difficulties for the SPA, since

hidden variables with continuous alphabets. This poses prob- an SPA message would ordinarily be passed as a function

lems for message passing, in that the messages are calculated of these variables. The FGEM algorithm provides a way to

and passed as functions of the hidden variables, and it is mitigate this complexity, as often only a single scalar value

generally not possible to exactly express these functions for needs to be passed. Secondly, factor graphs for these systems

continuous variables. One approach is to approximate the tend to have many variable nodes with high degree. This

variables using quantization or a Gaussian assumption. An may introduce short cycles in the factor graph describing the

alternative is to pass a message consisting of a single estimate estimation-decoding system; this is also a problem in a broader

as a working value of that variable. In recent work, Loeliger [4] class of systems affected by global values (such as in phase

noticed that gradient-based parameter estimation algorithms estimation [13]). We also show that the FGEM algorithm has

can be expressed on factor graphs, and proposed a modified the interesting property of breaking cycles in the factor graph,

SPA to take advantage of this observation.

which solves the short-cycle problem with low complexity.

Another useful algorithm for communication theorists is the Two practical examples are given in this paper: a block

Expectation-Maximization {EM) Algorithm [ 5 ] , which can be fading channel where the channel amplitudes are RayIeigh

used to estimate parameters in prababilistic systems with hid- distributed, and a pair of correlated binary sources to be

den variables. The intent of the EM algorithm is to iteratively compressed with Slepian-Wolf coding, where the source statis-

calculate maximum likelihood (ML) parameter estimates, and tics are blockwise constant. The remainder of this paper is

the estimates produced by the algorithm have the attractive organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the motivating

property of increasing monotonically in likelihood with each examples in detail, and give their probabilistic models. In

iteration. The EM Algorithm has been applied to a number of Section 3, we review the EM algorithm, and show in detail

problems in communications and signal processing, including how it can be calculated over a factor graph with simple

0-7803-886741051$20,0002005 IEEE

910

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

modifications to the sum-product algorithm. In Section 4, we derive the FGEM algorithm for the example applications, and
present results in Section 5.

rI. MOTJVATINGEXAMPLES

The EM algorithm is an exceptionally general technique for estimating unknown parameters. To give our investigation

some focus, we will be primarily interested in two specific
example systems: an LDPC code transmitted over a Rayleigh Fig. 1. An example factor graph for an LDPC code in a block fading block fading channel with additive Gaussian noise; and block channel, where U = 3 and U = 5.

binary source in an LDPC-based Slepian-Wolf source encoder.
In each case, we have hidden variables x,observations y, and states s. In both cases, the hidden variables and observations are divided into blocks, and each block is assigned exactly one state. The number of blocks is U , and the number of hidden variables and observations per block is U , so eachfrunze contains WJ hidden variables and observations. The j t h hidden variable (resp.,observation)in the ith block will be written ztJ (resp., yij), and the state for the ith block will be written si.
BIock fading channel. In this case, the hidden variables x
are symbols from a transmitted LDPC code;the channel states 5 represent fading amplitudes, where each szis an independent
Rayleigh distributed random variable with distribution

(PMF) of the outputs and channel states is given by

PY,S(Y:s I4 =

(3)

2!

2= 1

j=1

where py,,(yij x i j , s z ) = 1 - si if yzj = zij, .and py,, (yij 1 xij, si): s2 otherwise.
When combined with an LDPC code, the overall prob-

abilistic system for both examples may be represented on

factor graphs as in Fig. 1. In principle, estimation-decoding

for this factor graph may be accomplished using the sum-

product algorithm (SPA) [I]. However, as we mentioned in

the introduction, there are two problems with the SPA:

where p is the Rayleigh parameter; and the observations y are the channel outputs, Thus, using the above notation, the channel outputs may be described as yZj= sixij -k nij, €or a white Gaussian noise sequence n. The conditional probabiIity density function (PDF) of the channel outputs is then given
bY

The vuriables si ure continuous. Both the fading amplitudes in the first example and the inversion probabilities in the second example are continuous values. Since message-passing in the SPA is accomplished by passing functions of the destination variable, there would be some messages that are functions of the continuous s,. Dealing with a quantized representation of such a message would

require high complexity.

Possible short cycles irt the factor graph. From Fig. 1 , the variable nodes representing the channel states si have

degree U, which will lead to short cycles in the factor

graph if ZI is large and U. is small.

where Ii‘is constam with respect to y, s, and x.

As we will point out in the sequel, the FGEM algorithm can

Block binary source. Slepian-Wolf encoding refers to the address both of these problems.

joint compression of two correlated sources at different ter-

111. THEFACTOR GRAPH EM ALGORITHM

minals, without co-operation between them. An LDPC-based

Slepian-Wolf encoder may be set up along the lines described A. Review of the EM algorithm

in [15], [16]. Tbe two sources are binary and correlated, so Here we briefly introduce the EM Algorithm; detailed

they may be thought of as “noisy” versions a€ each other. introductions to the algorithm with examples can be found

One source is encoded independently, while the other source in P I , U71, U S ] .

is encoded as the syndrome of an LDPC code, and the decoder In maximum likelihood (ML) parameter estimation, the

must recover the second source from the first source and the problem can be stated as foIlows: given observations y,

syndrome by decoding the LDPC code. The observations y are a parameter 8, and a PDF f ~ ( y ; B )(called the likelihood

then the first (encoded independently) source, and the hidden function), find

variables x are the second (encoded in syndromes) source. The relationship between y and x is given by piJ = xij @nij,

8 = arg maxgfylo(y; 8).

where n.i, is a Bernoulli random variable with Pr(nij = 1)= That is, choose the value of B that makes the observation y

si. We furthermore assume that si is distributed uniformly on most likely. The difficulty is that this direct maximization may

the interval (0,0.5). The conditional probability mass function have very high complexity. However, in many cases, if the

91 I
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

observed variables y are augmented by hidden variables h, Furthermore, f ( h k I y;8 = 8) is obtained by marginalizing the maximization i s much easier to perform.' In this case, the f(y,h,0 = 8) over all h except h,, and then normalizing

e) EM algorithm may be used to iteratively calculate the ML with respect to hi.

estimate.

The marginalized and normalized PDF f(hk I y;13 =

To simplify the notation, for the remainder of the paper can be calculated with the SPA. This is done using a factor
we will drop the subscript notation far PDFs when it i s graph representing f(y,h,0 = 8),and there exists a message

unambiguous. That is, we will write f x ( x ) as f(z).

passing schedule to perform the exact calculation so long as

s Let f(y,h;8) represent the joint PDF of y and h, param- this factor graph is a tree [l].
eterized by 8. The EM Algorithm uses a two-step iterative Remark 3. Setting 8 = removes all the nodes 0 from

process, which proceeds as follows. Given an estimate 8 of 8, the factor graph for the factorization in (6), as though the 0

in the first step, we calculate

were "observed" to be 8.Thus, there exists a message-passing

4 Q(0;8 ) := E [log f(y, h;8)(y,B =

schedule so that f(hk 1 y:0 = 6 ) is obtained exactly by the
SPA, as long as the factor graph formed by f(y,h, S), with

1. =

f ( h I Y; 8 = 8)[logf ( Y ,h;e)]dh.

(4)

all variable nodes representing 8 removed, is a tree. Taking Remark 3 into account, the E-step is calculated in

This step is called the expectation step or E-step. In the second three steps:

e, step, we calculate a new estimate Bf of as follows:

1) Obtain the factor graph for f(y,h,B = g), which is a

8' = arg m a e Q(8; 8).

subgraph of the factor graph for f ( y , h,8).(We call this

(5 1

factor graph the E-step factor graph.)

e This step is called the maximization step or M-step. Subse-
quently, we assign := @, and return to the E-step, repeating these two steps until a stable estimate is obtained.
Remark 1. The estimates of 0 increase monotonically in

2) Using the SPA and an appropriate message-passing

schedule, obtain f { h k y;8 = 8) for each factor k E IC.

3) Using f(hk I y ; B

=

g), calculate

$1 E[log f ( y k ,hl;,Bk)ly,0 = for each factor k E K.

likelihood with respect to y [5]. That is, in every iteration, The last two points in this procedure can be calculated

independently with respect to each variable subset h,; that

is, locally at each factor in the E-step factor graph.

It is known that, if 8 is continuous, then the EM algorithm will converge at least to a local maximum in the space of a posteriori estimates. For discrete 8, the performance is usually very good as well.
Remark 2. If B is a random variable (i.e., there exists a PDF
f(0) so that f ( y , h ,6 ) can be written f ( y ,h I O)f(O)), then
the EM algorithm iterates toward the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate of 0 rattier than the maximum likelihood estimate. The monotonicity property of Remark 1 still applies to the MAP estimate.

B. The E-step on a factor graph

Suppose the PDF f(y,h,8 ) has a factorization

n fb:h, e) = f ( Y k ! hkr ek),

(6)

k€K

where K is an index set for the factors. Thanks to the
logarithm, (4) can be rewritten

4 Q ( 8 ;8) = E [log f ( ~ k h, k , &) 1 Y , 8 , (7)
kEK

where each expectation term under the sum in (7) may be
written

f(hk 1 Y , ~ = ~ ) l o g f ( Y k , h k , ~ k ) d h k .
'In the EM Algorithm literature, y is commonly called the incanrplefe duta. and {y,h} are jointly called the complete &la.

C. The M-step on a factor graph

e) Letting Q k ( 0 ; := Etlog f(y,, hk,6,) Iy, 8 = g], (7) can

be rewritten Kc1

&(e;8) = &I. Qk(@k;

(8)

k=l

The M-step finds the value of 8 that maximizes the function
&(e;@,and in this section we show that this maximization

can also be performed using a form of the SPA.

Firstly, we need to draw a factor graph representing Q(0;8),

or something equivalent. We will take exp(Q(8;8 ) ) ,and since

exp(4) is monotonic, the value of t9 that maximizes &(e;@)
e)). also maximizes exp(Q(8; So (8)becomes

n e,)). e x ~ ( Q ( 8 );) = e s ~ ( Q k ( o k ;

(9)

k€K

Remark 4. The terms exp(Qk(&;&)) each contain the same elements 8 k 8 as the terms logf(yk,hk,&). Thus,
exp(Q(0;8 ) ) has the same fucrorizariorz with respect to 8 as
f(Y,h>0). It follows from Remark 4 that we may draw an M-stepfac-
tor graph consisting of the nodes representing exp(Qk(8;8))
(corresponding to the factors containing 8 in the original factor graph), and all variable nodes corresponding to the variables
8. All variable nodes representing h (and, consequently, all factors that are not functions of B), may be removed. Using this M-step factor graph, the M-step may also be implemented
using the SPA, where operations over the ma-product semiring, where ma(.)replaces the usual addition [l I ] .

912
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Remark 5. If the M-step factor graph is a tree, it follows from [I 11 and [11 that the SPA returns the maximizing value of 0, thus exactly implementing the M-step.
Taking Remarks 4 and 5 into account, the M-step proceeds as follows on a factor graph:
e)), 1) Obtain the M-step factor graph for exp(&(B; which is a subgraph of the factor graph for f(y,h,0).
ef 2) Perform the SPA using the ma-product semiring over the M-step factor graph, obtaining which maximizes exp(Q(0;8)).
3) Retum 8+ to the E-step.

M-step factor graph
E-step factor graph
TtTWTTTTTTTFTT

To close this section. we make a note of the following, which follows from Remarks 3 and 5:
Remark 6, The EM algorithm can be exactly implemented on factor graphs containing cycles, so long as the E-step and M-step factor graphs are both trees.
In fact, Remark 6 solves the “short cycle” problem that we noted in the opening discussion. If the set of 0 is chosen appropriately, all these short cycles are broken.
D. Appi.oxii?iate EM Algorithms
The exact version of the factor graph EM algorithm is appropriatc, for example, for the decoding of convolutional codes in the presence of unknown parameters. However, the focus of this paper is on LDPC codes, for which the factor graph contains cycles in virtuaIly any natural formulation. Cycles in a factor graph do not prohibit the use of the SPA, so long as almost all of the cycles are very long; however, the results thus obtained are approximate. Thus, for any case in which the E-step or M-step factor graph contain cycles, we will call the resulting algorithm an approximate EM algorithm.
In a cycle-free factor graph, there is at least one “correct” message-passing schedule that allows the SPA to proceed exactly. Since cycles are present in the E-step factor graph
as a result of LDPC codes, there is already a conventional
message-passing schedule that we will use.
IV. EXAMPLES
We now derive FGEM algorithms for both example applications we mentioned in Section 2. As we mentioned, the channel states s are dealt with as parameters in the M-step, so the E-step and M-step factor graphs for both applications can be illustrated as in Fig. 2.
Assuming that the parameters 0 can be treated as random variables, a crucial step in the formulation of the EM algorithm is to select which variables will form h, and which variables will form 6’.For our two motivating examples, we will treat the hidden LDPC symbols x in place of h, and the channel states s in place of 8.For an LDPC code, it will become obvious that this is the best choice, since the decoding of LDPC symbols bears similarities to the E-step. However, in other systems, there may be reasons why a different assignment should be used, and in principle, the assignment can be arbitrary.

Fig. 2. An example factor graph for an LDPC code in a block fading
channel.

A. Block fading channel

For the EM algorithm, we set h := x, the set of code symbols, and B := s, the set of channel states. We then proceed as follows:

In the E-step, for some channel state estimate 5, we
obtain f ( l c i j I y; s = S). Since the SPA (approximately)
1 calcuhtes f(zij y ; s = S), the E-step is equivalent to
running the SPA on the assumption that s = S, and
obtaining probabilities of xij for all i:j at the end,
converting from log-likelihood ratios if necessary.
Note that the channel factors are now indexed by the
subscript ij,since they correspond to channel output yij.
Thus, to finish the E-step, the function &k(Bk; 8) becomes
Qij(si;a), and is given by

I Q i j ( s i ; S ) = :5 - 2 y i j s i E [ ~ i jy,s = 81.

I However, note that E [ X Q y 7 s = S ] can be easily
calculated from f(xij 1 y ; s : 5), which is calculated

by the decoder in the E-step.
Let & j := E [ q j I y , s = a]. The M-step factor graph

is composed of all the channel state nodes and their

attached factors, which now represent Q i j ( s i ; C). Taking

the Rayleigh prior (1) of the states si into account, the

maximizing values of 32 are given by

cy=, :3

71 =

Wjfij

As a simplification note, the M-step only needs the soft decisions & j , which is a scalar, and the E-step only needs the estimates gi, which are also scalars.
B. Blockwise binaiy source We again set h := x, the set of code symbols, and 0 :=s,
the set of channel states. We then proceed as follows:

913
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In the E-step, for some channel state estimate S, we
obtain I f(sij y ; s = a). Since the SPA (approximately) calculates I f ( q j y ; s = E), the E-step is equivalent to
running the SPA on the assumption that s = S, and obtaining probabilities of sij for all i , j at the end, converting from log-likelihood ratios if necessary. To finish the E-step, let ~ i :j= f(sij= yij Iy;s = S), that
is, 7;j is the overall probability that the symbol agrees
with the observation. The function Q k ( 8 k ; 8) is replaced
by Q i j ( s i ; S ) , where

V

21

Q i j ( s z ; S ) = l o g ( l - s , ) ~ . ~ i+jl o g s i C ( I -7ij)

j=L

j=1

The M-step factor graph is composed of all the channel state nodes and their attached factors, which now represent Qij(si;a). The maximization i s given by

that is, an average over the “soft” error count. Again, note that the M-step only requires the scalar yi~ij, and the E-step only requires the estimates Si.
Remark 7. In both of these examples, the only values passed between the state nodes si and the hidden variables zij are scalars. Thus, we have avoided the complexity of dealing with continuous random variables under the SPA, which addresses the “continuous variables” problem from the opening discussion.’
V. RESULTS
For the sake of space, we include results for the block fading case only. Results for the block binary source will be given in the conference presentation.
The FGEM algorithm was appIied to a Rayleigh block fading channel, and a (3,6)-regular rate-1/2 LDPC code was used for transmission. In Fig. 3, simulation results are given for an LDPC code with U = 10 and U = 264, for a total frame length of 2640 symbols. The results for the factor graph EM algorithm are compared with a one-stage detector which estimates the amplitude based on the received energy (i.e., without joint estimation-decoding), and a detector which assumes memoryless Rayleigh fading, as in 1141. Significant
gains are realized using the factor graph EM algorithm.
REFERENCES
E R. Kschischang, B. I. Frey, and H.-A. toefiger, “Factor Graphs and
the Sum-Product Algorithm.” lEEE Trans. Infomr. Theay, vol. 47, no. 2. pp. 498-519, Feb. 2001. A. P. Worihen and W. E. Stark, “Unified design of iterative receivers wing factor graphs,” IEEE Tram. !illfann. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 843-849, Feb. 2001. A. W. Ecldord. F. R.Kschischang, and S. Pasuparhy, “Analysis of lowdensity parity-check decoding over the Gdbert-Ellionchannel,” to appear in IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory. H.-A. Loeliger, “Some remarks on factor graphs,” Proc.3rd 1nt. Sytnp. on Turbo Codes and Relaied Topics, Brest, France, pp. 111-115, 2003. A. Dempster, N Laird, and D. Rubin, “Maximum likelihood from incompleie data via the EM algorithm,” J Roy. Sraf. Soc. B, vol. 39, pp. 1-38, 1977.

o One-stage estimation
+ Memoryless assumption

Y

1 ob 3 3.2 3.4 36 3.0 4 4 2 4.4 4.6 4.0 5
SNR (dB)

Fig. 3. Experimental resultfor Y = 10,U = 264.

L. B. Nelson and H. V. Poor, “Iterative multiuser receivers for CDMA channels: an EM-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Comniitn., vol. 44.no.
12. pp. 1700-1710, Dec. 1996.
H. Zamin-Jafarian and S . Pasupatby, “Adaptive MLSDE using the EM Algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Conintun.,vol. 47, no. E, pp. 1181-1193, Aug.
1999. A. Logothetis and V. Krishnamurthy, “Expectation maximization dgorithms for MAP estimation of jump Markov linear systems,’’ IEEE T m u . Signal Processing, vol. 47. no. 8, pp. 2139-2156, Aug. 1999. M. Nissila and S.Pasupathy. “‘AdaptiveBayesian and EM-based detcctors for frequency-selective fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Con~mun., vol. 51, no. 8, Aug. 2003. C. Herzet, V. Ramon, L. Vandendorpe, and M. Moeneclaey. “EM algorithm based W g synchronization in turbo receivers,” Proc. 2003 ICASSP, Hong Kong. 2003. S . M. Aji and R.I. McEliece, ‘The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inform. T/ieory,vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325-343, Mar.2000,
R. J. McEliece and W. E. Stark, “Channels with block interference,”
IEEE Trans. Iiljbmi. T l w o ~v,ol. 30, no. 1, pp. 44-53, Jan. 1984.
J. Dauwels and H.-A. Loeliger, “Phase estimation by message passing,” 2004 IEEE Inrernatiotd Conferelice on Communications, to appear. J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code optimization of iow-density parity-check codes on Rayleigh fading channels,” lEEE 1. Sel. Areas in Comniitri.,vol. 19,no, 5 , pp. 924934,
May 2001. D. Schonberg, K. Ramhandran, and S . S. Pradhan, “LDPC codes
can approach the Slepian Wolf bound for general binary sources,” 40ih Aitnuul Allerton Corference on Coriiriiiinication, Coflrml, urd Computing. Monticello, Illinois, USA, pp. 576-585, 2002.
S. S. Pmlhan and K. Ramchandtan, “Distributed sonrce coding us-
ing syndromes (DISCUS): Design and consuuction,” lEEE Trans. Infarm. Theory, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 626-643, Mar. 2003. T. K. Moon, ‘*TheEM Algoridvn in signal processing;’ IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 47-60. Nov. 1996. G. 1. McLachlan, The EM Algon‘rhm and Erfensions,New York Wfley. 1977.

914
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:13:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

