534

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 6, JUNE 2005

Flexible Construction of Irregular Partitioned Permutation LDPC Codes With Low Error Floors
Jingyu Kang, Pingyi Fan, Member, IEEE, and Zhigang Cao, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Irregular partitioned permutation (IPP) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been recently introduced to facilitate hardware implementation of belief propagation (BP) decoders. In this letter, we present a new method to construct IPP LDPC codes with great flexibility in the selection of code parameters. Meanwhile, small stopping sets are avoided in the code construction, thus good error floor performance can be achieved.
Index Terms— Error floor, low-density parity-check codes, permutation matrix, stopping set.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have received intensive research for their capacity-approaching performance and highly parallelizable decoder architecture. Some fully parallel decoders have been implemented for short blocklength irregular LDPC codes, e.g., in [1]. However, for the codes with larger block size, fully parallel implementation would be very difficult due to the routing congestion caused by a drastic increase in the number of node connections.
Recently, the class of irregular partitioned permutation (IPP) LDPC codes along with its partly parallel decoder architecture has been introduced [2], which is based upon the SFT approach [3] for regular LDPC codes. The special structure of IPP LDPC codes greatly facilitates the hardware implementation of decoders. However, with the SFT-based construction, the freedom in the parameter selection is limited due to the nature of the SFT approach, and the performance of the resulting codes is hampered by relatively high error floors.
In this letter, we present a new method to construct IPP LDPC codes, which provides more freedom in the selection of code parameters than the SFT-based method. Another advantage of our method is that the number of small stopping sets [4] in the Tanner graph of the code is reduced. Therefore, it is expected that better error floor performance can be achieved compared to that of the SFT-based IPP codes.
We begin this letter with a brief review of IPP LDPC codes and the SFT-based construction in Section II, then present an analysis on the partitioned permutation approach in Section III and propose our code construction method in Section IV. Finally, the simulation results are given.
Manuscript received October 12, 2004. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Marc Fossorier. This work was supported by the Nature Science Foundation of China under grant No. 60132010.
The authors are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China (e-mail: kangjy98@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {fpy, czg-dee}@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2005.06008.

II. A BRIEF REVIEW OF IPP LDPC CODES
In [2], the parity-check matrix H of an IPP LDPC code is constructed by first generating a j × k global matrix M, then replacing each 1 in M with a p × p permutation matrix and each 0 in M with a p×p zero matrix, where each permutation matrix is obtained by cyclically shifting the columns of an identity matrix by a particular number. Thus the size of H is jp × kp and the degree distributions in H are the same as those in M.
The performance of codes constructed above is determined by the design of the global matrix and the selection of cyclic shifts. In [2], the degree distributions in the global matrix M are optimized with the method in [5], and the SFT approach is employed to decide the cyclic shift of each permutation matrix. The SFT approach is described as follows. The cyclic shift corresponding to position (s, t) of M is bsat mod p, where the integer generators a, b are chosen such that a has multiplicative order k, i.e., k is the smallest positive integer satisfying ak ≡ 1 mod p, and b has multiplicative order j. Moreover, p is required to be a prime number.
The SFT-based method works well in some cases, while for most combinations of j, k and p, there does not exist an available pair of generators (a, b), thus the flexibility in the selection of code parameters is limited. In order to avoid this problem and enhance the error floor performance, we will present a new code construction method. To do so, we shall analyze the partitioned permutation approach first.
III. ANALYSIS OF CODE CONSTRUCTION USING PARTITIONED PERMUTATION
For clarity, some definitions are given first. Definition 1 (closed path, fold, cycle): In a Tanner graph, a closed path is a sequence of connected nodes (n0, n1, · · · , n ), where n0 = n ; in this closed path, if ni = ni+2 (mod ), we say that there is a fold in this closed path on the edge between nodes ni and ni+1 (mod ). A cycle is a closed path with no repeated edges. Because a matrix uniquely corresponds to a Tanner graph, we will use the term “cycle (or closed path) in a matrix” as an equivalent to “cycle (or closed path) in the Tanner graph of a matrix” in the rest of this letter. With the partitioned permutation approach introduced in Section II, the lengths of cycles in the parity-check matrix H are determined by the structure of the global matrix M and the cyclic shifts of permutation matrices. Two theorems are presented in this section to clarify their relations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. D10o8w9n-l7o7ad9e8d/0o5n$2J0u.n0e023c,20220605atI1E2E:1E2:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KANG et al.: FLEXIBLE CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR PARTITIONED PERMUTATION LDPC CODES WITH LOW ERROR FLOORS

535

Theorem 1: Each cycle in Hjp×kp corresponds to a closed the permutation corresponding to entry (c, v) of M can be path in Mj×k with the same length as the cycle, and there represented as πc,v = σsc,v . By using (1), the permutation

exists no folds on any edge in this closed path.

corresponding to the whole CP is

Proof: Given two successive nodes c and v in the cycle, 0 ≤ c < jp, 0 ≤ v < kp, which are a check node and a bit

ΦP = σsc0,v0 · σp−sc0,v1 · σsc1,v1 · σp−sc1,v2 · · ·

node, respectively, the entry (c, v) of H is 1, indicating that the entry ( c/p , v/p ) of M is 1, where x is the integer part of x, thus there is an edge between check node c/p and

σ · σ scn−1,vn−1

p−scn−1 ,v0

= σsc0,v0 −sc0,v1 +sc1,v1 −sc1,v2 +···+scn−1,vn−1 −scn−1,v0 (mod p)

bit node v/p in M. With this in mind, it is trivial to prove the first part of the theorem. Meanwhile, if a closed path in

σS

(2)

M contains a fold on one edge, it will not cause cycles in Here, we say S as the total cyclic shift of P. For an arbitrary

H because all the column weights and row weights in the permutation matrices are 1.
In light of theorem 1, only the closed paths in M with no folds will cause cycles in the resulting matrix H. Therefore, any closed path mentioned in the rest of this letter refers to a closed path with no folds, and is abbreviated as a CP.

element i in the set (0, 1, · · · , p − 1), the smallest integer

satisfying lengths of

the the

equation cycles in

ΦP (i) = i is H are L = 2n ·

=
p (p,S)

p (p,S)
.

,

hence

the

With theorem 2, we can define the length expansion factor

(LEF)

of

P

to

be

p (p,S)

,

which

is

1

iff

S

is

0.

When

p

is

a

prime number, the LEF must be 1 or p.

If there is a CP in the global matrix M, it will result in

cycles in H after matrix expansion using permutation matrices.

In [6], Fan had proposed a theorem in a general form on

the relation between CPs in the global matrix and cycles in

the resulting parity-check matrix. He considered the following

matrix

⎡

S0,0

H = ⎢⎢⎢⎣

S1,0 ...

⎤

S0,1 · · · S0,n−1

S1,1 ...

···

S1,n−1 ...

⎥⎥⎦⎥ ,

Sr−1,0 Sr−1,1 · · · Sr−1,n−1

IV. CODE CONSTRUCTION
In [4], small stopping sets in the Tanner graph of an irregular LDPC code have been shown harmful to the code’s error floor performance. Therefore, to lower the error floor of an irregular LDPC code, small stopping sets should be avoided in the code construction. In [7], Tian et. al proposed an algorithm to reduce the number of small stopping sets by avoiding the generation of cycles with small approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) in the code construction, and the effectiveness of this algorithm has been rigorously proved

where Si,j is a permutation matrix. More general than IPP
LDPC codes, the permutation described by Si,j is not required to be cyclic. The matrices Si1,j1 , Si1,j2 , Si2,j2 , Si2,j3 , · · · , Sik,j1 , where i1 = i2 = · · · = ik = i1 and j1 = j2 = · · · = jk = j1, correspond to a CP of length 2k in the global
matrix. According to Fan’s theorem, the lengths of cycles in

by Ramamoorthy et. al in [8]. In this letter, similar ACE
conditioning as in [7] is followed. The definition of ACE is
given as: Definition 2 (ACE): The ACE of a length-2n cycle in the
Tanner graph of an LDPC code is in=1(di − 2), where di is the degree of the i-th bit node in the cycle.

H resulting from this CP are 2k times the lengths of the cycles Although ACE is defined for cycles, this definition can be

in the permutation described by

naturally generalized to CPs.

T = Si1,j1 (Si1,j2 )−1Si2,j2 (Si2,j3 )−1 · · · Sik,jk (Sik,j1 )−1. (1)

Given a CP in M with ACE = a and LEF = f , it will cause cycles in H with ACE = f a because the number of

Note that a cycle in a permutation is defined differently from

a cycle in a Tanner graph. For a permutation π of the set

(0, 1, · · · , p − 1), we say that there is a cycle of length in π

if π (i) = i.

Fan’s theorem can be straightforwardly applied to the case

of IPP LDPC codes, where each permutation matrix is speci-

fied by a cyclic shift. To be specific, we obtain the following

theorem, which is the special case of Fan’s theorem with IPP

LDPC codes and is important in our code construction.

Theorem 2: For a length-2n CP in the global matrix Mj×k, which is denoted as P and represented as the sequence of

nodes (v0, c0, v1, c1, · · · , vn−1, cn−1, v0), where vi and ci are

bit nodes and check nodes, respectively, 0 ≤ vi < k, 0 ≤

ci < j, if the cyclic shift corresponding to position (c, v) of

M is sc,v, then the cycles in Hjp×kp resulting from P are

all

of

length

L

=

2n ·

p (p,S)

,

where

S

≡

sc0 ,v0

− sc0,v1

+

sc1,v1 − sc1,v2 + · · · + scn−1,vn−1 − scn−1,v0 (mod p), and

(p, S) denotes the greatest common divisor of p and S.

bit nodes of any degree in a resulting cycle is f times as that in the CP. Therefore, to avoid the generation of cycles with small ACEs, any CP in M with a small ACE should have an LEF at least greater than 1, or equivalently, the total cyclic shift S of this CP cannot be zero. Further conditioning on S will result in a larger LEF.
Having outlined the main idea, now we present the proposed construction method.
First, the global matrix M is generated which closely matches the degree distributions optimized with the method in [5]. In the generation of M, CPs with ACE = 0 should be avoided because a CP of zero ACE will cause zero-ACE cycles in H, which are very harmful to the code’s error floor performance.
Then, the CPs in M whose ACEs are smaller than some predetermined thresholds, which we call illegal CPs, are detected. The detection can be done very efficiently with the aid of the following matrix [9]

i.e.,

Proof: σp =

Let σ be the permutation with cyclic shift 1, Aueth, orwizehdelriceenseediussetlhimeiteiddteon: YtiotnyseipUenrimv. uDtoawtniolonad, edthoennJune

23,2026

at

12:12:35

A
UTC

=
from

IEMOEEjjTX××pjklore.M ORekjs××trkkictions,

apply.

536

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 9, NO. 6, JUNE 2005

10-1

matrix are optimized with the method in [5], with a maximum

bit node degree of 11. The sizes of permutation matrices for

10-2

the two codes are p = 97 and p = 257, corresponding to the

Bit Error Rate (BER)

10-3

block length of 3104 and 8224, respectively.

In the code construction, both codes are made free of length-

10-4

4 cycles by setting the ACE threshold of length-4 CPs to

infinity, while for CPs of length 6 to 18, the ACE thresholds

10-5

are chosen in a best-effort manner. Inspired by the results in

10-6

SFT-IPP p=97

SSC-IPP p=97

10-7

SFT-IPP p=257

SSC-IPP p=257

Regular 3100

10-8

0.6 0.8 1

1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

2

2.2 2.4

[7], all these thresholds are initially set to 4, then the illegal CPs are detected and cyclic shifts are searched. Several times of adjustment shall be made to the ACE thresholds such that as many CPs as possible could be detected as illegal, with the constraint that a set of cyclic shifts satisfying all the

Eb/N0(dB)

inequalities could be found by the computer search. In this

way, for the two SSC-IPP codes with p = 97 and p = 257

Fig. 1. Performance comparison of several rate-1/2 LDPC codes.

in this letter, the ACE thresholds for CPs of length 6 to 18

are selected to be “5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 4, 4” and “6, 6, 6, 6, 5, 5, 5”,

where O denotes a zero matrix. The j + k rows or columns

of A correspond to the j + k nodes in the Tanner graph of M. Letting a(rnt ) denote an entry of An, we have

j+k−1 j+k−1

ar(nt ) =

···

ari1 ai1i2 · · · ain−1t.

i1 =0

in−1 =0

respectively. As benchmarks, two SFT-IPP LDPC codes are constructed
with the same global matrix and the same block lengths as the SSC-IPP codes. Also, a rate-1/2, girth-6 regular LDPC code with length 3100 and bit node degree 3 is constructed using Mackay’s construction 1A [10]. The bit error rate (BER) performance of these five codes on binary-input additive white

Thus, if there exists a length-n path between nodes r and t, Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel is shown in Fig. 1. In the

there must be a nonzero term in the above summation, and vice simulation, belief propagation decoding with a maximum of

versa. Since a length-2n CP is composed of two length-n paths 200 iterations is performed.

between two nodes, with the help of matrix A and its powers, It can be seen in Fig. 1 that in the waterfall regions, the illegal CPs in M can be detected very fast. Additionally, SSC-IPP codes and SFT-IPP codes have almost identical the global matrix M is typically very small, which further performance because they have the same degree distributions

reduces the complexity of the detection. From each illegal CP, we can obtain an inequality S = 0,
where S is the total cyclic shift of the CP. This inequality imposes a constraint on the cyclic shifts of the involved permutation matrices. Once the detection is completed, the

and block lengths. While in low-BER regions, SSC-IPP codes
significantly outperform their SFT-IPP counterparts, and the BER floors of both SSC-IPP codes are below 10−7, which
are comparable to the results in [7].

whole set of inequalities are established, and a set of cyclic shifts satisfying all the inequalities can be searched randomly

REFERENCES

by computer. It should be noted that with a large number of

illegal CPs, the computer search may fail to find a set of cyclic

shifts satisfying all the inequalities. Therefore, to reduce the

number of illegal CPs while keeping the most important ones,

we limit our consideration only to CPs of length ≤ 18. Also,

the ACE thresholds are selected carefully.

In our code construction, p is not required to be a prime

number. Nonetheless, we prefer to select it to be prime,

because

when

p

is

prime,

the

LEF

p (p,S)

must

be

p

under

the condition of S = 0, hence a large LEF is obtained

without further conditioning on S. Moreover, choosing p to be

prime does not impair the freedom in the parameter selection

because the size of M can be adjusted flexibly according to

p. Therefore, even if p is chosen to be prime, our construction

[1] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mw 1-gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[2] D. E. Hocevar, “Ldpc code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), May 2003, pp. 2708–2711.
[3] D. Sridhara, T. Fuja, and R. Tanner, “Low density parity check codes from permutation matrices,” in Conf. on Info. Sciences and Sys., Mar. 2001.
[4] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[5] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[6] J. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, 2000, pp. 543–546.

method still provides more freedom in the parameter selection than the SFT-based approach.
The proposed method is named the stopping set conditioning (SSC) method in contrast to the SFT method.

[7] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Construction of irregular ldpc codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), May 2003, pp. 3125–3129.
[8] A. Ramamoorthy and R. Wesel, “Analysis of an algorithm for irregular ldpc code construction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inform. Theory (ISIT), June 2004, p. 69.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

[9] J. A. McGowan and R. C. Williamson, “Loop removal from ldpc codes,” in Proc. IEEE Info. Theory Workshop (ITW), Mar. 2003, pp. 230–233.

Two rate-1/2 SSC-IPP LDPC codes are constructed using [10] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

a

16 × 32

gloAubtahlormizeadtrliicxen. sTedheusdeeligmriteeed

tdoi:sYtornibseuitUionnivs. DionwtnhloeadgeldobonalJune

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, 23,2026 at 12:12:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Mar.

1999.

