IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

911

A Hardware Gaussian Noise Generator Using the Wallace Method
Dong-U Lee, Member, IEEE, Wayne Luk, Member, IEEE, John D. Villasenor, Senior Member, IEEE, Guanglie Zhang, and Philip H. W. Leong, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We describe a hardware Gaussian noise generator based on the Wallace method used for a hardware simulation system. Our noise generator accurately models a true Gaussian probability density function even at high values. We evaluate its properties using: 1) several different statistical tests, including the chi-square test and the Anderson–Darling test and 2) an application for decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Our design is implemented on a Xilinx Virtex-II XC2V4000-6 field-programmable gate array (FPGA) at 155 MHz; it takes up 3% of the device and produces 155 million samples per second, which is three times faster than a 2.6-GHz Pentium-IV PC. Another implementation on a Xilinx Spartan-III XC3S200E-5 FPGA at 106 MHz is two times faster than the software version. Further improvement in performance can be obtained by concurrent execution: 20 parallel instances of the noise generator on an XC2V4000-6 FPGA at 115 MHz can run 51 times faster than software on a 2.6-GHz Pentium-IV PC.
Index Terms—Channel coding, communication channels, field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), Gaussian noise, highperformance, Monte Carlo methods, reconfigurable-computing, technology-mapping.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE AVAILABILITY of high quality Gaussian random numbers is critical to many simulation, graphics and Monte Carlo applications. Currently, the majority of such simulations are performed using systems based on microprocessors, digital signal processors, or other software-programmable devices. In these systems, the trigonometric, exponential, and other functions involved in many of the methods for obtaining Gaussian random variables can be performed using software libraries [1]. As a result, not much research has been reported concerning efficient hardware methods for implementation of Gaussian noise generators. However, well-optimized hardware implementations can often operate one or more orders
Manuscript received August 20, 2004; revised March 23, 2005. This work was supported in part by Xilinx Inc., by the U.K. Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council under Grants GR/N 66599 and GR/R 31409, by the U.S. Office of Naval Research, and by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China, under Project CUHK4333/02E.
D. Lee was with the Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K. He is now with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90024 USA (e-mail: dongu@icsl.ucla.edu).
W. Luk is with the Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London 2SW 2BT, U.K. (e-mail: w.luk@imperial.ac.uk).
J. D. Villasenor is with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90024 USA (e-mail: villa@icsl.ucla.edu).
G. Zhang and P. H. W. Leong are with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong (e-mail: glzhang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, phwl@cse.cuhk.edu.hk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2005.853615

of magnitude faster than similarly optimized software implementations. Recent advances in field-programmable gate array (FPGA) technology have substantially improved performance and cost effectiveness of hardware implementations, and they provide a strong motivation for us to reexamine the issue of Gaussian noise generation in hardware.
The work described here is originally motivated by ongoing advances in communications relating to channel codes [2], and in particular by the development of new generations of channel codes that operate on very long (thousands to tens of thousands of bits each) blocks of data. For these codes, it is often desirable to perform simulations of extremely large numbers of blocks in order to assess the bit-error rate (BER) performance at rates as low as 10 .
There are many other applications in which very large simulations using Gaussian noise are valuable as well. These include financial modeling [3], simulation of economic systems [4], and molecular dynamics simulations [5]. For all of these applications, hardware-based simulation offers the potential to speed up simulation by several orders of magnitude, but is feasible only if suitably fast and high-quality noise generators can be implemented. In principle, one could generate the noise samples on a PC and transfer them to the hardware device performing the simulation. However in such approaches, generation of the noise samples is often the performance bottleneck. Hence, it is desirable to have a hardware noise generator. On-chip noise generation is significantly faster and does not suffer from transfer overheads.
In addition, since deviation from an ideal Gaussian probability density function (pdf) can degrade simulation results, very large simulations have stringent requirements on the quality of the pdf in the tails. Samples that lie at large multiples of (standard deviation) away from the mean are rare, but they are also exactly the noise realizations that are most likely to induce events of high interest in understanding the behavior of the overall system. To accurately obtain good characteristics in the tails requires the combination of: 1) an underlying method that creates high values with the proper frequency and 2) a hardware implementation of the method that preserves the requisite precision at all stages to ensure that high behavior is not compromised.
The principal contribution of this paper is a hardware Gaussian noise generator based on the Wallace method [6] that offers quality suitable for simulations involving very large numbers of noise samples. The noise generator occupies approximately 3% of the resources of a Xilinx Virtex-II

1063-8210/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

912

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

XC2V4000-6 FPGA device, while producing over 155 million samples with their direct table look-up approach, one would

samples per second. The key contributions of our work include: lead to an impractically large table.

• a hardware architecture for the Wallace method; • exploration of hardware implementations of the proposed
architecture targeting both advanced high-speed FPGAs and low-cost FPGAs; • evaluation of the proposed approach using several different statistical tests, including the chi-square test and the Anderson–Darling (A-D) test, as well as through application to a large communications simulation involving low-density parity-check (LDPC) channel codes [7].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II covers background material and previous work. Section III provides an overview of the Wallace method. Section IV describes our Wallace architecture, and discusses how each of its steps can be handled in a hardware implementation. Section V describes technology-specific implementation of the hardware architecture. Section VI discusses evaluation and results, and Section VII offers conclusions and future work.

Fan et al. [17] present a hardware Gaussian noise generator based on the polar method [11] in conjunction with the central limit theorem. Their design is implemented on an Altera Mercury EP1M120F484C7 FPGA; it takes up 336 logic elements and has a clock speed of 73 MHz generating a sample every clock. The polar method is a variant of the Box–Muller method and is a class of the rejection-acceptance methods, hence the output rate is not constant. In order to overcome this problem, they employ a first-in first-out (FIFO) buffer with the read speed set to half of the write speed.
The drawback of the hardware designs mentioned above are revealed by statistical tests applied to evaluate the noise samples produced. The authors carry out relative error comparisons between the ideal Gaussian pdf and the obtained pdf for a small number of samples and limited maximum value. Such tests are not enough to ensure the quality of the noise samples; one should thoroughly apply well known goodness-of-fit tests such as the chi-square test and the A-D test over large numbers of

samples. Designs which fail such statistical tests are inadequate

II. BACKGROUND

for high quality hardware communications simulations such as LDPC codes. This issue is discussed in more detail in

Most methods for generating random Gaussian variables are Section VI.

based on transformations or operations on uniform random In [18], we present a hardware Gaussian noise generator

variables. Widely used methods include various rejection-ac- based on the Box–Muller method and central limit theorem. ceptance methods [8]–[10], the use of the central limit theorem The idea is similar to [14], but we employ more sophisticated [11], the inversion method [12] and the Box–Muller method approximation techniques for the mathematical functions of the

[13]. While there are many software implementations of these Box–Muller method, resulting in significantly more statistically

methods, there is little previous work on digital hardware accurate noise samples. The design occupies 2514 slices, two

Gaussian noise generation.

block RAMs and eight MULT18X18s (18 18 embedded

The rejection-acceptance methods are popular in software ap- multiplier blocks) on a Xilinx Virtex-II XC2V4000-6 FPGA.

proaches. However, they contain conditional loops such that the It operates at 133 MHz generating a noise sample every clock

output rates are not constant, which is undesirable in a hardware and passes the statistical tests widely used for testing normality

simulation environment. While in principle the central limit the- discussed in Section VI.

orem can be used to produce Gaussian samples if a suitable All of the methods described above produce normal variables

number of samples are involved, in practice an impractically by performing operations on uniform variables. In contrast,

large number of samples would be required to achieve an ac- Wallace proposes an algorithm using an evolving pool of

curate representation of the ideal Gaussian pdf.

normal variables to generate additional normal variables [6].

The Box–Muller method, either alone or in combination with The approach draws its inspiration from uniform random

the central limit theorem, has been the focus of most efforts number generators that generate one or more new uniform

in hardware implementation. For example, Boutillon et al. variables from a set of previously generated uniform variables.

[14] present a hardware Gaussian noise generator based on the Given a set of normally distributed random variables, a new set

Box–Muller algorithm in conjunction with the central limit of normally distributed random variables can be generated by

theorem. Their design occupies 437 logic cells on an Altera applying a linear transformation. Brent [19] has implemented

Flex 10K100EQC240-1 FPGA, and outputs 24.5 million noise a fast vectorized Gaussian random number generator using the

samples per second at a clock speed of 98 MHz. Recently, the Wallace method on the Fujitsu VP2200 and VPP300 vector

“Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) Core 1.0” [15] has processors. In [20], Brent and Rüb outline possible problems

been released by Xilinx, which is based on the Boutillion et al. associated with the Wallace method and discuss ways of

architecture.

avoiding them.

Chen et al. [16] use a cummulative distribution function

(cdf) conversion table to transform uniform random variables

to Gaussian random variables. They have implemented the Gaussian noise generator as part of a readback-signal gener-

III. WALLACE METHOD

ator on a Xilinx Virtex-E XCV1000E FPGA at 70 MHz. The Wallace proposes a fast algorithm for generating normally

method they employ is basically the inversion method [12] distributed pseudorandom numbers which generates the target

implemented with a look-up table. However, the number of distributions directly using their maximal-entropy properties

table entries are insufficient. To produce high quality noise [6]. This algorithm is particularly suitable for high throughput

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: HARDWARE GAUSSIAN NOISE GENERATOR USING THE WALLACE METHOD

913

Fig. 1. Overview of the Wallace method.

hardware implementation since no transcendental functions

such as ,

or

are required.

An overview of the Wallace method is described in Fig. 1.

It takes a pool of

normally distributed random num-

bers from the normal distribution. These values are normalized

so that their average squared value is one. In transformation

steps, numbers are treated as a vector , and transformed

into new numbers from the components of the vector

where is an orthogonal matrix. If the original

values are normally distributed, then so are the new values.

Furthermore, this transformation preserves the sum of squares.

The process of generating a new pool of normally distributed

random numbers is called a “pass.” After a pass, a pool of new

Gaussian random numbers is formed. As there are variables

in the data pool, transformation steps are performed during

each pass. A -vector is multiplied with the orthogonal ma-

trix in performing a transformation step.

As stated by Wallace, it is desirable that any value in the pool

should eventually contribute to every value in the pools formed

after several passes. In Wallace’s original method, the old pool

is treated as an -by- array stored in row-major order, and the

new pass is treated as an -by- array stored in column major

order. Hence, each pass effectively transposes the values in the

pool. If is odd, the transposition is sufficient to ensure eventual

mixing of the values. However if is even, transposition alone

is not sufficient. We describe in Section IV how we overcome

this problem to reduce correlation even further.

The initial values in the pool are normalized so that their av-

erage squared value is one. Because is orthogonal, the sub-

sequent passes do not alter the sum of the squares. This would

be a defect, since if

are independent samples from

the normal distribution, we would expect

to have a

Fig. 2. Overview of our Gaussian noise generator architecture based on the Wallace method. The triangle in Stage 4 is a constant coefficient multiplier.

chi-squared distribution . In order to overcome this defect, a variate from the previous pool is used to approximate a random

IV. ARCHITECTURE

sample from the distribution. A scaling factor is intro- This section provides an overview of the hardware design for

duced to ensure that the sum of the squares of the values in the the Wallace method, which involves a four-stage hardware ar-

pool is , the random sample.

chitecture shown in Fig. 2. The implementation of this archi-

One concern of the Wallace method is the issue of correla- tecture in FPGA technology will be presented in Section V. In

tions given the use of previous outputs to generate new outputs. Fig. 2, the select signals for the multiplexors and the clock en-

This can be problematic in the case of realizations with large ab- able signals for the registers are omitted for simplicity.

solute values lying in the tails of the Gaussian, since each value In our design illustrated in Fig. 2, we choose

and

contributes values in the subsequent block, values in the

resulting in a pool size of 1024. Although one can

next block, and so on with diminishing influence. With proper choose any and , in this work, we follow Wallace’s orig-

choice of parameters such as pool size and transformation size, inal description. On-chip, true dual read/write port synchronous

the effect of these correlations can be minimized for a given set RAM is used to implement the pool. The dual-port RAM allows

of requirements with respect to number of noise samples, tail two values to be read and written simultaneously, improving the

accuracy, and noise quality.

memory bandwidth.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

914

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

As all the variables from the pool are used to generate the new pseudo random numbers, the indexes should cover all the numbers in the pool and at the same time reduce the correlations between them. The addresses which index the pool are started from a random origin “start,” stepped by a random odd “stride” and XOR is performed with a random “mask.” The combination of these three operations is critical to achieve good mixing between the Gaussian samples in the pool. Our tests show that if one of them is not performed, it causes degradation in the overall Gaussian noise quality.
In order to achieve better mixing of the Gaussian random number generator, more pass types can be used during a pass by introducing different orthogonal matrices. As in Wallace’s original implementation, two orthogonal matrices and are chosen for our design

Fig. 3. Transformation circuit of Stage 3. The square boxes are registers. The select signals for the multiplexors and the clock enable signals for the registers are omitted for simplicity.

During a pass, is used for first half and is used for the second half of the pass. As the elements of the matrices and are only 1 or 1, only simple integer addition and shift operations are required. The Gaussian random variables in the pool are held as 24 bit two’s complement integers. For the given set of four values , , , to be transformed, and with our choice of and , the new values , , , can be calculated from the old ones as follows:

B. Second Stage
This stage generates the addresses for the four values , , , from start, stride, and mask. The four addresses are calculated as follows:

start mask

(3)

start stride mask

(4)

start stride

mask

(5)

(1) (2)

where

. Note that the operations

above are performing the actual transformations, hence there is

no need to store and .

start stride

mask

(6)

The multiplication by two is implemented simply by a left shift, and the multiplication by three is implemented by a left shift followed by an addition. This addressing scheme ensures that the correlations between variables are kept at a minimum.

C. Third Stage

A. First Stage

This stage involves the most interesting challenge: efficiently performing the actual transformation. This stage contains the

This stage involves generation of the uniformly distributed realizations start, stride and mask. While traditional linear feedback shift registers (LFSRs) [21] are sufficient as a uniform random number generator (URNG), Tausworthe URNGs [22] offer better randomness with modest hardware cost. The Tausworthe URNG we employ follows the algorithm presented in [22]. It combines three LFSR based random number generators to obtain improved statistical properties, generates a 32-bit uniform random number per clock, and has a period of around 2 . Since we use a pool size of 1024, 10 bits are needed for the three variables. Since stride needs to be odd at all times, we concatenate a one after the least significant bit. Hence, for each pass, altogether 29 bits are used for start, stride, and mask.

“Pool RAM” which holds the pool of 1024 Gaussian random variables. Dual-port RAM is used to implement the pool. Since each variable in the pool is 24 bits, the total size of the pool is
bits. The “init Pool ROM” and the counter are used to initialize the pool with the original pool contents when the reset signal is set. This ROM is single-ported and has the same size as the pool. The contents of this ROM are generated in software using the Box–Muller method, and the variables are normalized so that their sum of squares is equal to one.
Fig. 3 shows how we perform the transformation steps described in (1) and (2). The timing diagram of this circuit and the “Pool RAM” is illustrated in Fig. 4. We can see that the dual-port RAM is fully utilized. is calculated in three steps

The remaining three bits are left unused.

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: HARDWARE GAUSSIAN NOISE GENERATOR USING THE WALLACE METHOD

915

A z z Fig. 4. Detailed timing diagram of the transformation circuit and the dual-port “Pool RAM.” indicates the address of the data and WE is the write enable
signal of the “Pool RAM.” All ports and registers of the transformation circuit and ports of the dual-port RAM are shown. We observe that the dual-port RAM is
fully utilized.

(8) D. The Fourth Stage

(9) This stage performs the sum of squares correction described

in Section III. It follows the approach used by Wallace in the

In principle, we could share a single adder in conjunction with multiplexors to perform all the operations of the transformation circuit. However, high-speed adders are efficiently implemented

FastNorm implementations [23]. A random sample with an approximate
be obtained as

distribution can

on FPGAs by fast-carry chains. In fact, both a two-input 24-bit

multiplexor and a 24-bit adder occupy 14 slices (user-config-

(10)

urable elements on the FPGA) in a Xilinx Virtex-II FPGA. In

addition the use of multiplexors would increase the delay signif- where has unit normal distribution,

and

icantly. For these reasons, we decide to use separate adders/sub-

for large . Hence, can be computed as

ractors for each operation. For other devices such as Applica-

tion-Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs), it can be more efficient to adopt the former approach involving hardware sharing.

(11)

The critical path of the entire Wallace design is from to

which is just a multiplexor followed by a subtractor.

where

. We set

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

916

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

The noise sample , generated from the transformation circuit of Stage 3, is multiplied by to correct the sum of the squares and hence the final noise sample. is obtained by

TABLE I RESOURCE UTILIZATION FOR THE FOUR STAGES OF THE NOISE
GENERATOR ON A XILINX VIRTEX-II XC2V4000-6 FPGA

(12)

Since and are constants, they are precalculated in soft-

ware and stored as constants in the hardware design.

Before a pass, is assigned with a variable from a previous

pass, and is updated. For the very first pass when the reset

signal is set, is initialized to

where is the sum

of squares of the initial pool. Note that we are using a pool size

of

.

TABLE II HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF THE NOISE GENERATOR
USING DIFFERENT TYPES OF FPGA RESOURCES ON A XILINX VIRTEX-II XC2V4000-6 FPGA

V. IMPLEMENTATION

This section presents implementations of the four-stage ar-

chitecture using FPGA technology.

The Tausworthe URNG in Stage 1 can be implemented

in configurable hardware using a small amount of resources.

Recent FPGAs have a large number of user-configurable ele-

ments: for instance, the Xilinx Virtex-II XC2V4000-6 device

has 23 040 user-configurable elements known as slices. We use

the primitive pentanomial

over

with a random initial state. This takes up just 77 slices.

Xilinx Virtex-II devices have embedded memory ele-

ments and multipliers, which are known as block RAMs and

MULT18X18s. Each block RAM can hold 18 kb of data and

each MULT18X18 can implement a 18 bit 18 bit multipli-

cation. If the data or the multiplication are larger than 18 kb

or 18 bit 18 bit, the Xilinx tools will use multiple block

RAMs and MULT18X18s to implement them. The Xilinx

Virtex-II XC2V4000-6 device has 120 block RAMs and 120

MULT18X18s in total. The “init Pool ROM” is implemented

using single-port block RAM, while the “Pool RAM” is imple-

mented using dual-port block RAM. Since, we use a pool of

1024 and use 24 bits for each noise samples, the size of “init

Pool ROM” and “Pool RAM” are both 24 576 bits, occupying

two block RAMs each. The constant coefficient multiplier in

Stage 4 uses two block RAMs to implement part of the mul-

tiplication. The 24 bit 24 bit multiplier in Stage 4 occupies

four MULT18X18s.

the latency is very large, it is not important since we only care about the throughput in a hardware-based simulation.
From a hardware designer’s point of view, it is interesting to explore the tradeoffs between using different types of hardware resources. For instance, a table can be implemented using block RAM or distributed RAM using slices. Table II shows our noise generator implemented using different FPGA resources. We observe that the design using slices only is more than four times the number of slices and has significantly lower clock speed than our original design. Also, the area and speed penalty of using slices to implement tables instead of block RAMs is especially high. Hence, in our opinion, dedicated FPGA resources such as block RAMs and MULT18X18s should be used wherever applicable.
We have also implemented our design on a low-cost Xilinx Spartan-III XC3S200E-5 FPGA, utilizing the slices, block RAMs, and MULT18X18s available on the chip. The design runs at 106 MHz and takes up the same amount of resources as the Virtex-II design above, which requires around half of the resources in the device.

Several FPGA implementations have been developed, using Xilinx System Generator 6.3 [24]. All designs are heavily

VI. EVALUATION AND RESULTS

pipelined to maximize throughput. Synplicity Synplify Pro 7.7 This section describes the statistical tests that we use to ana-

is used for synthesis. For place-and-route, Xilinx ISE 6.3 is lyze the properties of the generated Gaussian noise.

used with the maximum effort level and the clock constraints To ensure the randomness of the uniform random numbers

are carefully tuned to give the fastest clock frequency. We have start, stride and mask, we have tested the Tausworthe URNG

mapped and tested the Wallace design onto a hardware plat- with the Diehard tests [25]. The Tausworthe URNG pass all the

form with a Xilinx Virtex-II XC2V4000-6 FPGA. The design tests indicating that the uniform random samples generated are

occupies 770 slices, six block RAMs, and four MULT18X18s, indeed uniformly randomly distributed.

which takes up around 3% of the device. The pipelined de- We use two well-known goodness-of-fit tests to check the nor-

sign operates at 155 MHz, and hence our design produces mality of the random variables: the chi-square test and the

155 million Gaussian noise samples per second. The resource A-D test [26]. The test involves quantizing the axis into

usage of each of the four stages is shown in Table I.

bins, determining the actual and expected number of samples

The latency of our design is 1138 clock cycles ( 7 s at appearing in each bin, and using the results to derive a single

155 MHz); 1024 cycles are used to initialize the “Pool RAM” number that serves as an overall quality metric. This test is es-

with the initial pool of Gaussian random samples. The other 114 sentially a comparison between an experimentally determined

cycles are needed to fill up the pipelines of the design. Although histogram and the ideal pdf. In contrast to the test which deals

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: HARDWARE GAUSSIAN NOISE GENERATOR USING THE WALLACE METHOD

917

TABLE III COMPARISONS OF DIFFERENT HARDWARE GAUSSIAN NOISE GENERATORS
IMPLEMENTED ON XILINX VIRTEX-II XC2V4000-6 FPGAS. ALL DESIGNS GENERATE A NOISE SAMPLE EVERY CLOCK

and the A-D test resulting in a smooth bell-shaped Gaussian

distribution.

We compare our design with two other designs: “White

Fig. 5. The pdf of the generated noise from our design for a population of four
million samples. The p-values of the  and A-D tests are 0.7303 and 0.8763,
respectively.

Gaussian Noise Generator” block available in Xilinx System Generator 6.3 [24] and the design presented in [18]. The “White Gaussian Noise Generator” block is based on the “Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) Core 1.0” from Xilinx [15].

with quantized aspects of a design, the A-D test deals with continuous properties. It is modified from the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test [11] to give more weight to the tails than the K-S test does. The K-S test is distribution free in the sense that the critical values do not depend on the specific distribution being tested. The A-D test makes use of the specific distribution (normal in our case) in calculating critical values.
The probability that the deviation of the observed from the expected is due to chance alone can be obtained from a -value [26] based on the above tests. A sample set with a small -value means that it is less likely to follow the target distribution. The general convention is to reject the null hypothesis—that the samples are normally distributed—if the -value is less than

The Xilinx core follows the architecture presented by Boutillon et al. in [14], which uses the Box–Muller method in conjunction with the central limit theorem. The block is slightly slower and larger than the core, since it is less optimized. The design in [18] is also based on the Box–Muller method and central limit theorem, but we employ more sophisticated approximation techniques for the mathematical functions in the Box–Muller method, resulting in significantly more statistically accurate noise samples. We test the noise samples generated from the Xilinx block with the and the A-D test. We find that the samples fail the tests after just 160 000 samples. We also tested the Boutillon et al. [14] design with the test, and found that it fails after just 20 000 samples. This is primary due to the limited resolution problem of their nonuniform direct look-up

0.05.

table approach. We suspect that the tables would have to be

Our hardware Wallace implementation passes the statistical impractically large to generate high quality noise samples with tests even with extremely large numbers of samples. We have this approach.

run a simulation of 10 samples to calculate the -values for Table III compares the Xilinx block, our Box–Muller design

the and A-D test. For the test, we use 100 bins for the in [18], and our Wallace design. We can see that the Xilinx block

axis over the range

. The -values for the and A-D uses less resources and is slightly faster than our Wallace design,

tests are found to be 0.5385 and 0.7372 respectively, which are well above 0.05, indicating that the generated noise samples are indeed normally distributed. To test the noise quality in the high
regions, we run a simulation of 10 samples over the range

but as mentioned above the block fails the statistical tests after a small number of samples. Both of our Box–Muller and Wallace designs pass the statistical tests, even with very large numbers of samples. However, our Wallace design is around three times

and with 100 bins. This is equivalent to a simu- smaller and slightly faster.

lation size of over 10 samples. The -values for the and Fig. 6 shows the variation of the value with sample size

A-D tests are found to be 0.6839 and 0.7662, showing that the for the Xilinx block, and various Wallace implementations at

noise quality even in the high regions is high.

different data path and noise sample bit-widths. The dotted hor-

If

is a pair of random numbers with Gaussian distri- izontal line is the 0.05 confidence level ( -value), i.e., values

butions, then

should be uniform over . below this line pass the test. We observe that the Xilinx

Six million Gaussian variables, randomly picked from a popula- block fails after a small number of samples. For the Wallace im-

tion of 10 samples generated from our design are transformed plementations, we observe that with increasing precision more

using this identity, resulting in three million uniform random samples are required to fail the test. This is due to a com-

variables. These uniform variables are tested with the Diehard bination of two factors: 1) insufficient precision in the Wallace

tests [25] for uniformity. They pass all tests indicating that the arithmetic leading to low quality noise samples and 2) because

transformed numbers are indeed uniformly distributed. Fig. 5 of finite precision of the noise samples, some bins of the

shows the pdf obtained from our Gaussian noise generator for a test will be more biased than others, this effect is reduced with

population of four million samples. The samples pass both the increasing noise precision.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

918

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

Fig. 6. Variation of the  value with sample size for the Xilinx block and
various Wallace implementations at different precisions.
2 Fig. 8. BER performance simulation results for a 972 1944 irregular
LDPC code. The Box–Muller implementations are written in software using double-precision floating point arithmetic.
TABLE IV PERFORMANCE COMPARISON: TIME FOR PRODUCING ONE BILLION GAUSSIAN
NOISE SAMPLES. THE XC2V4000-6 FPGA BELONGS TO THE XILINX VIRTEX-II FAMILY, WHILE THE XC3S200E-5 FPGA
BELONGS TO THE XILINX SPARTAN-III FAMILY

Fig. 7. Wallace bitwidth versus number of samples without  failure. We see a linear behavior with the y axis in logarithmic scale.

In Fig. 7 we plot the Wallace bitwidth versus the number

of samples without failure. With the axis in logarithmic

scale, we can see a linear behavior. The dotted line shows the

trend at higher bit-widths. For instance, if 32 bit Wallace is used,

up to around 10 samples would pass the test. Increasing

the Wallace bit-width would require more block RAMs for the

pool, and larger multipliers for the sum-of-squares correction,

and more slices for the larger adders and multiplexors.

Fig. 8 shows BER performance simulation results for a

972 1944 irregular LDPC code from [27]. Results show our

Wallace noise generator, standard Box–Muller, and Box–Muller

with the noise saturated at and . The Box–Muller im-

plementations are written in software using double-precision

floating point arithmetic. Two observations can be made

from this figure. First, there are no distinguishable differ-

ences between our Wallace implementation and the software

Box–Muller. Second, limiting the noise power to a certain

multiple results in inaccurate simulation results, particularly in

regions of lower BER. For instance at

dB, our

Wallace gives a BER of 10 , standard Box–Muller gives

10 , whereas Box–Muller saturated at and give

10 and 10 , respectively. Thus, the lack of noise of

sufficient quality can lead to an overly optimistic (and incorrect)

conclusions regarding the behavior of the code.

tiple instances of our noise generator in an FPGA, and discovered that there is a reduction in clock speed due to increased routing congestion. We are able to fit up to 20 instances on the XC2V4000-6 FPGA running at 115 MHz, the number of block RAMs available on the device being the limit. Of course using a larger device such as the Virtex-4 XC4VFX140 FPGA, we are able to fit even more instances. Note that it is perfectly valid to use multiple instances of the noise generator, as long as the Tausworthe URNGs and pool RAMs are initialized with different random seeds and noise samples.
Our hardware implementations have been compared to several software implementations based on the Wallace, Ziggurat [10], polar and Box–Muller method [11], which are known to be the fastest methods for generating Gaussian noise for instruction processors. For the Wallace and Ziggurat methods, FastNorm21 [23] and rnorrexp [10], which are publicly available, are used. In order to make a fair comparison, we use the same uniform number generator for all implementations. The mixed multiplicative congruential (Lehmer) generator [28] used in the FastNorm2 implementation is chosen. Software implementations are run on an Intel Pentium-IV 2.6-GHz PC is equipped with 1-GB DDR-SDRAM. They are written in ANSI C and compiled

The performance of the noise generator can be improved by 1In FastNorm2, the pool is updated periodically, whereas in our hardware concurrent execution. We have experimented with placing mul- implementation it is not.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: HARDWARE GAUSSIAN NOISE GENERATOR USING THE WALLACE METHOD

919

with the GNU gcc 3.2.2 compiler with -O3 optimization, generating double precision floating-point numbers. Note that all software implementations pass the and A-D tests. The results are shown in Table IV. It can be seen that our hardware designs are faster than software implementations by 2–609 times, depending on the device used and the resource utilization. Looking at the PC results, we can see that the Wallace method performs significantly better than other methods.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have presented a hardware Gaussian noise generator using the Wallace method to support simulations which involve very large numbers of samples.
Our noise generator architecture contains four stages. It takes up approximately 3% of a Xilinx Virtex-II XC2V4000-6 FPGA and half of a Xilinx Spartan-III XC3S200E-5, and can produce 155 million samples per second. Further improvement in performance can be obtained by concurrent execution: 20 parallel instances of the noise generator on an XC2V4000-6 FPGA at 115 MHz can run 51 times faster than software on a 2.6-GHz Pentium-IV PC. The quality of the noise samples is confirmed by two statistical tests: the test and the A-D test, and also by applications involving LDPC decoding. We are currently exploring methods for characterizing and optimizing Gaussian noise generators, such that the most appropriate noise generator can be selected for a given application.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank R. P. Brent, A. Abdul Gaffar, A. C. H. Ng, R. C. C. Cheung, E. Vallés, and the reviewers for their assistance.

[13] G. Box and M. Muller, “A note on the generation of random normal deviates,” Ann. Math. Statist., vol. 29, pp. 610–611, 1958.
[14] E. Boutillon, J. Danger, and A. Gazel, “Design of high speed AWGN communication channel emulator,” Analog Integr. Circuits Signal Process., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 133–142, 2003.
[15] (2002) Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) Core v1.0. Xilinx Inc. [Online]. Available: http://www.xilinx.com
[16] J. Chen, J. Moon, and K. Bazargan, “Reconfigurable readback-signal generator based on a field-programmable gate array,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 1744–1750, Mar. 2004.
[17] Y. Fan, Z. Zilic, and M. Chiang, “A versatile high speed bit error rate testing scheme,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Quality Electronic Design, 2004, pp. 395–400.
[18] D. Lee, W. Luk, J. Villasenor, and P. Cheung, “A Gaussian noise generator for hardware-based simulations,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 1523–1534, Dec. 2004.
[19] R. Brent, “A fast vectorised implementation of Wallace’s normal random number generator,” The Australian National University, ANU Computer Sci.Tech. Rep. TR-CS-97-07, 1997.
[20] C. Rüb, “On Wallace’s method for the generation of normal variates,” Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik, Germany, MPI Informatik Res. Rep. MPI-I-98-1-020, 1998.
[21] P. Chu and R. Jones, “Design techniques of FPGA based random number generator,” presented at the Military and Aerospace Applications of Programmable Devices and Technology Conf., Laurel, MD, 1999.
[22] P. L’Ecuyer, “Maximally equidistributed combined Tausworthe generators,” Math. Comput., vol. 65, no. 213, pp. 203–213, 1996.
[23] C. Wallace. (2003) MDMC software—Random number generators. [Online]. Available: http://www.datamining.monash.edu.au/software/ random
[24] (2004) Xilinx System Generator User Guide v6.3. Xilinx Inc.. [Online] [25] G. Marsaglia. (1997) Diehard: A battery of tests of randomness. [On-
line]. Available: http://stat.fsu.edu/~geo/diehard.html [26] R. D’Agostino and M. Stephens, Goodness-of-Fit Techniques: Marcel
Dekker Inc., 1986. [27] A. Vila Casado, W. Weng, and R. Wesel, “Multiple rate low-density
parity-check codes with constant block length,” in Proc. IEEE Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, 2004, pp. 2010–2014. [28] C. Wallace, “A long-period pseudo-random generator,” Monash Univ., Australia, Tech. Rep. TR89/123, 1989.

REFERENCES
[1] W. Press, B. Flannery, S. Teukolsky, and W. Vetterling, Numerical Recipes in C. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993, vol. 2.
[2] B. Levine, R. Taylor, and H. Schmit, “Implementation of near Shannon limit error-correcting codes using reconfigurable hardware,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, 2000, pp. 217–226.
[3] A. Brace, D. Ga¸tarek, and M. Musiela, “The market model of interest rate dynamics,” Math. Finance, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 127–155, 1997.
[4] A. Bergstrom, “Gaussian estimation of mixed-order continuous-time dynamic models with unobservable stochastic trends from mixed stock and flow data,” Econometric Theory, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 467–505, 1997.
[5] B. Jung, H. Lenhof, P. Müller, and C. Rüb, “Langevin dynamics simulations of macromolecules on parallel computers,” in Macromolecular Theory Simul., 1997, pp. 507–521.
[6] C. Wallace, “Fast pseudorandom generators for normal and exponential variates,” ACM Trans. Math. Softw., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 119–127, 1996.
[7] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT–8, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[8] J. Ahrens and U. Dieter, “An alias method for sampling from the normal distribution,” Computing, vol. 42, no. 2–3, pp. 159–170, 1989.
[9] J. Leva, “A fast normal random number generator,” ACM Trans. Math. Softw., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 449–453, 1992.
[10] G. Marsaglia and W. Tsang, “The Ziggurat method for generating random variables,” J. Statist. Softw., vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 1–7, 2000.
[11] D. Knuth, Seminumerical Algorithms, 3rd ed, ser. The Art of Computer Programming. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1997, vol. 2.
[12] W. Hörmann and J. Leydold, “Continuous random variate generation by fast numerical inversion,” ACM Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 347–362, 2003.

Dong-U Lee (S’01–M’05) received the B.Eng. degree in information systems engineering and the Ph.D. degree in computing, both from Imperial College, London, U.K., in 2001 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher at the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), where he is developing hardware implementations of communication algorithms for deep-space communications with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA. He visited UCLA in 2002 and 2003 as a Visiting Scholar, where he developed hardware designs for LDPC codes. His research interests include reconfigurable computing, computer arithmetic, communications and video image processing.
Wayne Luk (S’85–M’89) received the M.A., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in engineering and computer science from the University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
He is a Member of Academic Staff in the Department of Computing, Imperial College of Science, Technology, and Medicine, London, U.K., and leads the Custom Computing Group there. His research interests include theory and practice of customizing hardware and software for specific application domains, such as graphics and image processing, multimedia, and communications. Much of his current work involves high-level compilation techniques and tools for parallel computers and embedded systems, particularly those containing reconfigurable devices such as field-programmable gate arrays.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

920

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

John D. Villasenor (M’90–SM’98) received the B.S. degree from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, in 1985, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 1988 and 1989, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
From 1990 to 1992, he was with the Radar Science and Engineering section of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, where he developed methods for imaging the earth from space. He joined the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in 1992, and is currently a Professor. He served as Vice Chair of the Department from 1996 to 2002. At UCLA, his research efforts lie in communications, computing, imaging and video compression, and networking.
Guanglie Zhang received the B.S., M.A., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1997, 2000, and 2003, respectively.
He is currently a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in the Chinese University of Hong Kong. His research interests are in the area of reconfigurable computing, embedded system, video processing, and MEMS sensor technologies.

Philip H. W. Leong (M’88–SM’97) received the B.Sc., B.E., and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, in 1986, 1988, and 1993, respectively.
In 1989, he was a research engineer at AWA Research Laboratory, Sydney Australia. From 1990 to 1993, he was a postgraduate student and research assistant at the University of Sydney, where he worked on low power analogue VLSI circuits for arrhythmia classification. In 1993, he was a consultant to SGS Thomson Microelectronics, Milan, Italy. He was a Lecturer at the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Sydney from 1994 to 1996. He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chinese University of Hong Kong and the Director of the Custom Computing Laboratory. He is the author of more than 70 technical papers and five patents. His research interests include reconfigurable computing, digital systems, parallel computing, cryptography and signal processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

