2005 IEEE International Symposium on Microwave, Antenna, Propagation and EMC Technologies for Wireless Communications Proceedings

An FPGA Implementation of A Structured Irregular L-DPC Decoder

Zhigang Cao Dept. of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China, 100084 Email: czg-dee~tsinghua.edu.cn

Jingyu Kang* Dept of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University Beijing, Chia, 100084 Email: kangjy98&hotnai1.com

Pingyi Fan Dept. of Electronic Engineering
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China, 100084
Email: fpygtsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract-In this paper, a code construcon nmthod of irregular Low-Densit Parity-Check (LDPC) codes Is presented, whickh facdtates the hardware Implementation of blef propagation
(BP) decoders and leads to low error floors as well To verify
the effeciveness of this construction, an FPGA-based decoder Is
designed and implemented, where a novel non-uniform quantization scheme for BP decoding Is used, so that the performance loss compared to Infinite-prechion decoding Is less than 0.1 dB The decoding throughput of the decoder can reach as high as

decoder. Therefore, we have designed a 3-level non-uniform

quantization scheme, which reduces the performance loss to

less tn 0.1 dB.

In used.

our Wi

F*PGeApri.omppelremdeenstiagtnio.onf,haArldwatreeCayrrccal.hoiAnteectIuIredeavnicdethies

use of pipelning, the decoding throughput reaches as high

afsurt5hOeMrboppst,imiwzhaitcihonisis

fast enough for many applications. If performed in the design of arithmetic

units, larger throughput can be achieved.

I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have received intensive research because of its capacity-approaching error performance [1] and parallelism in decoding. After more than half
a decade of theoretical development, LDPC codes are already coming into practical service. In [2], a fully-parallel decoder implementation for short block-length irregular LDPC codes was reported. However, for codes with larger block-length, fully parallel implementation will be very difficult due to the
large number of computing units and interconnects. To solve this problem, a class of irregular LDPC codes constructed from permutation matrices, namely the irregular partitioned permutation (IPP) LDPC codes was introduced in [3] and [4] along with their partly-parallel decoder architecture. With this architecture, the computation units in the decoder are timemultiplexed, so that their number is greatly reduced and the routing of interconnects becomes much easier.
it is well-known that irregular LDPC codes provide a larger coding gain than regular LDPC codes at the price of a higher error floor. With the code construction proposed in [3] or [4], the error floor problem is still prominent. Therefore, we have recently proposed another algorithm to construct IPP LDPC codes [5], which lowers the floor of bit error rate (BER) down to below 10-1.
Another challenge in the hardware implementation of the irregular LDPC decoder is the quantization scheme of mes-
sages in belief propagation (BP) decoding. For regular LDPC
codes, uniform quantization with 6 bits (including the sign bit) is good enough in many cases. While for irregular codes,
uniform quantization usin the same numnber of bits leads to a much larger perfozrmance loss in the water fall region
and an early-coming error floor compared to infinite-precision

conTshterucptaipoenr mies tohrogdanpizreodpoassedfoilnlow[5s]. iIsn qSueicctkiloyn rIeI,vioeuwredc.odIen Section III, the decoding algorithm and quantization scheme is introduce d the simulation results are shown. In Section IV, the decoder architecture is presented, and the implementation result is given. At last, we conclude the paper in Section V
II. CODE CONSTRUCTION
The parity-check matrix H of an IPP LDPC code is con-
structed by first generating a j x k global matrix M, then
replacing each I in M with a p x p permutation matrix and each 0 in M with a p x p zero matrix, where each permutation matrix is obtained by cyclically shifting the columns of an identity matrix by a particular number. Thus, the size of H is jp x kp and the degree distributions in H are the same as those in M.
The performance of codes constructed above is determined by the design of the global matrix and the selection of cyclic shifts. In [5], the degree distributions in the global matrix M are optimized with the algorithm in [1], and cycles whose bit nodes are all of degree 2 are avoided in M. Then, the selection of cyclic shifts plays the key role to lower the error floor, which is introduced below.
In [6], small stopping sets in the Tamer graph of an irregular LDPC code have been shown harmful to the code's error floor
performance. Therefore, to lower the error floor of an irregular
LDPC code, small stopping sets should be avoided in the code construction. In [7], Tian et al proposed an algorithm to reduce the number of s;mall stopping sets by avoiding the
generation of cycles with small appmuximate cycle exctrinsic message degree (ACE), whose definitionis given as:
Definition 1 (ACE): The ACE of a length-2n cycle in the
Tanner graph of anl LDPC code is S3=L1(di -2), where di is

O-7803-9128-4/05/$20.0O ©C 2005 IEEE.

1050

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the degree of the i-th bit node in the cycle. Inspired by these results, we select the cyclic shifts carefully
such that there are no cycles with small ACEs in the resulting IPP LDPC codes. To do this, the relation between the ACEs of cycles in the resulting parity-check matrix H and the structure

As shown above, the only non-linear computation in (1) and (2) is the evaluation of function +(x), which is plotted in
Fig. 1. Fortunately, with finite-length quantization, we can pre-
compute its values and store them in a look-up-table (LUT).

of the global matrix M should be understood. We discovered

3.5

that all cycles in the Tanner graph of H result from the closed 3

paths in the Tanner graph of M. For an arbitrary cycle C in

25

H, if it results from the closed path P in M, then relation

2

between the ACE of C and the ACE of PI is given by

2

1.5-

ACEC= ACEP ((,S)
where p is the size of permutation matrices, and S is given by 0
S=Sn-i=(-l)iSi,

1\

0.5

\

,

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

x

i=o

Fig. 1. Curve of 4(x), x >O

where n is the length of P and si is the cyclic shift corre-

sponding to the i-th edge in P.

The qantization scheme for the messages and te entries of

If the ACE equivalently S

of =

closed 0, the

path P is small and ACE of cycle C is

5= equally

1, or
small(

the LUT has a direct impact on the performance of BP decoder. With uniform quantization, we denote the quantization step

which will harm the error floor performance of the code. by 6. Clearly, with the decrease of 6, we can get increasingly

Therefore, we search a set of cyclic shifts, such that S #8 0 close approximation to 4'(x). However, when the number of

for all closed paths with small ACEs in M. In this way, for bits used in quantization is fixed, smaller 3 results in smaller

all cycles up to a certain length (18 in our work) in H, no dynamic range, i.e, the largest level of the messages are

one has an ACE smaller than some predetermined value, so smalL which results im a serious quantization overflow in BP

the average size of stopping sets in the Tarner graph of H is decoding and leads to a high error floor to LDPC codes [9],

enlarged in a statistical sense, and the error floor performance especially to irregular LDPC codes due to its code structure

is improved.

In our work we select the number of bits to be 6 (including

Interested readers may refer to [5] for a more detailed the sign bit), and a wide range of values have been tested for

introduction to our code construction algorithm.

3. The best error performance is achieved when 3 is around 0.125. However, even this performance is too bad for most

III. DECODING ALGORITHM AND QUANTIZATION SCHEME applications. The performance curve will be shown later in

The belief propagation (BP) algorithm is already a well- this section.

known sub-optimal algorithm widely used to decode LDPC Therefore, non-uniform quantization must be employed to

codes, so it is only briefly reviewed in this paper, and interested improve the performance of finite-precision decoding for ir-

readers may refer to [8] for a detailed introduction.

regular LDPC codes. In [10], a variable-precision non-uniform

Let rn, denote the message passed from variable node v to quantization scheme is proposed, where a small quantization

check node c, and ,tc,v be the message from check node c to step 6 is used for messages with magnitudes less than or equal

variable node v}. The variable to check messages are updated to 1, while for messages with larger magnitudes, the quantiza-

as:

tion step 46 is used. In this way, a reasonable trade-off can be

my, ,c3 3 = ec(EV )/C Mc,Ui + r X

(1) vaacrhiiaebvleed-pbreectiwseieonn qpuraenctiisziaotnioanndscdhyenmaemiwcorrkansgev.erTyhiwsel2l-lweivtehl

tEC(v,)/, 3regular LDPC codes, but with irregular codes, its performance
where C(vi)/cj denotes all check nodes connected to vi is still not satisfying in our simulation. So we devise a 3-level

except cj, and ri is the initial log-likelihood value associated variable-precision non-uniform quantization scheme, by which
with node vi. The update of check to variable messages is an even larger dynamic range can be obtained with the smallest

given by:

quantization step unchanged.

Hc-i1>iVt3 X+ =-L +(mu l cci)JrrvEV(4/v, s(m,)c

VEV(ci)/vj

EV(i)/v

(2)

conAssistwitthhe
where b4 is

mutanhgienfimoiortmsutdeqsuipagannrttii,fziacwtahiniotnc,bhit.5isColdueetanrolotyfe,dtthhbeeyretbo4atbarl3ebt26obt,abbliolt,sy

wdheenortees4.a(.x)var.ial-alr.oegn(otdadneehss(cIoxn/n2e1c)t)ed=to4rCc1ji(eexxx)dcc,eeenppaotttnedvjsi .Va(lcliv)a/r. vijablit3eh2teroqquuugaahnntti7iz3z.aattWiioohnnelnsetveebpl4s.i=s F3o0,'rsaotnhdtehbe83y

levels with b4 = b3
=are1,natteuraqlulayntmiazpa^tpieodn

0, tsote0p

cyc1leT,he ACE of a dosed path is defined the same way with the ACE of a

is increased to 43, radix point .by two

bwithsi. cThhleis

equivalent to corresponding

vrailghute-sshoifftthnigeseth8e

1051
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

quantization levels are computed by

unit(VNU) for each global variable node. Each global edge

bb-2b1323+b2163±b1*83-t-b0

'3 b36

1

b

b4timhneMp

is associated with an edge memory unit
messages passed on the p corresponding

(BMU),
edges in

where H are

where b is the logical NOT of b. Thus "01010" is mapped to stored. Also, for each global variable node in M, an initial-

83, "01011" to 123, , "01111" to 283, "01000" to 326 and message memory unit (IMU) is used for the storage of the p

"01001" to 366.

initial log-likelihood values associated with this global node.

For the remaining 16 levels with b4 = 1, the radix point is The architecture is shown in Fig. 3. Apparently, the number

again right-shifted by 2 bits, ie., the quantization step becomes of computation units in this decoder is reduced by a factor of

166. The corresponding values of these 16 levels are given by p compared to a fully parallel decoder.

b4b3 b2'bi bo 2566+b3 1286+b2.646+ bi .326+bo 16,6

therefore, "10011" is mapped to 483, *.., "11111" to 2403, "10000" to 2563, "10001" to 2723 and "10010" to 2886.
With this quantization scheme, the loss of coding gain
caused by quantization can be reduced to less than 0.1 dB over a wide range of BER if the smallest quantization step 3 is chosen properly (we find 3 = 0.032 is empirically good). To
show the performance, two rate-1/2 IPP LDPC codes, CODElI and CODE2, are constructed with the algorithm in Section II, where the size of the global matrix M is 16 x 32, and the size of permutation matrices, p, is 97 and 251 for CODEl and CODE2 respectively, corresponding to the block length of
3104 and 8102. The performance curves of these two codes on additional white gaussian noise (AWGN) channel under
double-float precision BP decoding and our 6-bits 3-level nonuniformly quantized BP decoding are shown in Fig. 2, and the performance of CODEI under uniformly quantized BP decoding is also given as a comparison. The 3 for uniform and non-uniform quantization is 0.125 and 0.032 respectively,
and 30 iterations of message passing is used in decoding.

lo-,
. -. -. ---'-------10-
.. - xF--------------......
0

z 1-0 -X-i -- - 4=---i -- $ I ----------

--

-

m lo5 -CODE--do-ublefo -

° CODEI, 6-bits uniorm

0-6 106 -elCOCCDOOEDD2EE,I2d,od6uo-bub,btlseesnnuofolnno-autnnFiFfo=ri:m:--f-~: o. rrrt

CODE2, 6-bits non-unifo

10 08 1 1.2 EbJNo(1B4) 16 18 2

Fig. 2. Performance comparison of several quantization schemes

IV DECODER ARCHITECTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION
The partly-parallel decoder architecture similar to that in [4] is used in our implementation. For convenience, we call a node/edge in the Tanner graph of the global matrix M a global node/edge, then each global node/edge corresponds to p nodes/edges in the Tanner graph of H, where p is the size of permutationl matrices. In the decoder, there is a check node
unlit (GNU) for each global check node and a variable node

IMUs

U EMUs

E i;i

OCNUI

2

I

NU2

.

CNUJ

CONTROL LOGIC
Fig. 3. Partly-Parallel Decoder Architedure
In this decoder, the computation units are time-multiplexed, i e., p nodes corresponding to the same global node will share the same computation unit in a time-division manner. To be more detailed, let us consider a single round of message passing. Initially, the access (both reading and writing) address
of all EMUs are set to zero, then all CNUs simultaneously
fetch messages from their connected EMUs, update these
messages, and replace the old messages in EMUs with the
new ones, then the addresses for all EMUs are increased by 1. The above process repeats until all messages have been updated by CNUs (when the access address of every EMU equals p - 1). As the second step, VNUs update messages i almost the same manner. But note that the initial access
-- $---of-sE-MU--ad-sr'es --a-r+eX-sn-o-t zero in VNU operation, ead, the
address of each EMU should be offset by a number equal to the
cyclic shift corresponding to the global edge associated with
this EMU, and when the address increases to p, it should wrap
=back to 0 in a cyclic manner. After all messages are updated by VNUs, an iteration of message passing is completed. The control logic in Fig. 3 will generate the access addresses for
all EMUs and IMUs.
According to (1) and the quantization scheme introduced in Section III, the VNU is designed as in Fig. 4. The block "Mapping" is to map the 5-bit magnitude part of the message to the corresponding quantization level, which is
represented by a 9-bit number. "SM to 2's" converts the operands from signed-magnitude format into 2's complement, which facilitates the implementation of the adder tree. And the "Saturate & Quantize" block quantizes the magnitude part of the computation results into a 5-bit vector according to the quantization table, which combines with the sign and forms the output message. The architecture of GN is shown in Fig.

1052
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5. To increase the clock frequency of the decoder, three stages of pipelining are used. The placement of pipelining registers is shown as a dashed line in the figures.

M_pnig SM to 2s
.Tere

2'sttSM

Si
1_ 8r6

W

5 10 10 10 -

Fig. 4. VNU7

V. CONCLUSION In this paper, we present a codehardare co-desig scheme
for irregular LDPC codes. Also, a 3-level non-uniform quan-
tization scheme of BP decoder is proposed which reduces
the loss of coding gain compared to double-float precision
decoding to within 0.1 dB over a large range of BER Th,e t'hroughput of our decoder can reach 50 Mbps, which already meets the requirement of many practical applications.
However, we have actually not fully optimized the design
of some arithmetic units in the decoder, such as the addertree, where carry-lookahead adder or carry-select adder can be employed. If proper optimizations are incorporated, the throughput of the decoder can be further increased to meet
even higher requirements.

.

;

.

Lo
.

Adder

+-

RY.

1~~Q~u~a~nt~z~e 5

s6.

REFERENCES

.t I.

/w P[1] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-

Mvpin&

F

F6 T s _LUTs v W W _ 9TI-nafpoprrmoaTdhheionryg,revgoull.ar47,lopwp-.de6n3s8i-t6y56p,arFietby.-c2h0e0c1k. code*' IEEE Trans

[2] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, "A 690-mw 1-gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2

-W L

:

low-density parity-check code decoder,' IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,

T,ft . <rvol. 37, pp. 404-412, Mar. 2002. [3] D. E. Hocevar, "Ldpc code construction with flexible hardware imple-

mentation," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf Communications aICC), May 2003,

pp. 2708-2711.

Fig. 5. CNU

[4] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, "Design of vlsi implementation-oriented ldpc

codes," in Proc. LEEE Vehicular Technology Confemnce (VTC) 2003-

The

FTPheGAFPGimplimepmleenenttaattiioon

Ooff

oouur

ddeeccoodderr

is
is

bbaaseedd

oonn

thhee

[5]fall, Oct.
[5] J. Kang,

2003. P. Fan,

and

Z.

Cao,

"Flexible

construction

of

iffegular

parti-

Altera Cyclone II family's EP2C70F672C7 device. The Fitter tioned permutation ldpc codes with low error floors," IEEE Commun

Summery shows that 33,043 out of the total 68,416 logic
elements anld e1le0m4en.t1s*8andk1b0i1t8kboiftoftthhe bblloocckk RAAMM aarree uussedd ffoorr tthhee

Lett., to appear. [6] Cl.engDtih, aDn.alPyrsoiisettoif,lEo.w-Tdeelnastiart,y Tp.arRiitcyh-acrhdescoknc,odaensd oRn. tUhrebabninkaer,y"eFriansiutree-

decoder of CODEl in Section Im. For CODE2, the control channel," IEEE Tans Infori Thwry, vol. 48, pp. 1570-1579, June

logic should be re-configured (because the cyclic shifts are 2002.

andlthe ldiidfnifefeafrreelnrytt)wi*tahnd

the the

slize of EMUs and IMJUs shnould be imnccrreeaassed the block length. The timing analysis shows

[7]

cIT.adtpTicioancnso,daCeI.sCCJw)oi,ntehMs,alyJo.wV2i0elr0lr3ao,srepnfpol.ro,or3sa1:n2'd5-iRn3.1PW2re9cs..el,IE"ECoEnsItntr.ucCtoionnf

of irregular
Communi-

that the the maximum frequency of our decoder is 98 MHz. If
3030i*tietreraattiioonns ooff mmeessssaaggee ppaassssi'nmgg iiSs perffoorrimneed, tthhee ccoorrrreessppoonndd--

[8]

T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, "The capacity
Tchheeocrky,covdole.s 4u7n,dpepr. m5e9s9s-a6g1e8-,paFsesbi.ng200d1e.coding,"

oIfElEoEw-dTernassi.ty

parity-
Inform.

ing decoding throughput is approximately (32p X frax)/(30 X [9] Y-C. He, H.-P. Li, S.-H. Sun, and L. Li, "Threshold-based design of

2p) - 52 Mbps, where 32p is the block length of the code,
and 2p aiSndhXei2sntphuemnubmeberr oof clock cycles neededtoto ppeerrffoorrmn aann

[10]

quantized decoder for ldpc codes," in Proc. IEEE ISIT 2003, July 2003.
To.f Zlhoawngd,enZs.itWyapnagr,itayncdhKe.ckK.coPdheashid,ec"oOdnerf,i"niiten pPrreocci.siIoEnEiEmpIlSeCmAenSta2t00i1o,n

iteration of message passing.

vol. 4, 2001.

1053
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

