1288
Transactions Papers

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes
Jinghu Chen, Member, IEEE, Ajay Dholakia, Senior Member, IEEE, Evangelos Eleftheriou, Fellow, IEEE, Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE, and Xiao-Yu Hu, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Various log-likelihood-ratio-based belief-propagation (LLR-BP) decoding algorithms and their reduced-complexity derivatives for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are presented. Numerically accurate representations of the check-node update computation used in LLR-BP decoding are described. Furthermore, approximate representations of the decoding computations are shown to achieve a reduction in complexity by simplifying the check-node update, or symbol-node update, or both. In particular, two main approaches for simplified check-node updates are presented that are based on the so-called min-sum approximation coupled with either a normalization term or an additive offset term. Density evolution is used to analyze the performance of these decoding algorithms, to determine the optimum values of the key parameters, and to evaluate finite quantization effects. Simulation results show that these reduced-complexity decoding algorithms for LDPC codes achieve a performance very close to that of the BP algorithm. The unified treatment of decoding techniques for LDPC codes presented here provides flexibility in selecting the appropriate scheme from performance, latency, computational-complexity, and memory-requirement perspectives.
Index Terms—Belief-propagation (BP) decoding, density evolution (DE), iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, reduced-complexity decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] deliver very good performance when decoded with the belief-propagation (BP) or the sum-product algorithm [2]. As LDPC codes are being considered for use in a wide range of applications, the search for efficient implementations of decoding algorithms is being pursued intensively. The BP
Paper approved by A. H. Banihashemi, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 29, 2003; revised June 25, 2004 and December 15, 2004. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0098029. This paper was presented in part at IEEE Globecom, San Antonio, TX, 2001, in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2002, and in part at IEEE Globecom, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., 2002.
J. Chen was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA. He is now with Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: jinghuc@qualcomm.com).
M. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, and X.-Y. Hu are with the IBM Research GmbH, Zurich Research Laboratory, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland (e-mail: adh@zurich.ibm.com; ele@zurich.ibm.com; xhu@zurich.ibm.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.852852

algorithm can be simplified using the so-called BP-based approximation [3] (also known as the “min-sum” approximation [4]), which greatly reduces the implementation complexity, but incurs a degradation in decoding performance. This has led to the development of many reduced-complexity variants of the BP algorithm [5]–[9] that nonetheless deliver near-optimum decoding performance.
Work on LDPC decoding has mainly focused on floatingpoint arithmetic or infinite precision. However, hardware implementations of the decoding algorithms for LDPC codes must address quantization effects in a fixed-point realization. The effect of quantization on decoding based on likelihood ratios was considered in [10]. Decoding based on log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) and finite precision was studied to a certain extent in [11]. The performance of these algorithms has also been evaluated using density evolution (DE) [12]. DE for the BP-based algorithm, or min-sum approximation, was developed in [13] and [14]. A modified BP-based algorithm based on corrective terms [5] was analyzed using DE in [15]. Further modifications of the BP-based algorithm using a normalization term and an offset adjustment term have also been evaluated [9]. Recently, [16] optimized the selection of quantization range (clipping thresholds) and the number of quantization bits for shortand medium-length codes using extensive simulations, and also proposed a modified BP-based algorithm that is attractive when using coarse quantization.
Several factors, including the LDPC code itself, influence the choice of decoding scheme. Besides the conventional LDPC codes, various geometric LDPC codes have been studied in [17] and [18]. These two classes of LDPC codes differ in the number of parity checks used in decoding, as well as in the number of short cycles in their Tanner graphs. The former influences the decoding complexity, the latter the decoding performance based on the amount of correlation introduced between messages. Furthermore, the choice of code rates and lengths also affects the decoding performance.
Here we bring together several of the leading approaches for decoding LDPC codes and examine them from algorithmic and structural points of view. We investigate their performance, as well as their implementation complexity. Starting with numerically accurate versions of the check-node update computation, various reduced-complexity variants are derived, in which the reduction in complexity is based on augmenting the BP-based approximation with either a normalization or an additive offset term. Many of the decoding algorithms are analyzed by means

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES

1289

of DE, a powerful tool for optimizing key parameters of the In the probability domain, the inputs to the BP decoding

algorithms as well as for evaluating finite quantization effects. algorithm are the a posteriori probabilities (APPs)

The influence of the type of LDPC codes on the decoding per-

and

, which

formance is also investigated using simulations. The simplified are computed based on the channel statistics. The BP decoding

decoding algorithms presented in this paper and the associated algorithm has two main iteratively executed steps. First, the

performance evaluation are either new or have already been pro- check-node update step computes, for

,

posed by the authors. Their unification, though, is novel and

. Second,

allows us to differentiate and select an appropriate decoding scheme according to performance, latency, computational complexity, and memory requirements.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the notation and describes the probabilistic approach for decoding LDPC codes. BP using LLRs as messages is described in Section III, focusing on numerically accurate representation of the LLRs. Section IV presents various reduced-complexity decoding algorithms. In Section V, DE is described and used to optimize the parameters for unquantized decoding algorithms.

the symbol-node update step computes, for

,

, where the con-

stant

is chosen such that

. The

algorithm terminates after a maximum number of iterations

, or earlier if the syndrome check is satisfied by the quan-

tized received word corresponding to the “pseudoposterior”

probabilities

,

where

, and the constant is chosen such that

.

Simulation results are presented to compare the different algorithms. DE and simulation results for quantized decoding algorithms are presented in Section VI. The issue of numerical accuracy versus correlation is discussed in Section VII, and finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VIII.

III. NUMERICALLY ACCURATE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE BP ALGORITHM
In practice, using LLRs as messages offers implementation advantages over using probabilities or likelihood ratios, because multiplications are replaced by additions and the normalization

II. LDPC CODES AND BP DECODING

step is eliminated. BP decoding of LDPC codes can be achieved in several different ways, all using LLRs as messages. Here, we

A binary

LDPC code [1], [2] is a linear block code

described by a sparse

parity-check matrix . A bipar-

tite graph with check nodes in one class and symbol or

variable nodes in the other can be created using as its inci-

dence matrix. Such a graph is known as the Tanner graph [19].

An LDPC code is called

-regular if in its bipartite graph,

every symbol node is connected to check nodes, and every

check node is connected to symbol nodes; otherwise, it is

called an irregular LDPC code. The graphical representation of

LDPC codes is attractive, because it not only helps understand

their parity-check structure, but, more importantly, also facili-

tates a powerful decoding approach. The key decoding steps are

motivate the most popular approaches [1], [12], [20] by recalling

several identities relating the LLRs and probabilities. We then

describe BP decoding alternatives that are easy to implement

and can reduce the decoding delay.

The LLR of a binary-valued random variable is defined as

, where

denotes

the probability that takes the value . We can express

, and

,

which yields

. It

can be shown [12], [20] that for two statistically independent

binary random variables and , the so-called “tanh rule” is

given by

the local application of Bayes’ rule at each node and the ex-

change of the results (“messages”) with neighboring nodes. At

any given iteration, two types of messages are passed: probabil-

ities or “beliefs” from symbol nodes to check nodes, and prob-

abilities or “beliefs” from check nodes to symbol nodes.

Using a notation similar to that in [2] and [3], let

de-

note the set of check nodes connected to symbol node , i.e., the

positions of ones in the th column of , and let

denote

the set of symbol nodes that participate in the th parity-check

equation, i.e., the positions of ones in the th row of . Let

represent exclusion of from the set

. In addi-

tion,

and

denote the message from symbol

node to check node indicating the probability of symbol

being zero or one, respectively, based on all the checks in-

volving except . Similarly,

and

denote

the message from the th check node to the th symbol node

indicating the probability of symbol being zero or one, re-

(1)

A practical simplification follows from the fact that the func-

tions

and

are monotonically increasing and

have odd symmetry, implying

sign

and

sign

. Therefore, in practice,

the sign and the magnitude of

are separable in

the sense that the sign of

depends only on the

signs of

and

, and the magnitude

only on the magnitudes

and

. Hence, equiva-

lently, the tanh rule is

sign

sign

. Hereafter, BP or

LLR-BP decoding both mean the BP algorithm using LLR

messages, and the same symbol denotes the random variable

and its value in LLRs.

spectively, based on all the symbols checked by except . The symbols and indicate addition modulo 2. Finally,

A. LLR-BP Based on the tanh rule

and

denote the Let us define the LLRs

transmitted codeword and the received word, respectively.

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

Following the tanh rule, the LLR-BP algorithm is summarized as follows.

Initialization: Each symbol node is assigned an a pos-

teriori LLR

. For every position

such that

,

.

Step 1) (check-node update): For each , and for each , compute

realized. The transform is first done on all incoming LLR messages. Then all the terms are summed, and individual terms are subtracted to obtain the individual pseudomessages from which the outgoing messages are obtained by means of the involution transform. This approach requires evaluations of the involution transform and additions, is simple, amenable to a parallel implementation, and therefore promising for use in extremely high-speed applications. However, the digital hardware implementation of the transform poses a significant challenge (see Section VI-B).

Step 2) (symbol-node update): For each , compute

C. LLR-BP Based on the Jacobian Approach

The “tanh rule” of (1) can alternatively be represented by [20]

(2)

, which

can be expressed by using the Jacobian logarithm [22] twice as

for each (3)

Step 3) (decision): Quantize

such

that

if

, and

if

.

If

, halt, with as the decoder output; otherwise

go to Step 1). If the algorithm does not halt within some

, declare a decoder failure.

Although using LLRs in Step 2) above eliminates multiplication and normalization operations, the evaluation of hyperbolic tangents is still required. In software, a two-dimensional (2-D) lookup table can be used to implement the tanh rule [13]. The implementation of (2) requires hyperbolic tangent evaluations, multiplications to obtain their product, divisions to obtain the extrinsic terms, and inverse hyperbolic tangent evaluations. The signs can be obtained by getting the overall sign, and then the “extrinsic” signs by using exclusive OR with the individual signs.

B. LLR-BP Based on Gallager’s Approach
The LLR messages in a check node can be computed [1] based on the following identity:

(4)

where the function

is an in-

volution transform, i.e., has the property

. The

only change in the LLR-BP algorithm is the check-node update,

given by

(5)

(6)

Consider check node with edges from symbol

nodes in

. The incoming mes-

sages are

.

Define two sets of auxiliary binary random variables

, and

. Using (6) repeatedly, we obtain

and

in a re-

cursive manner from

. Using

, we obtain

for every

. Thus, the outgoing message

from check node becomes

(7)

Clearly, this is essentially the forward–backward algorithm ap-

plied to the trellis of a single parity-check code [2], requiring

computations of the core operation

in

(6) per check-node update. The underlying function

can be implemented as a lookup table or a piece-

wise linear function [7]. Therefore, the core operation

can be realized using four additions, one comparison, and two

corrections. Each correction can be a table lookup or a linear

function evaluation with a shift and a constant addition.

IV. APPROXIMATED GENERAL REPRESENTATIONS OF THE BP ALGORITHM
This section focuses on simplifying the check-node updates to obtain reduced-complexity LLR-BP derivatives that achieve near-optimum performance. A simplified symbol-node update that is useful for certain LDPC codes and reduces storage requirements is also described.

A. BP-Based Decoding

The involution transform can be elegantly implemented in soft- The key motivation behind the most widely used BP-based ware where essentially infinite precision representation can be approximation is as follows.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES
TABLE I COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF VARIOUS CHECK-NODE UPDATES

1291

Lemma 1: The magnitude of

is less than or equal

to the minimum of the magnitudes of

or , namely,

.

Proof: Using (4), we obtain

. The inequality fol-

lows from that fact that

used in (4) is a monotonically

decreasing function. In addition, as

, we have

.

Using

, (7) can be ap-

proximated by

Although should vary with different signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) and different iterations to achieve the optimum performance, it is kept a constant for the sake of simplicity. A good approach to determine the value of is by DE, see Section V-B. Interestingly, as mentioned in [17], the performance of BP decoding of short-to-moderate length LDPC codes can also be further improved by about 0.2 dB using proper scaling of the LLRs. This observation was verified in [23].
C. Offset BP-Based Decoding
In (6), the term can be approximated to get

(8)

which is the check-node update in the BP-based decoding al-

gorithm. In practice, it requires the determination of two of the

incoming LLRs having the smallest magnitudes, as well as of

the signs of the outgoing messages. Furthermore, only two re-

sulting values, as opposed to , have to be stored, because

branches share the outgoing LLR messages. The computational

complexity of this step is

additions (compar-

isons) [3].

Thus we have established that

and

have

the same sign and the magnitude of

is always greater

than that of

, i.e.,

and

. This suggests further processing of

to obtain more accurate soft values.

B. Normalized BP-Based Decoding
The BP-based approximation can be improved by employing a check-node update that uses a normalization constant greater than one, and is given by

(10)

A method to obtain the correction factor was described in [5],

where it was also shown that the use of a fixed in all computa-

tions of

incurred only a negligible loss in performance

with respect to BP decoding. A similar approach was also pre-

sented in [15].

A computationally more efficient approach that captures the

net effect of the additive correction term applied to each check-

node update core operation (10) is obtained from the BP-based

decoding by subtracting a positive constant as follows:

(11)
This method differs from the normalization scheme in that LLR messages smaller in magnitude than are set to zero, thereby removing their contributions in the next symbol-node-update step. Note that BP-based, normalized BP-based, and offset BP-based decoding do not need any channel information, e.g., the SNR, and work with just the received values as inputs.
Table I summarizes the computational complexity of the various check-node updates.

D. APP-Based Symbol-Node Simplification
The computation of the extrinsic outgoing messages at a (9) symbol node can be performed in a similar manner as that
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

of the extrinsic signs at a check node, i.e., first compute (3),

and then obtain the extrinsic messages

by individually

subtracting

. The symbol-node update can be further

simplified by only computing the a posteriori LLR for ,

given by (3). Then, the outgoing messages from are obtained

as

,

. Decoding

algorithms with this symbol-node-update simplification are

called APP algorithms. A similar approach was used in [19]

and [24]. This simplification can greatly reduce not only the

computational complexity, but also the storage requirements.

Its impact on the decoding performance depends on the class

of codes, as well as on the type of check-node update, as will

be illustrated in Sections VI-C and VII.

V. DENSITY EVOLUTION AND SIMULATIONS FOR UNQUANTIZED SIMPLIFIED ALGORITHMS

DE [12] is an effective numerical method to analyze the
performance of message-passing iterative decoding algorithms. Q x Fig. 1. Example of updated ( ) after normalization and offsetting.

Here we apply it to many of the algorithms discussed above,

and present their asymptotic performance. Simulation results are provided to show the performances of different decoding algorithms with codes of finite lengths.
For a check node with degree , each outgoing mes-

DE in symbol nodes of the BP-based and BP decoding is iden-

tical, and

can be numerically computed with the fast

Fourier transform (FFT), since only additions are involved.

sage can be expressed by a function of

in- B. DE and Simulation Results for Normalized and Offset

coming messages (with one incoming message along the BP-Based Decoding

same edge as the outgoing message being excluded), i.e.,

, where

depends on the

decoding algorithm, e.g., (2) for the BP algorithm. Similarly,

for a symbol node of degree , each can be expressed

by

, where

are

incoming messages, and is the a priori LLR value of

this bit. For both the BP and the BP-based algorithms,

. DE typically

assumes all-one transmission, based on some symmetry con-

ditions, and a loop-free bipartite graph. Hence, all messages

It is straightforward to modify the DE for the BP-based

algorithm to take normalization and offset into account. In

the symbol-node update, the procedure is the same as in the

BP-based algorithm for both the normalized and the offset

BP-based algorithms. In each check-node update, we first cal-

culate

with (12), as for the BP-based decoding. Then, for

normalized BP-based decoding, we modify

according

to the normalization operation, i.e.,

, and

for offset BP-based decoding, we update

with

entering one node are independent and identically distributed

(13)

(i.i.d.). The key problem is to calculate the probability density

function (pdf) of the messages of the current iteration based on

the pdf of the messages from the preceding iteration. That is,

in check-node processing, given the pdf

of and the

mapping , we need to derive the pdf

of ; in the

symbol-node processing, given

and

, we need the

pdf

according to .

where

results from setting all in the range

to zero in the offset processing. In (13), the impulse

function introduced in the pdf

with offset disappears in

the pdf of

after the symbol-node processing. Note that

both normalization and offsetting preserve the sign of the re-

sulting LLRs and reduce their magnitudes. Fig. 1 shows an ex-

ample of

for the case of BP-based approximation, after

A. DE for Iterative BP-Based Decoding

The DE of the BP-based algorithm has been addressed

in [9], [14], and [15]. In check-node processing, a spe-

cific output is a function of

i.i.d. random vari-

ables,

, with pdf

and the map-

ping

. For

, define

normalization, and after offsetting. It can be seen that with either

normalization or offsetting, the density

is concentrated

toward the origin such that the mean on is decreased.

Using DE for the normalized BP-based and offset BP-based

decoding, we can optimize the decoder parameters by varying

or in calculating the thresholds, and selecting those or

that provide the best performance. The numerical results of

and

, which

canbeinterpretedastheprobabilitiesof withmagnitudegreater

than , and sign and , respectively. Then, the pdf of is

the two improved BP-based algorithms for three ensembles of LDPC codes with rate 1/2 are summarized in [9], and compared with those obtained for the BP and the BP-based algorithms. With a properly chosen or , the two improved BP-based algo-

rithms exhibit only about 0.1 dB of degradation in performance

compared with the BP algorithm, and most of the gap between (12) the BP and BP-based decoding can be bridged. The normalized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES

1293

[8], an alternative method to obtain for such codes has been proposed.

Fig. 2. Bit-error performances of an (8000,4000) and a (1008,504) LDPC code under two improved BP-based algorithms (it = 100).

BP-based algorithm slightly outperforms the offset BP-based al-

gorithm, but may also be slightly more complex to implement.

Importantly, the results suggest that little additional improve-

ment could be achieved by allowing either or to change at

each iteration, or by using a 2-D optimization that combines the

two approaches.

Fig. 2 shows simulation results for the two improved

BP-based algorithms for an (8000,4000) and a (1008,504)

regular LDPC code with

[2] and

.

Even for these code lengths, DE is effective in optimizing the

decoder parameters. For the longer code, the gap between the

BP and the BP-based algorithm is about 0.5 dB, very close to

the 0.6 dB gap predicted for infinite code lengths. However,

with the normalized and the offset BP-based algorithms, the gap

can be reduced to about 0.05 dB with

and

values, respectively, that are optimized using DE. Even for

LDPC codes with medium and short code length, the values

of and obtained with the DE are still excellent to achieve

a close-to-BP performance. For the (1008,504) code, the two

improved algorithms have even a slightly better performance

than the BP algorithm at high SNR values. See also [16]. These

results are not surprising, because at medium or short code

lengths, the BP algorithm is not optimum, owing to correlation

among messages passed during the iterative decoding. The two

improved BP-based algorithms seem to be able to outperform

the BP algorithm by reducing the negative effect of correla-

tions. Optimizing or by DE may not be applicable to LDPC

codes with many short cycles in their graph representation,

e.g., short Gallager codes or Euclidean geometry codes. In

VI. DE AND SIMULATIONS FOR QUANTIZED SIMPLIFIED ALGORITHMS
For logic circuit design with finite precision, normalization can be implemented with a look-up table, or as a register shift for normalization factors like two, four, or eight. However, in general, offset BP-based decoding is more convenient for hardware implementation than normalized BP-based decoding. This section focuses on the quantization effects for the offset BP-based algorithm and the BP algorithm. Section VI-C presents the simulation results of the quantized normalized BP-based algorithm and the quantized normalized APP-based algorithm for difference-set cyclic (DSC) codes, where the normalized algorithms offer a better choice with scaling factors of two or four. Only uniform quantizers have been considered in this paper. Examining the use of nonuniform quantizers to cope with the nonlinearities of the functions considered is an interesting avenue for further research (see [25] and [26]).

A. DE and Simulation Results for Quantized Offset BP-Based Decoding

We first derive the DE for the quantized offset BP-based de-

coding, in a similar way to the approach in Section V-A. Let

denote a uniform quantization scheme with quantization

step and quantization bits, one of which denotes the sign,

whereas the remaining

denote the magnitude. Suppose

that the same quantization is taken for both received values and

messages passing in the decoder. Then the messages passing in

the iterative decoding belong to an alphabet of size

, rep-

resented by

, where

.

The quantization threshold is defined as

. A re-

ceived value is initially quantized to an integer , whose

sign and magnitude are determined by

and

, respectively. We rede-

fine

and

, for

. The cumulative mass function of

is shown

in (14) at the bottom of the page. The probability mass func-

tion (pmf)

is, taking the difference of consecutive

values

(15)

DE in the symbol node is almost the same as that in the continuous case. For a small number of quantization levels, the FFT can be avoided by directly computing discrete convolution.
The thresholds for the quantized BP-based decoding depend on both and . In Table II, numerical results for LDPC

(14)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005
TABLE II THRESHOLDS FOR QUANTIZED BP-BASED AND QUANTIZED OFFSET BP-BASED DECODING

codes with

(3,6) and (4, 8) are presented, using 1, 2, and 3, respectively, corresponding to the best offset value

dB

, where is the code rate and

in the continuous case. The same idea is used in choosing the

is the single-sided power spectral density of the additive white step size for the ensemble of (4,8) codes. For small , say four

Gaussian noise (AWGN). The best threshold values obtained or five, a larger value means a larger quantization range and

are shown in bold. Note that for some quantization schemes, results in better performance; for large , fine quantization, i.e.,

the thresholds are even better than those in the continuous a small value, is of great importance. For example, for (3,6)

case. The reason is that for these cases, the quantization ranges codes, with

, the best result is obtained when

are not wide enough. However, small quantization ranges and

; with

, the best result is achieved with

may be beneficial because the extrinsic messages, which are

and

. For both code ensembles, with

or even

overestimated, are upper bounded. This clipping effect could be

, thresholds very close to those of the continuous cases

regarded as a trivial improvement to the BP-based algorithm. are obtained. Space limitations preclude us from presenting in

Based on the quantized DE of the BP-based algorithm, the detail the procedure used for obtaining the optimum parameters,

quantized DE of the offset BP-based algorithm can be derived which can be found in [6], [8], [9], and [27]. See also [16].

readily in a similar way to Section V-B. In Table II, we list Fig. 3 compares the performance of the quantized offset

some of the numerical results for

(3,6) and (4,8) BP-based algorithm for the same two LDPC codes as in Sec-

regular LDPC codes, where, again, the best threshold values are tion V-B, with

for practical purposes, to that of

shown in bold. For the ensemble of (3,6) codes, we primarily the unquantized BP algorithm. For both codes,

quanti-

choose

0.15, 0.075, and 0.05, such that the offsets

zation, with one bit for the sign, can perform close to the BP

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES

1295

Fig. 3. Bit-error performances of an (8000,4000) and a (1008,504) LDPC code Fig. 4. DE results for the (d ; d ) = (3; 6) regular LDPC code under

under quantized offset BP-based algorithm (it = 50).

quantized BP decoding and quantized offset BP-based decoding.

algorithm. Thus, 4-b operations are involved in check-node

processing. For the (1008,504) code, as in the unquantized

case, the quantized offset BP-based algorithm achieves a better

performance than the BP algorithm at high SNR values. For

the (8000,4000) LDPC code, with

, the quantized offset

BP-based algorithm can achieve slightly better performance

than with

, and suffers a degradation of less than 0.1 dB,

compared with the unquantized BP algorithm.

In [16], a modification of the offset BP-based algorithm is

proposed, in which the offset is conditionally applied during

each check-node update, based on the spread of the incoming

LLR values. While computationally more involved, this ap-

proach offers some advantages when using rather coarse (e.g.,

4-b) quantization.

for the output of . Then, the input and output of

are quantized as (7,1/32) and (3,1.0), respectively. Using

two approximations of

prevents information loss in the

intermediate step, accommodating a wide range of input LLRs

(see also [21]).

The DE for the quantized BP algorithm can be greatly simpli-

fied, compared with that for the unquantized BP algorithm [12],

since the number of quantization levels is usually small. First,

the pmf of

(or

) can be obtained by

table lookup, given the pmf of the random variable . Second,

the pmf of sums in check- and symbol-node processing can be

directly computed with convolution, avoiding the use of FFT

and the related numerical errors.

In check-node processing, given the pmf

and by

B. DE for Quantized LLR-BP Decoding of Gallager’s Approach
The derivation of DE for the unquantized BP algorithm in [12] used Gallager’s approach, discussed in Section III-B. Here, by using DE analysis and simulation results, we provide a justification that Gallager’s BP decoding algorithm is sensitive to quantization and round-off errors, although the algorithm is appealing for software implementation with infinite precision. For simplicity, we suppose that uniform quantization is taken for

looking up the function table defined for

,

and

are obtained for the transform

, where

corresponds to

, and

to

. Define

and

as the pmf of

responding to

respectively. Then

and

convolutions of

and

, cor-

and

,

are

-fold

. That is, initially set

and

update them for

times by

, then recursively

both input LLR values and messages passing in the decoder. An

input LLR value is quantized to an integer based on a uniform

(17)

quantization scheme, with

.

In check-node processing, the message passing from a check Let

node after processing is

and

and

be the pmf of corresponding to

, respectively.

and

can be obtained

from

and

, respectively, by looking up the table

(16) for . Finally,

is obtained by combining

and

. In symbol-node processing,

is updated using

where

and

are two quantized realizations of .

and the pmf

, and the FFT can be avoided.

The input and output of are quantized with

and DE reveals that the quantized BP decoding is subject to error

, respectively, while those of

are quantized with floors. Fig. 4 depicts the BER results of DE for the (3,6) LDPC

and

, respectively. For example, consider code, with

and various pairs of

.

for the input LLRs, i.e., the quantization for The quantization thresholds are determined heuristically based

the input of

is

, and

on and the pdf of input LLRs. With larger , the quantized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

Fig. 5. Error performance of an (1008,504) LDPC code under quantized BP algorithm with Gallager’s approach (it = 50).

Fig. 6. Performance of the (273,191) DSC code with the quantized normalized BP-based and the quantized normalized APP-based algorithms.

BP decoding has better thresholds and lower error floors. Sim-

ilar results are observed for smaller values, see also [28]. The

error floor around was verified experimentally for a (3,6)

code of length 8000 with

.

As a comparison, we plot the DE results of the quantized offset

BP-based algorithm. Even with 5-b or 6-b quantization (with

one bit for the sign), there are no error floors above

for

this algorithm. Note that in Fig. 4, the error floor is becoming

slightly tilted with the increase of SNR in some cases. That is

due to the fact that a quantization scheme may be less optimized

for a high SNR value than for a low one.

rithm performs very close to the BP algorithm, and even slightly better at high SNR values. With the same quantization levels, the performance of the normalized APP-based algorithm is only 0.1 dB worse than that of the BP algorithm, while allowing further reduction in computational and storage requirements. Similar results for quantized BP-based and APP-based algorithms are observed for the (1057,813) DSC code, with a scaling factor of four, i.e., a register shift of two positions. Note that for both DSC codes, the BP-based and APP-based algorithms have about 1-dB performance loss, compared with the BP algorithm, and there is no performance improvement after ten iterations.

In Fig. 5, simulation results of the quantized BP and the quantized offset BP-based decoding are compared for a (1008,504)

VII. FURTHER SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

regular LDPC code. Even with 7-b quantization of , i.e., 7-b magnitude computation, the quantized BP demonstrates error floors in low BER or word-error rate ranges, although error floors in simulations with finite code length appear higher than where predicted by DE. However, for the quantized offset BP-based decoding with 5-b quantization, or 4-b operations in magnitude computation, no error floor appears at BER down to
. Sensitivity of the BP algorithm to quantization errors has also been observed in [10], [12], and [29], and error floors have been observed in the simulation with finite quantization bits.

We have described two broad categories of decoding algorithms. All approaches in the first category maintain an accurate representation of the required computations, even though the implementation of the actual functions computed are different. The second category aims at reducing the computational complexity by approximating the key step of check-node update. The choice of the approximation used can lead to performance degradation but, interestingly, there appears to be a dependence not just on the decoding algorithm, but also on the properties of the LDPC code selected.

C. DSC Codes With Quantized Normalized BP-Based and APP-Based Decoding

Two types of LDPC codes have been used for this study. The first, called the conventional LDPC code, is obtained via a random construction that avoids cycles of length four in the

Fig. 6 shows the BER performance of the (273,191) DSC Tanner graph [2]. The second type is called the geometric LDPC

code with the quantized normalized BP-based algorithm and code [17], [18], which also includes DSC codes. These codes

the normalized APP-based algorithm. For this code, we take have very good minimum distance and are competitive for

uniform quantization scheme

. All the re- high-rate codes of short or medium length. Their parity-check

ceived values and messages are represented by integers in the matrices are usually squared, and have a larger number of ones

range [ 31, 31]. The quantization step has been chosen such in each row or column than conventional LDPC codes do.

that the quantization range is neither too small nor too large, and Hence, the Tanner graphs of geometric codes generally contain

no other optimization has been considered. The normalization more short cycles, leading to more correlations in the messages

factor is

, corresponding to one position register shift. For passed between check nodes and symbol nodes.

each algorithm, an appropriate

is chosen such that there Fig. 7 shows the BER performance of different BP-based de-

is no obvious improvement in performance with increased itera- coding algorithms for the conventional (1008,504) LDPC code

tions. The simulations show that the normalized BP-based algo- with

and

. The BP-based decoding algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES

1297

Fig. 7. Performance of a (1008,504) LDPC code (it = 100).

among messages after the first several iterations, even with the BP algorithm. Hence, for this code, the APP algorithm achieves a performance close to that of the BP algorithm, as shown in [17], while for conventional LDPC codes, the APP algorithm provides much worse performance. Indeed, the good performance of the DSC codes is largely due to the redundant number of check sums. Both the Jacobian LLR-BP (table lookup) and the normalized BP-based approaches work well and are close to each other. At high SNRs, however, the simulation results show that the normalized BP-based algorithm outperforms the Jacobian LLR-BP algorithm, because the former algorithm achieves a better reduction of the correlation effect among the messages after several iterations. However, the approximation of the BP algorithm via normalization is not as accurate as that achieved by the Jacobian LLR-BP algorithm, and this impacts the decoding performance during the first few iterations. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 8, the normalized BP-based algorithm has worse performance after two iterations than the Jacobian LLR-BP algorithm. The simplified symbol-node update in the APP-based decoding results in a larger correlation among the messages. As shown in Fig. 8, with a sufficiently large number of iterations, the normalized APP-based algorithm is able to overcome this effect and delivers better performance than the Jacobian APP-based algorithm.
In general, although the accurate LLR-BP schemes provide better estimates than the approximate schemes for the first several iterations, they introduce more correlations in the iterative process. Thus, the accurate decoding schemes are less robust than the approximate decoding schemes for LDPC codes with many short cycles in their Tanner graphs.

VIII. CONCLUSIONS

We investigated efficient LLR-BP decoding of LDPC codes

and its reduced-complexity versions. Our exposition offers a

unifying framework encompassing all existing numerically acFig. 8. Performance of the (1057,813) DSC code with at most it = 50. curate LLR-BP decoding algorithms and their reduced-com-

plexity counterparts.

suffers a 0.3 0.4 dB degradation in performance, compared Focusing on the computationally expensive check-node

with the Jacobian LLR-BP decoding using a small lookup update, several numerically accurate versions of LLR-BP

table. Both the normalized and offset BP-based algorithms decoding were presented. The core computation steps in each

have excellent performance that is slightly better than that of case have different properties with respect to infinite or finite

the Jacobian LLR-BP. Note that longer conventional LDPC precision realization, and hence, different storage and latency

codes that have fewer short cycles in their Tanner graphs lead requirements. Furthermore, reduced-complexity variants of

to reduced correlations among the messages exchanged in iter- LLR-BP decoding were described, starting with the most com-

ative decoding, and hence, better performance for the accurate monly used BP-based approximation of the check-node update.

LLR-BP algorithms (see Fig. 2). The APP-based simplified New simplified versions were obtained by incorporating either

symbol-node update does not provide good performance with a normalization term or an additive offset term in the BP-based

the Jacobian LLR-BP algorithm. However, with a scaling factor approximation. Both offset and normalized BP-based decoding

much bigger than that computed by DE for the normalized algorithms can achieve performance very close to that of BP

BP-based algorithm, the APP-based approach, together with decoding while offering significant advantages for hardware

normalization in check-node updates, can achieve a perfor- implementation.

mance that is 0.1 dB better than that of BP-based algorithm, The use of DE was introduced to analyze the quantized ver-

but is still 0.25 dB worse than LLR-BP decoding.

sion of Gallager’s original LLR-BP decoding scheme, as well

Fig. 8 depicts the performance of the (1057,813) DSC code. as quantized versions of various reduced-complexity BP-based

Using the property of finite geometries, it can be proved that algorithms. This approach also allowed optimization of param-

in the Tanner graph of this code, every symbol or check node eters related to the reduced-complexity variants of LLR-BP de-

is in a cycle of length six, leading to a large correlation effect coding. An important outcome of this study is that Gallger’s

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005

original decoding scheme is very sensitive to finite precision implementations, requiring at least 7 b of precision. Comparatively, the offset BP-based decoding is not so sensitive to quantization errors, and only 4-b precision is often sufficient to avoid error floors.
Our results indicate that in iterative decoding, accurate representations of the LLR-BP algorithm do not always lead to the best performance if the underlying graph representation contains many short cycles. In fact, simplified reduced-complexity decoding schemes sometimes can outperform the BP decoding algorithm.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the editor for an advance copy of [16]. They also thank the editor and the anonymous reviewers for constructive comments that improved the quality of this paper.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1963.

[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 399–431, Mar.

1999.

[3] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity it-

erative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief prop-

agation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.

[4] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

[5] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “Reduced-complexity

decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” IEE Electron.

Lett., vol. 37, pp. 102–104, Jan. 2001.

[6] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Decoding low-density parity-check

codes with normalized APP-based algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom,

San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1026–1030.

[7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient im-

plementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,”

in Proc. IEEE Globecom, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1036–1036E.

[8] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near-optimum universal belief-propa-

gation-based decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.

[9]

, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algo-

rithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210,

May 2002.

[10] P. Li and W. K. Leung, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with

finite quantization bits,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 62–64,

Feb. 2000.

[11] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for BP-based de-

coding algorithms of LDPC codes and their quantized versions,” in Proc.

IEEE Globecom, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., Nov. 2002, pp. 1026–1030.

[12] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-

check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[13] S. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding

schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, Sep. 2000.

[14] X. Wei and A. N. Akansu, “Density evolution for low-density parity-

check codes under Max-Log-MAP decoding,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol.

37, pp. 1125–1126, Aug. 2001.

[15] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the

min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in

Proc. IEEE Globecom, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1021–1025.

[16] A. H. Banihashemi, J. Zhao, and F. Zarkeshvari, “On implementation

of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding LDPC codes,”

IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published.

[17] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-

step majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE

Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931–937, Jun. 2000.

[18] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based

on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[19] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 9, pp. 533–548, Sep. 1981.
[20] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[21] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[22] J. Erfanian, S. Pasupathy, and G. Gulak, “Reduced-complexity symbol detectors with parallel structures for ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, no. 2-4, pp. 1661–1671, Feb.-Apr. 1994.
[23] M. R. Yazdani, S. Hemati, and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improving belief propagation on graphs with cycles,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 57–59, Jan. 2004.
[24] K. Karplus and H. Krit, “A semi-systolic decoder for the PDSC-73 errorcorrecting code,” in Discrete Applied Mathematics 33. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1991, pp. 109–128.
[25] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precesion implementation of low density parity check codes decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, Sydney, Australia, May 2001, pp. 202–205.
[26] Y.-C. He, H.-P. Li, S.-H. Sun, and L. Li, “Threshold-based design of quantized decoder for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun.–Jul. 2003, p. 149.
[27] J. Chen, “Reduced-complexity decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check codes and turbo codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, Dec. 2003.
[28] D. Declercq and F. Verdier, “A general framework for parallel implementation of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication.
[29] J. Thorpe. Low-complexity approximations to belief propagation for LDPC codes. [Online]. Available: http:www.ee.caltech.edu/jeremy/research/papers/research.html
Jinghu Chen (S’01–M’04) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, in 2003.
From November 2003 to March 2005, he was a Research Associate with the Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago. He joined Qualcomm Inc., San Diego, CA, in April 2005, where he is currently a Senior Engineer. His research interests include wireless communications, error-correcting codes, and algorithms for decoding and detections.
Ajay Dholakia (M’91–SM’03) received the B.E. (Hons.) degree in electrical and electronics engineering from the Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, India, in 1984, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from North Carolina State University (NCSU), Raleigh, in 1988 and 1994, respectively.
From September 1987 to December 1989, he worked as a Modem Design Engineer with Datec, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC. After spending a year as a Postdoctoral Research Associate with the Department of Computer Science, NCSU, he joined IBM Corp., Research Triangle Park, NC, where he worked on design and development of digital signal processing algorithms for PC-based multimedia telephony and modems. He spent April 1997 to June 1999 on international assignment at the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory, Rüschlikon, Switzerland, working on design and development of advanced communications and signal processing algorithm for high-speed voice-band modems. In July 1999, he joined the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory as a Research Staff Member, and has been working on coding and signal processing for data storage technologies and systems. His research interests are in the areas of coding and information theory and their application to data storage and communications systems. He holds 25 patents (granted and pending) in these areas. He is the author of the book Introduction to Convolutional Codes with Applications (Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publications, 1994. Dr. Dholakia has served as a member of the Technical Program Committee for the 2003, 2004, and 2005 IEEE International Conferences on Computer Communications and Networks. He received the Best Student Paper Award at IEEE AUTOTESTCON, 1991.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DECODING OF LDPC CODES

1299

Evangelos Eleftheriou (F’02) received the Diploma in electrical engineering from the University of Patras, Patras, Greece, in 1979, and the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 1981 and 1985, respectively.
He joined the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory, Rüschlikon, Switzerland, in 1986, where he worked on various projects related to wired and wireless communications, as well as magnetic recording. He currently manages the storage technologies group at the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory. His primary research interests lie in the areas of communications and information theory, particularly signal processing and coding for transmission and recording systems. His research activities have also expanded into the area of nanotechnology and, in particular, probe-storage techniques. He holds over 40 patents, granted and pending applications. He was named an IBM Fellow in May 2005. Dr. Eleftheriou was Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 1994 to 1999 in the area of Equalization and Coding, and Guest Editor of the IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS special issue on The Turbo Principle: From Theory to Practice. He was corecipient of the 2003 IEEE Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize Paper Award.

Xiao-Yu Hu (M’03) received the Ph.D. degree in computer and communication science from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, in 2002. Prior to that, he studied at the East China Institute of Technology and Southeast University, China.
Since September 1999, he has been with the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory, Rüschlikon, Switzerland, currently as a Research Staff Member, working on various projects including a xDSL transceiver, magnetic recording channel technology, and high performance/availability disk-based storage systems. His research interests include information and communication theory, signal processing, coding theory, especially codes on graphs, and distributed/parallel algorithms with applications to storage systems.

Marc P. C. Fossorier (S’90–M’95–SM’00) was born in Annemasse, France, on March 8, 1964. He received the B.E. degree from the National Institute of Applied Sciences (I.N.S.A.), Lyon, France, in 1987, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, in 1991 and 1994, all in electrical engineering.
In 1996, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawai’i, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He was promoted to Associate Professor in 1999. In 2002, he was a Visiting Professor at Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommunications (ENST), Paris, France. His research interests include decoding techniques for linear codes, communication algorithms, and statistics. He coauthored (with S. Lin, T. Kasami, and T. Fujiwara) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms (Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998). Dr. Fossorier is a recipient of a 1998 NSF Career Development award. He has served as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY since 2003, as Editor for the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS since 1999, as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 1996 to 2003, and as the Treasurer of the IEEE Information Theory Society from 2000 to 2003. Since 2002, he has also been a member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society. He was Program Co-Chairman for the 2000 International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA), and Editor for the Proceedings of the 2003 and 1999 Symposia on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms, and Error-Correcting Codes (AAECC). He is a member of the IEEE Information Theory and Communications Societies.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:18:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

