IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

2413

Convergence of Min-Sum Message Passing for Quadratic Optimization
Ciamac C. Moallemi, Member, IEEE, and Benjamin Van Roy, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We establish the convergence of the min-sum message passing algorithm for minimization of a quadratic objective function given a convex decomposition. Our results also apply to the equivalent problem of the convergence of Gaussian belief propagation.
Index Terms—Decentralized optimization, message-passing algorithms.

I. INTRODUCTION

C ONSIDER an optimization problem that is characterized

by a set and a hypergraph

. There are deci-

sion variables; each is associated with a vertex

and takes

values in a set . The set is a collection of subsets (or, “hy-

peredges”) of the vertex set ; each hyperedge

is as-

sociated with a real-valued “component function” (or, “factor”)

. The optimization problem takes the form

where

codes [1]–[3]. Message passing algorithms are now used rou-

tinely to solve NP-hard decoding problems in communication

systems. It was a surprise that this simple and efficient approach

offers sufficing solutions.

The majority of literature has been focused on the case where

the set is discrete and the resulting optimization problem is

combinatorial in nature. We, however, are interested in the the

case where

and the optimization problem is continuous.

In particular, many continuous optimization problems that are

traditionally approached using methods of linear programming,

convex programming, etc. also possess graphical structure, with

objectives defined by sums of component functions. We believe

the min-sum algorithm leverages this graphical structure in a

way that can complement traditional optimization algorithms,

and that combining strengths will lead to algorithms that are

able to scale to larger instances of linear and convex programs.

One continuous case that has been considered in the literature

is that of pairwise quadratic graphical models. Here, the objec-

tive function is a positive definite quadratic function

(1)

Here,

is the vector of variables associated with

vertices in the subset . We refer to an optimization program

of this form as a graphical model. While this formulation may

seem overly broad—indeed, almost any optimization problem

can be cast in this framework—we are implicitly assuming that

the graph is sparse and that the hyperedges are small.

Over the past few years, there has been significant interest

in a heuristic optimization algorithm for graphical models. We

will call this algorithm the min-sum message passing algorithm,

or the min-sum algorithm, for short. This is equivalent to the

so-called max-product algorithm, also known as belief revision,

and is closely related to the sum-product algorithm, also known

as belief propagation. Interest in such algorithms has to a large

extent been triggered by the success of message passing algo-

rithms for decoding low-density parity-check codes and turbo

Manuscript received March 18, 2006; revised May 06, 2008. Current version published April 22, 2009. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation by Grant IIS-0428868. The work of C. C. Moallemi was supported by a Benchmark Stanford Graduate Fellowship.
C. C. Moallemi is with the Graduate School of Business, Columbia University, New York, NY 10025 USA (e-mail: ciamac@gsb.columbia.edu).
B. Van Roy is with the Departments of Management Science and Engineering and Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e-mail: bvr@stanford.edu).
Communicated by A. Krzyz˙ak, Associate Editor for Pattern Recognition, Statistical Learning, and Inference.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2016055

This function is decomposed in a pairwise fashion according to

an undirected graph

, so that

where the functions

are quadratic. It has been

shown that, if the min-sum algorithm converges, it computes the

global minimum of the quadratic [4]–[6]. The question of con-

vergence, however, has proved difficult. Sufficient conditions

for convergence have been established [4], [5], but these con-

ditions are abstract and difficult to verify. Convergence has also

been established for classes of quadratic programs arising in cer-

tain applications [7], [8].

In recent work, Johnson, et al. [9], [10] have introduced the

notion of walk-summability for pairwise quadratic graphical

models. They establish convergence of the min-sum algorithm

for walk-summable pairwise quadratic graphical models when

the particular set of component functions

(2)

is employed by the algorithm and the algorithm is initialized with zero-valued messages. Further, they give examples outside this class for which the min-sum algorithm does not converge.
Note that there may be many ways to decompose a given objective function into component functions. The min-sum algorithm takes the specification of component functions as an input

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

and exhibits different behavior for different decompositions of text of general convex (i.e., not necessarily quadratic) objective

the same objective function. Alternatively, the choice of a de- functions. The notion of a convex decomposition is easily gen-

composition can be seen to be equivalent to the choice of initial eralized, while it is not clear how to interpret the walk-summa-

conditions for the min-sum algorithm [6], [11]. A limitation of bility condition or a decomposition of the form (2) in the gen-

the convergence result of Johnson, et al. [9], [10] is that it re- eral convex case. In follow-on work [12], we have been able

quires use of a particular decomposition of the objective func- to establish such a generalization and develop conditions for

tion of the form (2) and with zero-valued initial messages. The the convergence of the min-sum algorithm in a broad range of

analysis presented does not hold in other situation. For example, general convex optimization problems. When specialized to the

the result does not establish convergence of the min-sum algo- quadratic case, however, those results are not as general as the

rithm in the applied context considered in [7].

results presented herein.

We will study the convergence of the min-sum algorithm The optimization of quadratic graphical models can be stated

given a convex decomposition:

as a problem of inference in Gaussian graphical models. In this

Definition 1 (Convex Decomposition): A convex decomposition of a quadratic function is a set of quadratic functions
such that

case, the min-sum algorithm is mathematically equivalent to sum-product algorithm (belief propagation), or the max-product algorithm. Our results therefore also apply to Gaussian belief propagation. However, since Gaussian belief propagation, in

general, computes marginal distributions that have correct

means but incorrect variances, we believe that the optimization

perspective is more appropriate than the inference perspective.

each function is strictly convex, and each function is convex (although not necessarily strictly so).
We will say that a quadratic objective function is convex decomposable if there exists a convex decomposition. This condition implies strict convexity of the quadratic objective function, however, not all strictly convex, quadratic functions are convex decomposable.
The primary contribution of this paper is in establishing that the min-sum algorithm converges given any convex decomposition or even decompositions that are in some sense “dominated” by convex decompositions. This result can be equivalently restated as a sufficient condition on the initial messages used in the min-sum algorithm. Convergence is established under both synchronous and asynchronous models of computation. We believe that this is the most general convergence result available for the min-sum algorithm with a quadratic objective function.
The walk-summability condition of Johnson, et al. is equiv-

As such, we state our results in the language of optimization.

Finally, note that solution of quadratic programs of the form

(1) is equivalent to the solution of the sparse, symmetric, pos-

itive definite linear system

. This is a well-studied

problem with an extensive literature. The important feature of

the min-sum algorithm in this context is that it is decentralized

and totally asynchronous. The comparable algorithms from the

literature fall into the class of classical iterative methods, such

as the Jacobi method or the Gauss-Seidel method [13]. In an

optimization context, these methods can be interpreted as local

search algorithms, such as gradient descent or coordinate de-

scent. While these methods are quite robust, they suffer from

a notoriously slow rate of convergence. Our hope is that mes-

sage-passing algorithms will provide faster decentralized solu-

tions to such problems than methods based on local search. In

application contexts where a comparison can be made [7], pre-

liminary results show that this may indeed be the case.

alent to the existence of a convex decomposition [10]. In this way, our work can be viewed as a generalization of their con-

II. THE MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

vergence results to a broad class of decompositions or initial conditions. This generalization is of more than purely theoretical interest. The decentralized and asynchronous settings in which such optimization algorithms are deployed are typically dynamic. Consider, for example, a sensor network which seeks

Consider a connected undirected graph with vertices

and edges . Let

denote the set of neighbors

of a vertex . Consider an objective function

that

decomposes according to pairwise cliques of

; that is

to estimate some environmental phenomena by solving an op-

(3)

timization problem of the form (1). As sensors are added or

removed from the network, the objective function in (1) will change slightly. Reinitializing the optimization algorithm after each such change would require synchronization across the entire network and a large delay to allow the algorithm to converge. If the change in the objective function is small, it is likely that the change in the optimum of the optimization problem is small also. Hence, using the current state of the algorithm (the set of messages) as an initial condition may result in much quicker

The min-sum algorithm attempts to minimize by an iter-

ative, message passing procedure. In particular, at time , each

vertex keeps track of a “message” from each neighbor

. This message takes the form of a function

.

These incoming messages are combined to compute new out-

going messages for each neighbor. In particular, the message

from vertex to vertex

evolves according to

convergence. In this way, understanding the robustness of the

min-sum algorithm over different initial conditions is important

to assessing it’s practical value.

Beyond this, however, our work suggests path towards under-

(4)

standing the convergence of the min-sum algorithm in the con-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

2415

Here, represents an arbitrary offset term that varies from

message to message. Only the relative values of the function

matter, so does not influence relevant information.

Its purpose is to keep messages finite. One approach is to

select so that

. The functions

are

initialized arbitrarily; a common choice is to set for all messages.
At time , each vertex forms a local objective function by combining incoming messages according to

identical to

, modulo constant offsets. A running

estimate of the th component of an optimal solution to the orig-

inal problem is generated according to

(6)

The message passing interpretation and the reparameterization interpretation can be related by

The vertex then generates a running estimate of the th component of an optimal solution to the original problem according to

By dynamic programming arguments, it is easy to see that this

procedure converges and is exact given a convex decomposition

when the graph

is a tree. We are interested in the case

where the graph has arbitrary topology.

A. Reparameterizations

An alternative way to view iterates of the min-sum algorithm

is as a series of “reparameterizations” of the objective function

[6], [11]. Each reparameterization corresponds to a different

decomposition of the objective function. In particular, at each

time , we define a function

, for each vertex

, and a function so that

, for each edge

,

The functions evolve jointly according to

These relations are easily established by induction on . As they

indicate, the message passing interpretation and the reparame-

terization interpretation are completely equivalent in the sense

that convergence of one implies convergence of the other, and

that they compute the same estimates of an optimal solution to

the original optimization problem.

Reparameterizations are more convenient for our purposes

for the following reason: Note that the decomposition (3) of the

objective is not unique. Indeed, many alternate factoriza-

tions can be obtained by moving mass between the single vertex

functions

and the pairwise functions

. Since

the message passing update (4) depends on the factorization,

this would seem to suggest that the each choice of factorization

results in a different algorithm. However, in the reparameteriza-

tion interpretation, the choice of factorization only enters via the

initial conditions. Moreover, it is clear that the choice of factor-

ization is equivalent to the initial choice of messages

.

Our results will identify sufficient conditions on these choices

so that the min-sum algorithm converges.

III. THE QUADRATIC CASE
We are concerned with the case where the objective function is quadratic, i.e.,

(5) Here,

is a symmetric, positive definite matrix and

They are initialized at time

according to

is a vector. Since must decompose relative to the

graph

according to (3), we must have the nondiagonal

entries satisfy

if

. Without loss of generality,

we will assume that

for all

(otherwise, each

such edge can be deleted from the graph) and that

for all

(otherwise, the variables can be rescaled so that

this is true).

Let

be the set of directed edges. That is,

In the common case, where the functions

iff

and

iff

. (We use braces

are all set and parentheses to distinguish directed and undirected edges, re-

to zero, the initial component functions

are spectively.) Quadratic component functions

that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

sum to

can be parameterized by two vectors of parameters, linear parameters , and the running estimates

and

, according to

Moreover,

converge.

Given such a representation, we will refer to the components of

as the quadratic parameters and the components of as the

linear parameters.

Iterates

of the min-sum algorithm can be

represented by quadratic parameters and linear parameters

. By explicit computation of the minimizations involved in

the reparameterization update (5), we can rewrite the update

equations in terms of the parameters and . In particular,

if

, then

(7)

If, on the other hand, mization

(8) , then the mini-

is unbounded and the update equation is ill-posed. Further, the estimate of the th component of the optimal solution, defined by (6), becomes

This result is more general than required to capture the “typical” situation. In particular, consider a situation where a problem formulation gives rise to component functions
that form a convex decomposition of an objective function . Then, initialize the min-sum algorithm with
. Since the initial iterate is a convex decomposition, it certifies that is convex decomposable, and it is also a convex-dominated decomposition.
We will prove Theorem 1 in Section VI. Before doing so, we will study the parameter sequences and independently.

IV. CONVERGENCE OF QUADRATIC PARAMETERS

The update (7) for the the quadratic parameters does not

depend on the linear parameters . Hence, it is natural to study

their evolution independently, as in [5] and [7]. In this section,

we establish existence and uniqueness of a fixed point of the up-

date (7). Further, we characterize initial conditions under which

converges to this fixed point.

Whether or not a decomposition is convex depends on

quadratic parameters but not the linear ones. Let be the set

of quadratic parameters

that correspond to convex

decompositions.

We have the following theorem establishing convergence for

the quadratic parameters. The proof relies on certain mono-

tonicity properties of the update (7), and extends the method

developed in [5], [7].

Theorem 2 (Quadratic Parameter Convergence): Assume that is convex decomposable. The system of equations

(9) has a solution such that

when

, and is ill-posed otherwise.

We define a generalization to the notion of a convex decom-

position.

Moreover, is the unique such solution.

Definition 2 (Convex-Dominated Decomposition): A If we initialize the min-sum algorithm so that

, for

convex-dominated decomposition of a quadratic function

some

, then

, for all , and

is a set of quadratic functions

that form a de-

composition of , such that for some convex decomposition

,

Proof: See Appendix A.

The key condition for the convergence is that the initial

quadratic parameters must be dominated by those of a

is convex, for all edges

.

Note that any convex decomposition is also convex-domi-

nated.

The following theorem is the main result of this paper.

Theorem 1 (Quadratic Min-Sum Convergence): If is

convex decomposition. Such initial conditions are easy to find,

for example

or

satisfy this requirement.

Note that we should not expect the algorithm to converge for

arbitrary . For the update (7) to even be well-defined at time

, we require that

convex decomposable and

is a convex-dom-

inated decomposition, then the quadratic parameters , the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

2417

The condition on in Theorem 2 guarantees this at time , and the theorem guarantees that it continue to hold for all . Similarly, the computation (9) of the estimate requires
that

To be precise, define a walk of length vertices

to be a sequence of

The theorem guarantees that this is true for all suitable choice of .

such that

, for all

we can define a weight by the product

, given

. Given a walk ,

V. CONVERGENCE OF LINEAR PARAMETERS
In this section, we will assume that the quadratic parameters are set to the fixed point , and study the evolution of the
linear parameters . In this case, the update (8) for the linear parameters takes the particularly simple form

(We adopt the convention that

for walks of length ,

which consist of a single vertex.) Given a set of walks , we

define the weight of the set to be the sum of the weights of the

walks in the set, that is

This linear equation can be written in vector form as

Define

to be the (infinite) set of all walks from vertex to

vertex . If the quantity

was well-defined, examining

the structure of and (13), we would have

where

is a vector with

(14)

(10)

is a diagonal matrix with (11)

and

is a matrix such that

if

,,

otherwise. (12)

If the spectral radius of is less than 1, then we have conver-

gence of independent of the initial condition by

Definition 3 (Walk-Summability): Given a matrix

with

, define by

. We say is walk-

summable if the spectral radius of is less than .

Walk-summability of guarantees the the function is

well defined even for infinite sets of walks, since in this case,

the series

is absolutely convergent. It is not difficult

to see that existence of a convex decomposition of implies

walk-summability [9]. More recent work [10] shows that these

two conditions are in fact equivalent.

We introduce a different weight function defined by

We will show that existence of a convex decomposition of is a sufficient condition for this to be true. In order to proceed, we first introduce the notion of walk-summability. A. Walk-Summability
Note that the optimization problem we are considering
has the unique solution

can be extends to sets of walks as before. However, we in-

terpret this function only over nonbacktracking walks, where

a walk is nonbacktracking if

, for

. Denote by the set of nonbacktracking walks. The fol-

lowing combinatorial lemma establishes a correspondence be-

tween on nonbacktracking walks and .

Lemma 1: Assume that is convex decomposable. For

each

, there exists a set of walks , all terminating

at the same vertex as , such that

Define

, so

and

, if . If we

assume that the matrix has spectral radius less than 1, we can

express the solution by the infinite series

(13)

Further, if

and

disjoint.

Proof: See Appendix B.

, then and

are

The above lemma reveals that is well-defined on infinite sets of nonbacktracking walks. Indeed, if

(15) The idea of walk-sums, introduced by Johnson, et al. [9], allows

us to interpret this solution as a sum of weights of walks on the

graph.

and the latter sum is finite since is walk-summable.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

We can make the correspondence between and stronger with the following lemma.

Lemma 2: Assume that is convex decomposable. If we

define

to be the set of all nonbacktracking walks from

vertex to vertex , we have

Here, we define

is the set of nonbacktracking walks of

length at least starting at and ending at . Note that if ,

then a nonbacktracking walk from to must have length at

least . Thus

Proof: See Appendix B.

If , there is a single nonbacktracking walk of length 0 from

to , namely

, and

. Thus

B. Spectral Radius of

Examining the structure of the matrix from (12), it is

clear that if

is defined to be the set of all length

nonbacktracking walks with

and

, then

Hence Comparing with Lemma 2, and (14), we have

Thus, if

is the set of all nonbacktracking walks

of length at least satisfying

and

Thus,

.

Putting together the results in this section, we have the fol-

lowing theorem.

Lemma 1 and (15) assure us that the later sum must be absolutely convergent. Then, we have established the following lemma.
Lemma 3: Assume that is convex decomposable. The spectral radius of is less than .
C. Exactness From Lemma 3, we have

Theorem 3 (Linear Parameter Convergence): Assume that

is convex decomposable and that

. Then, for arbi-

trary initial conditions , the linear parameters converge.

Further, the corresponding estimates converge to the global

optimum .

VI. OVERALL CONVERGENCE

In Section IV, we established the convergence of the

quadratic parameters . In Section V, we established

the convergence of the linear parameters assuming the

quadratic parameters were set to their fixed point. Here, we will

combine these results in order to prove Theorem 1, which es-

tablishes convergence of the full min-sum algorithm, where the

linear parameters evolve jointly with the quadratic parameters.

It suffices to establish convergence of the linear parameters

. Define the matrix

by

For each vertex , define the quantity

if otherwise.

,,

In this case, the estimate converges to

Define the diagonal matrix

by

for each vertex , defined by (6),

. Then, the min-sum update (8) becomes

where is defined by (10). From Theorem 2, it is clear that

and

(where and are defined by (12)

and (11), respectively).

From Lemma 3, the spectral radius of is less than 1.

Hence, there is a vector norm on and a corresponding

induced operator norm such that

, for some

[14].

Pick sufficiently large so that

for all

.

Then, the series

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

2419

converges for

. Set

Then, for

,

Since that if

, for any ,

we can pick . Then, for

Repeating over

Thus

if

otherwise

Note that the processor at vertex is not computing its updates

with the most recent values of the other components of the pa-

rameter vector. It uses the values of components from the last

time it communicated with a particular processor.

We will make the assumption of total asynchronism[13]: we

assume that each set is infinite, and that if is a sequence

in tending to infinity, then

, for each

neighbor

. This mild assumption guarantees that each

component is updated infinitely often, and that processors even-

so tually communicate with neighboring processors. It allows for arbitrary delays in communication, and even the out-of-order ar-

rival of messages between processors.

We can extend the convergence result of Theorem 1 to this

setting. The proof is straightforward given the results we have

already established and standard results on asynchronous algo-

rithms (see [13], for example). We will provide an outline here.

For the convergence of the quadratic parameters, note that the

synchronous iteration (7) is a monotone mapping (see Lemma

4 in Appendix A). For such monotone mappings, synchronous

convergence implies totally asynchronous convergence by

Proposition 6.2.1 in [13]. The linear parameter update equation

for the synchronous algorithm has the form

Since is arbitrary, it is clear that converges to . The fact that converges to follows from the same ar-
gument as in Theorem 3.

A. Asynchronous Convergence

The work we have presented thus far considers the conver-

gence of a synchronous variation of the min-sum algorithm. In

that case, every component of each of the parameter vectors

and is update at every time step. However, the min-sum al-

gorithm has a naturally parallel nature and can be applied in dis-

tributed contexts. In such implementations, different processors

may be responsible for updating different components of the

parameter vector. Further, these processors may not be able to

communicate at every time step, and thus may have insufficient

information to update the corresponding components of the pa-

rameter vectors. There may not even be a notion of a shared

clock. As such, it is useful to consider the convergence proper-

ties of the min-sum algorithm under an asynchronous model of

computation.

In such a model, we assume that a processor associated with

vertex is responsible for updating the parameters and

for each neighbor

. We define the to be the set of

times at which these parameters are updated. We define

to be the last time the processor at vertex commu-

nicated to the processor at vertex . Then, the parameters evolve

according to

For sufficiently large, by the convergence of the quadratic

parameters, the matrix

becomes arbitrarily close to .

From Lemma 3, the matrix has spectral radius less than

one. In this case, by [13, Corollary 2.6.2], it must correspond

to a weighted maximum norm contraction. Then, one can

establish asynchronous convergence of the linear parameters

by appealing again to [13, Prop. 6.2.1].

VII. DISCUSSION

The following corollary is a restatement of Theorem 1 in terms of message passing updates of the form (4).

Corollary 1 (Convergence of Message Passing Updates):

Let

be a convex decomposition of , and

let

be a decomposition of into quadratic

functions such that

(16)

is a convex function of

, for all

. Then, using

the decomposition

and quadratic initial mes-

sages

, the running estimates generated by the

min-sum algorithm converge. Further,

if otherwise

The work of Johnson, et al. [9] identifies existence of convex decomposition of the objective as a important condition

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

for such convergence results and also introduces the notion of walk-summability. However, the convergence analysis presented there only establishes a special case of the above corollary, where

e) If

,

.

Proof: Parts i)-iii) follow from the corresponding proper-

ties of the function

for

. Part v) follows from setting

in Part iv).

Part iv) remains. For notational convenience, define

In addition, they present a quadratic program that is not convex decomposable, and where the min-sum algorithm fails to converge.
The prior work of the current authors in [7] considers a case that arises in distributed averaging applications. There, convergence is established when

We have

is convex

This is also a special case of Corollary 1. The work in [7] further develops complexity bounds on the rate of convergence in certain special cases. Study of the rate of convergence of the min-sum algorithm in more general cases remains an open issue.
Note that the main convexity condition (16) of Corollary 1 can also be interpreted in the context of general convex objectives. While our analysis is very specific to the quadratic case, the result may be illuminating in the broader context of convex programs.
Finally, although every quadratic program can be decomposed over pairwise cliques, as we assume in this paper, there may also be decompositions involving higher order cliques. Our analysis does not apply to that case, and this is an interesting question for future consideration.

Denote the numerator of the last expression by denominator is positive, it suffices to show that
Note that

. Since the . Define

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THEOREM 2
Define the domain

Since

, we have

, for each

we can derive the chain of inequalities

. Then,

and the operator

by

This operator corresponds to a single min-sum update (7) of the quadratic parameters. We will first establish some properties of this operator.

Lemma 4: The following hold:

a) The operator is continuous.

b) The operator is monotonic. That is, if

,

.

c) The operator is positive. That is, if

,

d) If

and

and We are now ready to prove Theorem 2.
Theorem 2: Assume that is convex decomposable. The . set of system of equations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

2421

has a solution such that

APPENDIX B PROOF OF LEMMAS 1 AND 2

Moreover, is the unique such solution.

If we initialize the min-sum algorithm so that

, for

some

, then

, for all , and

Proof: Pick some

. Then,

from Part v)

of Lemma 4. Thus, we have

, for all

, by monotonicity. (Here,

denotes applications of the

operator .) Then, the sequence

is a monotonically

decreasing sequence, which by the positivity of , is bounded

below by zero. Hence, the limit

exists. By continuity, it

must be a fixed point of .

Now, note that, by positivity,

. Thus, by mono-

tonicity,

, for all . Since

,

we have

, for all

, and this sequence

converges to a fixed point

.

We wish to show that

. Assume otherwise.

Define

For the balance of this section, we assume that admits a convex decomposition.
In order to prove Lemma 1, we first fix an arbitrary vertex , and consider an infinite computation tree rooted at a vertex corresponding to . Such a tree is constructed in an iterative process, first starting with a single vertex . As each step, vertices are added to leaves on the tree corresponding to the neighbors of the leaf in the original graph other than its parent. Hence, the tree’s vertices consist of replicas of vertices in the original graph, and the local structure around each vertex is the same as that in the original graph. We can extend both functions and to walks on the computation tree by defining weights on edges in the computation tree according to the weights of the corresponding edges in the original graph. We will use the tilde symbol to distinguish vertices and subsets of the computation tree from those in the underlying graph.
We begin with a lemma.

Lemma 5: Given connected vertices in the computation

tree, with labels , , respectively, let

be the set of walks

starting at and returning to but never crossing the edge .

Then

Since

, the set in the above infimum is not empty.

Since

and

, we must have

. Then, we have

Proof: First, note that walks in

can be mapped to

disjoint walks on the original graph. Hence, by walk-summa-

bility, the infinite sum

Applying and using Part iv) of Lemma 4

This contradicts the definition of . Thus, we must have

.

Set

. From the above argument, we have

, for all

. Thus, satisfies the condi-

tions of the lemma.

Assume there is some other fixed point satisfying the con-

ditions of the lemma. Positivity implies

. Then, since

for some

, by repeatedly applying , we

have

converges absolutely. Now, define the set

to be the set of walks in

that travel at most a distance away from in the computation

tree. A walk

can be decomposed into a series of

traversals to neighbors

, self-returning walks from

to that do not cross

and travel at most distance

from , and then returns to . Letting index the total number

of such traversals, we have the expression

By walk-summability, this infinite sum must converge. Thus

for all . Taking a limit as

, it is clear that

.

It remains to prove the final statement of the lemma. Consider

, with

, for some

. Note that

. Then

for all

. Taking limits,

By the symmetry of the computation tree, the quantity depends only on the labels of and in the original

graph. Set

and

, for

each

and integer

. Then, we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

By Theorem 2, we have

Then, since

, and

we have
We call a walk on the computation tree a shortest-path walk if it is the unique shortest path between its endpoints. Given a shortest-path walk define to be the set of all walks of the form

Now, consider another walk

,

, that also

terminates at . We would like to show that and are

disjoint. Let be the shortest-path walk corresponding to .

Equivalently, we can show and are

disjoint. Assume there is some walk

. Then,

both and must be the shortest-path from the origin of to

. Since shortest-paths between a pair of vertices on the compu-

tation tree are unique, we must have

and this

,

which is a contradiction.

Note that we only considered nonbacktracking walks termi-

nating at a fixed vertex . However, our choice or was arbitrary

hence we can repeat the construction for each

. Moreover,

if and terminate at different vertices and , respectively,

the sets and will contain only walks that terminate at

and , respectively, thus they will be disjoint.

Using similar arguments as above, we can prove Lemma 2.

where

, for

. Intuitively, these

walks proceed along the path , but at each point , they may

also take a self-returning walk from vertex to vertex that

does not cross the edge

.

Lemma 2: Assume that is convex decomposable. If

we define

to be the set of all nonbacktracking walks from

vertex to vertex , we have

Lemma 6: Given a shortest-path walk Proof:

Proof: Consider a walk

, and let be the unique

corresponding walk in the computation tree terminating at . Let

be the unique shortest-path walk corresponding to . Note that

will originate at a replica of , and end at . Thus, uniquely

corresponds to a nonbacktracking walk

.

Now, can be uniquely decomposed according to

where

, for

, and is a self-

returning walk from to . Applying Lemma 6, we have

We are now ready to prove Lemma 1.

Lemma 1: Assume that is convex decomposable. For

each

, there exists a set of walks , all terminating

at the same vertex as , such that

where

is the set of self-returning walks from to .

However, a walk

can be uniquely decomposed

into a series of traversals to neighbors

, self-returning

walks from to that do not cross , and then returns to .

Letting index the total number of such traversals, we have the

expression

Further, if

and

, then and

are

disjoint.

Proof: Take a vertex in the original graph. Given a walk

from to in the original graph, there is a unique corresponding

walk from a replica of to in the computation tree. Also notice

that nonbacktracking walks in the original graph that terminate

at correspond uniquely to shortest-path walks in the computa-

tion tree that terminate at .

Now, assume that

terminates at . Let be the

corresponding shortest-path walk in the computation tree, and

consider the set . We will define to be the set of walks

in the original graph corresponding to . From Lemma 6,

From Lemma 5 Thus

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

2423

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
C. C. Moallemi wishes to thank J. Johnson for a helpful discussion.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. Int. Commun. Conf., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, 2001.
[4] Y. Weiss and W. T. Freeman, “Correctness of belief propagation in Gaussian graphical models of arbitrary topology,” Neural Computat., vol. 13, pp. 2173–2200, 2001.
[5] P. Rusmevichientong and B. Van Roy, “An analysis of belief propagation on the turbo decoding graph with Gaussian densities,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 745–765, 2001.
[6] M. J. Wainwright, T. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “Tree-based reparameterization framework for analysis of sum-product and related algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, pp. 1120–1146, 2003.
[7] C. C. Moallemi and B. Van Roy, “Consensus propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, pp. 4753–4766, 2006.
[8] A. Montanari, B. Prabhakar, and D. Tse, “Belief propagation based multi-user detection,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Comput., 2005.
[9] J. K. Johnson, D. M. Malioutov, and A. S. Willsky, “Walk-sum interpretation and analysis of Gaussian belief propagation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006, vol. 18.
[10] D. M. Malioutov, J. K. Johnson, and A. S. Willsky, “Walk-sums and belief propagation in Gaussian graphical models,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 7, pp. 2031–2064, Oct. 2006.
[11] M. J. Wainwright, T. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “Tree consistency and bounds on the performance of the max-product algorithm and its generalizations,” Statist. Comput., vol. 14, pp. 143–166, 2004.

[12] C. C. Moallemi and B. Van Roy, “Convergence of the Min-Sum Algorithm for Convex Optimization,” Tech. Rep. Stanford Univ., Manage. Sci. Eng. Dep., 2007 [Online]. Available: http://moallemi.com/ciamac/ papers/cc-2007.pdf
[13] D. P. Bertsekas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Parallel and Distributed Computation: Numerical Methods. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1997.
[14] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985.
Ciamac C. Moallemi (M’05) received the S.B. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science and in mathematics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, in 1996. He received the Certificate of Advanced Study in mathematics, with distinction in 1997 from the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K. He received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 2007.
He is an Assistant Professor with the Graduate School of Business, Columbia University, New York, where he has been since 2007.
Dr. Moallemi is a member of INFORMS. He is the recipient of a British Marshall Scholarship (1996) and a Benchmark Stanford Graduate Fellowship (2003).
Benjamin Van Roy (M’00) received the S.B. degree in computer science and engineering, and the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science in 1993, 1995, and 1998, respectively, all from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge.
He is an Associate Professor of Management Science and Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and, by courtesy, Computer Science, at Stanford University, Stanford, CA. He has held visiting positions as the Wolfgang and Helga Gaul Visiting Professor at the University of Karlsruhe and as the Chin Sophonpanich Foundation Professor of Banking and Finance at Chulalongkorn University.
Dr. Van Roy is a member of INFORMS. He has served on the editorial boards of Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, Machine Learning, Mathematics of Operations Research, and Operations Research. He has been a recipient of the MIT George C. Newton Undergraduate Laboratory Project Award (1993), the MIT Morris J. Levin Memorial Master’s Thesis Award (1995), the MIT George M. Sprowls Doctoral Dissertation Award (1998), the NSF CAREER Award (2000), and the Stanford Tau Beta Pi Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching (2003). He has been a Frederick E. Terman Fellow and a David Morgenthaler II Faculty Scholar.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

