2016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

Reversible Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
David Haley, Member, IEEE, and Alex Grant, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes may be decoded using a circuit implementation of the sum–product algorithm which maps the factor graph of the code. By reusing the decoder for encoding, both tasks can be performed using the same circuit, thus reducing area and verification requirements. Motivated by this, iterative encoding techniques based upon the graphical representation of the code are proposed. Code design constraints which ensure encoder convergence are presented, and then used to design iteratively encodable codes, while also preventing 4-cycle creation. We show how the Jacobi method for iterative matrix inversion can be applied to finite field matrices, viewed as message passing, and employed as the core of an iterative encoder. We present an algebraic construction of 4-cycle free iteratively encodable codes using circulant matrices. Analysis of these codes identifies a weakness in their structure, due to a repetitive pattern in the factor graph. The graph supports pseudo-codewords of low pseudo-weight. In order to remove the repetitive pattern in the graph, we propose a recursive technique for generating iteratively encodable codes. The new codes offer flexibility in the choice of code length and rate, and performance that compares well to randomly generated, quasi-cyclic and extended Euclidean-geometry codes.
Index Terms—Bipartite graph, block codes, codes on graphs, cycles in a graph, encoding, iterative decoding, linear codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, sparse matrices.
I. INTRODUCTION
I NSPIRED by the principle of iterative decoding, we investigate the use of iterative techniques for encoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. A previous study of high rate LDPC codes with short block length [1] has shown that randomly generated codes (decoded using a practical soft-decision sum–product decoder) outperform comparable Reed–Solomon (RS) codes (decoded by a hard input decoder). However, RS codes possess an advantage over randomly constructed LDPC codes, in that an RS erasure decoder can also be used for encoding [2].
Motivated by this idea of decoder reuse, and the potential to encode on the factor graph [3], we develop a class of reversible
Manuscript received August 26, 2006; revised December 02, 2008. Current version published April 22, 2009. This work was supported by the Australian Government under ARC Grant C00002232 and was performed while the authors were at the Institute for Telecommunications Research, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, Australia. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, September 2005, and the IEEE Global Communications Conference, Taipei, Taiwan, November 2002.
D. Haley is with Cohda Wireless, Kent Town SA 5067, Australia (e-mail: david.haley@cohdawireless.com).
A. Grant is with the Institute for Telecommunications Research, University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes SA 5095, Australia (e-mail: alex.grant@unisa. edu.au).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 2–22 in this paper are available online at http:// ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2016025

LDPC codes, i.e., codes that are iteratively encodable and decodeable on the same graph. We aim not only to provide an encoding technique which has low time complexity, but more specifically one which reuses the sum–product message-passing decoder [4].
By reusing the decoder architecture for encoding, both operations can be performed by the same circuit on a time switched basis [5]. The utilization of area within practical LDPC decoder implementations is limited by routing congestion [6]. The area required for wire routing in a dedicated LDPC encoder implementation is also significant. By eliminating the need for a separate dedicated encoder we aim to reduce the overall size of the circuit.
A further benefit of sharing circuit components is to increase the probability of detecting an implementation error during testing. When verifying operation of the encoder, errors in the routing network are exposed quickly. The proposed encoding algorithm is very similar to the message-passing decoder, and nodes are connected using the same routing structure. Routing errors can be difficult to detect when testing the decoder, especially in the case of analog decoder implementations where bit/cycle exact testing against a software model is not applicable. Monte Carlo decoder circuit simulation can be computationally expensive and hence a routing error that introduces an error floor may not be exposed until after fabrication [7]. In contrast, circuit simulation of the encoder is less computationally expensive and can help identify errors in shared circuit components early in the development process.
There are two general approaches that form the basis for existing algorithms which target practical encoding of LDPC codes. The first approach is to design (or transform) sparse parity-check matrices such that they have approximate triangular form (such possible transformations rely only on permutations of rows and columns which preserve the sparsity of the original matrices) [8]–[12], or to design codes of a cascaded structure [13], [14]. This allows encoding via back substitution. The second approach involves cyclic [15], [16] or quasi-cyclic [17]–[19] code designs, which allow encoding using a shift register. Both of these approaches necessarily involve serial computation, implying latency scaling linearly with code length.
This paper considers a different approach to low-complexity encoding, which is based upon message passing reusing the parallel decoder architecture. In contrast to serial encoding algorithms, the parallel message schedule makes all parity bits simultaneously available after a fixed number of encoder iterations. In this paper, we present two classes of reversible LPDC codes, encodable using four and eight iterations. Moreover, code design rules for iterative encodability constrain only a portion of the parity-check matrix, providing greater flexibility in code

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

2017

length, rate, and edge distribution than quasi-cyclic construction.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the iterative encoding algorithm; Section III presents algebraic tools for the construction of type-I reversible LDPC codes using circulant matrices; Performance results and analysis of type-I codes are then provided in Sections IV–VI; Section VII presents a recursive algorithm for constructing type-II reversible codes, and provides performance results; Section VIII then concludes the work.

II. ITERATIVE ENCODING OF LDPC CODES

Consider the problem of encoding a binary systematic

code, with codewords arranged as row vectors

,

where are the information bits and are the parity bits.

Likewise, the parity-check matrix is partitioned

.

Thus, is a codeword iff

, or equiva-

lently,

. Define

, and encoding be-

comes equivalent to solving

. So

, where is the error of the initialization

. Hence, the error term vanishes for iterations

if

. Conversely, if

for all , the algorithm will fail to

universally converge since the error will be zero only if is in

the null space of , which cannot be guaranteed independently

of the initial guess.

Denoting the eigenvalue of

with the largest magnitude

as , the convergence of the Jacobi method over is governed

by the spectral radius . More precisely, the asymptotic rate

of convergence becomes slower in the limit

. In con-

trast, we can say less about the rate of convergence for the Ja-

cobi method over . The above theorem implies only that the

method either converges after a finite number of steps, or that it

never converges.

Based on Theorem 1, we can in principle construct codes that

are iteratively encodable in iterations using (3) by selecting

such that

(4)

(1)

Therefore, for an .

nonsingular , the parity bits satisfy Definition 1 (Reversible Code): A reversible code is iteratively encodable using the Jacobi method (3) over .

If is triangular then encoding may be performed by reusing the sum–product decoder to implement back-substitution [20]. Alternatively, having reduced the encoding problem to one of matrix inversion, it is natural to wonder whether classical iterative inversion techniques for real matrices, such as those described in [21], can be applied to finite-field matrices. We therefore investigate an iterative solution method for (1) and the corresponding convergence criteria and constraints imposed on . The idea behind using the code constraints to perform

We also say that such codes are Jacobi encodable, and note the following property for codes with upper triangular .

Theorem 2: Any code with upper triangular is Jacobi

encodable over .

Proof: Let

. Hence,

. Each suc-

cessive power of will therefore be upper triangular, with its

first nonzero entry of each row occurring at least one place to

the right. Thus,

for some .

encoding on the graph was originally suggested by Tanner [3].

The work presented in this paper forms a link between this

concept and classical iterative matrix inversion techniques,

allowing the design of good codes that encode quickly.

Suppose we wish to solve

, for given and . Split

according to

. We can then write

,

and try the iteration

We may view the Jacobi iteration (3) as message-passing on a bipartite graph formed as follows. Let variable node correspond to . Connect to checks according to . Columns of correspond to variables and rows correspond to checks. A nonzero element at generates an edge between variable and check . This is the same connection structure as required for sum–product decoding.

(2)

for some initial guess . In order to compute

easily,

should be easily invertible. The classical Jacobi method for real

matrices chooses

and converges for any initial

guess provided that the spectral radius of

is less than .

We consider using this method for matrices with elements from

the finite field of order two, i.e., , necessitating different con-

vergence criteria.

In order for diagonal to be invertible, all values along its

diagonal must be nonzero. Over this implies that

and

. Hence, (2) becomes

Let variable nodes correspond to . Connect each node

to the check node .

Define

as the set of all check nodes adjacent to variable

node , specified by column of . Similarly, the set of all

variable nodes adjacent to check node ,

, is specified by

row of . The Jacobi message-passing schedule, for a binary

mapping:

,

is defined as follows.

Algorithm 1

1. Initialization:

Set all

and

.

2. Variable—Check:

Send

to all

. Note and are

(3)

connected nodes since

3. Check—Variable:

Theorem 1: For arbitrary , the iteration (3) with all ma-

From check send

to

trices and vectors over , yields

for

only.

iff

.

Note that

includes the variable node .

Proof: Let the error term at iteration be

.

If

for all then exit. Otherwise, set

Subtracting

from

gives

and return to Step 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 Fig. 1. Jacobi algorithm as message-passing.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

of polynomials. To this end, let denote the first row polynomial of and then map the iterative encodability constraint (4) into the polynomial domain as

(5)

We refer to the number of nonzero terms in as the weight of the polynomial. We will use to denote both the weight of the polynomial and the column weight of the corresponding circulant matrix.

A. Building Iteratively Encodable Circulants

We first develop a technique for generating polynomials

which satisfy (5), and then refine the approach to block the

creation of -cycles.

Consider an

circulant matrix and let denote

the coefficient of in , where

. We

now introduce some further constraints on the choice of the first

row polynomial in order to simplify the algebra involved

in searching for candidate polynomials.

Lemma 1: 1 If

with degree

An example of how this algorithm operates on the graph is shown in Fig. 1. Each iteration, variables may be updated in parallel. For clarity, Fig. 1 shows only those messages used to update .
We note that Algorithm 1 has a strong resemblance to the sum–product decoder. The update process for message in the Jacobi method is identical to the message passed in the sum–product algorithm, so the decoder architecture may be reused. Only one operation per node is performed in each step of the Jacobi method, in contrast to one per connected edge for each of the nodes in the sum–product case.
III. TYPE-I REVERSIBLE LDPC CODES

and

for

, then

Proof: has characteristic two, hence

All coefficients are binary and hence

for all and .

Recursively substituting

the lemma holds for all

which is a power of 2.

In this section, we use the Jacobi convergence rule, to Henceforth, restrict design -cycle free codes which are iteratively encodable in constraint (5) reduces to iterations of the Jacobi method. We therefore seek a -cycle

. By Lemma 1, the encodability

free matrix which satisfies (4). Once has been obtained,

(6)

we may then complete by randomly generating , while blocking the introduction of -cycles. The codes have paritycheck matrices which combine circulant and random components, in a similar manner to that presented by Bond et al. [22]. However, we use different criteria for selecting the circulant components, such that the codes are iteratively encodable.
Here we focus on the algebraic construction of reversible

The implementation of (3) is simplified if we have a direct

connection for feedback between variable and check on

the factor graph representation of . For this reason, we fur-

ther assume

and define

, where

represents the remaining terms in once

has been

fixed. The encodability constraint on becomes

LDPC codes by constructing as an

circulant ma-

trix. The first row of a circulant matrix can be specified by a

(7)

polynomial , where the coefficients of

represent the

entry in column . The th row of the matrix is then specified

by the polynomial

.

The algebra of circulant matrices over is isomorphic to

the algebra of polynomials modulo

having coefficients

from [18]. Choosing to be a circulant matrix we may

It is desirable to minimize as it represents the number of iterations that the encoder will take to converge.
As we are dealing with polynomials that have binary coefficients, must have an even weight in order to satisfy (7), implying an odd weight for . To construct we must

define our design constraints in terms of algebraic manipulation 1A proof of this lemma is also provided in [23].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

2019

therefore select pairs of nonzero coefficients

and

, such that

where

(8)

We now seek a means of grouping candidate terms for so

that we may choose pairs which satisfy (8). To this end let

, where

. We will now show how the terms of

may be grouped into cosets, according to their exponents.

Hence, we now focus on the set

which

are valid choices for coefficient indices, and therefore exponents

of , in . Note that also represents the set of columns

(indexed from zero) in the first row of the matrix .

Lemma 2: If

then, under modulo addition, the

set

will be partitioned into the cosets of

, each of order .

Proof: Modulo addition will group into distinct

equivalence classes. The equivalence class labeled zero will be

. The remaining

classes then form

cosets of this, having the form

,

where

. As is a multiple of , each coset

must have the same size

.

The following theorem shows how it is possible to construct by applying Lemma 2 and choosing pairs of terms from
within the same coset.

Theorem 3: Let

and

for

. If

are in the same coset as specified by Lemma 2 , then

.

Proof: If and are in the same coset then

for

some constant

. Therefore

We now show how the overlap constraint may be viewed al-

gebraically, in order to block -cycle creation in the graphical

representation of , as we build .

Given that each row of is a cyclic shift of the first row,

the separation between nonzero elements in the first row is of

interest. We now define a test for -cycle presence using .

Let denote possible choices for the position of nonzero

terms in , i.e.,

. Let be rep-

resented by the set

, containing the chosen positions for

nonzero terms in .

Lemma 3: 2 A circulant matrix with nonzero elements

specified by

will contain -cycles if and only

if

(9)

for some

,

,

, and

.

Proof: Due to the cyclic nature of , if an overlap occurs

it will be replicated through the matrix and hence we need only

to test the first row against all other rows. Assign the index to

the first row of . Row

is then a cyclic shift

of row modulo . In order for an overlap to occur between

the first row and row , it is sufficient that

and

which, under modulo addition, is equivalent to (9). Furthermore, in order for an overlap to exist between two nonzero terms
and it is necessary that

Note that

which, under modulo addition, reduces to the specific case of

the initial statement when

and .

Hence,

It is apparent from Lemma 3 that in order to detect the overlap

between nonzero terms and , we must consider both the sep-

aration

and also

. We therefore

.

need a means of classifying the separation between two terms.

By choosing and from the same coset and then setting we may select pairs of terms to include in
such that (7) is satisfied.

Definition 3 (Separation Class): Consider two pairs of

nonzero terms at positions

and

where

and

. These pairs are

in the same separation class, labeled by the unordered pair

B. Enforcing the Overlap Constraint

if

and

In order to improve iterative decoder performance, it is a

.

common practice to constrain the factor graph of a code to be The pair of elements

in a separation class label

-cycle free. This appears to be especially important for high- are additive inverses modulo . Hence, for even , let

rate codes, and a mapping of the -cycle free graph constraint be the set of distinct separation class labels

onto the parity-check matrix follows [1].

. Note that does not contain

Definition 2 (Overlap Constraint): Constraining the paritycheck matrix , such that the maximum overlap between any two columns is one, prevents -cycles from appearing in the

as

by definition, and hence,

. From

this point forward, with some abuse of notation, we will use the

term separation class to refer to a separation class label

.

graph of .

2We are aware of an independent discovery of Lemma 3 [24].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

Theorem 4: 3 Let

contain the chosen positions for

nonzero terms in . Let be the list of all separation classes

that may be formed by selecting pairs of elements from . Note

that

. Let be the

circulant matrix corre-

sponding to , where

,

. The overlap con-

straint will be violated for if and only if

or any member of appears in more than once.

Proof: If

, then there must be a pair

of nonzero terms at positions

,

, such that

. This violates the

overlap constraint according to Lemma 3 .

Assume that a member

appears twice in and hence

. The elements in appear without repetition. So, there

must exist an assignment of labels

to these ele-

ments, for

,

,

and

, such that

These equivalence relationships violate Lemma 3 .

If the overlap constraint is violated, then by Lemma 3 there

exists some

,

,

and

, such that

. Hence, there is a repetition of the

separation class

or, in

the case when

and ,

.

Select a candidate pair of terms from a coset created in

Step 2.

4. Test for Overlap:

Let be the set of all separation classes (Definition 3) that

may be formed between the candidate terms to be added

to and the current contents of . If does not contain

and

is empty, then add the candidate

terms to and , and update .

5. Stop/Continue:

If

then exit declaring success. Otherwise, if all

possible paired combinations from have been tried then

exit declaring failure. Otherwise return to Step 3.

Theorem 5: If Algorithm 2 terminates with success, then the

first row polynomial corresponding to will generate a -cycle

free circulant matrix which is iteratively encodable in itera-

tions.

Proof: In Step 3, candidate terms for are selected from

the cosets of

. Hence, the iterative encod-

ability constraint will always be enforced, according to Theorem

3, with iterations required for convergence. A candidate pair is

rejected if it would introduce an overlap in Step 4, according to

Theorem 4. Hence, if the algorithm terminates successfully with

, then the polynomial represented by will correspond

to an iteratively encodable -cycle free circulant matrix.

When building

Theorem 4 may therefore be used to

check for the introduction of -cycles. We assume in The-

orem 4 is based upon the contents of and then let

be the set of all separation classes that may be formed between

a candidate nonzero element to be added to and the current

contents of . Hence, if

is not empty then the introduc-

tion of the candidate element will violate the overlap constraint.

C. Building Type-I Reversible LDPC Codes

The following algorithm provides a method for building cir-

culant matrices suitable for use in reversible codes.

Algorithm 2 (Type-I Reversible Codes)

1. Initialize:

Choose input parameters:

: column weight for , such that

and odd.

: number of iterations required to encode, such that

for

.

: size of , such that

, where

.

Initialize output parameters:

Let the output polynomial be represented by the set

, containing the chosen positions for nonzero terms

in , where

. Initialize

and

.

Initialize internal parameter:

Let be the list of all separation classes that may be

formed by selecting pairs of elements from . Initialize

to be the empty set.

2. Generate Cosets:

Group into cosets of

3. Select Candidate Terms:

3We are aware of an independent discovery of Theorem 4 [24].

It is now natural to wonder what the minimum number of encoder iterations is, for which we can build a polynomial of weight .

Theorem 6: A circulant matrix with odd column weight

, constructed using Algorithm 2 , will require

iterations

to encode, where

for

.

Proof: Consider a coset of

gen-

erated in Step 2 of Algorithm 2 . Let the set of distinct sep-

aration classes (Definition 3) that can be formed by selecting

pairs of elements from the coset, in Step 3, be

.

Once we have selected a pair of elements which form a sep-

aration class

we may not select another pair of

elements from any coset which also form

. Doing so

would violate the overlap constraint test in Step 4. We also

note that choosing a pair of elements which form the separa-

tion class

will also violate this

constraint. Hence, the total number of separation classes that are

available for selection without violating the overlap constraint

is

.

In Step 1 we initialize the coefficient of in

to be

and hence the initial weight of is one. So, to create

a matrix of odd weight , we will need to add

pairs

of terms. Each pair of terms will form a separation class. There-

fore, to create a weight matrix without violating the overlap

constraint we will need at least

separation classes.

Hence, we require

and thus

.

We may use the above theorem to select an appropriate value

for in the initialization step of Algorithm 2 , based upon the

target weight for .

We now present a method for constructing

-regular,

-cycle free, reversible codes. Using Algorithm 2 we may

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

generate a -cycle free iteratively encodable matrix with

column weight

. By Theorem 6 we therefore seek a

circulant which is encodable in

iterations.

Setting

and

, Algorithm 2 returns the candidate

polynomial

. The circulant matrix which

corresponds to follows.

2021 TABLE I REVERSIBLE LDPC CODES
TABLE II RANDOMLY CONSTRUCTED BENCHMARK LDPC CODES

We note that this polynomial has the form and now show that this general form may be used to
generate larger matrices.

Theorem 7: If is a binary

circulant matrix, where

for

, built from cyclic rotations of

the first row polynomial

, then is

-cycle free -regular matrix, which is iteratively invertible

The set of randomly constructed LDPC codes listed in Table II are used as a benchmark for comparison. Each of these rate , -regular codes has a corresponding entry in Table I of approximately the same block length. Where possible the random codes have been obtained from MacKay’s online archive [25], in order to provide a standard point of reference. All of these codes are -cycle free.

using four iterations of the Jacobi method over .

A. Performance on the AWGN Channel

Proof: Given that the weight of is and the transpose of a circulant matrix is also circulant, it follows that is
-regular. By Lemma 1

In the figures that follow, we compare the performance of each reversible code over the AWGN channel, to that of its corresponding random benchmark code. The experiments were performed using a soft-decision sum–product decoder [4], for

a maximum of 50 iterations. For the random codes, the perfor-

mance measured across the information bits matches that mea-

Hence, satisfies (6) for

and is iteratively invert-

ible using four iterations of the Jacobi method over .

Let correspond to the positions of nonzero terms in .

The set of separation classes that may be formed by selecting

pairs of elements from is

sured across the full codeword, and hence it has not been plotted. However, this is not the case for the reversible codes. Here, we observe that, in general, the bit-error rate (BER) measured across the full codeword is higher than that measured across the information bits alone. Hence, the error rate curves are shown for both the full codeword and information section. All simula-

tion points shown represent a minimum of 50 word errors, mea-

sured across the information section of the codeword.

The members of not include free.

are necessarily unique and the set does . Hence, by Theorem 4, is -cycle

We complete for a -regular reversible code by ran-

domly building a

distributed , while blocking the in-

troduction of -cycles.

The reversible and random codes with length

exhibit

similar performance, as shown in Fig. 2. The reversible code

exhibits bit- and word-error rate floors at around

and

, respectively. The BER and word error rate (WER) of

the reversible code measured across the full codeword matches

that measured across the information bits alone. Fig. 3 shows

the performance of the Rev512 code matching that of the

IV. PERFORMANCE OF TYPE-I REVERSIBLE CODES

Rand504 code, until flooring begins at bit- and word-error rates

of around

and , respectively. As the signal-to-noise

In this section, we use the methods described above to build ratio (SNR) is increased for the reversible code, the BER and

reversible LDPC codes, and compare their performance to that WER measured across the full codeword becomes higher than

of randomly generated LDPC codes. Simulation results are pro- that measured across the information bits alone. Similar be-

vided for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and binary havior is shown in Fig. 4 for the Rev1024 code, in comparison

erasure channels (BEC).

to the Rand1008 code. The BER and WER of the reversible

We study the reversible LDPC codes listed in Table I. These code begin to floor at around

and , respectively.

rate , -regular codes are all encodable using four iter- This behavior is also exhibited by the Rev4096 code, which

ations of the Jacobi algorithm. The parity-check matrix of each is compared to the Rand4000 code in Fig. 5. Here, we see the

code has the form

, where is a circulant matrix with BER and WER of the reversible code, measured across the

the first row polynomial coming from Theorem 7. In each information bits alone, begin to floor at around and ,

case, is a -regular randomly generated matrix, chosen respectively. Moreover, the BER and WER measured across the

such that the graph of is -cycle free.

full codeword are significantly higher, with the BER beginning

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

 Fig. 2. Performance of reversible and random (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes, with Fig. 3. Performance of reversible and random (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes, with

length n = 64, on the AWGN channel.

length n 500, on the AWGN channel.

to floor at around and the WER beginning to floor almost immediately.
In order to prevent numerical overflow in the log-likelihood

We now summarize the above results for the reversible codes. An analytical account for the observations follows in Section V.

sum–product check calculation [4], the input to

was

Unequal Bit-Error Protection

clipped such that

when

. Since collecting these

We observe a much higher error rate for the parity bits of

results we have discovered that the choice of the clipping pa-

the codeword than for the information bits. This indicates

rameter, , can significantly affect performance of the reversible

a potential weakness for message passing in the code sub-

codes. Results for the reversible codes were obtained using

graph corresponding to .

. In Fig. 6 we see how the BER and WER vary in re-

Unequal Word-Error Protection

lation to . The values plotted here for the Rev4096 code were

Although unequal bit-error protection is not always detri-

taken at an SNR of 2 dB, with a minimum of 100 word errors per

mental to the information BER of the code, it does increase

point, measured across the information section of the codeword.

the WER. A word error is declared if the decoder runs for

Hence, we may lower the floor observed in Fig. 5, by instead se-

the maximum iteration count without converging, i.e., if

lecting

. These results indicate that reducing dy-

the stopping criterion has not been met. The WER mea-

namic range will not necessarily reduce reversible code perfor-

sured across the full codeword is therefore higher than that

mance, and in some cases performance may improve, depending

measured across the information bits alone.

on the structure of the graph. In contrast, we have observed that

Error Floor

applying a hard limit to the check outputs can slightly increase

The reversible codes display an error floor which appears

the error rate for the random benchmark codes at high SNR.

at a different level for each of the codes. Flooring becomes

However, the effect was much smaller than that observed for the

more significant as the code length is increased.

reversible codes, and was not visible for the length 4000 code.

Dependence Upon Block Length

Hence, when decoding the random codes we have set a high

In general, the shorter reversible codes fare better against

clipping limit,

.

their respective benchmarks than the longer codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

2023

  Fig. 4. Performance of reversible and random (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes, with Fig. 5. Performance of reversible and random (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes, with

length n 1000, on the AWGN channel.

length n 4000, on the AWGN channel.

No Undetected Errors

Undetected errors were observed only in the case of the

very short codes with

. We did not observe unde-

tected errors for any of the other codes.

point, the bit erasure rate measured across the full codeword becomes higher than that measured across the information bits alone. The word erasure rate measured across the full codeword matches that measured across the information bits

B. Performance on the Binary Erasure Channel

alone, and exhibits a floor at around . Similar behavior is shown in Fig. 9 for the Rev1024 code, in comparison to the

In the figures that follow, we compare the performance of Rand1008 code. Here, the bit erasure rate of the reversible code

each reversible code to its corresponding random benchmark matches that of the random code. For the Rev1024 code, the

code, over the BEC. The experiments were performed using a bit erasure rate measured across the full codeword becomes

binary erasure decoder [10]. All simulation points shown rep- higher than that measured across the information bits alone,

resent a minimum of 50 word erasures, measured across the in- below

. The word erasure rate of the reversible code

formation section of the codeword. In cases where the plot of begins to floor at around . Performance of the Rev4096

the performance measured across the full codeword appears to code is compared to that of the Rand4000 code in Fig. 10. The

be obscured by that measured across the information bits alone, bit erasure rate measured across the information bits alone,

the two are equivalent.

begins to floor at around . The bit erasure rate measured

The random and reversible length- codes exhibit the same across the full codeword becomes significantly higher than

performance on the BEC, as shown in Fig. 7. The bit and word this at

, beginning to floor at around . The word

erasure rates of the reversible code, measured across the full erasure rate measured across the full codeword matches that

codeword, match those measured across the information bits measured across the information bits alone, and begins to floor

alone. Fig. 8 shows that the bit erasure performance of the at around .

Rev512 code closely matches that of the Rand504 code, above A summary of results for the reversible codes follows, with

the channel bit erasure probability of

. Below this an analytical account provided in Section V.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

= 2 dB Fig. 6. Shifting the error floor for Rev4096, at E =N

, by varying .

(3 6); Fig. 7. Performance of reversible and random

= 64 n length

, on the BEC.

-regular LDPC codes, with

Unequal Bit Erasure Protection

As observed for the case of the AWGN channel, the infor-

mation bits appear to be more heavily protected than the nize that the error control system represents the pairing of a code

parity bits. This inequality begins to surface as we decrease to a suboptimal decoder. It is therefore important not only to an-

the channel erasure probability and is most visible for the alyze the code but to also consider how the structure of the code

longer codes.

is suited to the operation of the decoding algorithm. We note

Equal Word Erasure Protection

that the analytical tools each have a different purpose. For ex-

In contrast to the AWGN case, the word erasure rate mea- ample, poor minimum distance exposes a weakness of the code

sured across the information bits matches that measured without considering the decoder, stopping set analysis is more

across the full codeword. This indicates that on average, appropriately applied to the BEC than the AWGN channel, and

when the decoder fails to correct all erasures, the set of re- so on.

maining erasures contains both information and parity bits.

Erasure Floor

A. Minimum Distance

We observe a floor on the decoded erasure rate, which again appears to be more significant for the longer codes. Dependence upon Block Length The comparative performance of the reversible codes, against their respective benchmark codes, appears to deteriorate with increased block length. This observation is common to both channels.

The problem of evaluating the minimum distance of an LDPC code is intractable, except for codes with very small block length [27]. Some analytical bounds on are well known [28], [29]. However, we show here that some very simple bounds on are sufficient to suggest a weakness for the larger circulant based reversible structures.
For a small linear code we may search for the minimum-

V. ANALYSIS OF CODES AND DECODER BEHAVIOR

weight nonzero codeword by considering low-weight information vectors. We generate all possible information vectors with

In this section, we employ theoretical tools to analyze the be- weight

and then encode this set. We choose to

havior of the reversible LDPC codes presented above. We recog- be small enough that the search is computationally feasible. Let

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

2025

 Fig. 8. Performance of reversible and random (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes, with
length n 500, on the BEC.

 Fig. 9. Performance of reversible and random (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes, with
length n 1000, on the BEC.

Finally, we provide an upper bound on the minimum distance

denote the weight of the member in the encoded set which of any -regular reversible code with a circulant that is has the lowest weight. This value provides an upper bound on encodable in four iterations.

. If

, then this gives

. All codewords in

a -regular code have even weight [30]. Hence, if is odd

and

then

. Moreover, if

, and

is odd, then we may conclude that

.

The Rev64 code is small enough that we are able to find its

lowest weight codeword using such a search. Table III shows

a partial weight distribution, corresponding to a subset of code-

words generated from all nonzero information vectors of weight

. We see that the code has

. Using the same

approach for the Rev512 code, this time for

, yields

the partial weight distribution given in Table IV. From this par-

tial distribution we can conclude that

.

It is well known that preventing -cycles in a -regular

LDPC code lower-bounds

. The above -reg-

ular reversible codes are -cycle free by design, and hence have

. An upper bound on minimum distance comes from

Theorem 8: Consider a -regular reversible LDPC code,

with parity-check matrix constructed such that is an

circulant matrix with

. If the code

is encodable using four iterations of the Jacobi algorithm then

, independent of block length.

Proof: As is encodable in four iterations we have

. Expanding

gives

. is

therefore a circulant matrix having a maximum possible column

weight of , when no terms in cancel. Consider the system-

atic parity-check matrix

. Given

that is -regular, the maximum weight of a column in

is . Hence, the maximum row weight of the

generator matrix

, and thus an upper bound on ,

is .

the weight of the lowest weight row in . These bounds are From Theorem 8, reversible codes that are encodable in four

summarized in Table V.

iterations and built using a circulant matrix for , have a min-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

 TABLE III
PARTIAL WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF REV64, FOR (x ) 5

 TABLE IV
PARTIAL WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF REV512, FOR (x ) 3 (FIRST 14 ENTRIES ONLY)

Fig. 11. Occurrence of maximal stopping sets for Rev4096, when  = 0:375.

block length. Instead, the observed performance floor appears to be related to problems with decoder convergence. Minimum distance is a property of the code which is independent of the chosen decoding algorithm. In the following analysis we consider the structure of the reversible codes in relation to the operation of the decoder.

B. Stopping Sets and Extrinsic Message Degree

Stopping set analysis is an appropriate tool for investigating

the behavior of message-passing decoding of LDPC codes over

the BEC [31]. Let the set of erasures made by the channel be de-

noted , and those remaining when the decoder fails be denoted

 Fig. 10. Performance of reversible and random (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes,
with length n 4000, on the BEC.

. Recall that represents the maximal stopping set from . We now consider the simulation results for the Rev4096 code shown in Fig. 10. We empirically observe the final state of the

BOUNDS ON

TABLE V FOR THE REVERSIBLE CODES

decoder for each word erasure event in the result sample, when

the channel bit erasure probability is

. Five different

stopping set configurations exist in the sample, each having a

different size. Fig. 11 shows how the occurrence of these sets

is distributed over the 50 word erasure events in the empirical

sample space.

Table VI lists each stopping set configuration observed for

Rev4096 when

. Each set of size consists of

imum distance that does not scale well with block length. How- parity bits and only one information bit. This structure is in

ever, this does not fully explain our experimental observations. agreement with the observed inequality in bit erasure protec-

We expect a poor minimum distance to cause the decoder to tion. It is also worth noting that it is the same information bit

make undetected errors, yet none occurred for the reversible which appears in all five stopping set structures.

codes with

. For

, they were observed for the Fig. 12 shows a subset of the graph corresponding to for

random code also, as is expected to be the case for such a short the Rev4096 code. Here we see that the cyclic nature of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES
TABLE VI STOPPING SET CONFIGURATIONS

2027

H Fig. 13. Repetitive pattern in the graph of .

= 11 Fig. 12. Parity bits in the jF j

stopping set.

observed floor in performance. However, they have a nonzero EMD and therefore require the inclusion of one or more infor-

mation bits for stopping set closure. This accounts for the ob-

servation that the word erasure rate measured for the full code-

leads to a repetitive pattern in the graph. Variable (bit) nodes are word matches that measured for the information bits alone. At

represented on the graph by circles and check (constraint) nodes high channel erasure rates, the maximal stopping set for a given

by boxes. Each node is labeled by its index, and members of the set of erased bits consists of smaller component stopping sets.

size

stopping set are highlighted. Checks 999 and The overlapping of such sets accounts for the observed sym-

1509 have only a single connection into the parity bit subset of metry across the number of information and parity bits in the

this stopping set. Information bit 3245 is connected to checks maximal stopping set. However, at low channel erasure rates,

999, 1509, and 2019. Note that this information bit does not the maximal stopping set is often also the minimal stopping set

appear in Fig. 12, as it lies on the graph of . By considering (ignoring the empty set). In these cases, the heavy weighting

the complete graph of and connecting this information bit, of parity bits within the set causes the observed bit erasure rate

we close the stopping set. Similar structures appear on the graph measured across the information bits to be less than that mea-

for all of the configurations listed in Table VI. In each case, the sured across the full codeword.

information bit plays a crucial role in closing the stopping set.

The structure may be extended to completely represent the C. Cycles and Near-Codewords graph of , as shown in Fig. 13. This graph represents for

all codes listed in Table I, by assigning node labels such that We now turn our attention to the experiments performed in

. Each row contains four nodes, and consists entirely presence of AWGN noise. In this case, we are interested in the

of either variables or checks. There are a total of rows of each behavior of the message-passing sum–product decoder, in par-

type.

ticular at high SNR, where the performance of the reversible

The repetitive pattern in the graph contains small sets of vari- codes begins to diverge from that of the random codes.

ables which have a low extrinsic message degree [32]. An ex- In contrast to the equal word error protection that we observed

ample set shown in Fig. 13 contains nine parity bits. All checks on the BEC, here we observe error events which only affect

connected to the set are connected twice, with the exception of parity bits. We investigate results for the Rev4096 code, at an

the check labeled

. Hence, the set has an extrinsic message SNR of 2 dB. There are a total of 931 word errors, although only

degree (EMD) of one. This undesirable structure, and others like 100 of these affect information bits. The histograms in Fig. 14

it, are replicated throughout the graph. These structures increase correspond to the observed error vector weight, i.e., a count of

the probability of stopping set creation and contribute to the the number of positions in which the transmitted and decoded

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2028

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

H Fig. 15. Cycles in a variable row of the graph of .

[34]. Near-codewords can arise from the connection of short cy-

cles in the graph of , and hence it is not surprising that the error

pattern corresponds to a near-codeword. More precisely,

if is a vector with ones positioned according to , having

zero valued entries elsewhere, then is a

near-codeword.

In this case, the weight of the syndrome for corresponds to

the extrinsic message degree of a row of variables in the graph

shown in Fig. 13.

A similar method may be used to account for other low-

weight error vectors which dominate the distribution. In partic-

ular, the pattern of parity bits with an EMD of one, shown in

Fig. 13, represents a

near-codeword.

In order for these structures to cause a word erasure on the

BEC, it is necessary to include at least one information bit to

close the stopping set. However, on the AWGN channel the ex-

istence of these near-codewords alone appears sufficient to in-

hibit decoder convergence and thus cause a detected word error.

Hence, we see separation of the information section and full

codeword WERs on the AWGN channel, in contrast to the BEC

observations.

D. Finite Graph-Covers

= E =N Fig. 14. Error vector weight histograms for Rev4096 at

2 dB.

Our empirical results suggest that the decoder arrives at

near-codewords, due to decoder convergence problems on

vectors differ. We compare the histogram for the full codeword

to that taken across only the parity section of the codeword.

The distribution of low-weight error vectors is dominated by

those which corrupt only parity bits. In particular, we see a large

number of errors vectors, , with weight

. A closer

inspection of these vectors shows that they all conform to the

pattern

(10)

where

and

. Here, the algebraic

representation of has the same form as that used to repre-

sent the first row vector of in Section III. This error pattern

corresponds to a row of variables in the graph of shown in

Fig. 13. Although the repetitive pattern in the graph is -cycle

free, it contains many -cycles.4 Each variable in a row of the

graph is connected to its neighbors on either side via a -cycle,

while an -cycle connects all variables in the row, as shown in

Fig. 15.

MacKay and Postol have proposed that near-codewords can

cause convergence problems for the message-passing decoder

the AWGN channel. However, we do not yet have a precise

explanation for this. To this end, we now extend our analysis by

using the finite graph-cover techniques of Kötter and Vontobel

[35], [36].

In order to simplify the analysis in this section, our discus-

sion will assume the transmission of the all-zero codeword. As

suggested in [35], we may build a pseudo-codeword using

a procedure similar to that of canonical completion, rooted at

the

near-codeword defined by (10). At this point we ig-

nore and operate only on the graph corresponding to .

This process is illustrated in Fig. 16. Variable tiers of the graph

are labeled consecutively, starting at the root tier, , which

corresponds to the nonzero elements of . There are

tiers, such that all parity variables appear exactly once. Each

variable on tier is then assigned the value

. These

values are shown to the right of each variable. The assignment

ensures that all local indicator functions are satisfied based upon

the parity variables alone. Thus, appending an all-zero informa-

tion sequence generates a valid pseudo-codeword.

It is straightforward to show that the pseudo-weight of the

 3 i 4In fact, any graph built from circulants having row weight has at most pseudo-codeword constructed using the above technique,

girth six [33].

has the property that

independently of the code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

2029

Fig. 17. Comparison of expansion for random and reversible structures.

H Fig. 16. Building a pseudo-codeword on the graph for .
length. A similar process can be used to find other pseudo-codewords, e.g., by rooting the canonical completion at the near-codeword discussed in the previous section. Furthermore, these low-weight pseudo-codewords are replicated throughout the repetitive structure of the graph.
To build this example pseudo-codeword we have considered only the graph of . Hence, has an all-zero information section. Using a heuristic search it is possible to find pseudo-codewords which have lower pseudo-weight than , by considering the full graph of and allowing nonzero elements in the information section [37].
The analysis in this section provides a quantitative account for the near-codewords observed through empirical investigation. We have identified that the structure of admits pseudo-codewords with low pseudo-weight, thus leading to convergence problems for iterative sum–product decoding in the case of the AWGN channel.

have optimal expansion. A randomly generated regular graph is likely to be a good expander [39]. Explicit construction of codes using graphs with good expansion has also been investigated [13], [29], [40]–[43].
In contrast to the good expansion of random graphs, the expansion of the -regular graphs of for the reversible codes, is limited by its repetitive structure. In Fig. 17, we compare the normalized spectral gap for the graph of , for each of the reversible codes, to that of a randomly generated graph of the same size.
The random graphs exhibit a good expansion property, which appears to approach the Ramanujan bound as they get larger. In contrast, the expansion metric for the circulant based reversible structures vanishes as they get larger. We now show that can be obtained directly from a circulant . This will allow us to investigate the spectral properties of these matrices, without considering the adjacency matrix.
Lemma 4: Let

E. Graph Expansion

For both channel models, the reversible code performance degrades with respect to that of the random codes, as the block length is increased. We now consider graph expansion, and show how the normalized spectral gap may be used to account for this observation.

where is an

circulant matrix, having eigenvalues

ordered such that

.

Denoting the (real) eigenvalues of as , and ordering them

, we have

.

Definition 4 (Normalized Spectral Gap): Consider a con-

Proof: The characteristic polynomial of is

nected -regular graph , with a total of nodes, having ad-

. Therefore, if is an eigenvalue of

then

jacency matrix . As is symmetric it has real eigenvalues,

are eigenvalues of .

which we order

. Since is connected The singular values of are the square roots of the eigen-

and regular, has multiplicity one and

. We define the values of . Moreover, as is circulant, its singular values

normalized spectral gap of as

.

correspond to the magnitude of its eigenvalues.

If the normalized spectral gap is large, then the graph is a

good expander. It is well known from the Ramanujan bound,

that

, in the limit of infinite graph size [38].

If is an eigenvalue of , then is a singular value of , and is an eigenvalue of . Hence , are eigenvalues of and the result follows.

Therefore, for large -regular graphs, we expect that the best Let be a circulant

matrix with first row polyno-

normalized spectral gap attainable will be bound by

mial chosen according to Theorem 7, such that

. A graph which achieves this bound is said to

. If

is a complex th root of unity then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2030

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

H Fig. 18. Loci of the spectra for of the reversible codes.

is an eigenvalue of [44]. We may therefore con- set, having uniform angular distribution about the point

.

sider each eigenvalue of to be the sum of three unit vectors Therefore, as we increase the matrix size, , the argument of

in the complex plane, such that

, reduces and

. Hence, from Lemma 4 , the spectral

where

. Fig. 18(a) shows the locus of the spectrum gap of the graph vanishes.

for the size

circulant used in the Rev64 code. The

vector components of each eigenvalue are also shown. All eigenvalues are located in a disc of radius , centered at the origin.

VI. HIGH-RATE TYPE-I REVERSIBLE LDPC CODES

Recall that

, and thus a small spectral gap arises In this section, we consider the construction of using a

when an eigenvalue is positioned close to the edge of this disc. weight

circulant matrix. We then use such a matrix to

Loci of the spectra for the other reversible codes are also shown build high-rate type-I reversible LDPC codes that are encodable

in Fig. 18, however, the vector components have been omitted in

iterations of the Jacobi method. Our motivation for

to improve clarity.

selecting a higher column weight is twofold.

We now focus on the set of eigenvalues for which the second First, when considering high-rate binary LDPC codes,

and third vector components have the same argument. This oc- MacKay and Davey have presented arguments against the use

curs when

, and thus

, of column weight

[1]. We are considering finite-length

for

. Of particular interest is the eigenvalue codes, and the potential for weakness increases for high-rate

in this set which has the smallest nonzero argument. We label codes of short block length. This is reflected by the performance

this eigenvalue and its complex conjugate and , respec- of a randomly generated code, having

tively, as shown in Fig. 18(a). There are eigenvalues in the and

, shown in Fig. 19. The code performs well at low

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

2031

 Fig. 19. Comparing the performance of some r 0:763 LDPC codes.

SNR but then exhibits an error floor. Furthermore, undetected

errors were observed during simulation at high SNR.

Using Algorithm 2 , we can construct iteratively encodable

circulants with weight

. Our second point of motiva-

tion for using such a matrix is that they offer better expan-

sion than the iteratively encodable circulants with

. We

have built an iteratively encodable circulant, having

and size

. This matrix has a

normalized spectral gap

, which is just over 50% of

the Ramanujan bound when . Although not optimal, it rep-

resents a large improvement upon the

case (see Fig. 17)

where is less than 2% of its corresponding optimal value. We

may complete , to build an

code, by ap-

pending columns of weight , whilst blocking the creation

of -cycles.

The performance of this code on the AWGN channel is

shown in Fig. 19. Sum–product decoding was performed for

a maximum of 50 iterations. All simulation points represent a

minimum of 50 word errors, measured across the information

section of the codeword. We note that the BER taken across

the information section closely follows that taken across the

full codeword. Also, there is only a slight deviation between

the WER taken across the information section and that taken

across the full codeword. Empirically we observe that the

decoder is failing to converge in the presence of some

near-codewords. These near-codewords have nonzero elements

in the parity bits only, thus causing the slight imbalance in

WER. There were no undetected errors observed during simu-

lation. The agreement between information and full codeword

error rates, and the absence of an error floor, stands in contrast

to the results for the type-I reversible codes with

. We

attribute this to the improved expansion property of the graph

corresponding to with

.

It is a requirement that the circulant have odd column

weight in order to be iteratively encodable. However, aside from

enforcing the -cycle free constraint, the choice of is uncon-

strained. Hence, we may choose as above but select columns

of weight

for . The performance improvement offered

by this

code with

is shown in

Fig. 19.

As a benchmark for comparison to these rate

re-

versible codes, we use a type-I Euclidean-geometry (EG-LDPC)

code of the same rate and approximately the same length. The

performance of this code (cf. [16]) is also shown in Fig. 19.

We see that the EG-LDPC code outperforms the

reversible code by approximately 0.26 dB at a BER of . In

Fig. 19(b), we also compare the WER performance of a ran-

domly constructed quasi-cyclic LDPC code [19]. The quasi-

cyclic code has length

and

, and slightly out-

performs the

reversible code by 0.08 dB at a WER

of

.

We now compare the complexity of the reversible LDPC and

benchmark codes. Each nonzero element in represents an

edge in the factor graph representation of the code, and thus

a connection between nodes in the circuit of the corresponding

sum–product decoder. Hence, the density of gives us some

indication of implementation complexity, in terms of routing.

A simple count of edges in the factor graph does not account

for the complexity of the nodes themselves. For example, a

-edge check node has the same number of edges as two -edge

checks, yet it has a higher internal complexity. We can construct

a multiple edged node by using bidirectional soft-logic gates as

building blocks [4], [45]. We may use a count of these blocks as

a simple metric for implementation complexity.

Definition 5 (Bidirectional Soft-Logic Gate Count): The bidirectional soft-logic gate count (BSGC) for a parity-check matrix , represents the total number of bidirectional soft-logic gates required to implement the sum–product decoder core corresponding to .

By cascading two bidirectional soft-logic gates we can build

a -port node, and so on. Hence, the BSGC of a single -edged

check node is . We assume that each -edged variable node

requires an extra edge for channel interfacing, and thus assign

it a BSGC of . The BSGC of a -regular LDPC code is

therefore

.

For simplicity, the complexity of check and variable BSGs is

assumed to be equal. The BSGC metric may be easily modified

when this is not the case, by weighting the counts of the different

node types. Moreover, we ignore any possible optimization of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2032

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

TABLE VII COMPARISON OF HIGH-RATE CODE PERFORMANCE AND COMPLEXITY
the nodes that may be achieved through partial reuse of intermediate results. It is intended that the BSGC be used only as an approximate metric for implementation complexity, rather than as a means of determining the precise transistor count of an optimized decoder circuit.
A comparative summary of performance and implementation cost, in terms of both the total number of edges in the code’s factor graph and the BSGC metric, is provided in Table VII.
A tradeoff exists between the improved performance offered by the EG-LDPC code and the lower complexity offered by the reversible LDPC code. The EG-LDPC code has redundant rows in its square parity-check matrix. Every variable and check has degree , giving a much higher node implementation complexity than that of the reversible codes. Furthermore, as the reversible codes have a much smaller edge count, they offer a significant reduction in routing complexity. The quasi-cyclic LDPC code has slightly better performance and lower complexity than the reversible code. However, the choice of the number of columns in for the reversible code is arbitrary. Hence, the reversible codes offer greater flexibility of rate and block length than the benchmark codes.

Select to be a -cycle free, -regular,

ma-

trix, having the property

. This matrix can be con-

structed as a circulant with first row polynomial

. It is easy to see that this polynomial gener-

ates , by considering Theorem 7. Small circulants offer

good expansion, and as

, they make suitable tem-

plate components. We note that is -cycle free, since

.

Generate Components:

Choose two

component matrices as follows.

: random permutation matrix

: random -regular, -cycle free matrix.

Apply Template

Let

represent the matrix Kronecker product of

and . Setting

and

, insert the

components into the template to create , as follows:

Theorem 9: Algorithm 3 generates a -regular, -cycle free

matrix, which is iteratively encodable in

iterations.

Proof: In Step 1, the template is generated such that

it is -cycle free. As Step 2 selects -cycle free components, it

follows that is also free of -cycles. The Kronecker products

performed in Step 4 generate -regular and , and hence

is -regular. We now show that is iteratively encodable,

by considering

VII. TYPE-II REVERSIBLE LDPC CODES

The analysis presented in Section V has exposed a weak-

ness of using weight

circulant matrices to construct re-

versible LDPC codes. The graphs corresponding to such struc-

tures have a poor expansion property. This admits low-weight

pseudo-codewords, and ultimately leads to decoder convergence

problems. We note however, that it is not a necessary condition

that be circulant in order for it to be iteratively encodable.

Motivated by the good expansion property of random graphs,

in this section we break the repetitive structure of the type-I

reversible codes, by incorporating randomness into the graph.

We employ a recursive construction, as proposed by Tanner [3].

The challenge in doing this is that the codes must also satisfy the

iterative encodability (4) and overlap (Definition 2) constraints.

We note that the identity

holds for

appropriately dimensioned matrices. Thus,

and

. Step 2 selects

,

causing the result to vanish for both cases. Hence, satisfies

(4) for

iterations.

Targeting a graph of with good expansion, we seek a ma-

trix with good expansion for the creation of the template ma-

trix in Algorithm 3. In this construction, we note that small

circulants offer good expansion and construct accordingly.

However, any -cycle free, -regular,

matrix, with

property

is a suitable candidate for , and such a ma-

trix should be selected on the merit of its expansion property.

We complete by extending with a randomly generated

, while blocking the creation of -cycles. Using Algorithm

A. Recursive Construction

The following algorithm uses a recursive approach to gen-

erate , while incorporating two randomly generated compo-

nents.

Algorithm 3 (Type-II Reversible Code)

Initialize:

Choose target size , for . Select the template matrix

size

, and set the component matrix size

.

Create Template:

Construct the following

code template matrix:

3 , with

, we have built example matrices of size

, 512 and 2048.

Randomization of components for the type-II reversible

codes makes it harder to provide precise bounds on their girth.

However, Fig. 20 shows that these matrices offer much better

expansion, achieved by breaking the repetitive interconnection

of short cycles in the circulants used to generate the type-I re-

versible codes.

Braking the repetitive structure of the graph discussed in

Section V-B, also reduces the probability of creating small

stopping sets. Hence, we expect that reversible codes built

using the above matrices should also provide improved BEC

performance. Furthermore, incorporating randomness into the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

2033

Fig. 20. Expansion of type-II reversible structures.

structure should statistically improve minimum distance. For

example, the lowest weight row in the generator matrix for

RevII512 has weight , which is significantly larger than the

values presented in Table V.

In contrast to the type-I codes, the size of type-II codes is

not constrained such that

,

. As the choice of

component matrix size is arbitrary, the size of is constrained

only to be some multiple of the template size. Recall also that

the choice of the number of columns in is arbitrary, and its

content is limited only by the overlap constraint. Hence, type-II

reversible codes can be designed for a very wide selection of

rate and block length.

B. Simulation Performance

Fig. 21. Performance of type-II reversible (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes.

Here we investigate the performance of some type-II re-

versible codes, built using the three example matrices from type-II reversible code also exhibits the same performance as

Section VII-A. In each case, we have extended to build the length

approximate lower triangular code.

-cycle free codes, using a randomly generated .

The

code initially compares well to its random

All results assume transmission on the AWGN channel, with benchmark but shows signs of flooring at around WER

.

sum–product decoding, for a maximum of 50 iterations. All sim- For this code we empirically note convergence failure in the

ulation points represent a minimum of 50 word errors, measured presence of some

near-codewords. The random structure

across the information section of the codeword. There were no of the code carries through to the near-codewords. This com-

undetected errors observed.

bined with their rarity makes them less amenable to the type

Fig. 21 shows the AWGN performance of three -reg- of structural near-codeword analysis that was performed for the

ular type-II reversible codes. Performance of the random codes type-I codes. The performance of each type-II code is signifi-

listed in Table II is again provided as a benchmark. We also cantly better than that observed for its type-I counterpart in Sec-

compare the BER performance of a length

-reg- tion VI, and may be acceptable for some applications. Moreover,

ular code with approximate lower triangular (ALT) construction the WER is about two orders of magnitude higher than the BER,

[11]. This code has a gap

and is therefore linear indicating that error events involving only a few variables are

time encodable.

unlikely. It may be possible to use an alternative recursive ap-

The performance of the

and

codes proach, e.g., applying a different template matrix, or performing

matches that of their respective random benchmarks, with no multiple layers of recursion, to generate long reversible LDPC

evidence of a floor. In both cases, the BER and WER measured codes with improved performance.

across the information section matches that measured across the Using the example structure with size

, we

full codeword. Some minor flattening of the curves is observed have also constructed two example codes having

beyond a BER around . However, this effect is also ob-

and rate

. The performance of these type-II

served for the random benchmark codes and is expected to be a reversible LDPC codes is shown in Fig. 22. All columns in

limitation due to the finite length of the codes. The

for the code labeled A, have weight

. The code labeled B

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2034

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

TABLE VIII COMPARISON OF TYPE-II REVERSIBLE LDPC AND EXTENDED EG-LDPC
COMPLEXITY

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have presented a new encoding algorithm,

based upon the Jacobi method for iterative matrix inversion. The

new algorithm allows the decoder architecture to be reused for

encoding. Our investigations have also drawn a link between

iterative encoding/decoding and classical iterative matrix inver-

sion techniques. Reuse of the decoder architecture has the poten-

tial to reduce the size of the codec [5]. In particular, by encoding

on the factor graph of the code, we are able to reuse the wire

routing in place for the decoder. Routing represents a signifi-

cant amount of area in an LDPC decoder implementation. Thus,

being able to reuse it for encoding is advantageous. Moreover,

the proposed algorithm allows parallel implementation, with la-

tency determined by the number of encoder iterations which is

fixed by design. Sharing circuit components between the de-

coder and encoder also reduces the overall design and testing

requirements. The encoder can quickly expose routing errors

during simulation and/or identify fabrication errors during chip

verification.

We have proposed two classes of -cycle free reversible codes

that are Jacobi encodable. The type-I reversible codes exhibit

different characteristics depending upon the channel, and cor-

= 0 6 Fig. 22. Performance of rate r : type-II reversible LDPC codes.

responding decoder being employed. They therefore provide an interesting case study and highlight the need for quantitative and flexible analytical tools, such as that provided by fi-

nite graph–cover analysis. The analysis of the type-I codes also

has an section with 512 columns of weight

and 256 demonstrates the importance of the particular parity-check ma-

columns of weight

. As a comparative benchmark, we trix structure chosen for iterative decoding. The absence of un-

also show the performance of an extended Euclidean-geometry detected errors suggests that their potentially poor minimum

code (cf. [16]) having the same rate and approximately the distance properties are much less significant than their poor min-

same length.

imum pseudo-weight. By removing the iterative encodability

All three codes exhibit similar performance. At low SNR, constraint, a similar analysis may be useful for selecting can-

the reversible code having some weight

columns in

didate polynomials to build cyclic or quasi-cyclic LDPC codes.

performs slightly better than the other reversible code. However, Although the circulant design approach used to construct the

this gap closes as the SNR increases.

type-I reversible codes is not well suited to -regular codes,

Decoding complexity is compared in Table VIII, using the we have shown that it may be used to construct high rate codes.

metrics discussed in Section VI. The parity-check matrix of an We have presented a simple recursive algorithm for con-

extended EG-LDPC code has a much lower density than that structing type-II reversible codes. This reversible design

of a type-I EG-LDPC code. In this case, the benchmark ex- employs random components, in order to improve the expan-

tended EG-LDPC code has columns of weight

and sion property of the graph corresponding to . Simulation

row weight

, with similar complexity to the reversible results for the example type-II reversible codes compare well

codes. The reversible LDPC code labeled has more columns to random and extended EG-LDPC benchmarks. The recursive

of weight

than the other codes and therefore has a slightly construction offers a wide range of choices for the size of .

higher complexity. The EG-LDPC codes may be encoded using We also have an arbitrary choice for the number of columns

a shift register and hence encoder latency scales linearly with in . Hence, type-II reversible codes may be designed with

code length. The reversible codes may be encoded using a (fully a high degree of freedom for rate and block length. It should

or partially) parallel architecture, having computational latency also be possible to create irregular reversible LDPC codes

set by the number of encoder iterations, which is

in this with a certain distribution. The target distribution could be

case.

included when designing to meet the iterative encodability

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HALEY AND GRANT: REVERSIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

2035

constraint. Design of is arbitrary with respect to iterative encodability, thus providing much flexibility in distribution selection. This is a potential area for future exploration. For example, a recursive approach similar to that proposed for the type-II codes may be targeted and/or the iterative encodability of any upper triangular may be exploited.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank P. Vontobel for his helpful feedback regarding the finite graph cover analysis, and for performing a heuristic pseudo-codeword search for the type-I reversible codes.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models, ser. IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000, vol. 123, pp. 113–130.
[2] S. B. Wicker, Error Control Systems for Digital Communication and Storage. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[5] D. Haley, C. Winstead, A. Grant, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “An analog/digital mode switching LDPC codec,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, Kobe, Japan, 2005, pp. 5790–5793.
[6] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[7] C. Winstead, J. Dai, W. J. Kim, S. Little, Y. B. Kim, C. Myers, and C. Schlegel, “Analog MAP decoder for (8,4) hamming code in subthreshold CMOS,” in Proc. ARVLSI (Advanced Research in VLSI), Salt Lake City, UT, 2001, pp. 132–147.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[9] L. Ping, W. K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, “Low density parity check codes with semi-random parity check matrix,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 38–39, Jan. 1999.
[10] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[11] S. Freundlich, D. Burshtein, and S. Litsyn, “Approximately lower triangular ensembles of LDPC codes with linear encoding complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1484–1494, Apr. 2007.
[12] J. M. Perez and K. Andrews, “Low-density parity-check code design techniques to simplify encoding,” IPN Progr. Rep., vol. 42–171, Nov. 2007.
[13] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[14] M. G. Luby, M. A. Shokrolloahi, M. Mizenmacher, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[15] R. Lucas, M. P. C. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic deductible codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931–937, Jun. 2000.
[16] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[17] R. L. Townsend and E. J. Weldon , Jr, “Self orthogonal quasi-cyclic codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 2, pp. 183–195, Apr. 1967.
[18] M. Karlin, “New binary coding results by circulants,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-15, no. 1, pp. 81–92, Jan. 1969.
[19] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

[20] D. Haley, A. Grant, and J. Buetefuer, “Iterative encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. GLOBECOM 2002, Taipei, Taiwan, 2002, vol. 2, pp. 1289–1293.
[21] G. Strang, Linear Algebra and its Applications, 3rd ed. Ft. Worth, TX: Saunders College Publishing, 1988.
[22] J. Bond, S. Hui, and H. Schmidt, “Constructing low-density paritycheck codes,” in Proc. EUROCOMM 2000, Munich, Germany, 2000, pp. 260–262.
[23] R. M. Roth, Introduction to Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006.
[24] T. Shibuya and K. Sakaniwa, “Construction of cyclic codes suitable for iterative decoding via generating idempotents,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals, vol. E86-A, no. 4, pp. 928–939, 2003.
[25] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes, [Online]. Available: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/
[26] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[27] A. Vardy, “The intractability of computing the minimum distance of a code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1757–1766, Nov. 1997.
[28] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum-distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.
[29] P. Vontobel, “Algebraic Coding for Iterative Decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 2003.
[30] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[31] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[32] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC 2003), Anchorage, AK, 2003, vol. 5, pp. 3125–3129.
[33] R. M. Tanner, “Spectral graphs for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun./Jul. 2001, p. 226.
[34] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Irish Conf. Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science and Information Technology, MFCSIT 2002 (ser. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science), Galway, Ireland, 2003, vol. 74, pp. 97–104.
[35] R. Kötter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, 2003, pp. 75–82.
[36] P. Vontobel and R. Kötter, “Lower bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 70.
[37] P. Vontobel, Personal Communication. [38] N. Alon, “Eigenvalues and expanders,” Combinatorica, vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 83–96, 1986. [39] J. Friedman, “On the second eigenvalue and random walks in random
d-regular graphs,” Combinatorica, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 331–362, 1991. [40] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit group-theoretic constructions of combinato-
rial schemes and their applications in the construction of expanders and concentrators,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 39–46, 1988. [41] A. Lubotzky, R. Phillips, and P. Sarnak, “Ramanujan graphs,” Combinatorica, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 261–277, 1988. [42] J. Lafferty and D. Rockmore, “Codes and iterative decoding on algebraic expander graphs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory and Its Applications, Honolulu, HI, 2000, p. 276. [43] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2000, pp. 248–257. [44] E. W. Weisstein, Circulant Determinant, [Online]. Available: http:// mathworld.wolfram.com/circulantdeterminant.html. [45] F. Lustenberger, “On the Design of Analog Iterative VLSI Decoders,” Ph. D. dissertation, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 2000.
David Haley (M’02) received the B.Sc. and B.E. degrees from the University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, in 1996 and 1998, respectively. He received the Ph.D. degree from the University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, in 2004.
He began his career in the ICT industry in 1994, and joined Cohda Wireless in 2004, where he is now Lead Research Engineer. His research interests include error control coding theory, circuit design, and wireless communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2036

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

Dr. Haley was a UniSA Postgraduate of the Year. His thesis, “Efficient Architectures for Error Control Using Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” was awarded the Michael Miller Medal.
Alex Grant (S’93-M’96-SM’03) received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of South Australia, Mawson Lakes, in 1993 and 1996, respectively.
In 1997, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Laboratory for Signal and Information Processing, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Since March 1998, he has been with the Institute for Telecommunication Research, Univer-

sity of South Australia, where he is now Director and Research Professor of Information Theory.
Prof. Grant served as Chairman for the IEEE SA/ACT/Vic Sections Information Theory Society Joint Chapter (2000–2003). He served as Technical Co-Chair for the 2001 IEEE Information Theory Workshop and as general Co-Chair for the 2005 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia. He is a Member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society, and is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:39:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

