IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

2055

Error-Correction Capability of Column-Weight-Three LDPC Codes
Shashi Kiran Chilappagari, Member, IEEE, and Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, the error-correction capability of column-weight-three low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes when decoded using the Gallager A algorithm is investigated. It is
 proved that a necessary condition for a code to correct all error
patterns with up to k 5 errors is to avoid cycles of length up to
9 8 2k in its Tanner graph. As a consequence of this result, it is shown
that given any  > 0, N such that n > N , no code in the ensemble of column-weight-three codes can correct all n or fewer errors. The results are extended to the bit flipping algorithms.
Index Terms—Error-correction capability, Gallager A algorithm, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Tanner graph, trapping sets.

I. INTRODUCTION

G ALLAGER [1] showed that for

and

, there

exist

regular low-density parity-check (LDPC)

codes for which the bit error probability tends to zero asymp-

totically whenever we operate below the threshold. Richardson

and Urbanke [2] derived the capacity of LDPC codes for var-

ious message passing algorithms and described density evolu-

tion, a deterministic algorithm to compute thresholds. Zyablov

and Pinsker [3] analyzed LDPC codes under a simpler decoding

algorithm known as the bit flipping algorithm and showed that

almost all the codes in the regular ensemble with

can cor-

rect a constant fraction of worst case errors. Sipser and Spielman

[4] used expander graph arguments to analyze the serial and par-

allel bit flipping algorithms. Burshtein and Miller [5] applied

expander-based arguments to show that message passing algo-

rithms can also correct a fixed fraction of worst case errors when

the degree of each variable node is at least six. Feldman et al.

[6] showed that the linear programming decoder [7] is also ca-

pable of correcting a fraction of errors. Recently, Burshtein [8]

showed that regular codes with variable nodes of degree four

are capable of correcting a linear fraction of errors under the

parallel bit flipping algorithm. He also showed tremendous im-

provement in the fraction of correctable errors when the variable

node degree is at least five.

In this paper, we consider the error-correction capability of

the ensemble

of

regular LDPC codes as

defined in [2] when decoded using the Gallager A algorithm [1].

Manuscript received October 18, 2007; revised October 27, 2008. Current version published April 22, 2009. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grants CCF-0634969, ITR-0325979, and INSICEHDR.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mails: shashic@ece.arizona. edu; vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2015990

We analyze decoding failures using the notions of trapping sets

and inducing sets and prove that a code with a Tanner graph

[9] of girth

cannot correct all error patterns with up

to errors. Using this result, we prove that for any

,

for sufficiently large block length , no code in the

ensemble can correct fraction of errors. This result settles the

problem of error-correction capability of column-weight-three

LDPC codes. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In

Section II, we establish the notation and describe the Gallager

A algorithm. We then characterize the failures of the Gallager

A decoder with the help of trapping sets [10] and inducing sets.

We also introduce the notions of failure sets, fixed sets, and fixed

points. In Section III, we investigate the relation between error-

correction capability and girth of the Tanner graph of the code.

We extend the results to the bit flipping algorithms in Section IV

and conclude in Section V.

II. DECODING ALGORITHMS AND TRAPPING SETS

A. Graphical Representations of LDPC Codes

LDPC codes [1] are a class of linear block codes, which can

be defined by sparse bipartite graphs [9]. Let be a bipar-

tite graph with two sets of nodes: the set of variable nodes

with

and the set of check nodes with

.

The check nodes (variable nodes) connected to a variable node

(check node) are referred to as its neighbors. The degree of a

node is the number of its neighbors. This graph defines a linear

block code of length and dimension at least

in the

following way. The variable nodes are associated with the

coordinates of codewords. A vector

is a

codeword if and only if for each check node, the modulo two

sum of its neighbors is zero. Such a graphical representation of

an LDPC code is called the Tanner graph [9] of the code. The

adjacency matrix of gives , a parity check matrix of . An

regular LDPC code has a Tanner graph with variable

nodes each of degree (column weight) and

check nodes

each of degree (row weight). This code has length and rate

[1]. In the rest of this paper, we consider codes in

the , , regular LDPC code ensemble. Note that in the

literature, the column weight and row weight are also referred

to as left degree and right degree, respectively. It should also be

noted that the Tanner graph is not uniquely defined by the code

and when we say the Tanner graph of an LDPC code, we only

mean one possible graphical representation. The girth is the

length of the shortest cycle in . In this paper, represents a

variable node, represents an even-degree check node, and

represents an odd-degree check node.

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:32:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

B. Hard Decision Decoding Algorithms

Gallager [1] proposed two simple binary message passing

algorithms for decoding over the binary symmetric channel

(BSC): Gallager A and Gallager B. See [11] for a detailed

description of Gallager B algorithm. For column-weight-three

codes, which are the main focus of this paper, these two algo-

rithms are the same. Every round of message passing (iteration)

starts with the variable nodes sending messages to their neigh-

boring check nodes (first half of the iteration) and ends by the

check nodes sending messages to their neighboring variable

nodes (second half of the iteration). Let , a binary -tuple,

be the input to the decoder. Let

denote the message

passed by a variable node to its neighboring check node in

th iteration and

denote the message passed by a check

node to its neighboring variable node . Let

denote

the set of neighbors of check node . Additionally, let

denote the set of all messages from ,

denote the set

of all messages from except to , and

denote the set of

all messages to . The terms

,

,

,

, and

are defined similarly. The Gallager A

algorithm can be defined as follows:

if if otherwise

At the end of each iteration, an estimate of each variable node is made based on the incoming messages and possibly the received value. The codeword estimate of the decoder at the end of th iteration is denoted as . The decoder is run until a valid codeword is found or a maximum number of iterations is reached, whichever is earlier. The output of the decoder is either a codeword or .
1) A Note on the Decision Rule: Different rules to estimate a variable node after each iteration are possible and it is likely that changing the rule after certain iterations may be beneficial. However, the analysis of various scenarios is beyond the scope of this paper. For column-weight-three codes only two rules are possible.
• Decision Rule A: if all incoming messages to a variable node from neighboring check nodes are equal, set the variable node to that value; else set it to its received value.
• Decision Rule B: set the value of a variable node to the majority of the incoming messages; majority always exists since the column weight is three.
We adopt Decision Rule A throughout this paper but note that all the results can be established for Decision Rule B also.
C. Trapping Sets of Gallager A Algorithm
We now characterize the failures of the Gallager A decoder using the notions of trapping sets [10], inducing sets, and fixed sets. We adopt the definitions of the terms eventually correct variable nodes, trapping sets, and failure sets from [10]. For output symmetric channels, without loss of generality, we can

assume that the all zero codeword is transmitted [2]. We make

this assumption throughout this paper. The support of a vector

, denoted by

, is defined as the

set of all variable nodes for which

. Since the trans-

mitted codeword is assumed to be the all zero codeword, the

support of the input to the decoder is simply the set of variable

nodes flipped by the channel (or in other words the set of vari-

able nodes initially in error).

Let denote the input to the Gallager A decoder and

denote the codeword estimate of the decoder at the end of th

iteration. A variable node is said to be eventually correct if

there exists a positive integer such that for all

,

. For an input , the failure set

is defined as the set

of variable nodes that are not eventually correct. The decoding

on the input is successful if and only if

. If

, then we say that

is a trapping set and

is an

inducing set. The size of an inducing set is its cardinality. Since

the failure sets of two different input vectors can be the same

trapping set, we denote a trapping set simply by . A trapping

set is said to be an

trapping set if it has variable nodes

and odd-degree check nodes in the subgraph induced by .

Remarks:

1) If the Tanner graph of a code has an inducing set of

size , then the code cannot correct all error patterns with

up to errors. We use this fact as the basis for our main

theorem.

2) An

trapping set is not unique, i.e., two trapping sets

with the same and can have different underlying topo-

logical structures (induced subgraphs). So, when we talk

of a trapping set, we refer to a specific topological struc-

ture. In this paper, the induced subgraph is assumed to be

known from the context.

3) In order to show that a given set of variable nodes is

a trapping set, we should exhibit a vector for which

.

The definitions above do not provide the necessary and suffi-

cient conditions for a set of variable nodes to be an inducing set

or trapping set. Hence, we define the notion of a fixed set for

which such conditions can be derived and note that any fixed

set is an inducing set and a trapping set.

Definition 1: Let be a set of variable nodes and let be a

vector such that

. Consider running the Gallager

A decoder with as the input. If

,

, then

is known as a fixed set and is known as a fixed point.

That is, the messages passed from variable nodes to check

nodes along the edges are the same in every iteration. Since the

outgoing messages from variable nodes are the same in every it-

eration, it follows that the incoming messages from check nodes

to variable nodes are also the same in every iteration and so is

the estimate of a variable node after each iteration. In fact, the

estimate after each iteration coincides with the received value. It

is clear from the above definition that if the input to the decoder

is a fixed point, then the output of the decoder is the same fixed

point. It follows that for transmission over the BSC, if is a

fixed point and

, then

is a trapping

set as well as an inducing set. We now provide necessary and

sufficient conditions for a set of variable nodes to be a fixed set.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:32:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI AND VASIC: ERROR-CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES

2057

subsets

,

,

, and

are inducing sets.

III. ERROR-CORRECTION CAPABILITY AND GIRTH OF THE CODE

Burshtein and Miller [5] applied expander-based arguments

to message passing algorithms. They analyzed ensembles of ir-

regular graphs and showed that if the degree of each variable

node is at least six, then the message passing algorithms can

correct a fraction of errors. Codes with column weight three

and four cannot achieve the expansion required for these argu-

Fig. 1. Subgraphs induced by (a) (3; 3) trapping set and (b) (4; 2) trapping set. ments. Recently, Burshtein [8] developed a new technique to in-

vestigate the error-correction capability of regular LDPC codes

and showed that at sufficiently large block lengths, almost all

Theorem 1: Let be a code with Tanner graph in the en- codes with column weight four are also capable of correcting a

semble of

regular LDPC codes. Let be a set of variable fraction of errors under the parallel bit flipping algorithm. For

nodes with induced subgraph . Let the check nodes in be par- column-weight-three codes, he notes that such a result cannot be

titioned into two disjoint subsets: consisting of check nodes proved. This is because a nonnegligible fraction of codes have

with odd degree and consisting of check nodes with even de- parallel edges in their Tanner graphs and such codes cannot cor-

gree. is a fixed set iff: a) every variable node in is connected rect a single worst case error.

to at least two check nodes in and b) no two check nodes of In this paper, we prove a stronger result by showing that for

are connected to a common variable node outside .

any given

, at sufficiently large block lengths , no code in

Proof: See Appendix I

the

ensemble can correct all or fewer errors under

We note that Theorem 1 is a consequence of Fact 3 from [10]. Since every fixed set is an inducing set, the conditions a) and

the Gallager A algorithm and show that this holds for the bit flipping algorithms also.

b) of Theorem 1 are sufficient for a given set of variable nodes Lemma 1 [8]: A code whose Tanner graph has parallel edges

to be an inducing set and a trapping set. We illustrate the above cannot correct a single worst case error.

definitions with an example.

Proof: The ensemble of

regular codes consists of

Example 1: Fig. 1(a) shows a subgraph induced by a set of

three variable nodes

in a Tanner graph of girth six.

If no two odd-degree check nodes from

are con-

nected to a variable outside the subgraph, then by Theorem 1,

is a fixed set, and therefore, an inducing set of size

three. If with

is the input vector to the

codes whose Tanner graphs consist of a variable node connected to a check node via multiple edges. Such a Tanner graph is said to contain parallel edges. In [8], it was shown that such a code cannot correct a single worst case error. The proof is for the parallel bit flipping algorithm, but also applies to the Gallager A algorithm (see [8] for details).

Gallager A decoder, then

. This implies that Lemma 2: Let be an

regular LDPC code with

is a trapping set and according to the terminology Tanner graph of girth

. Then, has at least one in-

is a

trapping set, i.e., the induced subgraph ducing set of size two or three.

has three variable nodes and three odd-degree (here degree one)

Proof: See Appendix II.

check nodes.

Lemma 3: Let be an

regular LDPC code with

If two odd-degree check nodes, say and , are connected Tanner graph of girth

. Then, has least one inducing

to another variable node, say , then the subgraph induced by set of size three or four.

is depicted in Fig. 1(b). Assuming that the check

Proof: Since , there is at least one six cycle. Without

nodes and are not connected to a common variable node, loss of generality, we assume that

together with the

is a fixed set and an inducing set of size four. If three even-degree check nodes

and the three odd-de-

with

is the input vector to the Gal- gree check nodes

form a six cycle as in Fig. 1(a). The

lager A decoder, then

. Consequently, check nodes , and are distinct, since otherwise the girth

Fig. 1(b) depicts the subgraph induced by a

trapping set. would be less than six. If no two check nodes from

Now, assume that no two check nodes in

are connected to a common variable node, then

is a

in Fig. 1(b) are connected to a common variable node in fixed set and hence an inducing set of size three. On the con-

. Let with

be the trary, assume that

is not a fixed set. Then, there

input to the decoder. In this case,

. On the exists a variable node , which is connected to at least two

other hand if with

is the input to the check nodes from

. If is connected to all the three

decoder, then

. This illustrates that an check nodes, then

is the support of a codeword

inducing set of size three can result in a trapping set of size of weight four and it is easy to see that

is an in-

four. We also note that a fixed set can contain inducing sets as ducing set. Now assume that is connected to only two check

its subsets. In this example,

is a fixed set and its nodes from

. Without loss of generality, let the two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:32:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2058

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

check nodes be and . Let the third check node connected

to be as shown in Fig. 1(b). If and are not connected

to a common variable node, then

is a fixed set

and hence an inducing set of size four. If and are con-

nected to say , we have two possibilities: a) the third check

node neighbor of is and b) the third check node neighbor

of is (the third check node neighbor of cannot be or

as this would introduce a four cycle). We claim that in both

cases

is an inducing set. The two cases are dis-

cussed below.

Case a) Let

. Then

otherwise. The messages in the second half of the first iteration are

Fig. 2. Illustration of a cycle of length g.

most one incorrect message and hence

. The messages

passed in the first half of the third iteration (and therefore sub-

sequent iterations) are the same as the messages passed in the

first half of the second iteration. The algorithm runs for it-

erations and the decoder outputs

which implies that

is an inducing set.

Similar equations hold for

otherwise. . For , we have

otherwise.

Similar equations hold for . At the end of the first iteration,

we note that and receive all incorrect messages,

and receive two incorrect messages, and all other variable

nodes receive at most one incorrect message. Therefore, we have

and

. The messages sent

by variable nodes in the second iteration are

The messages passed in the second half of the second iteration

are the same as in the second half of first iteration, except that

. At the end of the second iteration, we note that

and receive all incorrect messages,

and receive

two incorrect messages, and all other variable nodes receive at

most one incorrect message. The situation is the same as at the

end of first iteration. The algorithm runs for iterations and the

decoder outputs

, which implies that

is an inducing set.

Case b) The proof is along the same lines as for Case a). The

messages for the first iteration are the same. The messages in

the first half of the second iteration are

Lemma 4: Let be an Tanner graph of girth ducing set of size four or five.
Proof: See Appendix II.

regular LDPC code with . Then, has at least one in-

Remark: It might be possible that Lemmas 2–4 can be made stronger by further analysis, i.e., it might be possible to show that a code with Tanner graph of girth four always has an inducing set of size two, a code with Tanner graph of girth six has an inducing set of size three, and a code with Tanner graph of girth eight has an inducing set of size four. However, these weaker lemmas are sufficient to establish the main theorem.

Lemma 5: Let be an

regular LDPC code with

Tanner graph of girth

. Then, the set of variable nodes

involved in the shortest cycle is a fixed set

(as well as an inducing set) of size .

Proof: Since has girth , there is at least one

cycle of length . Without loss of generality, assume

that

form a cycle of minimum length

as shown in Fig. 2. Let the even-degree check nodes be

and the odd-degree check nodes be

. Note that each variable node is

connected to two check nodes from and one check node from

and

is connected to . We claim that no two check

nodes from can be connected to a common variable node

outside

.

The proof is by contradiction. Assume and

are connected to a variable node . Then,

form a cycle of length

and

form a cycle of length

. Since

This implies that there is a cycle of length less than , which is

a contradiction as the girth of the graph is .

The messages passed in the second half of the second iteration

are the same as in the second half of the first iteration, except

that

and

.

By Theorem 1,

is a fixed set, and con-

sequently, an inducing set of size . It is worth noting that

is a

trapping set.

At the end of the second iteration,

and receive Corollary 1: For a code in the standard

regular LDPC

two incorrect messages and all other variable nodes receive at code ensemble to correct all error patterns up to

errors,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:32:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI AND VASIC: ERROR-CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES

2059

it is necessary to avoid all cycles up to length in its Tanner Corollary 2: A fixed set for the Gallager A algorithm is also

graph representation.

a fixed set for the bit flipping algorithms.

We now state and prove the main theorem.

Theorem 2: Consider the standard

regular LDPC code

ensemble. Let

. Let be the smallest integer satisfying

Then, for any

, no code in the

correct all or fewer errors.

Proof: First, observe that for any

ensemble can , we have
(1)

It can be shown that Lemmas 1–5 and Theorem 2 also hold for the bit flipping algorithms.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have investigated the error-correction capa-

bility of column-weight-three codes under Gallager A algorithm

and extended the results to the bit flipping algorithms. Recently,

we have shown in [12] that a column-weight-three LDPC code

with Tanner graph of girth

can correct all error patterns

with up to

errors thereby showing that the bounds estab-

lished in this paper are tight. Future work includes investigation

of necessary and sufficient conditions to correct a given number

of errors for higher column weight codes.

From [1, Th. C.1] and [1, Lemma C.1], we have that the girth

of any code in

is bounded by

(2)

For

, (1) and (2) imply that for any code in the

ensemble, the girth is bounded by

APPENDIX I

Proof of Theorem 1: We first show that the conditions of

the theorem are sufficient. Let be a set of variable nodes with

induced subgraph satisfying conditions a) and b). Let be the

input to the decoder with

. Then

otherwise.

Let a check node

. Then

The result now follows from Corollary 1.

otherwise.

IV. EXTENSION TO THE BIT FLIPPING ALGORITHMS Let a check node
The serial and parallel bit flipping algorithms [3], [4] do not

. Then

belong to the class of message passing algorithms. However, the definitions from Section II and the results from Section III

otherwise.

can be generalized to the bit flipping algorithms. Without loss of generality, we assume that the all zero codeword is sent. We begin with a few definitions.

For any other check node ,

. By the conditions of

the theorem, at the end of first iteration, any

receives at

least two ’s and any

receives at most one . So, we have

Definition 2 [4]: A variable node is said to be corrupt if it

is different from its original sent value. In our case, a variable node is corrupt if it is . A check node is said to be satisfied

otherwise.

if it is connected to even number of corrupt variable nodes and The messages passed in the subsequent iterations are the same

unsatisfied otherwise.

as the messages passed in the first iteration, and by definition,

Definition 3: Let be the input to the bit flipping decoder

(serial or parallel).

is a fixed set for the bit flipping al-

gorithms if the set of corrupt variable nodes after every iteration

is

.

Theorem 3: Let be a set of variable nodes satisfying the

is a fixed set. To see that the conditions stated are necessary, observe that for a variable node to send the same messages as in the first iteration, it should receive at least two messages, which coincide with the received value.

conditions of Theorem 1. Then, is a fixed set for the bit flip-

ping algorithms.

Proof: Let

. Then, is the set of corrupt

variable nodes at the beginning of the decoding. Observe that a

variable node flips if it is connected to at least two unsatisfied

check nodes. Since no variable node is connected to two unsatis-

fied check nodes, the set of corrupt variable nodes is unchanged

and by definition is a fixed set.

APPENDIX II

Proof of Lemma 2: Let

be the variable nodes that

form a four cycle. The following two cases arise.

1) The subgraph induced by and has three even-de-

gree check nodes , and . In this case,

is

a weight-two codeword, and therefore, an inducing set

of size two.

2) The subgraph induced by and has two even-degree

We note that Theorem 3 is also a consequence of Fact 3 from

check nodes

and two odd-degree check nodes

[10].

. If and are not connected to a common

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:32:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

as this would violate the girth condition. So, let the third check node be . In the first half of the second iteration, we have

or otherwise.

Fig. 3. Subgraphs induced by (a) (4; 4) trapping set (b) (5; 3) trapping set.

variable node, then

is a fixed set, and hence,

an inducing set of size two. Now assume that and

are connected to a common variable node . Then,

is a fixed set, and therefore, an inducing set

of size three.

Proof of Lemma 4: Let

be the set of

variable nodes that form an eight cycle [see Fig. 3(a)]. If no two

check nodes from

are connected to a common

variable node, then is a fixed set and also an inducing set of

size four. On the other hand, if is not a fixed set, then there

must be at least one variable node, which is connected to two

check nodes from

. Assume that and are

connected to and the third check node neighbor of is

[see Fig. 3(b)]. We claim that

is an inducing

set. Let be the subgraph induced by . Let and be as

defined in Theorem 1.

Case 1: No two check nodes from

are con-

nected to a common variable node. Then, is a fixed set and

hence an inducing set of size five.

Case 2: All the three check nodes in are connected to a

common variable node, say . Then,

is a codeword

of weight six and it is easy to see that is an inducing set.

Case 3: There are variable nodes connected to two check

nodes from . There can be at most two such variable nodes

(if there are three such variable nodes, they will form a cycle of

length less than or equal to six violating the condition that the

graph has girth eight). Note that if

, the decoder

has a chance of correcting only if a check node in receives an

incorrect message from a variable node outside in some th

iteration. We now prove that this is not possible. Indeed, in the

first iteration

otherwise.

The only check nodes that send incorrect messages to variable

nodes outside are

, and . The variable node is

connected to and . If and are not connected to any

common variable node, we are done. On the other hand, let

and be connected to a variable node, say . The third check

node neighbor of cannot be in . Proceeding as in the case of

proof for Lemma 3, we can prove that is an inducing set by

observing that there cannot be a variable node outside , which

sends an incorrect message to a check node in .

Subcase 2: There are two variable nodes connected to two

check nodes from . Let and be connected to and

and connected to . Proceeding as above, we can conclude

that is an inducing set.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank A. R. Krishnan and D. V. Nguyen for illustrations and R. Radhakrishnan for useful discussions.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity for Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 11, pp. 18–28, 1976.
[4] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[5] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for message-passing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 782–790, Feb. 2001.
[6] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[7] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[8] D. Burshtein, “On the error correction of regular LDPC codes using the flipping algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 24–29, 2007, pp. 226–230.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[10] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[11] A. Shokrollahi, “An introduction to low-density parity-check codes,” in Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science: Advanced Lectures. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2002, pp. 175–197.
[12] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “Error correction capability of column-weight-three LDPC codes: Part II,” 2008 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0807.3582

By similar arguments as in the proof for Theorem 1, it can be

seen that the only check nodes that send incorrect messages to

variable nodes outside are

and . There are now two

subcases.

Subcase 1: There is one variable node connected to two check

nodes from . Let be connected to and . It can be seen

that the third check node connected to cannot belong to

Shashi Kiran Chilappagari (S’05–M’09) received the B.Tech. and M.Tech. degrees in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India, in 2004 and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2008.
Currently, he is a Research Engineer at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona. In summer 2006, he was an intern in the Systems Group at the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory, Zurich, Switzerland. In summer 2008, he interned at the Los Alamos National Labs, Los Alamos, NM. His research interests include error control coding, data compression, and information theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:32:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI AND VASIC: ERROR-CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF COLUMN-WEIGHT-THREE LDPC CODES

2061

Bane Vasic (S’92–M’93–SM’02) received the B.Sc., M. Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nis, Nis, Yugoslavia (now Serbia), in 1989, 1991, and 1994, respectively.
From 1996 to 1997, he worked as a Visiting Scientist at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Kodak Research, Rochester, NY, where he was involved in research in optical storage channels. From 1998 to 2000, he was with Lucent Technologies, Bell Laboratories (Bell-Labs). He was involved in research in iterative decoding and low-density parity-check codes, as well as development of codes and detectors implemented in Bell-Labs chips. Currently, he is a Professor at the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, communication theory, and digital communications and recording.

Dr. Vasic is a Member of the Editorial Board for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS. He served as Technical Program Chair of the IEEE Communication Theory Workshop in 2003 and as Co-Organizer of the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) Workshops on Optical/Magnetic Recording and Optical Transmission, and Theoretical Advances in Information Recording in 2004. He was Co-Organizer of the Los Alamos Workshop on Applications of Statistical Physics to Coding Theory in 2004, the Communication Theory Symposium within the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC 2006), and IEEE Communication Theory Workshop (CTW 2007).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:32:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

