1976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

Finding All Small Error-Prone Substructures in LDPC Codes
Chih-Chun Wang, Member, IEEE, Sanjeev R. Kulkarni, Fellow, IEEE, and H. Vincent Poor, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—It is proven in this work that it is NP-complete to exhaustively enumerate small error-prone substructures in arbitrary, finite-length low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Two error-prone patterns of interest include stopping sets for binary erasure channels (BECs) and trapping sets for general memoryless symmetric channels. Despite the provable hardness of the problem, this work provides an exhaustive enumeration algorithm that is computationally affordable when applied to
 codes of practical short lengths n 500. By exploiting the sparse  connectivity of LDPC codes, the stopping sets of size 13 and the  trapping sets of size 11 can be exhaustively enumerated. The
central theorem behind the proposed algorithm is a new provably tight upper bound on the error rates of iterative decoding over BECs. Based on a tree-pruning technique, this upper bound can be iteratively sharpened until its asymptotic order equals that of the error floor. This feature distinguishes the proposed algorithm from existing non-exhaustive ones that correspond to finding lower bounds of the error floor. The upper bound also provides a worst case performance guarantee that is crucial to optimizing LDPC codes when the target error rate is beyond the reach of Monte Carlo simulation. Numerical experiments on both randomly and algebraically constructed LDPC codes demonstrate the efficiency of the search algorithm and its significant value for finite-length code optimization.
Index Terms—Branch-and-bound, error floors, exhaustive search, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, stopping distance, stopping/trapping sets, support trees.
I. INTRODUCTION

determine the error floor performance (of BECs) but also determine the entire bit-error rate (BER) and the frame-error rate (FER) curves of any LDPC code [4], [5]. For general memoryless binary-input/symmetric-output channels, the dominating error-prone patterns are named differently according to the associated analytical techniques; these include trapping sets [6], near-codewords [7], pseudocodewords [8], and instantons [9].
Due to the prohibitive cost of computing the entire stopping set distribution [10] and the even greater expense of exhaustively enumerating all trapping sets, in practice, the performance of an LDPC code is determined in two separate steps. Given one fixed LDPC code, the waterfall threshold of the BER is approximated using density evolution [11], [12] with the corresponding scaling laws [13] taking care of finite-code-length effects, and then pinpointed by Monte Carlo simulation. The error floor is lower-bounded by identifying most of the dominant small stopping sets [14], [6], by importance sampling [15], or by the instanton analysis [9], [16]. For the case of a random finite-length code ensemble (not restricted to one given code), and for the simplest nontrivial setting of BECs, many insightful results have been obtained including the averaged performance [4], the corresponding waterfall scaling law [13], and the ensemble error floor analysis [17], [18]. Other research related to stopping set analysis includes results on the asymptotic stopping set weight spectrum [19], the Hamming distance spectrum [20], [21], and the stopping redundancy [22].

A. Bad Substructures of LDPC Codes
A SSUMING iterative decoding [1], the error floor performance of arbitrary, fixed, finite-length low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes [2], [3] is dominated by the bad substructures residing in the code of interest. For binary erasure channels (BECs), the error-prone patterns have been explicitly characterized and termed the stopping sets [4]. The stopping sets not only
Manuscript received September 05, 2006; revised February 01, 2008. Current version published April 22, 2009. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants ANI-03-58807 and CNS-06-25657. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, July 2006, and at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, June 2007.
C.-C. Wang is with the Center for Wireless Systems and Applications (CWSA), the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 USA (e-mail: chihw@purdue.edu).
S. R. Kulkarni and H. V. Poor are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA (e-mail: kulkarni@princeton.edu; poor@princeton.edu).
Communicated by T. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 2, 8–13 in this paper are available online at http:// ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2015993

B. Determining the Minimal Distances
The minimal stopping distance is defined as the minimal size of all nonempty stopping sets. As the minimal Hamming distance is related to the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) detector, the minimal stopping distance is the dominating factor determining code performance for iterative decoding over BECs in the low-error-rate regime. Recently, determining the minimal stopping distance for an arbitrary binary linear code has been shown to be an NP-complete problem [23]. Namely, there is little chance that a deterministic algorithm can be devised with polynomial computational complexity with respect to the codeword length . Although not explicitly stated in [23], it follows that the task of determining the minimal stopping distance for LDPC codes with sparse parity matrices is still NP-complete regardless of the sparsity constraint on the codes of interest. By noting that for large LDPC codes, most small stopping sets are also valid codewords due to the combinatorial bias of random construction [18], this NP-completeness result is not totally unexpected since deciding the minimal Hamming distance of any arbitrary linear code is a classic NP-complete problem of information theory [24]–[26].

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1977

It is worth pointing out that the NP-completeness result fo- C. Simple Complexity Comparisons

cuses on computer programs that take any arbitrary LDPC code as input, and output the corresponding minimal stopping distance. If one is willing to sacrifice the ability to accept arbitrary codes as input and limit the codes of interest to have some special structure such as the Hamming codes, the circulant-matrix-based LDPC codes, the convolutional LDPC codes, etc., then the minimal stopping/Hamming distances can be determined efficiently and sometimes analytically through combinatorial or algebraic analyses [27]–[31]. Until the present, there has been no combinatorial or algebraic method for determining the minimal distance of an LDPC code constructed arbitrarily from a given degree distribution, which is arguably the most important class of LDPC codes.
Suppose we are willing to further sacrifice some precision and are interested only in an upper bound on the minimal stopping distance. Since the minimal stopping distance is defined as the minimal size of all nonempty stopping sets, upper bounds on the minimal stopping distance can be obtained by explicitly identifying any single stopping set of small size. This task is generally achieved efficiently via the error impulse methods [32], [33]. The efficiency of computing upper bounds motivates the following question: can a nontrivial lower bound on the minimal stopping distance be easily obtained so that the minimal distances can be bracketed efficiently? Unfortunately, few meaningful lower bounds on the minimal stopping distance exist. The lack of progress is essentially due to the aforementioned NP-hardness of the problem.
The challenges of determining the low-error-rate performance of iterative decoding persist for non-erasure channels as well. For non-erasure channels, the minimal trapping distance can be defined analogously as the minimal size of all nonempty trapping sets. In Section III-B, it is proven that the problem of deciding the minimal trapping distance is also NP-complete. In other words, determining the asymptotic low-error-rate performance of the iterative detector (for BECs and for non-erasure channels) is not easier than determining the asymptotic performance of the optimal MAP detector. The NP-hardness of

A simple analysis of the complexity of deciding the minimal

stopping/trapping distances (or equivalently, the complexity of

exhaustively enumerating small stopping/trapping sets) is dis-

cussed as follows. Consider the problem of exhaustively enu-

merating all minimum stopping sets1 of size in a code of

length . A brute-force method must examine all

sub-

sets of size

. Let and denote the maximal variable

and check node degrees in the corresponding Tanner graph. A

smarter search achieves

when the girth of

the corresponding Tanner graph is larger than . Namely, we

need only to consider the depth- support tree rooted at each

variable node (see [14] for details). Both the brute-force and

the smarter methods show that this problem is fixed-parameter

tractable with respect to . On the other hand, when is fixed,

the complexity is bounded by

and does not grow with re-

spect to . So the problem is also fixed-parameter tractable with

respect to . Nonetheless, for practical values of , , , and

(say

,

,

,

) the complexity quickly

becomes intractable for any of the above schemes. In this work,

instead of improving the asymptotic complexity for large values

of and , we are interested in developing efficient algorithms

that can handle parameters of practical ranges. Further discus-

sion on the NP-completeness is relegated to Section III.

An algorithm that is capable of solving problems with

small-to-moderate values of and is of practical importance

since many applications use codes of length

. By

taking advantages of the sparse structure of LDPC codes, we

are able to enumerate exhaustively all stopping sets of size

for LDPC codes of length

and thus decide the

minimal stopping distances if they are . The closed-form

complexity of the proposed algorithm is difficult to characterize

due to its convoluted nature. For comparison, with

and

the aforementioned brute-force search requires

trials, which demonstrates the efficiency

of the proposed scheme. The smarter depth- tree approach

in [14] results in similar complexity for such values of and

this problem is one of the reasons that all existing finite-code . The proposed stopping set exhaustive search algorithm will

error-floor optimization schemes employ approximations or guided heuristics as objective functions. Some such examples include the girth of the Tanner graph [34], [35], the Approximate Cycle Extrinsic (ACE) message degree [36], partial

later be generalized for trapping sets as well. All trapping sets of size can then be exhaustively enumerated for codes.

stopping set elimination [37], and ensemble-inspired upper bounds [38]. With already significant success based on these indirect metrics, one would expect greater improvement if the minimal stopping/trapping distance can be computed and directly employed during code optimization. One purpose of this paper is to serve as a starting foundation for future research on efficient exhaustive search algorithms for error-prone substructures, which are critical to finite-length code optimization.
Other recent research related to the determination of the minimal Hamming distance, the pseudocodeword weight, and the girth of the Tanner graph can be found in [39]–[44]. Ensemblebased FER bounds for MAP decoders are explored in [45], [46],

D. Main Applications of Our Results
In addition to its computation-theoretic interest, three major applications of the proposed algorithm are listed as follows.
1) For BECs, an exhaustive list of minimum stopping sets can be used to obtain a BER/FER lower bound that is tight in both order and multiplicity. For non-erasure channels, the exhaustive list of minimum trapping sets can be used to derive lower bounds tightly predicting the error floor performance [6].
2) A central component of the algorithm is a novel BER/FER upper bound for any fixed arbitrary codes over BECs.

and the references therein. It is worth noting that deciding the

girth of the Tanner graph is not an NP-hard problem and can be

easily done with complexity

.

1To be consistent with graph-theoretic terminology, we will use the terms minimum stopping set and minimal stopping set to denote, respectively, stopping sets that are of minimal size and those which have no sub stopping sets. Further discussion of this terminology is included in Section IV-A.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

Fig. 1. A simple parity-check code C .

and the check nodes

, code

expressed in its Tanner graph representation such that

if and only if there is an undirected edge connecting

example, a simple parity-check code with

can be . For

Based on a support-tree-pruning technique, this upper

bound can be iteratively sharpened until its asymptotic

order equals that of the error floor. This thus provides a worst performance guarantee for BECs with arbitrarily low erasure probability. 3) Using the exhaustive list of minimum bad substructures as an objective function, one can optimize the error floor

can be mapped bijectively to a bipartite graph as in Fig. 1. The

coded bits

and the variable nodes

are

generally used interchangeably in the Tanner graph representa-

tion. However, in the most stringent definitions,

refers to the “bits” of the codeword vector satisfying

of any arbitrary finite-length code. The error-floor perfor- while

refers to the “nodes” in the corresponding

mance can be guaranteed without any combinatorial out- Tanner graph.

lier, a weakness of randomized constructions that was first In this paper, we use the most general definition of LDPC

pointed out in [6]. Further implementation of the code opti- codes, namely, a family of linear codes such that the number of

mization algorithm is discussed in a companion paper [18]. ones in is of the order of when tends to infinity. Although

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. This our results are derived with the application to LDPC codes in

paper focuses on exhaustive search algorithms for two different mind, they hold for arbitrary linear codes as well.

types of substructures: the stopping sets and the trapping sets. Basic definitions of these error-prone patterns are given in Sec- B. Stopping Sets and Trapping Sets

tion II, and the NP-completeness of exhaustively enumerating 1) Stopping Sets: A stopping set is a subset of

minimum trapping sets is proven in Section III. We then de- such that the induced subgraph contains no check nodes of

rive a tree-based algorithm for computing a BER upper bound degree one. Using code in Fig. 1 as an example, both

for BECs in Section IV, a central component of the proposed

and

are stopping sets for code .

exhaustive search algorithm. Inspired by properties of stopping The minimal stopping distance is defined as the minimal

sets and by the corresponding Boolean expression framework, size of all nonempty stopping sets. Since the collection of

several methods to further improve the efficiency of the algo- the value- bits in any codeword is a stopping set, we have

rithm are discussed in Section V. The stopping set exhaustive

, the minimal Hamming distance.

search algorithm is generalized for trapping sets in Section VI. Di et al. in [4] showed that for BECs, a belief propagation

Section VII contains numerical experiments, including results

for the

Golay code, the

Tanner code

[29], the Ramanujan–Margulis (

,

) code [47], the

Margulis code ( ) [48], and two rate- ,

lifted

LDPC codes from the companion paper [18]. Section VIII con-

cludes this paper.

iterative decoder [49] fails if and only if the set of erased bits contains a stopping set. As a result, for small erasure probability , the FER performance is determined by the minimal stopping distance and the corresponding multiplicity , the latter of which is defined as the number of distinct stopping sets of size .
2) Trapping Sets: The notion of trapping sets stems from an

II. PRELIMINARY AND FORMULATION

operational definition in which a trapping set originally refers to

A. Code Representation

a subset of

that is susceptible to errors under iter-

ative decoding. Namely, if the observations on these nodes are

For fixed

, let

denote misleading, it is “highly unlikely” that the extrinsic messages

a transmitted vector, for which is the codeword length. The will correct any of the nodes. The errors are “trapped” within

receiving signal vector, denoted by

, is the these nodes [6]. It is a concept depending on both the under-

image of the transmitted corrupted by memoryless stationary lying channel model and the decoding algorithm. For example,

noise:

. One particular type of channel a stopping set is legitimately a trapping set when the underlying

of interest is the BEC in which we use to represent the erasure channel model is the BEC and the belief propagation decoder

symbol and the erasure probability is

.

is employed. For non-erasure channels, empirically, almost all

Only linear codes are considered. We use

trapping sets are near-codewords [7]. That is, almost all trapping

to denote the codebook and use to denote the corresponding sets are subsets of

such that the induced subgraph

parity-check matrix . We then have

for all contains only a “limited” number of check nodes of odd degree

assuming is a row vector. The chosen to represent and is thus “nearly” a codeword. A near-codeword can be cat-

is not unique. As all our results depend on the choice of , egorized by two numbers, the total number of variable nodes

the code sometimes refers to the corresponding parity-check involved and the number of check nodes of odd degree in the

matrix rather than to the collection of valid codewords . induced graph. For example, a

near-codeword refers to

By viewing the matrix as an incidence matrix of a bipar- a set of 12 variable nodes for which there are four check nodes

tite graph containing two sets of vertices: the variable nodes of odd degree in the induced subgraph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1979

To better facilitate our discussion, we redefine the trapping those input sizes (in bits) rather than the codeword length .

set from a graph-theoretic perspective, which is independent of More rigorous definitions/discussions of these concepts can be

the underlying channel model and the decoding algorithm:

found in [50].

Definition 1 ( -Out Trapping Sets): A subset of is a -out trapping set if in the induced subgraph, there are exactly check nodes of degree one.

NP-complete problems are the hardest non-deterministically polynomial problems in the sense that the NP P question is equivalent to asking whether any NP-complete problem can be solved with complexity polynomial in the size of the problem.

A similar definition is the “elementary trapping set” intro- It is generally believed that solving NP complete problems

duced in [31], which is a special case of the -out trapping set requires exponential complexity. Some known NP-complete

defined herein.

problems in the coding and information theory literature are

By the above definition, every stopping set is a -out trapping the following.

set.

in of Fig. 1 is a -out trapping set. It is

worth noting that the definition of a -out trapping set is slightly

different from the definition of near-codewords. The near-code-

word focuses on the total number of check nodes of odd degree,

including those with degree and those with degrees , and

emphasizes its link to valid codewords. The -out trapping set

considers a pattern resembling the stopping sets but has edges

connecting to check nodes of degree . These degree- check

nodes are able to receive correct extrinsic messages to recover

the contaminated bit values. In addition to the check nodes of

degree , there might be more check nodes of odd degrees

within a -out trapping set, which makes the definition different

than that of an

near-codeword. This slight relaxation does

not affect the generality of our exhaustive search algorithm for

1) Minimal Hamming Distance: A binary decision problem is

a special type of problem in which a yes/no question is pro-

posed and the algorithm/solver outputs or depending

on whether the answer to the proposed question is positive

or negative. We consider the following decision problem:

given as input an arbitrary parity-check matrix and an in-

teger , the decision problem MIN-DISTANCE

out-

puts if and only if (iff)

, in which is the

minimal Hamming distance of code specified by . It

has been shown in [24]–[26] that MIN-DISTANCE

is NP-complete (with respect to the input size

). The question whether

is hard to answer

for large and large .

the following two reasons. First, for any set of variable nodes, Note: One can easily show that MIN-DISTANCE

is

an near-codeword must, by definition, be a -out trapping of similar complexity to the problem of directly computing

set for some

. As a result, any attempt to enumerate ex- given ,2 while the simpler nature of the Yes/No question fa-

haustively all -out trapping sets of sizes

and

cilitates the complexity analysis.

can also serve the purpose of exhaustively enumerating all

near-codewords for

and

. Second, for a randomly

constructed code of large length , almost all small stopping

sets are valid codewords and almost all small -out trapping sets

of size are

near-codewords due to some combinatorial

bias discussed in [18]. In our numerical examples, all minimum

-out trapping sets are

near-codewords.

One can similarly define the minimal -out trapping distance

2) Minimal Stopping Distance: Given as input an arbitrary

parity-check matrix and an integer , the decision

problem MIN-DISTANCE

outputs iff

,

in which is the minimal stopping distance of code

specified by . For notational simplicity, we use

SD

as shorthand. It has been shown in [23] that

SD

is also an NP-complete problem.

as the minimal size of all nonempty -out trapping sets.

Sometimes a subset of an NP-complete problem, defined by

III. NP-COMPLETENESS

restricting the cases considered, can be polynomially solvable. For example, the SAT problem is polynomially solvable when

A major motivation of this work springs from the fact that restricted to 2-SAT. The decision problem SD

,

the inherent NP-hardness of the minimal stopping/trapping dis- where

is restricted to that of an LDPC code, may

tance problems describes only their asymptotic worst case com- have different complexity than the original SD

due to

plexity with large codeword length , which does not preclude the additional sparsity constraint on . Nonetheless, in [23],

efficient algorithms for shorter codes. However, it is still worth the NP-completeness of SD

is proven by reduction

investigating the asymptotic behavior, as it provides valuable from the classic NP-complete VERTEX-COVER problem

insight into the intrinsic hardness of exhaustively enumerating to SD

in a way that any vertex cover for the original

minimum error-prone substructures.

graph

is mapped bijectively to a stopping set for

A. Existing Results

. By carefully inspecting the construction of from in

[23], we notice that there are

rows and

The designation NP refers to those problems that are guar-

columns in and there are

anteed to be solvable by a fictional (N)ondeterministic Turing nonzero entries in . Therefore, is a sparse matrix. As a

machine within (P)olynomial time with respect to the input size. result, the same reduction proposed in [23] can be used to prove

For example, if the input of the problem is a general linear code, that SD

is an NP-complete problem regardless of

then

bits are required to describe the problem. If the input such a sparsity constraint.

of the problem is an LDPC code of length , then in general bits are needed to describe the LDPC code struc-
ture. The polynomial termination time is taken with respect to

2There are instances in which the decision problem is strictly easier than direct computation, for example, the primality test problem versus the factorization problem.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

B. Minimal -Out Trapping Distance

Given as input an arbitrary parity-check matrix and an in-

teger , the decision problem -OUT-TRAPPING-DISTANCE

outputs iff

, in which is the minimal -out

trapping distance of the parity-check code specified by . For

notational simplicity, we use -OTD

as shorthand. Note

that unlike and , is not part of the input. We can then prove

the following theorem.

Theorem 1: For any fixed integer , the decision problem

-OTD

is NP-complete.

Proof: It is easy to show that -OTD

is an NP

problem since a nondeterministic Turing machine can choose

any one of the nonempty minimum -out trapping sets and

verify whether its size is in polynomial time with respect

to the input size

. The NP-completeness proof

is based on the polynomial time reduction from SD

to

-OTD

as described in Algorithm 1 and illustrated in

Fig. 2.

Algorithm 1 Reduction from SD

to -OTD

1: Input: the parity-check matrix and .

2: Construct the corresponding bipartite graph from .

3: Construct by duplicating

copies of , and

denote the

variable nodes as

.

4: for

to do

5: Form a

-clique among all the variable node copies

by adding

new edges.

6: Break each new edge into two by inserting a new check nodes of degree in between.

7: end for

8: Denote the final graph as .

9: for

to do

10: Construct from by adding check nodes of degree , and connecting them to .

11: Let denote the parity check matrix of .

12: end for

13: Output: If -OTD

outputs for any , then

output . Otherwise, output .

G G k + 2 Fig. 2. Illustration of

Algorithm 1, in which is duplicated

times

k = 2 v k 1 (

). Cliques are formed among f g and degree- check nodes are

v added to .

such that is a -out trapping set of

for . We first show that if

for some

and , then

for all

. Suppose not.

Define the following two nonempty sets:

and

. Since jointly and form a clique

(ignoring the degree- check nodes), by the min-cut max-flow

theorem, there are

edges connecting and . All the

degree- check nodes corresponding to those edges connecting

and will be of degree in the subgraph induced by .

Therefore, will induce at least

degree- check nodes,

which contradicts that is a -out trapping set. Therefore,

implies

for all

.

By the previous analysis, we can safely assume

for some . We then show that

must be a stopping set for the input . Suppose

not, say there are

check nodes of degree induced

by

. Since contains

parallel copies

of

, there are at least

check nodes

of degree , which contradicts that is a -out trapping set.

Therefore ,

must be a stopping set. Since

, we have

. The output of Algo-

rithm 1 being one implies that SD

. The proof is

complete.

Remark: The polynomial time reduction does not assume

any underlying structure of the input code. Since for sparse

input matrices, SD

is still NP-complete, the same

reduction in Algorithm 1 shows that even with a sparsity con-

straint on

, the decision problem -OTD

is

still NP-complete.

The polynomial running time of Algorithm 1 can be easily

IV. SEARCHING FOR THE MINIMUM STOPPING SETS

proved by inspection. So it remains to prove the correctness of

the reduction.

Without loss of generality, suppose

is a stop-

ping set of size for . Then

In this section, we focus mainly on exhaustively searching for the minimum stopping sets while the generalization for minimum -out trapping sets will be addressed in Section VI-D.
The fact that the iterative decoder fails when the erased

is a -out trapping set of size

for , where the bits contain a stopping set implies that each stopping set

extrinsic edges are connected to . Therefore, SD

corresponds to a lower bound

on the FER where is

implies that the output of Algorithm 1 is positive.

the erasure probability. Exhaustively enumerating stopping

Without loss of generality, suppose -OTD

sets of sizes smaller than or equal to is thus equivalent to

outputs , namely, there exists a subset

identifying (or eliminating, if there is no such stopping set)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1981

possible existence of lower bounds of order

. On the

other hand, an alternative way of eliminating possible FER

lower bounds of order

is to construct an upper bound

if such an upper bound exists. Sharing the same

effects as eliminating possible lower bounds, in the broadest

sense, any FER upper bound can be viewed as an exhaustive

search algorithm for small stopping sets and vice versa. For

the following, we construct an algorithm for computing upper

bounds on the error probability for arbitrary parity-check codes

over BECs, which later leads to an efficient minimum stopping

set exhaustive search algorithm in Section V-C.

A. The Boolean Expression Framework

Without loss of generality and for notational simplicity, we

assume that the all-zero codeword

is transmitted. With

this assumption and for the BEC, a decoding algorithm for bit

,

is a function outputting either or , the

former of which represents being successfully decoded and

the latter of which means the bitwise decoder fails. More explic-

itly, a decoder for bit is a function

with

output

, where

is the received signal

vector. In this paper, we use the function

,

to denote the iterative decoder for bit after iterations. And

we use

to denote the end result after iterative

decoding stops improving with more iterations. If we further re-

label the element “ ” by “ ,” and become Boolean func-

tions.

One advantage of this Boolean expression is that the iterative

message map at the variable node becomes “ ,” the binary AND

operation, and the iterative message map at the parity-check

node becomes “ ,” the binary OR operation. If we define the ex-

pectation of a Boolean function as its probability of being one,

the BER for bit is simply the expectation

.

This Boolean-expression framework was implicitly considered

in many papers discussing iterative decoders on BECs. For ex-

ample, [10] and [51] use the “projection algebra” to characterize

directly the expectation of the Boolean functions instead of fo-

cusing on the underlying Boolean functions. By focusing di-

rectly on the Boolean functions, many new useful implications

can be derived.

Take the simple parity-check code in Fig. 1 as an example.

Suppose we further use

to represent the message from

variable node to check node during the th iteration. The

iterative decoders ,

, for bit then become

many Boolean input ’s, also known as short “cycles,” pose

a great challenge to the evaluation of

. One so-

lution is to simplify (1) by expanding the nested structure into a

sum–product Boolean expression [10]

(2)

can then be evaluated by the projection algebra in [10]

or equivalently by the inclusion–exclusion principle. For this

example, we have

, where

, is the erasure probability. For comparison, with

,

while the BER predicted by density

evolution after two iterations is

. An order-of-

magnitude gap is observed between the actual performance and

the prediction by density evolution due to the presence of many

short cycles.

Following the convention in graph theory, we use “minimum

stopping sets” to refer to those stopping sets of minimal size

and use “minimal stopping sets” to describe those stopping sets

containing no other nonempty stopping set as its proper subset.

We then have the following results.

Proposition 1: In the simplified sum–product form 3 of ,

each monomial (product) term, for example

in (2),

corresponds to a minimal stopping set involving and vice

versa.

Proof: We first notice that each monomial term must be a

stopping set involving since knowing the values of outside

the monomial term does not help decode the value of . More-

over, in the simplified sum–product form, each monomial term

cannot be absorbed by another monomial term using a subset

of . Therefore, if only a subset of of the monomial term is

erased, the decoder can always decode the value of , which

implies that the monomial term in the simplified form must cor-

respond to a minimal stopping set.

To prove the converse, we notice that if we set the observation

values outside a minimal stopping set to be and the observa-

tions within the minimal stopping set to be , the decoder will

fail and the output of will be . Therefore, at least one of

the monomial terms uses only contained in a subset of the

minimal stopping set. The forward direction that we just proved

shows that monomial term must be a stopping set. Since a min-

imal stopping set cannot contain any proper stopping subset, the

monomial must correspond to the minimal stopping set. This

completes the proof.

In general, the number of monomial terms in a simplified

sum–product form is exponential with respect to . If only a

small collection of the product terms is identified, say

and

, then a lower bound

can be obtained where (1)

As the iteration proceeds, we can derive the Boolean expres- In this work, the inequality

between two Boolean vari-

sion for all

,

. The final decoder of bit is

ables is defined over their corresponding real values.4

, and in this particular example of , one can verify

that

for all

. Although (1) ad-

mits a pleasing nested structure, the repeated appearances of

3A simplified sum–product form contains the minimal number of product
terms.
 : _ 4A more formal definition is (a b) ( a) b.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

In our example,

is asymptotically

tight and determines the error floor. If any one of the minimum

stopping sets, which are

and

in this example, is

not identified, then the resulting lower bound will be loose. The

major challenge of this approach of constructing lower bounds

is thus to ensure that all minimum stopping sets are exhaus-

tively enumerated. Furthermore, even when all minimum stop-

ping sets are exhaustively enumerated, this lower bound is tight

only when the erasure probability is sufficiently small. Cur-

rently, whether is small enough can be determined only by

extrapolating the waterfall region, which is subject to doubt

since no analytical derivation can be made. A rigorous upper

bound thus becomes essential for a deeper understanding of the

error-floor behavior.

An upper bound can be constructed by iteratively computing

the sum–product form of

from that of

. To

counteract the exponential5 growth rate of the number of

product terms with respect to , during each iteration, we can

“relax” and “merge” some of the product terms so that the

complexity is kept manageable [10]. For example,

in

(2) can be relaxed and merged as follows:

UB

so that the number of product terms is reduced from four to

two. This technique is generally very loose since relaxation

destroys too much information. To generate tight upper bounds,

the number of relaxation steps must be kept minimal, which yields again an exponential growth rate of the number of

product terms. As a result, tight upper bounds constructed by

this relax-and-merge approach have been reported only for

codes of lengths

[10].

In contrast, we construct an efficient upper bound UB

by preserving much of the nested structures in (1) in-

stead of focusing on the simplified sum–product form in (2).

Tight upper bounds can be obtained for

– , a signif-

icant improvement over existing results. Furthermore, the tight-

ness of our bound can be verified with ease, a feature absent in

the relax-and-merge approach. Combined with the lower bound

, the finite code performance can be upper- and lower-bounded asymptotically tightly.

expressed using only

, binary AND “ ” and binary

OR “ ” operations without the binary NOT “ ” operation. By

the distributiveness of the AND and OR operations, an iterative

decoding function can always be simplified as a sum of mono-

mials without using NOT operations.

For example:

is an iterative decoding func-

tion while the XOR function

is not. All ,

, and

discussed in the previous section are it-

erative decoding functions. Before introducing a simple upper

bound, we first prove the following two properties of iterative

decoding functions.

Proposition 2 (Monotonicity): Suppose is an iterative decoding function. Then is monotonically increasing with respect to each input variable . That is

Proof: Since each variable node corresponds to an AND and

each check node corresponds to an OR, it can be shown that any

iterative decoding function can be converted to a parity-check

code detection problem assuming iterative decoders. One im-

portant property of iterative decoding over BECs is that regard-

less of whether the underlying graph is cyclic or not, the de-

coding is monotonic. Namely, knowing one more uncorrupted

observation can only improve the decoding result even for

codes with cycles. Proposition 2 is simply a restatement of the

monotonicity argument. This property, however, differentiates

the iterative decoding functions

from arbitrary Boolean

functions.

Proposition 3 (Positive Correlation): The correlation be-

tween two iterative decoding functions and is always

nonnegative, i.e.,

.

Proof: We prove this result by induction on the number of

common determining variables of and . When

and share no common determining variable, then and

are independent and

.

Suppose the same inequality holds for and sharing

determining variables. Consider the case in which and

share

determining variables. Without loss of gener-

ality, let be one of the common determining variables. Given

(or

), the conditional and share only

common determining variables. We then have

B. The Iterative Decoding Functions

Some useful notation is as follows. We use to represent

a partial segment

from to . With this

notation,

represents a received vector with the

th value being .

(3)

Definition 2: For any ,

able of

if there exist

.

is a determining vari- in which the last inequality follows from induction. On the other

and

such that hand

Definition 3 (Iterative Decoding Functions): A Boolean function is an iterative decoding function if can be

O 0 0 5The number of product terms is generally (((d 1)(d 1)) ), where

d and d are the maximal variable and check node degrees.

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1983

Subtracting (4) from (3), we have

By Proposition 2, the right-hand side of the above inequality

is always nonnegative. It is thus proved that

for

and

sharing

common

determining variables. By induction, Proposition 3 is proved.

Fig. 3. Rule 1: A simple relaxation for check nodes.

C. A Simple Upper Bound Based on the Decoding Tree

Let and be two iterative decoding functions. Con-

sider the simple variable node message map

and the Fig. 4. Rule 2: A pivoting rule for variable nodes.

simple check node message map

. The three simplest

cases are discussed below and three rules are introduced to cope with these scenarios.

of Rule 1 is illustrated in Fig. 3, in which we assume that the only common determining variable.

is

Rule 0–Density-Evolution-Like Evaluation:
If and share no determining variables, then and are independent and

Rule 2–The Pivoting Rule:

Consider the simplest case in which

and

share

one and only one common determining variable . By simple

Boolean algebra, we can upper-bound

as

follows:

Namely, when the inputs are independent, the BER of interest can be iteratively computed by the above formulas. Nonetheless, a more interesting question is for the cases in which we have dependent and . Can we still use this density-evolution-like (DE-like) evaluation as an upper bound? This question is answered in Rules 1 and 2.
Rule 1–A Simple Relaxation:
Suppose and share at least one determining variable, i.e., there is at least one repeated node in the input arguments of and . By the inclusion–exclusion principle and by Proposition 3, we have

It can be proved by Proposition 2 that the above inequality is actually an equality and we have

(6)

The realization of the above equation is demonstrated in Fig. 4.

Once the tree in Fig. 4(a) is transformed to Fig. 4(b), messages

entering the two variable nodes in Fig. 4(b) become indepen-

dent since with the value of fixed, the conditional functions

and

share no common determining variables

and are independent of each other. The expectation of the vari-

able node AND operation can be exactly evaluated by Rule 0. Al-

though the two messages entering the top check node in Fig. 4(b)

are still dependent, the expectation at the check node OR opera-

tion can be upper-bounded by reapplying Rule 1. The final upper

bound thus becomes

(5)

(7)

The above rule suggests that when the incoming messages and of a check node are dependent, the error proba- where for any deterministic

bility of the outgoing message can be upper-bounded by blindly

assuming the incoming messages are independent and by in-

voking Rule 0, the DE-like evaluation. Furthermore, the upper bound computed by Rule 1 has the same asymptotic order as the target error probability, as can be easily seen in (5). The multiplicity of the upper bound may be different from that of the error

In summary, after performing the pivoting rule as described by

(6) and in Fig. 4, the expectation

can also be upper-

bounded by the DE-like evaluation.

probability. Due to the random-like interconnection within the Remark 1: The pivoting rule (6) gives an equality and thus

code graph, for most cases, and are “nearly indepen- does not incur any performance loss. Any potential looseness

dent” and the multiplicity loss is not significant. The realization of this upper bound (7) results from the application of Rule 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

will be used exclusively for the root of a decoding tree, for which there is no upstream edge. A dummy leaf unit contains only one variable node and one input that is hardwired to as illustrated in Fig. 5(b).
The detailed concatenation of Rules 0 to 2 is provided in Algorithm 2.

Fig. 5. The (c ; v ) and the dummy leaf units.

Algorithm 2 A tree-based method for upper bounding , the BER of bit .

Rule 2 thus preserves the asymptotic order of Rule 1. Only the multiplicity term might be loose.

as does

Remark 2: Although Rules 0 to 2 hold for iterative decoding functions in sum–product form as well, it is more efficient to represent an iterative decoding function in its original tree form since the latter admits efficient computation of the DE-like evaluation. For general iterative decoding functions, the DE-like evaluation can only be used as “an approximation” of the finite code performance without concrete justification. Rules 1 and 2 provide a mechanism for converting the original tree to a suitable format such that the direct DE-like evaluation gives us a rigorous upper bound on the finite code length BER.

D. The Algorithm

1: Initialization: Let be a tree containing an

leaf

unit, of which all children sockets are open and the variable

node has an active input .

2: repeat

3: Locate an open socket, say a

-socket. Append to

the socket a

leaf unit with an active input .

Use to denote the variable node in the newly added leaf

unit.

4: if there exists at least another variable node in that also has active input observation then

5: Let denote the collection of all such in that have active input observation .

As a simple (easy to evaluate) but asymptotically tight upper 6: Let

denote the youngest common ancestor6

bound, Rules 0 to 2 are designed to upper-bound the expec-

between and all

. Use to denote the node

tation of single operations, either an AND or an OR operation, with the incoming messages and sharing at most one

in such that the youngest common ancestor

of and is

.

common determining variable. Thus, Rules 0 to 2 are not di- 7: if rectly applicable to real decoding problems for parity-check

is a variable node then

codes, which involve multiple concatenated operations and mul- 8: As suggested by Rule 2, a pivoting construction involving

tiple common determining variables. Nonetheless, once care-

tree duplication is initiated. Consider the iterative

fully concatenated, Rules 0 to 2 can construct a BER upper

decoding function for the subtree rooted at

bound UB for an infinite-sized decoding tree with many re-

. The two incoming messages along the

peated nodes while still preserving most of the nested structure.

branches corresponding to and , respectively,

Before the detailed description of the concatenation of these

are denoted as and . The shared determining

three rules, we define a

leaf unit as in Fig. 5(a). To be

variable is . The pivoting rule with respect to ,

more explicit, a

leaf unit contains one variable node and

, , and is illustrated in Fig. 6(a),(b).

check nodes. Within the

leaf unit, there are

edges connecting the variable node and the check

nodes. There is one upstream edge entering the variable node

and

downstream edges leaving the

9:

As illustrated, the subtrees correspond to and

are duplicated and two new variable nodes and one new

check node are added between

and the

duplicated subtrees.

check nodes, where denotes the set of neighbors of . Each

downstream edge is assigned an open socket labeled

10: Replace all active observations in the duplicated left

such that

. Additional leaf units can be concate-

and right subtrees either by or by depending on

nated through those sockets during tree construction. Once there

whether the active observation is in the left subtree or in

is one leaf unit connected to a parent leaf unit through a partic-

the right subtree.

ular edge, the corresponding socket is then considered closed. There is one input entering the variable node, which can be or
or an active observation . It is very important to view a leaf unit as a purely graphical structure and not associating any la-

11: The root of the left subtree, which is an auxiliary variable node, is assigned an active input while the root of the right subtree has its input hardwired to . (See Fig. 6(b).)

bels to the variable/check nodes. Only the sockets and an active

observation are labeled by

and by in a leaf unit.

We also define a

leaf unit that is very similar to a

leaf unit except that there is no upstream edge entering

the variable node and there are

interior check nodes and

downstream edges. The

leaf unit

6For any two nodes v and v in a tree, their youngest common ancestor (v ; v ) can be uniquely defined by finding all the common ancestors of
this pair of nodes and then selecting the youngest of them. For any existing variable node v with active observation y , we can uniquely determine the
(v; v ) between the variable node v in the newly added leaf unit and the existing node v . In Line 6 of Algorithm 2, (v; V ) refers to the youngest node among f (v; v ) : v 2 V g. Note that (v; V ) is unique but v may not be. Algorithm 2 works for any choice of v .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1985

In other words, for any set

, let

be the corresponding binary vector such

that

,

if

and

, otherwise.

Then for any stopping set ,

. There may be a

that is not a stopping set but that still satisfies

. The-

orem 3 says that there may be some such that

is strictly

less than

. But as iteration proceeds, the number of such

becomes smaller and smaller. Thus, the collection of “possibly

bad ” characterized by becomes smaller and smaller.

 Fig. 6. The pivoting rule, Rule 2, in a real decoding tree. For the most general
case, (v; V ) can have 2 children and the children not involved during pivoting are represented by lines entering (v; V ) with different slopes. The function f (y) focuses mainly on the AND operation on the two incoming messages g(y) and h(y) with respect to the branches corresponding to v and v .

The proof of Theorem 3 is based on an incremental tree-revealing argument presented in Appendix II.
We conclude this section by listing some other properties of Algorithm 2 as follows.
• The only computationally expensive step is when Rule 2

is invoked, which, in the worst case, may double the tree

12: end if 13: end if

size and thus reduce the efficiency of Algorithm 2. Some tree-pruning rules will be introduced later in Section V-A, which alleviate significantly the computational cost asso-

14: until the size of exceeds the preset limit.
15: Append all remaining open sockets by dummy leaf units (Fig. 5(b)).

ciated to Rule 2.

• Once the tree construction is completed, evaluating UB

for any

can be achieved efficiently with com-

plexity

, where is the size of .

16: UB can be computed by blindly assuming all incoming messages in are independent and applying Rule 0 iteratively.

• The preset size limit of provides a tradeoff between computational resources and the tightness of the resulting UB . Since Algorithm 2 generates a rigorous upper bound, one can terminate the program early even before the tightest re-

The evaluation of UB in Algorithm 2 is taken iteratively based on Rule 0. For the case in which an observation is hard-

sults are obtained, as long as the intermediate results have met the evaluation/design requirements.

wired to zero/one, we substitute

or

into the

formula of the variable node function

. Note: the for-

mulas in Rule 0 are written in terms of expectations. When Rule

0 is used for computing the upper bounds, one should follow the

corresponding arithmetic operations but should not associate the

V. PERFORMANCE/EFFICIENCY RELATED ISSUES
In this section, different schemes to further improve the efficiency/performance of UB or to confirm the tightness of UB will be discussed.

computed quantities as expectations any more. A more accurate description for the iterative upper bound computation in Rule 0 should be

UB

UB

UB

A. Pruning the Tree
To control the growth rate of the size of , we introduce the following two lossless pruning rules, which also play an important role when proving the optimality of Algorithm 2.

UB

UB

UB

UB

UB

instead of using the expectation operator. We then have the following theorem:

Rule 3–The Equation

:

We first note that

for any . Therefore, if

a variable node has input , then we can completely discard

all other messages entering . Or equivalently, we can prune all

Theorem 2: Algorithm 2 generates a BER upper bound

UB

.

The proof of Theorem 2 involves the graph-theoretic proper-

ties of

defined in Line 6 of Algorithm 2 and is de-

subtrees rooted at and the size of will be reduced. Rule 3 can be applied to the right subtree in Fig. 6(b) every time pivoting is performed, since Line 10 in Algorithm 2 replaces many active inputs by fixed zeros.

ferred to Appendix I in the interest of streamlining the discus- Rule 4–Degenerate Pivoting:

sion.

We first note that the following equation holds for all iterative

Let us denote by

the corresponding iterative decoding decoding functions :

function based on the tree assuming iterations of the RE-

PEAT-UNTIL loop in Line 2 are performed. Then, the detailed

(8)

behavior of Algorithm 2 can be further described by the following theorem.

Theorem 3 (A Narrowing Search): For all , we have

and for all

for all

.

For the variable node

tive input , define

tivated by (8), if

in the newly added leaf unit with acand as in Algorithm 2. Mo, then no pivoting is necessary

and we can directly replace all active inputs in the subtree

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

rooted at by ’s, as suggested by the right-hand side of (8). Rule 4 can be viewed as a degenerate case of Rule 2 in which
.

Whether

should be checked every time piv-

oting is about to be performed. If

, then we can

use Rule 4 instead of pivoting, and the computational cost is re-

duced.

B. The Socket-Finding Module

the error-floor performance of a given parity-check code. In this

subsection, we will discuss how to construct an exhaustive list

of minimum stopping sets containing from Algorithm 2.

To this end, after iterations of Algorithm 2, we

first enumerate exhaustively all the potentially bad sets

of minimal size such that

.

Denote the minimal size as and denote the exhaustive

collection of those by

. We then have the following

corollaries.

The tightness of UB in Algorithm 2 depends heavily on the

socket-finding (SF) module invoked in Line 3. A properly de-

signed SF module generates an upper bound UB of which the

asymptotic order is to better than that of a random SF

module. The intuition behind a good SF module is as follows.

Theorem 3 ensures that the support tree captures all stop-

ping sets plus some non-stopping sets. Adding new leaf-units

enlarges the support tree , which consequently places more

constraints on

and potentially may eliminate some non-

stopping sets. Nonetheless, the newly added constraint may be

redundant to the existing constraints captured by , namely, it is

possible that

and no non-stopping set

is eliminated. The goal of a good SF module is thus to ensure that

the constraint resulted by a new leaf unit eliminates at least one

non-stopping set such that such that

.

The ultimate benefit of an optimal SF module is stated in the

following theorem.

Theorem 4 (The Optimal SF Module): With an optimal SF

module, the simple pruning rules in Section V-A, and a suffi-

ciently large amount of memory, there exists

such that

In words, the output tree is able to implicitly characterize all stopping sets containing within a finite number of steps. We then have the following corollary.

Corollary 1 (Order Tightness of Algorithm 2): With an op-

timal SF module and the pruning rules, the UB computed by

Algorithm 2 is tight in terms of the asymptotic order if suffi-

cient computational resources are provided. Namely, there ex-

ists

such that

for all

.

Proof: This is a direct result of Theorem 4 and the order

preserving property of Rule 1, the only relaxation rule. In par-

ticular, the proof follows from Proposition 5 in Appendix I.

Corollary 2 (Tightness Confirmation): If there exists that is a stopping set, then UB is tight in terms of the
asymptotic order. Otherwise, UB is loose.

Corollary 3 (Stopping Set Exhaustive Enuemration): Let

denote the collection of all

that are

also stopping sets. If

is not empty, then

is an

exhaustive list of all minimum stopping sets containing bit .

If

, then there is no stopping set of size

.

Corollary 4 (The Tight Lower Bound): A nonempty

can be used to derive a lower bound

that is guaran-

teed to be tight in both the asymptotic order and the multiplicity

as described in Section IV-A.

Proofs of Corollaries 2 to 4: We first notice that is the

asymptotic order of both

and the upper bound UB

due to the order-preserving property of Rule 1. Suppose there

exists

that is a stopping set. By Theorem 3, no stop-

ping set containing has weight less than and the asymp-

totic order of

is thus . UB therefore has

the same asymptotic order as that of

. For the other

case in which no element of

is a stopping set, by The-

orem 3, any stopping set containing must have weight strictly

larger than and therefore the asymptotic order of

must be strictly larger than . UB is loose and Corollary 2 is

proved.

Theorem 3 also guarantees that the minimal stopping distance

is

. If there exists

that is a stopping set, then

. Theorem 3 then implies that all minimum stopping

sets must be in . Therefore,

is an exhaustive list

of minimum stopping sets. Corollary 3 is proved.

Corollary 4 is a straightforward result of Corollary 3 .

The exhaustive list

gives us a richer understanding

of the code behavior than the Yes/No answer to the decision

problem SD

in Section III-B.

It is worth emphasizing that if a suboptimal SF module is used

or the pruning rules are not employed,

may be strictly

bounded away from

for some even when

. The

proof of Theorem 4 is provided in Appendix III.

For all our numerical experiments, we use an efficient approx-

imation of the optimal SF module motivated by the proof of The-

orem 4.

VI. FURTHER GENERALIZATIONS
In the previous sections, a tree-based algorithm for upperbounding BER performance and exhaustively enumerating minimum stopping sets is provided. To further demonstrate the versatility of the proposed algorithm, we discuss the following generalizations, including the minimum -out trapping set exhaus-

C. Confirming the Tightness of UB and Constructing an

tive search algorithms.

Exhaustive List of Minimum Stopping Sets

Two important features of the proposed algorithm are the A. Applications on Shortened and Punctured Codes

easy confirmation of the tightness of UB and a byproduct tight Algorithm 2 can be easily generalized for codes with punc-

lower bound LB , which together with the tight UB brackets tured or shortened bits as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1987

If we take a closer look at the puncture operation on a partic-

ular bit , it is equivalent to deterministically assigning “era-

sure” to . That is, it becomes an erasure channel with

with probability one. Similarly, shortening a bit is equiva-

lent to deterministically assigning value to the observation .

Based on this observation, Algorithm 2 can be applied to codes

with punctured and shortened bits by replacing all active in-

puts with fixed / values depending on whether bit is short-

ened or punctured. The ability to analyze shortened/punctured

codes makes the algorithm directly applicable to irregular/reg-

ular repeat–accumulate (RA) codes without modifications.

Not only can the algorithm handle the punctured and the

shortened bits, the upper bound UB can be computed for the

setting of parallel independent channels, in which different bits

may experience different erasure probabilities

.

No modification of Algorithm 2 is necessary since Algorithm

2 does not assume a common erasure probability for different

bits . The unequal erasure probabilities affect the output UB

only during the evaluation stage (Line 16 of Algorithm 2).

B. The Branch-and-Bound Approach

The upper bound UB computed by Algorithm 2 also suits

naturally the classic branch-and-bound approach widely used

in the computer science community for solving NP-hard prob-

lems with practical input parameters. A detailed description of

exploiting Algorithm 2 as part of a branch-and-bound method

is as follows.

We first notice that the expectation

can be further

decomposed as

where the ’s are events partitioning the sample space . For example, we can define a collection of nonuniform
’s by

and

Since for any ,

is simply another finite code with

many punctured and shortened bits, Algorithm 2 can be applied

to each

, respectively, and different bounds UB

will be obtained. An overall, composite upper

bound can be obtained by combining the upper bounds for dif-

ferent partitioning events

C- UB

UB

stopping set , however, will not include since

is

considered to be a fixed, punctured code structure instead of a

channel observation. By taking the union,

becomes a

minimum stopping set of the original code

with being

confined in

and

In summary, with the above slight modification, the branch-and-

bound approach is able to search exhaustively through the parti-

tioned space

one event at a time. The reduced sample

space in each event makes the branch-and-bound approach

much more efficient than the original algorithm alone.

With a properly chosen nonuniform partition

of

50–20,000 events, the branch-and-bound approach generally

results in upper bounds of the asymptotic order to

higher than the original UB , and is capable of exhaustively

enumerating small stopping sets of sizes to larger than

the capability of the original algorithm. With the improved

efficiency, we are able to determine the minimal stopping

distance and enumerate exhaustively all minimum stopping sets

for many rate- LDPC codes of practical length

.

C. BER Versus FER

Thus far, all our discussions have been based on the perspec-

tive of each individual bit. We either construct an upper bound

on the BER , or enumerate exhaustively all minimum stopping

sets involving bit . Upper bounds for the average BER can be

easily obtained by taking averages over upper bounds for indi-

vidual bits. An equally interesting problem is to upper bound the

FER. In this subsection, we briefly discuss how to upper-bound

the FER or to enumerate exhaustively the minimum stopping

sets from the frame perspective.

We again rely on the Boolean expression framework. By

noticing that the frame error detector is simply the binary OR

of all individual bit detectors, we have FER

,

which is yet another iterative decoding function. Since Al-

gorithm 2 is applicable to all iterative decoding functions,

the upper bound UBFER and the exhaustive list of minimum stopping sets can be obtained by directly applying Algorithm 2

on FER . A graphical interpretation of FER can be obtained by introducing an auxiliary variable and check node

pair

such that the new variable node is punctured

and the new check node is connected to all

variable

nodes from to . The FER of the original code now equals

the BER of variable node and can be upper-bounded

by Algorithm 2. An efficient and straightforward partition

for the branch-and-bound approach is

One might also view the above method as a divide-and-conquer

approach.

and

(9)

In addition to upper-bounding , this branch-and-bound approach can also be used to search exhaustively for minimum stopping sets after the following slight modification.

All our FER results are based on the above partition or on a finer partition derived from the above basic partition.

Consider the event as an example. Applying Algorithm 2 Remark: Since the FER depends only on the worst bit per-

to

returns an exhaustive list of the minimum stop- formance, it is generally easier to construct tight UBFER for

ping sets of the corresponding punctured/shortened code in the FER than for the BER. Although it is computationally more

which is punctured while is shortened. Any minimum challenging to find the bit-wise upper bounds/exhaustive lists of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1988

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

minimum stopping sets, the bit-wise information provides detailed performance prediction for each individual bit and is of great importance during code optimization and analysis [37], [18].

D. Exhaustively Enumerating Minimum -Out Trapping Sets The Algorithm:

= 2 Fig. 7. Illustration of Algorithm 3, in which k . The two corresponding ( ) ( ) extrinsic edges x ; c and x ; c are illustrated.

We are now ready to generalize the bit-wise minimum stop-

ping set exhaustive search algorithm for minimum -out trap-

ping sets in a frame-wise perspective. We start by converting our 16: until all possible selections of distinct edges are

bit-wise stopping set exhaustive search algorithm to its frame-

exhausted.

wise counterpart. Namely, using the procedures described in the 17: Output: previous sections, one is able to obtain an efficient algorithm

and .

taking inputs , , and a list of punctured bits

, and

outputting

. If the minimal size of the stopping

: The “ ” operation is defined as follows. Any element in

sets is within the searchable range ,

is an exhaustive list

is of the form

for some

.

of the frame-wise minimum stopping sets and is the corre-

sponding minimal size. If the minimal stopping distance is be-

yond the searchable range , then

and

.

We denote this algorithm as the minimum stopping set exhaus-

tive search SSES

. The minimum -out trapping set

exhaustive search algorithm is then described in Algorithm 3.

Theorem 5: The output of Algorithm 3 is an exhaustive list of minimum -out trapping sets if the minimal -out trapping distance is .
Proof: The if condition in Line 5 ensures that the edges chosen in Line 4 are legitimate choices of the “extrinsic” edges

in any -out trapping sets since each is connected to one and

Algorithm 3 A minimum -out trapping set exhaustive search only one .

algorithm based on SSES

Line 6 ensures that all variable nodes connected to those

(excluding the selected ) are hardwired to . Therefore,

1: Input: and .

we can simply remove those corresponding columns while we search for the minimum stopping sets of the remaining graph.

2: Initialization:

and

.

Line 7 further strips away those extrinsic edges

.

3: repeat

Puncturing in Line 8 forces the SSES algorithm to focus exclusively on minimum stopping sets that contain . Com-

4: Based on the Tanner graph, select edges connect-

bining the above modifications, any minimum stopping set in

ing to distinct check nodes and denote them as

corresponds to a minimum -out trapping set in . By

.

exhaustively considering all ways of choosing the extrinsic

5: if there is no edge between and for any then

,

edges, the proof is complete. See Fig. 7 for illustration of this behavior.

6:

Construct a new by removing all columns in

satisfy both 1)

, and 2)

such that

.

that

With a fixed search range , the complexity of Algorithm 3,

although being polynomial with respect to , grows on the order

of

, which makes the above algorithm less appealing for

cases of large . Using the efficient SSES

proposed

7: Construct a new by removing rows

in this paper, the proposed algorithm is capable of identifying

from .

minimum -out trapping sets for short practical codes

8: Let the punctured bits be

with

.

On the other hand, for commonly used LDPC codes with

9:

SSES

.

many low-degree variable nodes, the dominating error patterns

10: if

then

are generally those -out trapping sets with small

, as

noted in [6]. In the same paper, it has been shown that for a rate

11:

and

.

,

almost-regular code, more than 55% of the

12: else if

then

FER is contributed by the minimum -out trapping sets with

, equivalent to the

near-code-

13:

.

words respectively [6, Fig. 5]. Additional numerical examples

14: end if

will be reported in Section VII, including the exhaustive enumeration of all minimum -out trapping sets of size for the

15: end if

Tanner code [29].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1989

Fig. 8. Comparisons among the upper bound (UB), the composite upper bound (C-UB), the Monte Carlo simulation (MC-S), and the byproduct tight lower bound
(LB) for bits 0, 5, and 20 of the (23; 12) binary Golay code. The corresponding asymptotic (order, multiplicity) pairs obtained by UB, C-UB, and the actual BER is are V0: f(3; 10); (4; 75); (4; 75)g, V5: f(3; 15); (4; 50); (4; 45)g, and V20: f(4; 221); (4; 27); (4; 1)g.

Some Remarks:

, where is an

Two final remarks on the efficiency and algorithmic issues are follows:

as follows.

unity matrix and is as

Remark 1: The core of our results is the bit-wise Algorithm

2. The efficiency of this bit-based algorithm can be further

improved for codes with special automorphism structures,

including the Margulis codes, the Ramanujan–Margulis codes,

the lifted LDPC codes based on permutation matrices, etc.

Taking the cyclically lifted LDPC codes with lifting factor as

an example, the complexity of Algorithm 3 for -out trapping

sets can be reduced by a factor of , which makes our algorithm

especially suitable for the protograph codes based on small

base codes with high lifting factor [52].

Remark 2: For large , exhaustively enumerating minimum

-out trapping sets becomes tricky especially when the minimal

variable node degree is . If a single variable node is of

degree

, then itself is the minimum -out

trapping set and would thus dominate the outputs of Algo-

rithm 3 and make the results useless. For example, searching

for minimum -out trapping sets of an irregular code with

degree- nodes always returns trapping sets containing single

degree- nodes. A simple remedy is to carefully select the

of interest in Line 4 of Algorithm

3 and preclude uninteresting combinations. A more effective

method would require unambiguous definitions of “nontrivial”

-out trapping sets and is currently under investigation.

The minimal stopping distance of the Golay code is and all 130 minimal stopping sets can be found by the proposed SSES in 2 seconds. All bits are involved in at least one stopping set of size and thus their BERs are of similar magnitudes. Fig. 8 compares the upper bound (UB), the composite upper bound (C-UB) determined by the branch-and-bound method in Section VI-B, the Monte Carlo simulation (MC-S), and the tight lower bound (LB), for bits , , and . As illustrated, C-UB and LB tightly bracket the MC-S results, which shows that the UB and C-UB are capable of decoupling even non-sparse Tanner graphs with plenty of cycles. However, the non-sparsity slows down SSES considerably, compared to sparse LDPC codes of similar sizes, due to the higher frequency of invoking the pivoting rule. Nonetheless, the proposed SSES still demonstrates

superior performance when compared to the naive brute-force

VII. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
The numerical experiments will be divided into four categories: i) non-sparse codes, ii) LDPC codes with random con-

search. For comparison, the extremely short codeword length of

the Golay code makes it still possible to use the naive brute-force

search, which requires

trials.

struction, iii) error-floor optimized LDPC codes, and iv) algebraically constructed codes. We use SSES and -TSES as shorthand for the minimum stopping set exhaustive search and the minimum -out trapping set exhaustive search algorithms discussed in the previous sections.

B. LDPC Codes With Random Construction

1) A

LDPC Code With

:A

LDPC code

with

is randomly generated, and the UB, the C-UB, the

MC-S, and the tight LB are performed on bits , , and , as

plotted in Fig. 9, and the statistics of all 50 bits are provided in

A. Non-Sparse Codes

Table I(a). The UB is tight in the asymptotic order for all bits while for 34 bits, the UB is also tight in multiplicity. Among

1) The

Binary Golay Code: The standard the 16 bits for which UB is not tight in multiplicity, 11 bits

parity-check matrix of the Golay code is described by

are within a factor of three of the actual multiplicity, which is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1990

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

Fig. 9. Comparisons among the UB, the C-UB, the MC-S, and the LB for bits 0, 26, and 19 of a randomly generated (3; 6) LDPC code with n = 50. The asymptotic (order, multiplicity) pairs of the UB, the C-UB, and the actual BER are V0: f(4; 1); (4; 1); (4; 1)g, V26: f(6; 2); (6; 4); (6; 2)g, and V19: f(7; 135); (7; 10); (7; 5)g.
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE STATISTICS FOR COMPLETE RANDOMLY CONSTRUCTED (3; 6) LDPC CODES: “Num: bits” IS THE NUMBER OF BITS WITH THE SPECIFIED
ASYMPTOTIC ORDER. “order ” IS THE NUMBER OF BITS WITH UBS TIGHT ONLY IN THE ORDER. “+multi ” IS THE NUMBER OF BITS WITH UBS TIGHT
> BOTH IN THE ORDER AND IN THE MULTIPLICITY. “order ” IS THE NUMBER OF BITS WITH A UB OF THE SPECIFIED ORDER WHILE NO BRACKETING LOWER
BOUND CAN BE ESTABLISHED

Fig. 10. Comparisons among the UB, the C-UB, the MC-S, and the LB for bits 41, 25, and 60 of a randomly generated (3; 6) LDPC code with n = 72. The asymptotic (order, multiplicity) pairs of the UB, the C-UB, and the actual BER are V41: f(4; 1); 0; (4; 1)g, V25: f(7; 1); 0; (7; 1)g, and V60: f(7; 19); (8; 431); (8; 11)g.

obtained from the bit-wise exhaustive list of minimum stopping 3) A

LDPC Codes With

: Complete statistics

sets obtained from the SSES.

of all 144 bits are presented in Table I(c), and we start to see

In contrast with the Golay code example, the tight perfor- many examples (101 out of 144 bits) in which the simple UB is

mance can be attributed to the sparse connectivity of the corre- not able to capture the asymptotic order and we have to resort

sponding Tanner graph. The smaller sizes of variable and check to the C-UB for tighter results. It is worth noting that even the

node degrees result in a considerably smaller decoding tree and simple UB is able to identify some bits with BER of order ,

fewer chances of invoking the pivoting rule, both of which favor which requires

trials if a naive brute-force

significantly the SSES algorithm. As can be seen in Fig. 9(right), search is employed.7

the composite approach C-UB possesses the greatest advantage

over simple UBs that are not tight in multiplicity. The C-UB and

the LB again tightly bracket the asymptotic performance.

2) A

LDPC Code With

: The UB, the C-UB,

the MC-S, and the tight LB are applied to bits , , and ,

as plotted in Fig. 10 and the complete statistics of all 72 bits are

included in Table I(b). Almost all asymptotic orders and most

multiplicities can be captured by the UB with only two excep-

C. The Error-Floor Optimized LDPC Codes
For the randomly constructed LDPC codes in the previous examples, the frame-wise minimal stopping distances range from to , which does not present any challenge for the proposed frame-wise SSES. That is the reason why we deliberately omitted the discussion of the frame-wise minimum stopping set

tion bits. Both of the exception bits are of order , which is com- 7For the bit-wise brute-force search, since the target bit is always included, puted by the branch-and-bound SSES for each bit respectively. we need only to search through possibilities instead of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1991

Fig. 11. Comparisons among three different regular (3; 6) codes in the following order. A short n = 64 code with minimal stopping distance d optimized to 8
 and multiplicity 89 confirmed by stopping set exhaustive search. A randomly chosen n = 512 code with d = 11 and multiplicity 1 determined by the stopping
set exhaustive search algorithm. An optimized n = 512 code with d 13. For the last code, one stopping set of size 24 is identified during the Monte Carlo
simulation.

exhaustive enumeration in the previous examples and focused variable nodes. This is a concrete example showing the limita-

mainly on using the SSES as a bit-wise exhaustive search tions of using girth as an objective function. Among all

or a bit-wise upper bound. For the following, we consider codes with

, many codes are “girth-optimal” but only a

randomly constructed regular and irregular codes that have tiny fraction of them has

. Even with a limited attainable

been optimized for the error-floor performance by some other girth size (three variable nodes), one can still construct codes

algorithms so that their frame-wise minimal stopping distances with much larger minimal stopping distances once we directly

are between and . The SSES will provide exhaustive lists use the minimal stopping distance itself as the objective func-

of minimum stopping sets. -TSES will also be applied to dif- tion.

ferent codes of length

. This range of codeword lengths is

large enough to be considered practical and is beyond the reach

of any naive brute-force search algorithm. On the other hand,

it is still short enough so that its minimum stopping/trapping

sets can be exhaustively enumerated by the proposed SSES and

-TSES algorithms.

The codes discussed herein are optimized by the code an-

nealing method, presented in a companion paper [18], that uses

the exhaustive lists of minimum stopping/trapping sets gener-

ated by SSES and -TSES as the objective functions for error-

floor optimization. For all the Monte Carlo simulation results,

100 frame error events are observed for each simulation point.

Experiment 2: A Randomly Chosen

LDPC Code With

: It is well known that regular

codes gener-

ally have better error-floor performance with random construc-

tion than irregular codes with many degree- variable nodes.

We arbitrarily choose one realization from the random code en-

semble. This

code has minimal stopping distance

with multiplicity . The SSES is able to identify the

only one minimum stopping set, and the resulting tight lower

bound coincides with Monte Carlo simulation when

;

see Fig. 11. Using Monte Carlo simulation, one can also identify

the same minimum stopping set, but cannot claim with 100%

certainty that there is no other stopping set of size , which is

Regular

LDPC Codes on BECs:

Experiment 1: An Optimized LDPC Code With

:

Using the exhaustive list as the objective function, its minimal

a major distinction between the proposed SSES algorithm and any randomized enumeration algorithm, e.g., the error impulse methods.

stopping distance has been optimized to . Even for codes of Experiment 3: An Optimized

LDPC Code With

this small size , a brute-force search requires

: An optimized

code with

is con-

computations. All 89 minimum stopping sets are identified structed by using the exhaustive list of minimum stopping sets

by SSES, and the exhaustive list provides a tight lower bound as the objective function. After optimization, all stopping sets

for the FER. The corresponding Monte Carlo simula- of size are removed. The minimal stopping distance must

tion results and the tight lower bound are plotted in Fig. 11. For be

. One stopping set of size is observed during the

comparison, the girth for any

code of length

is Monte Carlo simulation, which gives us an upper bound on

upper-bounded by , counting both variable and check nodes, the minimal stopping distance. As can be seen in Fig. 11, for

while the minimum stopping set of this code consists of eight this optimized code with minimal stopping distance

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1992

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

Fig. 12. Comparisons among three different irregular ( (x);  (x)) codes with their minimal stopping distances d and multiplicities m determined by the minimum stopping set exhaustive search algorithm. One of these is a short n = 72 code with d optimized to 8 and m = 71. A second, a randomly chosen n = 576 code, denoted by “Rand,” with d = 2 and m = 2, has the poorest FER performance due to the existence of small stopping sets. In contrast with “Rand,” the error floor of an optimized n = 576 code with d = 13 and m = 104, denoted by “Opt,” is improved over its random counterpart. Tight lower
bounds derived from the exhaustive lists of minimum stopping sets are plotted for comparison.

no error floor can be observed by software simulations until

FER

.

Irregular LDPC Codes on BECs:
A more interesting subject is irregular LDPC codes with degree distributions optimized for threshold performance [11], which turns out to be the most computationally friendly instance for the proposed SSES algorithm. For rate- irregular codes of length , the searchable range can be extended to
, which is better than its regular code counterpart. All irregular codes considered in this subsection have the following variable and check node degree distributions [11] optimized for threshold performance:

good regular codes, provided proper optimization is performed using the exhaustive list of minimum stopping sets as the objective functions.

Experiment 5: An Optimized

Irregular LDPC Code:

Using the same

degree distributions with

, one

can construct an irregular code with minimal stopping distance

[18]. All 104 minimum stopping sets have been identified

by the SSES algorithm and a tight lower bound is provided. For

comparison, we also plot the FER curve of a typical irregular

code of the same degree distributions

. At

, an

improvement by a factor

is seen when compared to the

typical code performance.

Irregular LDPC Codes on Gaussian Channels:

and

which has asymptotic erasure probability threshold

[53]. Codes of different codeword lengths and construction

methods are discussed as follows and their results are illus-

trated in Fig. 12. For comparison, to enumerate exhaustively

all stopping sets of size for an

code requires

trials if a naive brute-force approach is

adopted.

We focus our trapping set discussions on binary-input addi-

tive white Gaussian noise channels (BiAWGNCs). Namely, the

observation vector

, where is an all-one

vector, is a standard Gaussian vector with unity covariance

matrix, and

is the signal to noise (power) ratio. Only ir-

regular LDPC codes will be considered and their common de-

gree distributions, optimized for threshold performance, are as

follows:

Experiment 4: An Optimized

Irregular LDPC Code: and

Using the above

degree distributions, an irregular code

is constructed with optimized minimal stopping distance

as described in [18], and all of the 71 minimum stopping sets can

be identified. Both codes in Experiments 1 and 4 are of min-

imal stopping distance and of similar sizes, which shows that

with an asymptotic threshold

[53]. All the minimum

stopping sets or -out trapping sets are identified by the SSES

and -TSES discussed previously. The corresponding Monte

Carlo simulation results are in Fig. 13.

although there are inherently many “bad” irregular codes, the Experiment 6: “Rand” is an

code arbitrarily chosen

error floor of “good” irregular codes is still comparable to that of from the

irregular code ensemble with an additional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1993

Fig. 13. Monte Carlo simulations for irregular ( (x);  (x)), n = 512 codes with different constructions: “Rand,” “SS Opt,” and “TS+SS Opt” as described in Experiments 6, 7, and 8, respectively. Their corresponding (min_size,multiplicity) of the k-out trapping sets for k = 0; 1, respectively, are: “Rand” (2; 1); (2; 8); “SS Opt” (13; 40); (5; 4); “TS+SS Opt” (11; 12); (10; 24). Eighty decoding iterations are performed and 100 error events are observed for each simulation point.

constraint that there are no parallel edges in the corresponding Remark: When applied to codes of larger sizes, e.g.,

bipartite Tanner graph. Without any graph optimization, the

, the searchable range of the SSES and -TSES also in-

performance is not impressive for irregular codes of this short creases when compared to

codes due to the larger

length. To further pinpoint the cause of the bad performance, girth. Nevertheless, the minimal stopping/trapping distances for

its minimum -out trapping sets are exhaustively enumerated longer codes generally grow faster than the searchable range

for

(the -out trapping sets correspond to the stop- and fewer tight results can be obtained for the error-floor opti-

ping sets), and their (min_size,multiplicity) pairs are

mized regular/irregular codes of length

.

and , respectively. Its short, minimal trapping distances

explain the poor performance of this code.

D. Algebraically Constructed Codes

Experiment 7: “SS Opt” is an

code with degree

distributions

but optimized with respect to the minimal

stopping distance by the code annealing method in [18]. Its cor-

responding (min_size,multiplicity) of the -out trapping sets for

are

and , respectively. This example con-

firms the phenomenon that codes with error floor performance

optimized for BECs also exhibit good error floor performance

for other channels as well since the minimal -out trapping dis-

tance has been improved to as a byproduct of optimizing the

minimal stopping distance.

We apply the exhaustive search algorithms to the following

well-studied codes: the

Tanner code [29], the

Ramanujan–Margulis

code with

and

[47], and the

Margulis code with

[48].

Since all these codes are regular codes of minimal variable

node degree , the -out trapping set exhaustive search is

performed in addition to the stopping set and the -out trapping

set exhaustive search.

1) The

Tanner Code: The minimal Hamming

distance of this code is known to be , which is computed

by MAGMA, a software suite, taking advantage of the corre-

Experiment 8: “TS+SS Opt” is an

code with de- sponding algebraic structure [54]. One can easily locate a stop-

gree distributions

but optimized with respect to both ping set of size by Monte Carlo simulation, which serves as

the minimal -out trapping distance and the minimal stopping an upper bound on the minimal stopping distance. The SSES and

distance (the minimal -out trapping distance) by the code an- -TSES are then performed for different types of error-prone

nealing method. Its corresponding (min_size,multiplicity) of the patterns of this code.

-out trapping sets for

are

and

, re- For stopping sets ( -out trapping sets), all candidates of size

spectively. Namely, for any set of contaminated bits of size ,

have been exhaustively examined and none of them is a

there are at least two extrinsic messages that might break this stopping set, which results in a lower bound of on the min-

error pattern. The BEC performance of “TS+SS Opt” is not as imal stopping distance. For -out trapping sets, all candidates of

good as “SS Opt,” since the minimal stopping distance of the size have been exhaustively examined and none of them is

former is as compared to . However, the minimal -out a -out trapping set, which results in a lower bound of on the

trapping distance optimization further brings down the error minimal -out trapping distance. For -out trapping sets, we are

floor for the non-erasure BiAWGNCs. No error floor is observed able to enumerate exhaustively all 465 minimum -out trapping

until FER

.

sets, which are of size . All 465 minimum -out trapping sets

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1994

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

can be obtained from the following five representatives by the automorphisms discussed in [29]:
and

TABLE II SUMMARY OF BOUNDING THE MINIMAL HAMMING, STOPPING, 1-OUT TRAPPING AND 2-OUT TRAPPING DISTANCES FOR THE TANNER (155; 64; 20) CODE, THE RAMANUJAN–MARGULIS (2184; 1092) CODE WITH q = 13 AND p = 5, AND THE MARGULIS (672; 236) CODE WITH p = 7. THE PAIR (d; m) REPRESENTS THE MINIMAL DISTANCE d (OR THE RANGE
OF THE MINIMAL DISTANCE) AND HOW MANY CODEWORDS/STOPPING
SETS/TRAPPING SETS ARE OF WEIGHT d. UPPER BOUNDS ARE OBTAINED
FROM ENUMERATIONS, WHILE LOWER BOUNDS ARE FROM THE EXHAUSTIVE
SEARCH ALGORITHM PROVIDED HEREIN. y IS OBTAINED USING COMPUTER
SEARCH VIA MAGMA [29]

Recently, the instanton analysis in [9] and [16] identified some

dominating error patterns, called instantons. Each of the re-

ported instantons contains one minimum -out trapping set as

a substructure.8 These results again confirm that the dominating

error patterns are generally -out trapping sets with small .

2) The Ramanujan–Margulis

Code .

,

: MacKay et al. [7] first pointed out there is a codeword of

Hamming weight for the Ramanujan–Margulis

code with

and . By the automorphism of the code,

there are at least 1092 codewords of such weight. Using a refinement of the error impulse method, Hu et al. [33] also identified the same 1092 codewords for the Ramanujan–Margulis
code. The remaining question is whether there is any other codeword of equal or smaller Hamming weight. There are at least two approaches to answering this question: one is to use the algebraic structure of the Ramanujan–Margulis code and mathematically prove that there is no other codeword of equal or smaller weight. The second approach is by exhaustive search over all possible codewords of smaller weights.
Our SSES algorithm shows that there are “only” 1092 stop-

of size

and no tighter upper bound can be obtained for

the minimal stopping distance. Combined with our results, the

minimal stopping and the Hamming distances of the

Margulis code are between and .

Results for the three algebraically constructed codes are sum-

marized in Table II.

Note: The SSES and -TSES are directly applied to these codes without taking advantage of their algebraic structures except for the automorphism as discussed in the final remarks of Section VI-D.

ping sets of size and there is no stopping set of smaller size.

Since any codeword must be a stopping set, the minimal Ham-

ming distance of the Ramanujan–Margulis

code

must be and its multiplicity must be 1092. What MacKay et

al. and Hu et al. found are indeed the minimum codewords.

We also exhaustively search for this code’s -out trapping

sets for

, respectively. All candidates for -out trapping

sets of size

and all candidates for -out trapping sets of

sixe have been examined and none of them is a trapping set,

which results in lower bounds of and on the minimal -out

and -out trapping distances, respectively. The lack of trapping

sets of small sizes explains why the dominating error event of

the Ramanujan–Margulis

code concerns the small

codewords instead of the small near-codewords.

3) The

Margulis Code With

[48]: It is

known that this code has a codeword of length [9]. The SSES

and -TSES are again performed to search for the error-prone

patterns of this code.

For stopping sets, the SSES shows that there is no stopping set

of size . For -out trapping sets, there is no -out trapping

set of size

and there is no -out trapping set of size .

Since no exhaustive list of any type of minimum error-prone

patterns can be obtained, our results serve only as lower bounds

on the sizes of minimum error-prone patterns. For comparison,

all stopping sets observed by the Monte Carlo simulation are

8In [9] and [16], the constituent permutation matrices are cyclically shifted to the right, which results in different indexing than the original construction in which the permutation matrices are cyclically shifted to the left [29]. An index remapping is necessary for direct comparison.

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH

In this paper, the problem of exhaustively enumerating

minimum error-prone patterns for arbitrary finite-length LDPC

codes has been discussed, and efficient exhaustive search

algorithms have been proposed for both the minimum stopping

sets and the minimum trapping sets for general channels. The

algorithm, based on the decoding tree of the iterative decoder,

is equivalent to a narrowing search of minimum error-prone

patterns. The optimality of the algorithms has been proven

and several improvements have been made to further im-

prove the efficiency, including a composite branch-and-bound

approach. All the proofs and derivations are based on the

proposed Boolean expression framework for iterative decoding

functions over binary erasure channels. Extensive numerical

experiments have been conducted on different codes, including

randomly constructed codes, error-floor optimized codes, and

algebraically constructed codes. For rate- codes of short

practical lengths

, both the minimum stopping sets and

the minimum trapping sets can be enumerated exhaustively.

The exhaustive list of error-prone patterns finds applications

in code behavior analysis, upper- and lower-bounding code

performance, and error-floor optimization.

The NP-completeness of the minimum trapping set exhaus-

tive search problem has also been established, which shows the

inherent hardness of the problem. The NP-completeness state-

ment is genuinely an asymptotic worst case analysis and implies

that there is little chance that an efficient algorithm for exhaus-

tively enumerating minimum stopping/trapping sets exists for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1995

long LDPC codes. However, it does not preclude the existence

of efficient algorithms for codes of short lengths. The algorithms

discussed in this work serve as the first successful step for codes

of short practical lengths.

We conclude this paper by providing a short, noncomprehen-

sive list of potential improvements.

1) Several parts of the existing algorithms can be further im-

proved, including but not limited to a better design of the

socket-finding module and the partitioning events for the

composite branch-and-bound approach. The effects of dif-

ferent partitioning events on the efficiency of the algo-

rithms can easily be as large as a factor of . With a con-

siderable amount of design freedom over the partitioning

events, we believe the full power of the branch-and-bound

approach has not been realized. One possible approach is

to use the information from the Monte Carlo simulation as

a design guideline for partitioning events.

2) Better implementations with different data structures, ma-

chine-optimized software codes, or even a hardware imple-

mentation of the algorithms could improve the applicable

range of the proposed algorithms to

or larger,

which will have even broader impact on finite length LDPC

code analysis and design.

3) The minimum trapping sets are the error-floor-determining

factor for general channels, and the sizes of interest are

generally less than , as opposed to the minimum stop-

ping distances of interest, which are generally – . The

above reasons make the exhaustive search for trapping sets

an especially appealing problem due to its practical impor-

tance and its much smaller search range. In this work, the

minimum trapping set exhaustive search problem has been

solved by the reduction to minimum stopping set exhaus-

tive enumeration. Directly designing algorithms for the

minimum trapping set exhaustive search algorithm would

further enhance its performance and extend its applications

to longer codes.

APPENDIX I A PROOF OF THE CORRECTNESS OF ALGORITHM 2

The proof of the correctness of Algorithm 2 consists of the

following two steps. For any constructed by Algorithm 2 after

iterations, let

denote the corresponding iterative de-

coding function (after appending the dummy leaf units). We will

show that i)

is no larger than the UB computed by

Algorithm 2, and ii) the decoding function

for

all . Since ii) is a restatement of Theorem 3, we will prove i) in

this appendix by the following two propositions and leave ii) to

Appendix II.

Proposition 4: In the tree generated by Algorithm 2, all messages entering the same variable nodes must be independent. Namely, if and enter the same variable node, then they share no common determining variable.
Proof: A stronger statement of the above proposition is that the youngest common ancestor of any two variable nodes with the same active inputs must be a check node. A simple proof that this new statement implies the proposition is as follows. Suppose there exist two distinct, dependent messages and

entering the same variable node . Then and

share at least one common determining variable, denoted by ,

and there must be at least one variable node with active obser-

vation in each of the subtrees of and . Pick one

such variable node from each subtree. The youngest common

ancestor of the selected pair of variable nodes is thus , which

contradicts the assumption that the youngest common ancestor

of any pair of variable nodes with the same active observation

is always a check node.

We then prove by induction that all youngest common an-

cestors, if they exist, are check nodes. During the initialization,

there is only one root variable node with active observation in

, and the above statement obviously holds. Suppose the state-

ment holds after iterations of the REPEAT-UNTIL loop in

Line 2. For the

th iteration of adding a

leaf unit

into , we use the same notation as in Algorithm 2 for which

denotes the existing variable node with active input and

jointly (the variable node in the newly added

leaf unit)

and have a common youngest ancestor

. Consider

two separate cases:

is a check node and

is a variable node. For the case in which

is a check

node, no pivoting is involved so one needs only to show that

after adding there is no other variable node with active

observation such that the youngest common ancestor of

and is a variable node. We prove this statement again by

contradiction. Suppose there exists such a . Since

is the youngest of all common ancestors and is a check node,

must be a strict descendent of

. There-

fore,

must equal

. The above implies that

is a variable node, which contradicts the induction

assumption that after iterations all youngest common ancestors

of any pair of variable nodes with the same active observation

must be check nodes.

Before proving the case in which

is a variable

node, we first show that if

is a variable node, then

before pivoting, there are exactly two messages and

entering

such that they share a single common

determining variable . A short argument is as follows. Since

is a youngest common ancestor of nodes and ,

there must be two interior-node-disjoint paths from

to and , which implies that and must contribute to

different messages entering

. Therefore, there are at

least two incoming messages having as their determining

variables. Suppose there is another message

entering

which also has as its determining variable.

Then there must be a variable node with active in

the subtree corresponding to

. Then

must

equal

, which contradicts the induction assumption

being a check node. Moreover, the same argument

also shows that all variable nodes with active input and in

the subtree rooted at

must be within the subtrees

corresponding to the two messages and .

To show that after pivoting (i.e., when

is a vari-

able node) the same statement holds, we first note that after piv-

oting, all variable nodes with active input are replaced ei-

ther by or by with the only exception being the root of the

left subtree; see Fig. 6 for illustration. Suppose after pivoting

there exist two variable nodes and with active input

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1996

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

and the youngest common ancestor

being a variable

node. Since the tree structure outside the two duplicated sub-

trees remains unchanged, one of and must be the root of

the left subtree, say , and the other node must not be in

the left and right subtrees of Fig. 6. Otherwise, the induction as-

sumption does not hold. Since cannot be a strict descendent

of

as

must carry only two incoming mes-

sages,

must be a strict ancestor of

. The

facts that after pivoting, is not a descendent of

and that

is a strict ancestor of

imply that

before pivoting, the youngest common ancestor of nodes and

is also

, which contradicts the assumption of in-

duction.

Another possibility is that after pivoting, there exist two ac-

tive nodes and , both of which are accepting the same free

observation ,

, and the youngest common ancestor of

is a variable node. We consider the following four

cases concerning the tree configuration after pivoting: (a) nei-

ther nor is a descendent of

, (b) one of them,

say , is a descendent of

while the other is not, (c)

both of them are in the same left (or right) subtree, and (d)

and are in the left and the right subtrees, respectively.

For case (a), we first note that the pivoting rule affects only

the descendents of

. Therefore, and are intact

during pivoting and their youngest common ancestor must be a

check node due to the induction assumption. For case (b), the

youngest common ancestor of and after pivoting must be

an ancestor of

since is a descendent of

but is not. Since must be obtained from a variable node

with active input during the tree-duplicating step of piv-

oting, we use to denote the corresponding variable node of

before pivoting. Then the

(after pivoting) is also

the youngest common ancestor of

(before pivoting).

Therefore

must be a check node. For case (c), since

and are in the same left (or right) subtree, their youngest

common ancestor must also be in the same left (or right) sub-

tree. As a result, the relative locations among and , and their

youngest common ancestor must be preserved during pivoting.

By the induction assumption,

must be a check node

as well. For case (d), the youngest common ancestor of and

is the check node of degree taking the two subtrees as its

children. For all cases (a)–(d), the youngest common ancestor

between and must be a check node.

From the above reasoning, after

iterations, all youngest

common ancestors of any pair of variable nodes with the same

active observation must be check nodes. Proposition 4 is thus

proved by induction.

Proposition 5: The UB computed in Algorithm 2 is an

upper bound on

. Furthermore, UB is of the same

asymptotic order as that of

.

Proof: By Proposition 4, all messages entering the variable

nodes are independent, and one can thus use Rule 0 to com-

pute the exact expectation of the outgoing message of a variable

node. On the other hand, Rule 1 gives us an upper bound on the

expectation of the outgoing message of a check node, namely

Using Rule 0 for

and Rule 1 for

, we are

able to compute their upper bounds assuming we know the ex-

pectations of all input messages, which are unfortunately not

available and are the quantities to be bounded. Fortunately, both

Rule 0 and Rule 1 are monotonically increasing functions with

respect to the input expectations. We can thus substitute all input

expectations with their upper bounds and obtain the iterative

upper bounding formula

UB

UB

UB

UB

UB

UB

UB

UB

which is as if we were computing the expectation value by

blindly assuming all messages were independent. Since the

only inequality involved is from Rule 1, which induces no order

loss, UB is an upper bound on

tight in asymptotic

order.

APPENDIX II

THE PROOF OF Theorem 3

The proof of Theorem 3 is based on a tree-revealing argu-

ment, the description of which needs the following lemma and

notation.

For any infinite-sized tree corresponding to an iterative de-

coding function

, a localized subtree of is defined as

a subtree sharing the same root as . The function

is computed by appending any open sockets of by dummy

leaf units. Since for BECs, revealing more symbols always im-

proves the performance, we have the following self-explanatory

lemma.

Lemma 1: If is a localized subtree of , then

for all

.

Proof of Theorem 3: We use to denote the finite tree

of Algorithm 2 after iterations of the REPEAT-UNTIL loop.

We will sequentially construct a series of infinite-sized trees

such that each is a localized subtree of for all . (Any

infinite-sized trees are denoted with an overline.)

The first entry of the series of infinite-sized trees is defined

as

, where denotes the infinite-sized tree corre-

sponding to the iterative decoder . By noting that , con-

taining a

leaf unit, is a localized subtree of and by

Lemma 1, we have

We now consider the situation after the first iteration, which

naturally consists of two cases corresponding to whether piv-

oting is performed or not during the first iteration. For the sim-

pler case, in which

is a check node and no pivoting is

performed, define

to be the second entry of the series

of infinite-sized trees. By observing that is obtained from

by adding another leaf unit that was previously in but not in

, we have that is a localized subtree of

, and

is a localized subtree of . Therefore

UB
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(10)

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1997

The more interesting case is when pivoting is performed. Let

denote the tree after adding another leaf unit but before piv-

oting. By Lemma 1, we have

.

Since pivoting only transforms the original tree into its

equivalent form , we have

for

all possible . Furthermore, the same pivoting operation can be

applied to the infinite-sized . When applying pivoting to ,

we limit the replacement of active inputs in Line 10 to those vari-

able nodes in that are also in . Use to denote the end

result after pivoting. By the same reason that pivoting does not

change the function, we will have

. By noting

that is again a localized subtree of , (10) holds for the case

in which pivoting is performed as well. The above completes the

proof of the induction from

to . The induction from

th iteration to

th iteration follows analogously. The proof

of Theorem 3 is complete.

APPENDIX III PROOF OF Theorem 4
Theorem 4 is the culmination of all analyses of Algorithm 2, the proof of which needs the following concepts/notation in addition to those established in Appendices I and II.

The Transcribed Tree :

Following the same notation as in Appendix II, let de-

note the infinite-sized tree corresponding to the iterative decoder

. Denote a series of localized finite subtrees of by

such that contains only one

leaf unit.

can be iteratively constructed from by

adding a single leaf unit to . Note: Unlike Algorithm 2, no

pivoting is performed this time. simply includes more and

more leaf units of as becomes large.

Again let denote the tree resulting from Algorithm 2 after

iterations of the REPEAT-UNTIL loop in Line 2. We then have

the following definition.

Definition 4: For any and , if the corresponding Boolean

functions

and

are identical for trees and

, then we say the tree, resulted from Algorithm 2, is tran-

scribed from the tree.

Namely, is of a different structure than but is equivalent to from the output value perspective. We say that Algorithm 2 transcribes from .

The Balanced Growing SF Module:

A balanced growing socket finding (SF) module is defined as follows.

Definition 5 (The Balanced Growing SF Module): With the

assumption that Algorithm 2 is combined with the pruning rules

in Section V-A, an SF module is balanced growing with respect

to the series

if there exists an increasing

sequence of time instants

, such that

is a transcribed tree of for all

.

Proposition 6: The balanced growing SF module exists for

any sequence

.

Proof: This proposition will be proved by explicit con-

struction.

When

, simply set

. Since contains only a

leaf unit and is identical to , is a transcribed tree

of . Proposition 6 holds for

.

Suppose Proposition 6 holds for the general th entry, i.e.,

is a transcribed tree of . Suppose further that

is obtained from by adding a

leaf unit. Using the

notation of Appendix II, let denote the infinite-sized tree

after iterations, of which is a localized subtree.

We first note that the pivoting operation involves duplicating

trees, which results in a one-to-many relationship between

nodes in the original tree and nodes in the pivoted tree. Due

to the fact that the pivoting operation may be performed many

times before arriving at , there may be more than one leaf

unit in but not in that correspond to the

leaf

unit that will be added to . All these leaf units are adjacent

to and are candidates for the next to-be-added leaf unit at

the

th iteration of Algorithm 2. We denote these leaf

units by

. If all these leaf

units can be added to successfully, we will obtain a

that is a transcribed tree of

, which completes the proof

of Proposition 6 . So the remaining question is how to add all

of them successfully to .

For the

th iteration, we design the SF module in Line 3

to choose

. If the resulting

is a check node,

no pivoting will be performed and

is added to

directly without any unexpected side effects.

leaf units

remain. For the case in which the re-

sulting

is a variable node, pivoting will be performed

and subtrees will be duplicated. Some leaf units in the previous

remaining list

are duplicated as well,

and the overall effect may be a longer list of remaining leaf units

.

We use the last nodes to denote the duplicated leaf units

resulting from pivoting. This node duplication effect presents

the major challenge of adding all

into . The

design goal is to have an SF module that does not result in an

ever-increasing list of

.

Without loss of generality, we assume that

are the

leaf units in

that will be duplicated by the left and the right subtrees in

Fig. 6(b). After pivoting, the original leaf units are duplicated

and have identical copies in the left and the right subtrees. We

use the first leaf units

to

represent the corresponding leaf units in the right subtree, and

use

for the corresponding

leaf units in the left subtree. For the

th iteration, the

SF module locates

as the next to-be-added leaf.

Since the root of the left subtree, denoted by , has an active

observation , the

resulted from adding

is simply . By invoking Rule 4 instead of

Rule 2, no pivoting is necessary and we can directly include

by replacing its active input by . By adding

the remaining

into

sequentially, and noting that only Rule 4 will be invoked, we

are able to shortened the list of the remaining leaf units to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1998

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 5, MAY 2009

. In summary, the end result of the

above construction is that regardless of whether

is a variable node or not, this SF module is able to successfully

add leaf unit

into without introducing any

new to-be-added leaf units. Repeating the same procedure

for

, we have constructed an SF module that

generates , a transcribed tree of . The SF module

under this construction is thus balanced growing. The proof is

complete.

Proof of Theorem 4: With the concept of balanced-growing

SF modules, the proof of Theorem 4 becomes straightforward.

We construct a series of finite trees

by

the breadth-first search. Its corresponding balanced growing SF

module is then an optimal SF module satisfying Theorem 4, the

justification of which is as follows.

Let denote the first such that the breadth-first search has

visited all nodes of depth . Since the iterative decoder stops

after at most rounds of message exchanging, the finite tree

is equivalent to the infinite tree in terms of function

outputs. The balanced growing SF module guarantees that after

a finite time

, is a transcribed tree of . There-

fore,

for all . The

proof is complete.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Network of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[2] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963, vol. 21, Research Monograph Series.
[3] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[5] J. Zhang and A. Orlitsky, “Finite length analysis of large- and irregularleft degree ldpc codes over erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 3.
[6] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
[7] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weakness of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comp. Sci., vol. 74, 2003.
[8] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, preprint–arXiv:cs.IT/0512078, to be published.
[9] M. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of low-density parity-check codes in the error-floor regime,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 552–556.
[10] J. Yedidia, E. Sudderth, and J.-P. Bouchaud, Projection Algebra Analysis of Error Correcting Codes Mitsubishi Electric Res. Labs., Cambridge, MA, Tech. Rep. TR2001–35, 2001.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[12] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Density evolution for asymmetric memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 4216–4236, Dec. 2005.
[13] A. Amraoui, R. Urbanke, A. Montanari, and T. Richardson, “Further results on finite-length scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. . Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 103.
[14] C. Cole, S. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. Giallorenzi, “Analysis and design of moderate length regular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. 40th Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2006.

[15] R. Holzlöhner, A. Mahadevan, C. Menyuk, J. Morris, and J. Zweck, “Evaluation of the very low BER of FEC codes using dual adaptive importance sampling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 163–165, Feb. 2005.
[16] M. Stepanov, V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, and B. Vasic´, “Diagnosis of weaknesses in modern error correction codes: A physics approach,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 95, Nov. 2005.
[17] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of various low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 1.
[18] C.-C. Wang, “Code annealing and the suppressing effect of the cyclically lifted LDPC code ensemble,” in Proc. 2006 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Chengdu, China, Oct. 2006, pp. 194–198.
[19] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[20] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: Asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[21] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “Distance distributions in ensembles of irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 3140–3159, Dec. 2003.
[22] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006.
[23] K. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “On the complexity of finding stopping distance in Tanner graphs,” in Proc. 40th Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2006.
[24] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-24, no. 2, pp. 384–386, Mar. 1978.
[25] I. Dumer, D. Micciancio, and M. Sudan, “Hardness of approximating the minimum distance of a linear code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 22–37, Jan. 2003.
[26] A. Vardy, “The intractability of computing the minimum distance of a code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1757–1766, Nov. 1997.
[27] K. Abdel-Ghaffar and J. Weber, “Stopping set enumerators of full-rank parity-check matrices of Hamming codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1544–1548.
[28] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2000.
[29] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[30] R. Smarandache, A. Pusane, P. Vontobel, and D. Costello, Jr., “Pseudocodewords in LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1364–1368.
[31] S. Ländner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2005 Int. Conf. Wireless Networks, Communications, and Mobile Computing, Maui, HI, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[32] C. Berrou and S. Vaton, “Computing the minimum distance of linear codes by the error impulse method,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Luasanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 5.
[33] X. Hu, M. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Paris, France, 2004, pp. 767–771.
[34] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int’. Conf. Communications, Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 2001, pp. 41–44.
[35] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[36] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[37] A. Ramamoorthy and R. Wesel, “Construction of short block length irregular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Jun. 2004, vol. 1, pp. 410–414.
[38] E. Sharon and S. Litsyn, “A method for constructing LDPC codes with low error floor,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 2569–2573.
[39] J. Tillich and G. Zémor, “On the minimum distance of structured LDPC codes with two variable nodes of degree 2 per parity-check equation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1549–1553.
[40] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Lower bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 70.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: FINDING ALL SMALL ERROR-PRONE SUBSTRUCTURES IN LDPC CODES

1999

[41] X. Wu, X. You, and C. Zhao, “An efficient girth-locating algorithm for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 817–820.
[42] T. Halford, K. Chugg, and A. Grant, “Which codes have 4-cycle-free Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 871–875.
[43] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 2173–2181, Sep. 1999.
[44] S. Hoory, “The size of bipartite graphs with a given girth,” J. Comb. Theory. Ser. B, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 215–220, 2002.
[45] M. Twitto, I. Sason, and S. Shamai (Shitz), “Tightened upper bounds on the ML decoding error probability of binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, to be published.
[46] S. Shamai (Shitz) and I. Sason, “Variations on the Gallager bounds, connections, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3029–3051, Dec. 2002.
[47] J. Rosenthal and P. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2000, pp. 248–257.
[48] G. A. Margulis, “Explict constructions of graphs without short cycles,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[49] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[50] M. Sipser, Introduction to the Theory of Computation, 2nd ed. Boston, MA: Course Technology, 2005.
[51] J. Yedidia and J.-P. Bouchaud, Renormalization Group Approach to Error-Correcting Codes Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA, Tech. Rep. TR2001–19, 2001.
[52] D. Divsalar, “Ensemble weight enumerators for protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1554–1558.
[53] [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/ [54] [Online]. Available: http://magma.maths.usyd.edu.au/
Chih-Chun Wang (M’06) received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan in 1999 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 2002 and 2005, respectively.
He worked at the Comtrend Corporation, Taipei, Taiwan, as a Design Engineer in 2000 and spent the summer of 2004 with Flarion Technologies, Bedminster, NJ. In 2005, he held a postdoctoral position in the Electrical Engineering Department, Princeton University. His current research interests are in the graph-theoretic and algorithmic analysis of iterative decoding and of network coding. His other research interests fall in the general areas of optimal control information theory, detection theory, coding theory, iterative decoding algorithms, and network coding.

Dr. Wang received the National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award in 2009.
Sanjeev R. Kulkarni (M’91–SM’96–F’04) received the B.S. degree in mathematics, the B.S. degree in electrical engineering, the M.S.degree in mathematics from Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, in 1983, 1984, and 1985, respectively, the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 1985, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, in 1991.
From 1985 to 1991, he was a Member of the Technical Staff at MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, MA. Since 1991, he has been with Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, where he is currently Professor of Electrical Engineering, and an affiliated faculty member in the Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering and the Department of Philosophy. He spent January 1996 as a research fellow at the Australian National University, Canberra; 1998 with Susquehanna International Group, and Summer 2001 with Flarion Technologies. His research interests include statistical pattern recognition, nonparametric statistics, learning and adaptive systems, information theory, wireless networks, and image/video processing.
Prof. Kulkarni received an ARO Young Investigator Award in 1992, an NSF Young Investigator Award in 1994, and several teaching awards at Princeton University. He has served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.
H. Vincent Poor (S’72–M’77–SM’82–F’87) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 1977.
From 1977 until 1990, he was on the faculty of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Since 1990, he has been on the faculty at Princeton University, where he is the Dean of Engineering and Applied Science, and the Michael Henry Strater University Professor of Electrical Engineering. His research interests are in the areas of stochastic analysis, statistical signal processing and their applications in wireless networks, and related fields. Among his publications in these areas are the recent books MIMO Wireless Communications (Cambridge University Press, 2007), coauthored with Ezio Biglieri, et al., and Quickest Detection (Cambridge University Press, 2009), coauthored with Olympia Hadjiliadis.
Dr. Poor is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and a former Guggenheim Fellow. He is also a Fellow of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the Optical Society of America, and other organizations. In 1990, he served as President of the IEEE Information Theory Society, and in 2004–2007 as the Editor-in-Chief of these TRANSACTIONS. He was the recipient of the 2005 IEEE Education Medal. Recent recognition of his work includes the 2007 IEEE Marconi Prize Paper Award, the 2007 Technical Achievement Award of the IEEE Signal Processing Society, and the 2008 Aaron D. Wyner Distinguished Service Award of the IEEE Information Theory Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

