Node Operation Reduced Decoding For LDPC Codes

Chia-Yu Lin
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Taiwan University Taipei, Taiwan
f93084@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Mong-Kai Ku
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Taiwan University Taipei, Taiwan
mku@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract—A novel scheme combining a stopping criterion and a node deactivation mechanism is proposed in this paper to reduce the number of node operations in LDPC decoding. The proposed stopping criterion employs an adaptive threshold to remove the channel-condition dependence of the conventional parity-check based stopping criterion. The proposed node deactivation mechanism improves the accuracy of node reliability estimation. As compared to standard BP decoding, the proposed scheme can save up to 80.06% node operations for IEEE 802.16e (2304, 1152) code. It can be implemented with only minor modifications of parity check step in standard LDPC decoders. This scheme can reduce the power consumption and decoding latency of LDPC decoder with low hardware overhead.
I. INTRODUCTION

constraints. The algorithm uses only binary additions to lower the implementation complexity. Their proposed decision rule does not have any channel dependent parameter.
However, there is still room for improvement. Previous stopping criterion works focus on reducing the average number of iteration of LDPC decoder. All the node operations must be carried out until the decoder stops. In fact, the same criterion can be used to turn off unnecessary node processors for more power savings. Only low complexity logic is needed to adjust for different convergence behavior of the bit nodes. Furthermore, the fixed threshold in the stopping criterion decision rule cannot adapt to different SNR situations. Adaptive threshold can improve the iteration reduction and BER performance over all SNR ranges.

Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have attracted much attention in the last decade due to their capacityapproaching error correcting performance [1][2]. Iterative Belief-Propagation (BP) algorithm is commonly used to decode LDPC codes. The decoding process requires a number of iterations to converge. For every iteration, huge number of messages is passed between bit nodes and check nodes with complex operation performed in each node. Thus the iterative decoder consumes considerable power and needs a long latency to decode one codeword. Both the number of iterations and operations required in one iteration are needed to be considered to minimize the LDPC decoder power consumption.

In this paper, we propose a novel approach to reduce the number of total node operations combining an adaptive stopping criterion with a node deactivation mechanism. The proposed approach is based on the inherent parity check step in standard BP decoding algorithm, so only a small amount of additional computation is needed. Our goal is to reduce the number of LDPC decoder operations with low hardware overhead. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the proposed stopping criterion with an adaptive threshold. Section III presents the proposed node deactivation mechanism in detail. Section IV shows the performance of the proposed approach and Section V concludes this paper.

To this end, some works in the literature tried to reduce the average number of decoding iterations by distinguishing the received block into decodable and undecodable [3]-[7]. The decoder will be stopped as soon as the block is detected as undecodable. In [3][4], Variable Node Reliability (VNR) is defined as the sum of the absolutes of all intermediate variable node LLRs. A simple rule is then applied to decide if the block is decodable based on the VNR value. This approach needs high complexity accumulators for VNR calculation and the decision process depends on channel. A similar stopping criterion in [5] is based on the convergence of the mean magnitude (CMM) of the log-likelihood ratio messages at the end of each decoding iteration. In [6][7], the detection is based on a simpler measure, the number of satisfied parity check

II. STOPPING CRITERION WITH AN ADAPTIVE THRESHOLD
For iteration reduction, the measure we use to estimate the decoding behavior is the number of satisfied parity checks (Nspc) in each decoding iteration [6]. Nspc is defined as

M

∑ Nspc = M - si

(1)

i =1

where M is the number of total parity checks and si is the syndrome, i.e., the result of the parity checks. This measure has low implementation complexity and still offers accurate

This work was supported in part by National Science Council of Taiwan under Grant No. 96-2221-E-002-281-MY3 and Excellent Research Projects of National Taiwan University under Grant No. 97R0062-05.

978-1-4244-3828-0/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

896

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

estimation results. A rule is used to decide when to stop decoding based on the variation of Nspc. To prevent the slow converging but decodable blocks from being stopped, if Nspc exceeds a pre-specified threshold, the decoding will continue even when the stopping condition is satisfied. However, the fixed threshold used in this method degrades performance in different channel conditions. A higher threshold enables the decoder to stop more quickly. However, decoding failures occur less frequently in higher SNR regions since the received blocks are always less corrupted. Hence higher thresholds are suited for low SNR regions and lower thresholds for higher SNR regions, which render a universal threshold inapplicable.
The simulation results are illustrated in Figure 1. Figure 1(a) shows the bit error rate performance on the AWGN channel using several distinct fixed thresholds. Figure 1(b) shows the corresponding average number of iterations required for decoding one block. We see that a higher threshold performs better in reducing average number of iterations but leads to worse error rate performance. In addition, with any fixed threshold, the performance degradation becomes more severe as the SNR goes higher. When the SNR is higher than 1.75 dB, the performance degradation cannot be avoided even though the threshold is set to a much lower value (e.g., 800) and nearly no iteration will be saved.1
Intuitively, threshold values determine the aggressiveness of the stopping criterion, i.e., a higher threshold implies a more aggressive stopping criterion. However, a less aggressive criterion is suited for less corrupted blocks (i.e. better channel condition or higher SNR), and vice versa. Hence it will be better if we can set the threshold value adaptively according to the level of noise associated with the received codeword. Fixed thresholds cannot meet this characteristic.
Our proposed approach determines the appropriate threshold value before decoding is started. First, the parity check step of the standard decoding is performed so Nspc can be calculated. Subsequently this initial Nspc is employed to estimate the channel condition or the noise level on the received codeword. Larger Nspc means the codeword is less corrupted and vice versa. Hence with this Nspc, the threshold can be determined appropriately. Larger Nspc implies a lower threshold value. In addition, when the value Nspc is high, the decoding is very likely to be successful and needs a small number of iterations to converge. In this case, the stopping criterion is less helpful and has a high probability to cause false stopping. Hence in the proposed approach, the stopping criterion is disabled when Nspc is larger than a certain value. The threshold T is determined as follows:

Tmin, Tmax, and d are predetermined parameters. We found that setting Tmin = 625, Tmax = 675 and d = 6 works well for IEEE 802.16e (2304, 1152) codes. Note that setting T to M means the decoding will always be stopped when the stopping condition is satisfied. Setting T to 0 means the stopping mechanism is disabled. For Nspc larger than Tmin and smaller than Tmax, T is varied based on the value of Nspc.
Figure 1 also shows the performance of the proposed adaptive threshold method. The simulation results show that the BER performance matches closely to standard BP decoding even in high SNR region and still offer good iteration reduction as shown in Figure 1(b).
(a)

⎧

T

=

⎪ ⎨

M if Nspc < Tmin , 0 if Nspc > Tmax ,

⎪ ⎩

M

- (Nspc - Tmin ) × d

otherwise.

(b)

Figure 1. Performance of decoding the IEEE 802.16e (2304, 1152) LDPC

(2)

code on the AWGN channel with a maximum of 50 iterations under the stopping criterion based on Nspc with fixed and adaptive thresholds: (a) Bit

error rate and (b) Average number of iterations per block.

1 In all simulations, the parameters θd and θmax are set to 6 and 4 respectively. The definition of the parameters is explained in [6].

897
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. PROPOSED NODE DEACTIVATION TECHNIQUE
For node operation reduction, in each iteration the reliability of each node is estimated based on a certain criterion and then the more reliable nodes can be deactivated. In [8]-[11], the magnitude of log likelihood ratio (LLR) value produced by each bit node is used as the reliability measure and a bit node is deactivated when the LLR magnitude is higher than a certain threshold. This threshold method involves additional comparison operation for each node. In [12] the syndrome generated after each iteration is used to decide node reliability. Those nodes associated with unsatisfied parity check constraints are regarded as unreliable nodes. The remaining reliable nodes are deactivated to save power. This approach is more cost-efficient than the threshold approach. However, the estimation of node reliabilities in [12] is not very accurate. A large number of nodes are usually deactivated in the first several iterations. This will slow down the convergence speed and degrade the performance.
We propose a node deactivation mechanism based on the parity check step of standard decoding to determine the node reliabilities more accurately. The method is summarized as follows.
Node Deactivation Mechanism:
At the end of the i-th iteration, the following three steps are performed.
Step_1. [Initialization] Set all bit nodes and check nodes to
reliable if i mod u ≡ 1 where u is a pre-specified
fixed interval.
Step_2. [Dual Syndrome Node Deactivation] Set those bit nodes and check nodes corresponding to unsatisfied parity checks in the i-th or (i-1)-th iteration to unreliable.
Step_3. [Check Node Correction] if any connected bit node is unreliable, set the reliable check node to unreliable.
Then in the (i+1)-th iteration, the reliable bit nodes and check nodes are deactivated. Step 1 is performed once every u iterations and u can be adjusted to trade the number of node operations for error correcting performance. In Step 2, the syndromes of two consecutive iterations are used to determine the node reliabilities. This dual syndrome method offers more accurate estimation about the convergence of the nodes than using only the current syndrome. Step 3 improves the BER performance of the parity check based method since those check nodes, set to reliable based on the syndromes, needs to be activated if some of their connected bit nodes are still unreliable and needs newly updated information from check nodes. This method shows no apparent communication performance degradation in simulation.
The block diagram of the decoder adopting the proposed approach is shown in Figure 2. The proposed approach combining the adaptive threshold stopping criterion described in Section II and the node deactivation technique in this section is all based on the inherent parity check step of standard BP decoding. All functions can be implemented by

counters and comparators. Hence additional hardware cost is minimized.
Figure 2. Block diagram of the decoder adopting the proposed approach.
IV. PERFORMANCE The performance of the proposed joint operation-reduced scheme are demonstrated in terms of bit error rate, average number of iterations, and average number of check and bit node operations for decoding per block. Figure 3(a) shows bit error rate performance of the IEEE 802.16e (2304, 1152) LDPC code on the AWGN channel code under different operation-reduction techniques. The proposed node operation reduced method demonstrates BER performance closely matching standard BP decoding even in high SNR regions. Figure 3(b) and Figure 3(c) compare the average number of iterations and the total number of decoding operations. The proposed joint operation-reduced scheme reduces the average number of total node operations significantly. For the SNR range of 0 to 2.5 dB, adding the node deactivation algorithm to the adaptive threshold stopping criterion saves up to 37.85% extra total node operations. Compared with traditional BP algorithms, the proposed scheme can save up to 80.06% node operations. The proposed method reduces higher percentage of operations in low SNR regions and the method in [10] performs better in high SNR regions. Our future work is to integrate the ideas of both works for more consistent decoder operation reduction across all SNR ranges. The result of node deactivation using only single syndrome is also compared to show the benefit of using the proposed dualsyndrome method. We see that using single syndrome can obtain a similar result in node operation reduction (Figure 3(c)). However, the BER performance is apparently worse than that of standard BP decoding and the proposed dualsyndrome method (Figure 3(a)).

898
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a novel low complexity approach combining

an adaptive stopping criterion and a node deactivation

mechanism is proposed to reduce the number of total node

operations required in LDPC decoding. The channel-condition

dependent property of the parity-check based stopping

criterion is removed by adaptive determination of the

threshold. A more accurate dual syndrome node deactivation

scheme is proposed. The simulation results show that the

proposed approach can significantly reduce the number of

node operations without error correcting performance

degradation. As compared to standard BP decoding, the

proposed scheme can save up to 80.06% node operations for

IEEE 802.16e code with block length 2304 and code rate 1/2.

It can be implemented with only minor modification of parity

check step in standard LDPC decoders. This scheme can

reduce the energy consumption and processing time of LDPC

(a)

decoder with low hardware overhead.

(b)
(c) Figure 3. Performance of decoding the IEEE 802.16e (2304, 1152) LDPC code on the AWGN channel with a maximum of 50 iterations under different operation-reduced techniques: (a) Bit error rate, (b) Average number of iterations per block, and (c) Average number of total node operations per block.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, p. 1645, 1996.
[3] F. Kienle and N. Wehn, “Low complexity stopping criterion for LDPC code decoders,” in Proc. IEEE 61st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC 2005-Spring), pp. 606-609, May-June 2005.
[4] T. Lehnigk-Emden, C. Brehm, T. Brack, N. Wehn, F. Berens, and C. Derdiyok, “Energy Consumption of Channel Decoders for OFDMbased UWB Systems,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Ultra-Wideband (ICUWB 2007), pp.447-452, Sept. 2007.
[5] J. Li, X.-H. You, and J. Li, “Early stopping for LDPC decoding: convergence of mean magnitude (CMM),” IEEE Communications Letters, vol.10, no.9, pp.667-669, Sept. 2006.
[6] D. Shin, K. Heo, S. Oh, and J. Ha, “A stopping criterion for lowdensity parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE 65th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2007-Spring), pp.1529-1533, April 2007.
[7] D. Alleyne and J. Sodha, “On stopping criteria for low-density paritycheck codes,” in Proc. 6th International Symposium on Communication Systems, Networks and Digital Signal Processing (CSNDSP 2008), pp.633-637, July 2008.
[8] E. Zimmermann, G. Fettweis, P. Pattisapu, and P. K. Bora, “Reduced complexity LDPC decoding using forced convergence,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC 2004), vol. 3, pp. 243–246, Padova, Italy, Sep. 2004.
[9] A. Blad, O. Gustafsson, and L. Wanhammar, “Early decision decoding methods for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Swedish Systemon-Chip Conference, Tammsvik, Sweden, April 2005.
[10] S.-C. Chou, M.-K. Ku, and C.-Y. Lin, “Switching activity reducing layered decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS 2008), pp. 528-531, May 2008.
[11] D. Levin, E. Sharon, and S. Litsyn, “Lazy scheduling for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Comminicatoin Letters, vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 70-72, Jan. 2007.
[12] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A computationally efficient selective node updating scheme for decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM 2005), vol. 3, pp. 1375-1379, Oct. 2005.

899
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:40:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

