1320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2009

Construction of Near-Optimum Burst Erasure Correcting Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Enrico Paolini, Member, IEEE, and Marco Chiani, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, a simple and effective tool for the design of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for iterative correction of bursts of erasures is presented. The design method consists of starting from the parity-check matrix of an LDPC code and developing an optimized parity-check matrix, with the same performance over the memoryless erasure channel, and suitable also for the iterative correction of single erasure bursts. The parity-check matrix optimization is performed by an algorithm called pivot searching and swapping (PSS) algorithm. It executes permutations of carefully chosen columns of the parity-check matrix, after a local analysis of particular variable nodes called stopping set pivots. This algorithm can be in principle applied to any LDPC code. If the input parity-check matrix is designed to achieve a good performance over the memoryless erasure channel, then the code obtained after the application of the algorithm provides a good joint correction of independent erasures and single erasure bursts. Numerical results are provided in order to show the algorithm effectiveness when applied to different categories of LDPC codes.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, burst erasure channel, iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, the problem of designing low-complexity codes for transmission on burst erasure channels, especially LDPC codes [1], has gained a certain interest (e.g. [2]–[14]). This demand for burst erasure correcting codes can be explained by the fact that such codes are quite interesting for several applications, including magnetic storage, wireless communications on correlated fading channels, and even space communications. For instance, LDPC codes with good properties in terms of correction of single bursts of erasures have been shown in [2] and [3] to represent a promising solution for the error control system in magnetic recording applications and for communication on correlated Rayleigh fading channels, respectively. Furthermore, it is currently under investigation the possibility to implement LDPC-like codes at the upper layers of the communication stack, for correcting bursts of packet erasures in space and satellite communication links [4], [5], in order to heavily reduce the use of automatic repeat request (ARQ) protocols.
It has been shown in [15] that practically any (n, k) linear block code can be used to correct any single burst of
Paper approved by A. H. Banihashemi, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received February 6, 2007; revised January 15, 2008 and September 15, 2008.
This research was supported in part by ESA/ESOC and in part by the European Community under Seventh Framework Program grant agreement ICT OPTIMIX n.INFSO-ICT-214625.
The authors are with DEIS/WiLAB, University of Bologna, Via Venezia 52, 47023 Cesena (FC), Italy (e-mail: e.paolini@unibo.it; marco.chiani@unibo.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2009.05.070047

n − k or less erasures, thus achieving the optimal correction capability of single erasure bursts. More specifically, it has been proved that, under very mild assumptions, it is possible to obtain a (redundant) representation of the parity-check matrix (called parity-check matrix in burst correction form) that permits to recover from any pattern of n − k or less contiguous erasures, by applying a decoding algorithm whose computational complexity is quadratic in the codeword length n. The same code can be then used in a communication system for erasure recovery both in scenarios with independent bit erasures and in scenarios where the erasures occur in bursts. The decoding is performed according to a two-step process: the received sequence is first processed by the burst correcting algorithm operating on the parity-check matrix in burst correction form, and then by the decoding algorithm for independent erasures correction, operating on a different parity-check matrix representation.
This very general technique can be in principle applied also to LDPC codes. In this case, in the first step of the decoding process, the burst erasure correcting decoder is applied, with quadratic complexity, to the parity-check matrix in burst correction form; in the second step of the decoding process, iterative decoding [16] is performed on a low-density representation of the parity-check matrix.
In this paper, the possibility to construct LDPC codes, capable to perform recovery of both independent erasures and bursts of erasures by exploiting only the iterative decoder, is investigated. More specifically, the approach consists of starting from an LDPC code parity-check matrix, usually designed to achieve a good performance over the memoryless binary erasure channel (BEC1), and then properly modifying it in order to make it suitable also for the iterative correction of single erasure bursts.
The performance of this single-step LDPC iterative decoding process is in general suboptimal, in burst scenarios, with respect to the two-step technique proposed in [15], because of the suboptimal iterative burst correction. However, as it avoids the quadratic complexity burst correction step (which becomes an issue for long LDPC codes), it only requires linear in n decoding complexity [16]. Furthermore, the proposed algorithm used to make the parity-check matrix suitable for iterative correction of erasure bursts, besides being very simple, turns out to be also very effective, generating finite length LDPC codes whose erasure burst correction capability is very close to its maximum possible value. If the input parity-check matrix is designed to achieve a good performance over the BEC, the
1Throughout the paper the acronym BEC will be used to denote the standard memoryless binary erasure channel.

0090-6778/09$25.00 c 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI and CHIANI: CONSTRUCTION OF NEAR-OPTIMUM BURST ERASURE CORRECTING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1321

optimized code can be used for transmission in both burst and when the erasures occur in bursts.

independent erasure scenarios.

The concept of span of stopping sets is considered in [8],

The present paper is strictly related to a number of recent where a lower bound is obtained for the minimum span of

works, i.e. [2], [3], [6], [9], [10]. In [2], a key parameter is stopping sets of any regular LDPC code. More specifically,

proposed as a measure of the robustness of an LDPC code it is proved that the minimum span of stopping sets satisfies

to single bursts of erasures, namely, the maximum guaranteed μ(G) ≥ δ, where δ is the minimum zero span in the parity-

resolvable erasure burst length, denoted by Lmax. A general definition of the parameter Lmax, valid for any code, can be given as follows.
Definition 1: For a given code, a given parity-check matrix representation, and a given decoding algorithm, the maximum guaranteed resolvable erasure burst length (Lmax) is the maximum length of an erasure burst which is correctable regardless of its position within the codeword.

check matrix. A zero-span is defined as a sequence of consecutive zeroes in a parity-check matrix row; in terms of Lmax the bound is Lmax ≥ δ −1. In [8], a technique for constructing regular LDPC codes with good Lmax is also presented. A class of protograph-based LDPC codes whose minimum stopping set size increases linearly with the codeword length n, and hence suitable for transmission over burst erasure channels, has been presented in [9].
The main contribution of this paper is the development

As explicitly remarked in this definition, Lmax is not unique of a greedy algorithm capable to modify the parity-check for a given code, heavily depending on both the decoding matrix of an LDPC code, designed for erasure correction over

algorithm and the parity-check matrix representation. For the BEC, in order to make it suitable also for the iterative

instance, for a given parity-check matrix representation of correction of single erasure bursts. The present work extends

an LDPC code, the value of Lmax is not the same with and improves some results from [10], where a former version respect to the standard iterative decoding algorithm or to of the algorithm was presented. The developed algorithm is

the improved decoding algorithm proposed in [17]. In the called PSS algorithm, since it is based on the search and

sequel, the standard iterative decoder for LDPC codes will swap of the pivots of stopping sets. The concept of pivot

be always considered. In [2], an algorithm for the efficient of a stopping set will be introduced in the next section.

computation of Lmax for LDPC codes under iterative decoding According to the proposed approach, the parity-check matrix

is developed.

for iterative burst correction is generated by only performing

An estimate of the optimal value of Lmax for LDPC codes, column permutations on the input parity-check matrix. Hence,
under standard iterative decoding, has been proposed in [3]. the sparseness of the matrix is not altered by the algorithm, and Consider an LDPC code, and let p∗ denote its associated the iterative decoder applied to the new parity-check matrix

asymptotic decoding threshold [18] over the BEC. Then, for leads, over the BEC, to exactly the same performance as the

sufficiently large codeword length n, there exists some proper original one. If the parity-check matrix received in input by

permutation of the parity-check matrix columns such that Lmax/n p∗. Then, p∗n can be used as an estimate of the
maximum value of Lmax that can be obtained for the length-n
LDPC code, by permuting the parity-check matrix columns.

the algorithm is designed for achieving a good performance over the BEC, then the code obtained after the application of the PSS algorithm provides a good joint correction of independent erasures and single erasure bursts, within a single-

The maximum guaranteed resolvable erasure burst length step decoding scheme only exploiting the iterative decoder.

of an LDPC code, under iterative decoding, has a strong A related algorithm, developed in [13], combines column

dependence on the stopping sets present in the bipartite graph. permutations with column eliminations to improve the code

The concept of stopping set has been first introduced in [19]. Lmax. On the other hand, as remarked above, only column By definition, a stopping set is any set of variable nodes such permutations are performed by the algorithm proposed in

that any check node connected to this set is connected to this paper, based on the concept of stopping set pivot. A

it at least twice. In [19], it is also proved that the union second related algorithm, based on permutations of the parity

of stopping sets is a stopping set, so that it is possible to check matrix columns, has been developed in [12] to obtain

define a maximal stopping set included in a subset of the improved LDPC codes for the correction of two or more

variable nodes, as the union of all the stopping sets included bursts of erasures. The metric adopted in [12] to measure

in the subset. The residual erased variable nodes (after iterative the code performance is based on the concepts of average

decoding) constitute the maximal stopping set included in the distance between elements and minimum distance between

original erasure pattern. Hence, a decoding failure takes place elements, and is different from Lmax. We also point out whenever the erasure pattern due to the channel contains a the LDPC code construction technique, based on circulant

stopping set.

matrices, proposed in [14] and aimed at obtaining LDPC

The relation between stopping sets and Lmax has been codes with a good compromise between correction of random addressed in [6]. Let G be the LDPC code bipartite graph, and erasures and erasure bursts. Differently from the approach in

let V = {V0, V1, . . . , Vn−1} be the set of its variable nodes. If S = {Vi1 , Vi2 , . . . , Vit }, with i1 < i2 < · · · < it, is a stopping set, then the span of S is defined as 1 + |it − i1|. Denoting by
μ(G) the minimum span of stopping sets (i.e. the minimum

[14], the algorithm developed in this paper can be applied to improve the robustness to a single erasure burst of any LDPC code.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II the concept

among the spans of all the stopping sets of G), it follows that of pivot of a stopping set is presented, some properties of the

Lmax = μ(G) − 1. The span of stopping sets, a concept of no pivots of stopping sets are proved, and an efficient algorithm interest over the BEC, heavily affects the code performance for finding some pivots of a given stopping set is proposed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1322
V1 m

V2 m

V3 m

V4 m

V5 m

V6 m

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2009

V1 m

V2 m

V3 m

V4 m

Fig. 1. Example of subgraph induced by a stopping set of size 6, with no pivots.

Fig. 2. Example of subgraph induced by a stopping set of size 4. The variable
nodes V1 and V2 are pivots for the stopping set, the variable nodes V3 and V4 are not pivots.

Section III is devoted to the detailed description of the PSS algorithm. In Section IV some numerical results are presented, showing the improvement in terms of Lmax achievable by applying the PSS algorithm to different types of LDPC codes. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. PIVOTS OF STOPPING SETS
In this section, the concept of pivot of a stopping set is introduced. It is proved that the minimum number of pivots for any stopping set is two, and an efficient algorithm for finding some pivots of a given stopping set is developed.
For any LDPC code, and for any stopping set of the LDPC code, we define subgraph induced by the stopping set the bipartite graph composed of the variable nodes which are part of the stopping set, the check nodes connected (necessarily at least twice) to these variable nodes, and the edges connecting such variable nodes and such check nodes. The key concept of pivot of a stopping set is introduced next.
Definition 2: Let G be the subgraph induced by a stopping set S of an LDPC code. A variable node V is called pivot of the stopping set if the following property holds: if the value of V is known and the value of all the other variable nodes of G is unknown, then the iterative decoder applied to G is able to successfully recover from the erasure pattern.

set of size 4 with the induced subgraph depicted in Fig. 2 has two pivots, V1 and V2. The concept of span of pivots, defined next, will be used in Section III.
Definition 3: Let S be a stopping set with pivots, and let Vp and Vq be the pivot of S with minimum index and the pivot of S with maximum index, respectively. Then, the span of pivots of S is defined as q − p + 1 2.
The next lemma points out an important property of the structure of stopping sets characterized by the presence of pivots.
Lemma 1: No stopping set S with pivots exists whose induced subgraph is composed by disjoint graphs.
Proof: The union of stopping sets is a stopping set. Hence, the union of stopping sets with disjoint induced subgraphs is a stopping set. Let G be the subgraph induced by a stopping set, and let G = G1 ∪ G2, with G1 and G2 disjoint. In such a condition, even if a variable node Vα is pivot with respect to G1, it cannot be a pivot for the whole stopping set, because no variable node in G2 can be corrected from the knowledge of the value of Vα only. Analogously, even if a variable node Vβ is pivot with respect to G2, it cannot be a pivot for the whole stopping set. Hence, the stopping set has no pivots.

According to this definition, if the variable node V is a pivot For a given stopping set of an LDPC code, the problem for a stopping set S, then the set of variable nodes S\{V } is of finding all the stopping set pivots could be in principle
not a stopping set for the LDPC code and contains no stopping solved by considering the subgraph induced by the stopping

sets. As recalled in the previous section, the iterative decoder is
not able to recover from a starting erasure pattern caused by the channel when this erasure pattern includes at least one stopping set. In particular, the set of variable nodes which remain uncorrected at the end of the decoding process is the maximal stopping set included in the starting erasure pattern, i.e., the union of all the stopping sets included in it. The residual graph at the end of the decoding process is the subgraph induced by the stopping set. What we point out with the above definition is that, among the variable nodes in this residual graph, one should distinguish between pivot and nonpivot variable nodes: if the value of at least one of the pivots was known, then the decoding would be successful. This is the basic idea exploited in the optimization algorithm presented in the next section.
It is important to underline that not all stopping sets have

set, and by trying, for each variable node, whether the property expressed by Definition 2 is verified. However, there are some complexity issues when following this approach. In fact, this technique would be computationally onerous, especially for stopping sets of large size and if iteratively used as a subroutine of some algorithm (like that one proposed in the next section). The complexity of this pivot searching algorithm may be reduced by exploiting the following lemma, which defines a necessary condition for a variable node to be a stopping set pivot.
Lemma 2: Necessary condition for a variable node belonging to a stopping set S to be a pivot of S, is that the variable node is connected to at least one check node with degree 2 in the subgraph induced by S.
Proof: If no such check node is connected to the variable node, even if the value of the variable node is known, no

pivots. For instance, the stopping set of size 6 with the induced 2The fact that a stopping set with pivots has at least two pivots will be subgraph depicted in Fig. 1 has no pivots, while the stopping proved in Theorem 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI and CHIANI: CONSTRUCTION OF NEAR-OPTIMUM BURST ERASURE CORRECTING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1323

further correction can be performed by the iterative decoder. In fact, after the elimination from the graph of the variable node and of all the edges connected to it, every check node still has a degree at least 2.
According to Lemma 2, the search can be restricted only to the variable nodes which are connected to at least one check node of degree 2 in the subgraph induced by the stopping set.
We propose next an alternative and more efficient algorithm for the search of stopping set pivots. This algorithm is in general not able to find all the pivots of a given stopping set, and its success is bound to the condition that at least one pivot for the stopping set is already available. However, for the purposes of the optimization algorithm of LDPC on burst erasure channels described in the next section, where two pivots for each stopping set are always available, this algorithm comes out to be extremely effective. The proposed pivot searching algorithm is based on the following lemma. It defines a simple, sufficient condition for a variable node to be a stopping set pivot.

V1 m V2 m V3 m V4 m V5 m V6 m V7 m V8 m

Fig. 3. Example of subgraph induced by a size-8 stopping set with pivots {V2, V4, V6, V7, V8}. If P0 = {V2}, then the set of pivots found by the pivot searching algorithm is {V2, V4, V6}.

neighboring pivots of V . Set

P ( +1) =

Pˆ(V ) ∪ P( ).

(1)

V ∈Pˆ( )

Set

Pˆ( +1) = P ( +1)\ P ( ).

(2)

Lemma 3: Sufficient condition for a variable node Vα belonging to a stopping set S to be a pivot of S, is that there exists some Vβ ∈ S and some check node such that Vβ is a pivot of S, the check node has degree 2 in the subgraph induced by S and it is connected to Vα and Vβ.
Proof: Let C be the check node connected to Vα and Vβ, with degree 2 in the subgraph induced by S. If the value of the variable node Vα is known, and the value of all the other variable nodes in S is unknown, then C is capable to correct the variable node Vβ. Since Vβ is a pivot of S by hypothesis, then all the variable nodes of the stopping set will be corrected.
Combining Lemma 2 and Lemma 3 it is possible to prove the following result.

• [Stopping criterion] If Pˆ( +1) is equal to the empty set, stop and return P( ). Else, set = + 1 and goto the P( ) expansion step.
If only one pivot is available at the beginning of the algorithm (|P(0)| = 1), since at least one neighboring pivot must exist for the available pivot, the minimum number of pivots returned by the algorithm is 2. At each step of the algorithm, the sufficient condition expressed by Lemma 3 is applied to the new pivots found at the previous step. The algorithm is stopped as soon as no new pivots are found. For instance, consider the stopping set of size 8 whose induced subgraph is depicted in Fig. 3, where the variable nodes V2, V4, V6, V7 and V8 are the stopping set pivots. In this figure, the check nodes with degree 2 in the subgraph induced by the stopping set, and

Theorem 1: If a stopping set S has pivots, then it has at connecting the neighboring pivots, have been depicted as filled

least two pivots. Proof: Let the variable node Vα be a pivot of S. Accord-
ing to Lemma 2, Vα must have at least one connection towards a check node C, with degree 2 in the subgraph induced by S. Let Vβ be the second variable node connected to C. From Lemma 3, this is sufficient to conclude that Vβ is a pivot of S. Thus, the number of pivots is at least two.

square nodes, while the other check nodes have been depicted as non-filled square nodes. If P(0) = Pˆ(0) = {V2}, then it follows P(1) = {V2, V4}, Pˆ(1) = {V4}, P(2) = {V2, V4, V6}, Pˆ(2) = {V6}, and P(3) = {V2, V4, V6}, Pˆ(3) = { }. The set of pivots P(2) is returned by the algorithm. Note that the pivots V7 and V8 cannot be found by the algorithm, for P(0) = {V2}.
This pivot searching algorithm is exploited in the optimiza-

The variable nodes Vα and Vβ in the statement of Lemma 3 will be referred to as neighboring pivots. If it is known that the variable node V is a pivot of a certain stopping set, then all its neighboring pivots can be found by looking, among the check nodes connected to V , for check nodes with degree 2 in the subgraph induced by the stopping set. Based on Lemma 3, we propose the following pivot searching algorithm for a stopping

tion algorithm for LDPC codes on burst erasure channels, presented in the next section. The key for the application of the pivots searching algorithm is the following observation: if for a given LDPC code with maximum guaranteed resolvable burst length Lmax, a burst of length Lmax+1 is non-resolvable, then two pivots of the maximal stopping set included in the burst can be always immediately found.

set S of an LDPC code. As remarked above, the hypothesis is that at least one pivot of the stopping set is already available at the beginning of the algorithm.

III. OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM FOR LDPC CODES ON BURST ERASURE CHANNELS
After having introduced the concept of stopping set pivot, in

Pivot Searching Algorithm.

this section we present the LDPC code optimization algorithm

• [Initalization] Set P(0) equal to the available (nonempty) set of pivots of S. Set Pˆ(0) = P(0). Set = 0.
• [P( ) expansion] For each stopping set pivot V ∈ Pˆ( ), apply Lemma 3 in order to find the set Pˆ(V ) of the

for burst erasure channels. For an LDPC code with maximum guaranteed resolvable
erasure burst length Lmax, any single erasure burst of length L ≤ Lmax can be corrected by the iterative decoder regardless

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2009

of the burst position within the codeword of length n. On the contrary, there exists at least one erasure burst of length

span of pivots after



swapping > Lmax + 1

-

Lmax + 1, starting on some variable node Vj , which is noncorrectable by the iterative decoder. This implies that this

span of pivots before  swapping = Lmax + 1 -

erasure burst includes some stopping sets. Next, it is proved that the maximal stopping set included in the burst (defined as the union of all the stopping sets included in the burst) has at least two pivots. Specifically, the variable nodes Vj and Vj+Lmax , i.e., the first and the last variable nodes in the burst, are pivots.

xxx

Vp(i) x

o

i-th non-resolvable burst of length Lmax + 1

V˜ (i) g


Theorem 2: Let Lmax be the maximum guaranteed resolvable burst length of an LDPC code under iterative decoding and let the erasure burst of length Lmax + 1, starting on the variable node Vj and ending on the variable node Vj+Lmax , be non-correctable. Then, Vj and Vj+Lmax are pivots of the maximal stopping set included in the burst.
Proof: Let S be the maximal stopping set included in the non-correctable erasure burst of length Lmax + 1, and let G be the subgraph induced by S. By hypothesis, an erasure burst of length Lmax, starting on the variable node Vj and ending on the variable node Vj+Lmax−1, can be corrected by the iterative decoder. This implies that if the value of the variable node Vj+Lmax is known, then the iterative decoder applied to G is able to successfully recover all the variable nodes in the maximal stopping set. Hence, Vj+Lmax is a pivot of S.
Analogously, an erasure burst of length Lmax, starting on the variable node Vj+1 and ending on the variable node Vj+Lmax , can be corrected by the iterative decoder. By reasoning in the same way, it is proved that Vj is a pivot of S.
The theorem implies that the span of pivots of the maximal stopping set included in the erasure burst of length Lmax +1 is equal to Lmax + 1. By combining Lemma 1 with Theorem 2 we also obtain the following result on the structure of the maximal stopping set included in a non-correctable erasure burst of length Lmax + 1.
Corollary 1: Let Lmax be the maximum guaranteed resolvable burst length of an LDPC code under iterative decoding. Let an erasure burst of length Lmax+1 be non-correctable, and let S be the maximal stopping set included in the burst. Then, the subgraph G induced by S is composed of non-disjoint bipartite graphs, i.e., a path exists from any variable node in G to any other variable node in G.
The optimization algorithm for LDPC codes on burst erasure channels is described next. It receives an LDPC code parity-check matrix in input, and returns an LDPC code paritycheck matrix with improved performance in environments where erasures occur in bursts. This algorithm performs some permutations of the input LDPC code variable nodes, in order to increase its maximum guaranteed resolvable burst length, thus improving its burst erasure correction capability. Neither the input code degree distribution nor the connections between the variable and the check nodes are modified by the

Fig. 4. The pivot Vp(i) of the stopping set Sm(ia)x is swapped with the variable node V˜ (i) (not in B(i)) in order to make the pivots’ span larger than Lmax + 1.
Consider an LDPC code with maximum guaranteed resolvable burst length Lmax, let V denote the ensemble of all its variable nodes, and assume that the iterative decoder is not able to successfully recover from a number NB of erasure bursts of length Lmax +1 (some of the non-correctable erasure bursts might be partly overlapped). Let V (i, f) and V (i, l) be the first and the last variable node of the i-th uncorrectable burst, respectively, and let B(i) be the set of all variable nodes included in the i-th burst (with i = 1, . . . , NB). According to Theorem 2, the i-th uncorrectable burst contains a maximal stopping set Sm(ia)x which includes V (i, f) and V (i, l) among its pivots, while other pivots of this stopping set can be eventually found by the pivot searching algorithm presented in the previous section. Suppose that one of these pivots is swapped with a variable node V˜ (i) not included in B(i) such that, after the swapping, the span of pivots of Sm(ia)x becomes larger than Lmax+1 (see Fig. 4). For any position of an erasure burst of length Lmax + 1, the value of at least one pivot of Sm(ia)x is now known, so that the considered stopping set will be now resolvable.
If this procedure is applied to each uncorrectable erasure burst, each maximal stopping set Sm(ia)x (i = 1, . . . , NB) becomes resolvable for any possible burst position. This does not necessarily imply that the erasure burst length Lmax + 1 will be resolvable at the end of the swapping procedure, since any swap could in principle reduce the span of pivots of some other stopping set. On the other hand, all our numerical results reveal that this approach is indeed very effective up to values of the erasure burst length L close to p∗n .
If the sequence of NB variable node permutations makes the erasure burst length Lmax+1 resolvable for any position of the burst, then the new burst length Lmax +2 is considered. On the contrary, a failure is declared, all the permutations are refused, and a new sequence of NB permutations is performed. The algorithm ends when a maximum number Fmax of subsequent failures is reached, for the same burst length. The Lmax optimization algorithm is formalized in the following. The algorithm input is an LDPC code parity-check matrix with maximum guaranteed resolvable burst length Lmax.
Pivot Searching and Swapping (PSS) Algorithm

algorithm. As a consequence, the input LDPC code and the LDPC code returned by the algorithm have the same degree distribution and the same performance over the BEC.

• [Initialization] Set L = Lmax + 1. • [Pivot searching step] Set F = 0. Find all the uncor-
rectable erasure bursts of length L, and let the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI and CHIANI: CONSTRUCTION OF NEAR-OPTIMUM BURST ERASURE CORRECTING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1325

such bursts be NB. For each i = 1, . . . , NB, find all the pivots which are neighbors of V (i, f) and all the pivots which are neighbors of V (i, l). Let Pi be the set of pivots
found for the burst i.

as the input code over the BEC, but is characterized by an enhanced capability to correct single erasure bursts. Then, the PSS algorithm can be used within a two-step design approach, consisting of first generating a good LDPC code

• [Pivot swapping step] For each i = 1, . . . , NB: 1- Randomly choose a pivot Vp(i) in P(i). 2- If Vp(i) = V (i, f) and Vp(i) = V (i, l), then randomly
choose a variable node

V˜ (i) ∈ V\ B(i) ∪

P (j)
j=i

∪ {V˜ (1), . . . , V˜ (i−1)} , (3)

for the memoryless erasure channel, and then improving it for burst correction. This approach leads to LDPC codes with good performance in environments where the erasures are independent, and where the erasures occur in bursts. The algorithm can be also applied to already implemented LDPC codes: in this case, it can be interpreted as a tool for the design of an ad hoc interleaver which will increase the robustness of the code to erasure bursts.

and swap Vp(i) and V˜ (i). Else, if Vp(i) = V (i, f), then randomly choose a
variable node V˜ (i) as from (3), and such that the index of V˜ (i) is smaller than the index of V (i, f). Swap Vp(i) and V˜ (i).
Else, if Vp(i) = V (i, l), then randomly choose a variable node V˜ (i) as from (3), and such that the index of V˜ (i) is larger than the index of V (i, l). Swap Vp(i) and V˜ (i).
• [Stopping criterion] If the erasure burst length L is not
resolvable, set F = F + 1. If F = Fmax, stop and return the new LDPC code with Lmax = L − 1. If F < Fmax
swap back the variable nodes and goto Pivot swapping
step.
Else, if the erasure burst length L is resolvable, set
L = L + 1 and goto Pivot searching step.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, some numerical results on the Lmax improvement achievable by applying the PSS algorithm are presented. Five examples are provided. The first four examples are given for LDPC codes with rate R = 1/2 and different construction methods; the fifth one for a rate R = 0.8752 LDPC code. The four rate-1/2 codes are a (3, 6)-regular (2640, 1320) LDPC code with Margulis construction [31], [32], an irregular (1008, 504) LDPC code generated with the PEG algorithm, a (2000, 1000) IRA code generated with the PEG algorithm and a (2048, 1024) GeIRA code generated with the PEG algorithm. The IRA and GeIRA code constructions were performed by first generating the (doublediagonal and multi-diagonal, respectively) part of the paritycheck matrix corresponding to the parity bits, and then by

For each non-resolvable burst, the randomly chosen pivot Vp(i) is swapped with a variable node V˜ (i) in order to guarantee that the span of pivots of Sm(ia)x after the swap is larger than Lmax + 1. If Vp(i) = V (i, f) and Vp(i) = V (i, l), then V˜ (i) is randomly chosen in V\B(i), with the exclusion of the pivots
available for the maximal stopping sets of the other non-
correctable bursts, and of the variable nodes already swapped for the previously considered bursts. If Vp(i) = V (i, f), there are some cases where the span of pivots of Sm(ia)x after the swap might be not larger than Lmax +1, i.e., when the index of V˜ (i) is larger than, and sufficiently close to, the index of V (i, l). For this reason, if V (i, f) is selected, V˜ (i) is chosen among the variable nodes with index smaller than V (i, f). Analogously, if V (i, l) is selected, V˜ (i) is chosen among the variable nodes with index larger than V (i, l).
The algorithm is general and can be in principle applied
to any LDPC code, independently of its structure, code rate
and codeword length. For instance, it can be applied to either
regular or irregular LDPC codes, both computer generated (e.g., IRA [20], eIRA3 [21][22] or GeIRA [23] codes, LDPC
codes generated with the PEG algorithm [24]–[26], protograph
codes [27], [28]) and algebraically generated (e.g., LDPC
codes based on finite geometries [29], [30]). The optimized
code returned by the algorithm has the same performance

generating the systematic part with the PEG algorithm, also considering the 1s already positioned in the parity part. The IRA code is characterized by a uniform check node distribution and by a regular systematic part of the paritycheck matrix, with all the variable nodes corresponding to the systematic bits having degree 5. The GeIRA code is characterized by feedback polynomial (of the recursive convolutional encoder) g(D) = 1 + D + D420, and by a uniform check node distribution. The degree multiplicity of the variable nodes corresponding to the parity bits is 1(1), 419(2), 604(3), while the degree multiplicity of the variable nodes corresponding to the systematic bits is 885(3), 85(13), 54(14). Finally, the rate 0.8752 code is a (4, 32)-regular (4608, 4033) LDPC code generated with the PEG algorithm (the parity-check matrix for this code is (576 × 4608), with one redundant row). The bipartite graphs of the (2640, 1320) Margulis code and of the (1008, 504) irregular code are both available in [33], where the degree distribution of the irregular code is also specified. The bipartite graph of the (2000, 1000) IRA code, (2048, 1024) GeIRA code and high rate code were generated independently.
The results obtained from the application of the PSS algorithm (with Fmax = n) to the five codes are summarized in Table I. In this table, n − k represents the maximum possible value for Lmax, which can be obtained by generating the parity-check matrix in burst correction form and applying to it

3There actually is a difference between IRA codes and eIRA codes, albeit the quadratic complexity decoding algorithm, as explained in small. In particular, the row weight for the systematic part of the parity-check [15]. For each code, the value of Lmax for the original code

matrix is constant according to the definition of an IRA code in [20]. Further, according to [20], the systematic part of the parity-check matrix must be a (low-density) generator matrix for an IRA code (meaning that it has more columns than rows). Neither of these contraints are necessary for eIRA codes.

and the estimate of the maximum value of Lmax achievable with column permutations ( p∗n , as suggested in [3]) are also
shown. At the bottom of the table, LmPSaSx denotes the maximum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1326
TABLE I ORIGINAL AND IMPROVED VALUES OF Lmax FOR THE FIVE
INVESTIGATED LDPC CODES.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2009
TABLE II NUMBER OF UNCORRECTABLE BURST POSITIONS AND CORRESPONDING ERASURE BURST LENGTHS FOR THE (4608, 4033) REGULAR LDPC CODE .

R n−k Lmax p∗n
LPmSaSx

Margulis
0.5 1320 1033 1133 1135

PEG irregular
0.5 504 86 473
446

PEG IRA
0.5 1000 403 861
852

PEG GeIRA
0.5 1024 495 946
914

PEG regular
0.8752 575 287 445
425

guaranteed resolvable burst length for the code returned by the

288 289 290 300 322 328 330 334 335 337 340 13311111111 344 352 354 356 361 362 365 368 373 374 376 11112111328 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 26453596869 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 5 13 6 2 5 9 7 12 3 9 7 399 400 401 402 403 404 405 406 411 412 414 8 12 7 5 18 1 6 1 2 1 3 415 416 418 419 420 421 422 423 424 425 426 32223546549

algorithm.

The starting value of Lmax for the Margulis code (1033) was already quite close to p∗n . On the contrary, the values
of Lmax exhibited by the other codes (86, 403, 495 and 287, respectively) were quite poor with respect to p∗n , especially
for the irregular (1008, 504) PEG code. When applied to the
Margulis code, the PSS algorithm returned a code with an excellent value of LmPSaSx, even larger than p∗n . This result leads to a relevant conclusion: it is possible to construct finite
length LDPC codes with moderate codeword length, such that Lmax > p∗n . Furthermore, for the irregular PEG code, the IRA code, the GeIRA code and the high rate regular code, the values of LmPSaSx produced by algorithm were quite close to (though lower than) p∗n . These examples reveal the
effectiveness of the PSS algorithm for a wide range of LDPC
codes. As a comparison, in [7, Example 3], a (4, 32)-regular
(4608, 4033) quasi cyclic LDPC code, whose construction is

resolvable burst position was found. By applying the pivot searching and swapping principle, a column permutation was obtained which made the length L = 288 resolvable for any burst position. Assuming this permuted version of the paritycheck matrix, the burst length L = 289 was investigated, and three burst positions where recognized as non-resolvable (NB = 3). Again, a column permutation was found that guaranteed the length L = 289 to be resolvable for any burst position, and so on up to the burst length L = 426, for which the algorithm failed. As it can be observed from Table II, for some values of L the algorithm was able to correct a relatively large number of uncorrectable burst positions, e.g., NB = 12 for L = 395 and L = 400, NB = 13 for L = 389 and NB = 18 for L = 403.

based on circulant permutation matrices, is proposed for burst erasure correction. This code is characterized by Lmax = 375. As it can be observed in Table I, the original (4, 32)-regular code generated by the PEG algorithm has a value of Lmax smaller than 375; however, the PSS algorithm was able to improve this value beyond 375, up to 425.
It should be observed that for LDPC codes characterized by systematic IRA-like encoding, the double-diagonal structure allowing efficient encoding is lost due to the column per mutations executed by the algorithm. In this case, the variable node permutation can be interpreted as an extra interleaving step to be performed on the transmitter side prior of encoding. An alternative approach for such codes consists of limiting the algorithm permutations to the systematic variable nodes only, in order to avoid the extra interleaving step. In this case, however, the achievable values of Lmax are smaller than those which can be obtained by applying the permutation to all the parity-check matrix columns. For example, we obtained Lmax = 607 for the (2000, 1000) IRA code of Table I.
Let us consider now Table II, where details about how the algorithm worked for the (4, 32)-regular code are provided. In

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a simple and effective algorithm for the optimization of LDPC codes over burst erasure channels, under iterative decoding, has been developed. The application of the proposed algorithm to a given LDPC parity-check matrix leads to a new parity-check matrix, characterized by properly permuted columns, with a notable improvement in terms of maximum guaranteed resolvable burst length. At each step of the algorithm, the columns to be permuted are carefully chosen on the basis of a local stopping set pivot analysis for the uncorrectable burst positions. The optimized code has the same performance as the original code over the BEC. Hence, if the input parity-check matrix is optimized in order to achieve good performance for independent erasures, then the resulting code can be used for communication both in scenarios with independent erasures and in scenarios where the erasures occur in bursts, by only exploiting the linear complexity iterative decoder. Numerical results have been presented, showing the effectiveness of the proposed approach for different LDPC codes.

each table entry two integer numbers are shown: the integer on the top is a value of erasure burst length, while the integer on the bottom is the number of uncorrectable positions registered

APPENDIX A ALGORITHM COMPLEXITY

for that erasure burst length (denoted by NB in the previous In this appendix, we discuss some algorithm complexity section). The burst lengths not shown in the table are those for issues. Specifically, given an LDPC code with maximum

which NB = 0 was registered. Hence, for instance, the first guaranteed resolvable burst length Lmax = L, we evaluate erasure burst length that was recognized as non-resolvable for the complexity to obtain an improved code for which the

some burst position, was L = 288: for this length, one non- erasure burst length L+1 is resolvable. As from the algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAOLINI and CHIANI: CONSTRUCTION OF NEAR-OPTIMUM BURST ERASURE CORRECTING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1327

formalization given in Section III, we see that the operations required to make the burst length L + 1 resolvable are:
1. Search of the unresolvable length-(L + 1) burst positions within the codeword (their number is denoted by NB).
2. Search of the pivots for each of the NB unresolvable burst positions.
3. Selection of NB pivots. 4. Selection of NB variable nodes. 5. Variable node swapping. 6. Search of the possible unresolvable length-(L + 1) burst
positions within the codeword. 7. Variable node swapping back if the erasure burst length
L + 1 is non-resolvable.
The steps 1 and 2 are performed only once. Denoting by Fact the actual number of trials needed to obtain the code for which the erasure burst length L+1 is resolvable, the steps 3 to 6 are performed Fact times, while the step 7 is performed Fact − 1 times (since the permutation is accepted at the trial Fact).
The overall complexity is the summation of the complexities and is dominated by the complexity of the steps 1 and 6, both requiring to perform n − L iterative decoding operations, each one with a starting erasure pattern of size L + 1. The complexity involved with the other steps is negligible from a practical perspective, due to the very simple operations performed (variable node selection or variable node swapping) and to the fact that the number NB of uncorrectable bursts of length Lmax + 1 is typically on the order of a few units, as shown for instance in Table II for the (4608, 4033) code. The overall complexity is then given by the complexity required to perform (Fact + 1)(n − L) iterative decoding operations, each one for L + 1 unknown bits. The number Fact of trials needed to succeed is usually quite small, typically ranging from a few units to a few tens. For example, in the optimization of the (2000, 1000) code of Table I, Fact was above 50 in one case only and typically less than 10. As the LDPC iterative decoder complexity is linear in the codeword length n, the complexity required for generating a code with Lmax > L, starting from a code with Lmax = L, is quadratic in n.
For the codes presented in Table I, the overall time to obtain the code with Lmax = LmPSaSx starting from the original code ranged from less than three minutes for the (1008, 504) code to about one hour and ten minutes for the (4608, 4033) code (whose parity-check matrix is the least sparse).
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] M. Yang and W. Ryan, “Performance of efficiently encodable lowdensity parity-check codes in noise bursts on the EPR4 channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 507–512, Mar. 2004.
[3] F. Peng, M. Yang, and W. Ryan, “Simplified eIRA code design and performance analysis for correlated Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 720–725, Apr. 2006.
[4] G. P. Calzolari, M. Chiani, F. Chiaraluce, R. Garello, and E. Paolini, “Channel coding for future space missions: new requirements and trends,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 11, pp. 2157–2170, Nov. 2007.
[5] E. Paolini, M. Chiani, and G. P. Calzolari, “Long erasure correcting codes: The new frontier for zero-loss in space applications?” in Proc. AIAA International Conf. Space Operations, June 2006.
[6] T. Wadayama, “Ensemble analysis on minimum span of stopping sets,” in Proc. Inform. Theory Applications Workshop, Feb. 2006.

[7] Y. Y. Tai, L. Zeng, L. Lan, S. Song, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes - part II: for AWGN and binary random and burst erasure channels,” Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms Error-Correcing Codes, Lecture Notes Computer Science, vol. 3857/2006, pp. 265–274, Feb. 2006.
[8] Y. Y. Tai, L. Lan, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the AWGN and erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1765–1774, Oct. 2006.
[9] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Protograph LDPC codes over burst erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Military Commun. Conf., Oct. 2006, pp. 1–7.
[10] E. Paolini and M. Chiani, “Improved low-density parity-check codes for burst erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE International Conf. Commun., June 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1183–1188.
[11] G. Hosoya, H. Yagi, T. Matsushima, and S. Hirasawa, “Performance of low-density parity-check codes for burst erasure channels,” in Proc. International Symposium Inform. Theory Applications, Nov. 2006.
[12] ——, “A modofication method for constructing low-density parity-check codes for burst erasures,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals, vol. E89–A, no. 10, pp. 2501–2509, Oct. 2006.
[13] T. Wadayama, “Greedy construction of LDPC codes for burst erasure channel,” IEICE Tech. Report, vol. 104, no. 302, pp. 35–40, Sept. 2004.
[14] S. Johnson and T. Pollock, “LDPC codes for the classic bursty channel,” in Proc. International Symposium Inform. Theory Applications, Aug. 2004, pp. 184–189.
[15] M. Fossorier, “Universal burst error correction,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium Inform. Theory, Jan. 2006, pp. 1969–1973.
[16] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[17] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 439–454, Mar. 2004.
[18] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[19] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[20] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd International Symposium Turbo Codes Related Topics, Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[21] M. Yang, Y. Li, and W. Ryan, “Design of efficiently encodable moderatelength high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[22] Y. Zhang, W. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Structured eIRA codes with low floors,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium Inform. Theory, Sep. 2005, pp. 174–178.
[23] G. Liva, E. Paolini, and M. Chiani, “Simple reconfigurable low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 258–260, Mar. 2005.
[24] H. Xiao and A. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, Dec. 2004.
[25] Z. Chen and S. Bates, “Construction of low-density parity-check convolutional codes through progressive edge-growth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1058–1060, Dec. 2005.
[26] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[27] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., vol. 3, Nov./Dec. 2005.
[28] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Low-rate LDPC codes with simple protograph structure,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium Inform. Theory, Sept. 2005, pp. 1622–1626.
[29] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[30] S. Lin, H. Tang, and Y. Kou, “On a class of finite geometry low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium Inform. Theory, June 2001.
[31] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 5, MAY 2009

[32] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan– Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[33] D. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes.” [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
Enrico Paolini was born in Fano, Italy, in October 1977. He received the Dr. Ing. degree (with honors) in Telecommunications Engineering and the Ph.D. degree in Telecommunications Engineering from the University of Bologna, Italy, in 2003 and 2007, respectively. During his Ph.D. he was a visiting research scholar at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. Currently, he holds a post-doctoral position at the Department of Electronics, Computer Science and Systems (DEIS) of the University of Bologna. His research interests include error-control coding (with emphasis on LDPC codes and their generalizations, iterative decoding algorithms, reduced-complexity maximum likelihood decoding for erasure channels), and distributed radar systems based on ultra-wideband. In the field of error correcting codes, has been involved since 2004 in activities with the European Space Agency (ESA). He is a member of the IEEE Communications Society and of the IEEE Information Theory Society.

Marco Chiani was born in Rimini, Italy, in April 1964. He received the Dr. Ing. degree (magna cum laude) in Electronic Engineering and the Ph.D. degree in Electronic and Computer Science from the University of Bologna in 1989 and 1993, respectively. Dr. Chiani is a Full Professor at the II Engineering Faculty, University of Bologna, Italy, where he is the Chair in Telecommunications. During the summer of 2001 he was a Visiting Scientist at AT&T Research Laboratories in Middletown, NJ. He is a frequent visitor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he presently holds a Research Affiliate appointment. Dr. Chiani’s research interests include wireless communication systems, MIMO systems, wireless multimedia, low density parity check codes (LDPCC), and UWB. He is leading the research unit of the CNIT/University of Bologna on Joint Source and Channel Coding for wireless video and is a consultant to the European Space Agency (ESA-ESOC) for the design and evaluation of error correcting codes based on LDPCC for space CCSDS applications. He has chaired, organized sessions, and served on the Technical Program Committees at several IEEE International Conferences. He was CoChair of the Wireless Communications Symposium at ICC 2004. In January 2006 he received the ICNEWS award “For Fundamental Contributions to the Theory and Practice of Wireless Communications.” He was the recipient of the 2008 IEEE ComSoc Radio Communications Committee Outstanding Service Award. He is the past chair (2002-2004) of the Radio Communications Committee of the IEEE Communication Society and past Editor of Wireless Communications (2000-2007) for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNIC AT I O N S .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:42:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

