2010 International Conference on Data Storage and Data Engineering

SpreadStore: A LDPC Erasure Code scheme for Distributed Storage System

Harihara S.G, ,Balaji Janakiram, M.Girish Chandra, Aravind K.G, Swanand Kadhe,Balamuralidhar P, B.S.Adiga
Innovations Lab, Tata Consultancy Services, 96, EPIP Industrial Estate, Whitefield Road,
Bangalore, INDIA. {harihara.g, balaji.janakiram, m.gchandra, aravind2.k, swanand.kadhe, balamurali.p, bs.adiga}@tcs.com

Abstract—A wide proliferation of distributed storage systems call for more robust and efficient systems than regular replication based storage systems. The Low density parity check (LDPC) codes have become a popular alternative to traditional Reed-Solomon (RS) erasure codes due to their low computational complexity. In this paper we propose, Spread Store- a distributed storage system based on LDPC code. Also, a brief analysis is made by examining different LDPC codes from the perspective of their efficiency and erasure handling capabilities.
Keywords- Distributed storage systems, Erasure codes, Low density parity check codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
The tremendous stride that technology has been taking over the past decade has seen a huge increase in the processing speed of all computing devices. The storage systems have become an inherent component of all these systems either at an individual level or at an enterprise level to handle the important and critical data. The better processing speeds have given rise to data intensive applications which involve accessing and storing thousands of giga bytes of data. With an involvement of such a large quantity of data it becomes imperative to come up with robust and reliable architectures for data storage. The redundant array of independent disks (RAID) systems is the favored mechanism when data backups are being taken at an enterprise level which involves access and backup of large sized data [1]. At an individual level the low cost backups, are still the most popular method. With such advancement of technology and the networking capabilities, the storage systems have also moved on from individual disks storage to distributed storage systems. A typical distributed storage system would involve accessing data over a local area network (LAN) where typically the data getting accessed would be stored in some other storage device which is present in the LAN. These distributed storage systems need to be highly fault tolerant systems to handle data critical applications. A key problem in the storage systems, like disk storage, server backups, and other kind of data archival method is that the failure of any of the storage device leads to a catastrophic loss in the stored data. Hence the data storage and retrieval always call for a very robust and efficient mechanism to be designed. The RAID systems use the

mirroring technique for data backup which is similar to the replication [1]. During mirroring the data when being written to a disk is also written on a non redundant disk, this duplication of information consumes twice the storage space. The traditional RAID systems do not provide good reliability against loss of data, which can occur due to disk losses or sector damages. So there is always a need for more reliable and efficient storage systems. The erasure correcting codes in recent years have been found to be a very good alternate for building storage systems which are highly fault tolerant. The erasure coding schemes significantly improves the performance both in terms of fault tolerance and downloading than the replicated systems. The Reed Solomon (RS) code is the most popular erasure code which was being adopted for this technique. Since the RS codes involve encoding schemes involving the complex Galois field operations and increased decoding complexity with increase in the size of data, other erasure codes which have ease of decoding and encoding complexity were researched to find if they can be a popular alternate to these RS codes. Few of the notable erasure codes which led the race were Tornado codes, fountain codes [2], [3] and the usual LDPC codes [4]. The fountain codes are patent protected codes. Hence the research community in order to find better erasure codes has been focusing on the LDPC codes. Planck et al [5] and Gaidioz et al [6] throw light on the LDPC codes for distributed storage. The LDPC codes offer good storage efficiency together with better erasure tolerant capability. These properties combined with the ease of encoding and decoding make them an ideal candidate for the distributed storage. In this paper we have implemented a prototype for LAN based distributed storage system. The LAN setup can be designed based on the length of the LDPC code. Here we have considered three different LDPC codes obtained by different construction of similar lengths and analyze their fault tolerance capability together with the over head. A comparative study has been made to choose ideal code based on the application. Further, the paper has been structured as follows Section II briefs the erasure codes and distributed storage system. Section III briefs on the different classes of LDPC erasure codes. The detailed mechanism of encoding and decoding operation is captured in Section IV. A brief summary about the prototype implementation is

978-0-7695-3958-4/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE

1554

DOI 10.1109/DSDE.2010.61

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

given in Section V. Conclusions and future works are given in Section VI.
II. MOTIVATION: ERASURE CODES AND DISTRIBUTED STORAGE SYSTEMS

in distributed storage systems and disk arrays for their fault tolerant capabilities [5].

As mentioned earlier, the replication technique has been the most popular technique in traditional storage systems. Both the distributed file access systems as well as peer-to-peer systems used replication techniques to improve the reliability and performance of the systems. In [5] the representation of a file access mechanism in a distributed environment has been captured. The file access scenario involves, multiple clients who are distributed, trying to access a large file as shown in the Figure 1. The strategy adopted here is to split the file into multiple blocks and distribute these blocks in different storage node/servers.

Figure 2. File acess mechanism in a Reed-Solomon erasure coding based Distributed Storage Systems

Figure 1. File acess mechanism in a traditional Distributed Storage Systems
During the file access mechanism the clients try to retrieve these blocks from any of the nearest storage nodes. The bottleneck of this scheme is the number of replications of each individual file and the ability of each client to find and download the required file chunks in order to get the whole file. For a file which has been split into n blocks of fixed size and each block replicated m times, the clients would require to download any n encoded blocks from the server and reconstruct the original data file Considering the above scenario in which a single file is split into eight blocks and each is replicated four times, the three clients still need to download eight blocks to retrieve the original file. This file access mechanism and the performance can be vastly improved by using the erasure coding schemes. An ideal erasure coding scheme would encode the data blocks and store them onto to the storage nodes/servers. In a RS erasure coding scheme from these original blocks, n + m encoding blocks are found and are stored in the storage nodes and clients can download any of the n (eight blocks in the current scenario) of encoded file and decode the original file. Hence they have been most popular choice in the terrain of storage application and have been effectively used

The information can be transmitted by linear codes when a sender encodes the desired word into codeword [13]. At the receiver end based on the nature of errors one can choose the decoding algorithms to decode the desired word. When the receiver knows the position of each received symbol within the all codeword symbol we can the model the channel as erasure channel. Further details can be obtained from [14]. In erasure codes exhibiting maximum distance separable (MDS) property it is sufficient to receive/download any n blocks from n + m encoded blocks/transmitted blocks. So typically any storage system built using these codes would have an erasure correcting capability of size (n + m) − n . The RS code is one of the
most popular MDS erasure correcting code. In the case of RS code to construct the encoded blocks one needs to operate on the Galois field arithmetic and decoding is vastly complex and with increase in size of n it induces too much overhead [6]. In erasure coding, the encoder takes n data blocks of length L each and generates m redundant blocks to form a code of n + m encoding blocks. This is done by using a (n + m, n, e) block code designed to correct e
erasures with symbols defined over the Galois Field GF(q) .
In the proposed work, we consider extended binary Galois field GF(2 k ) , ( k is an integer). Further, it is required to
choose n + m < 2k . The entire block can be considered as a single symbol (group of k bits) or a concatenation of l symbols. In either case the block size L = lk ; when l > 1 the encoding can be implemented using parallel encoders
operating at the symbol level. Hence for a block having l
symbols the encoding and decoding complexity can be represented as
• Encoding: O(mnl) ⇒ Matrix Multiplication
( ) • Decoding: O(n3) + O n2l ⇒ n × n matrix inversion
+ data symbols recalculation).

1556 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Hence these codes are practical only for small size of n, m . The alternate to these RS codes were proposed by Luby et al [3] and became popular as Tornado codes .The Tornado codes were found to be an instance of LDPC codes [7]. The advantage of the Tornado codes is the linear time complexity involved for both the encoding and decoding operations achieved using XOR(exclusive OR) operations which are inexpensive. However in case of decoding, unlike
RS codes these codes require fn blocks, where f is
overhead factor greater than one but approaches one as n approaches infinity. A comparative study between the Tornado codes and the RS codes can be found in [7] capturing the essential details for file distribution and access. The digital fountain codes are the other set of popular codes operating on the sparse graph for the erasure channels. Digital fountain codes are rateless codes i.e. we can generate unlimited encoded blocks from the source message [3]. These codes offer advantages of on the fly generation of limitless encoded blocks from the source message. At the decoder side we can receive as many encoded blocks required for decoding the original data irrespective of the statistics of the erasure events. These codes have found to have very small encoding and decoding complexities. The most popular of these fountain codes are the Luby Transform codes (LT) [3] and the Raptor codes [8]. Though the LT codes are quite similar to the Tornado codes there some typical advantages and applications where the LT codes are found to be more suitable. These fountain codes have good advantages when used for broadcasting and storage applications.
III. DIFFERENT CLASSES OF LDPC CODES
LDPC codes are linear block codes originally proposed by Gallager in the early 1960s [4]. Their parity check matrix is sparse having low density of ‘one’ entries. LDPC codes can be either regular or irregular. In the regular case, they have uniform column and row weights in the parity check matrix. Over the years, many different LDPC codes (both regular and irregular) have been developed [12], exhibiting different properties in terms of the way of encoding, the encoding complexity, the way of decoding, the decoding complexity, error performance (both bit and frame error rates), etc. Any LDPC code can be used for erasure correction, although performance may be not optimal and may vary among the codes.
A. Repeat Accumulate (RA) codes
Repeat accumulate codes originates from the general class of parallel and serially concatenated codes. They were studied for their analytical tractability [10] and rigorous proofs for these turbo-like codes were developed. The asymptotic results in [11] prove that the maximum

likelihood word error probability for RA codes over a

memoryless binary-input channel approaches zero. Though

the iterative decoding of RA codes is suboptimal (but linear-

time) they have showed very good experimental

performance. These codes being simultaneously a class of

simple “turbo-like” codes and a class of LDPC codes has

the additional advantage that allows the flexibility of using a

turbo code representation for the encoding and an LDPC

code representation for the decoding, thereby gaining the

benefits of both schemes [11].

For the RA code when viewed as an LDPC code, the

structure of parity check matrix H = [H1 H2 ] is governed by

the

accumulator

and

interleaver.

Here

H 1

is

an

M×K ,

matrix specified by the interleaver, and H2 is an M × M

dual diagonal matrix representing the accumulator. The RA

code used for the proto type implementation is constructed

using the interleaver design technique as mentioned in [11].

We have generated a (14, 8) structured RA code to be used

in the prototype and simulation.

B. Projective Geometry (PG) LDPC codes

A LDPC code defined by a regular parity check matrix H has the following structural properties [8]: (1) each row
consists of ρ “ones”; (2) each column consists of γ
“ones”; (3) the number of "ones" in common between any
two columns, is no greater than 1; and (4) both ρ and γ
are small compared to the length of the code. The code is simply the null space of H . A PG can be constructed from the elements of a Galois field
( ) ( ) GF 2(m+1)s , which contains GF 2 s as a subfield. In this
paper, we restrict ourselves to m = 2 or the two-dimensional PG. In this case, the number of distinct points and lines are the same and is equal to n = 22s + 2s + 1 . The incidence
vector for any line is an n-tuple in GF(2) , with j th
component being 1 if that point is on the line. The square parity check matrix H of dimension n × n has incidence vectors of n lines as rows. Each row has ρ = 2s +1 ones
and each column, which corresponds to a point, has γ = 2s + 1 ones. It is useful to note that H can be obtained by shifting an incident vector 22s + 2s times [9]. These codes being cyclic can be encoded easily, using linear shift
registers with feedback connections based on their generator
polynomials. For the prototype and simulation we have
used (7, 3) PG LDPC code. For a given n and m , erasure correction capability e is
decided by the connections between n data blocks and m redundant blocks, which can be represented by a
bipartite graph. To generate a graph having optimal erasure
correction capability for n = 8 and m = 6 , Monte Carlo
simulation has been used in [6] which gives e = 3 . Figure 3 represents this graph whose parity check matrix is also
represented below.

1567 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 3. LDPC code graph with n = 8 and m = 6

⎡1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 ⎤

⎢⎢1 1

0

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

⎥ ⎥

H

=

⎢1 ⎢⎢0

010 0 11

0 1

1 0

0 1

1 0

0 0

0 0

1 0

0 1

0 0

0⎥

0

⎥ ⎥

⎢0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 ⎥

⎢

⎥

⎢⎣0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1⎦⎥

The Parity check matrix of the graph can be represented as
shown below. Where H = [H1 H2 ] and H2 is a staircase
lower diagonal matrix. The LDPC codes do not exhibit the MDS property so it requires fn blocks out of n + m encoded blocks to recover the original n data blocks. The erasure correction capability is given as e = (n + m) − fn .
IV. ENCODING AND DECODING OF ERASURE CODES
The encoding and decoding operations are explained based on the graph shown in Figure 3. For the ease of illustration, each block is treated as a symbol. The encoding of LDPC erasure codes is simple and involves only XOR (exclusive OR) operations. Nodes represented as 0,1,2,3…7 are the data symbols and 8,9,10,…13 are the redundant symbols.
The redundant symbol is calculated by XOR-ing the data symbols. For redundant symbol 8, this can be represented as
8 = 0 ⊕2 ⊕5⊕7 and so on. The number of operations
required to obtain the redundant symbols is equal to the number of edges in the graph. The decoding operation also depends upon the graph which is used for the encoding. The decoding process reconstructs the original file from the encoded blocks where some of them would be completely erased with some probability. The remaining symbols are always completely correct; hence the decoder tries to determine the value of the unknown symbols. Here we have implemented a generic version of decoder using the Tanner graph, consisting of the variable and check nodes of the parity check matrix. For a parity-check equation which includes only one erased symbol, the correct value for the erased symbol can be determined by choosing the value which satisfies even parity [12]. The value of an erased symbol if it is the only erased symbol in its parity-check equation is determined by each check node in the decoder.

On the edges of Tanner graph a variable node sends the same outgoing message M to each of its connected check
nodes. This message for the i th variable node labeled M i will declare the value of the symbol if it is known or ‘ x ’ if it is erased. If the check node receives only one ‘ x ’
message, it can calculate the value of the unknown symbol by choosing the value which would satisfy the parity. Now the check nodes send back different messages to each of their connected variable nodes. This message, from the j th
check node to the i th variable node labeled E j,i , declares the value of the i th symbol as determined by the j th check
node. When any of the variable nodes of an erased symbol receives an incoming message then the variable node changes its value to the value of the incoming message. This process would be repeated until all of the symbols are known, or until some fixed number of decoder iterations are carried out. This methodology can be extended when blocks have more than one symbol (say l symbols). In such situations, the encoding and decoding can be visualized in terms of symbol level operations over l parallel graphs.
V. PROTOTYPE IMPLEMENTATION
We consider a typical LAN scenario comprising of several client machines connected to a central server. We use a simple client server communication protocol using socket programming. The server communicates with each individual client one after the other i.e. at a single instance of time only one client and server communicate with each other. Both the server and clients operate on Windows OS with 1 GB RAM speed and Pentium processors with 2.8GHz clock frequency. The server sends each encoded file to different client machines whereas each of the client machines receives only one of the encoded files. The file is encoded using any one of the LDPC encoders designed and each of the encoded file is sent to different client machines. When the original file is required, a request message is sent to each of the client machine to obtain the encoded file. During this process, the recovery of original file is possible even when some of the client machines are not available. Once enough encoded files are obtained from the active clients we can decode them using the appropriate erasure decoding scheme as explained in the previous section. Figure 4 depicts the MATLAB GUI developed for (14, 8, 3) LDPC based erasure coding for distributed storage which has an encoder and decoder built into it. The encoder and decoder run on a Windows server.

1578 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

classes of LDPC codes like repeat accumulate and projective-geometry based codes are also studied for their erasure correction, efficiency and overhead characteristics. The symbol level decoding for erasure correction has been developed which would ensure faster encoding/decoding of files during large file handling operation. Distributed storage using LDPC can find numerous applications in the current storage systems and can be an integral part in the emerging paradigm of cloud computing as well.
REFERENCES

Figure 4. LDPC Erasure Coding software for Distributed Storage.
As shown in Figure 4, an image is taken as an input file and encoded. The 14 encoded files obtained from the encoder are also shown in the figure. Now these encoded files are sent to different client machines. When the original file is requested, the server sends a message to the connected clients. After receiving at least 11 encoded files (based on the erasure correction capability), the decoder present in the server recovers the original file. If the number of encoded files received is less than 11 then the decoding process fails and the original file cannot be retrieved.
Table 1. A Comparitive Study of different LDPC Erasure Codes for Distributed Storage.
Table 1 captures the comparision study details of all the three codes used for the implementation.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we examined the usage of LDPC codes for erasure correction. We have implemented a storage system which can tolerate failure of three erasures. Apart from the near optimal three-erasure correction LDPC code, other

[1] Peter M.Chen, Edward K.Lee, Garth A. Gibson, Ransy H.Katz and David A.Patterson, “RAID: High-Performance, Reliable Secondary Storage” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) archive Volume 26, Issue 2 (June 1994) Pages: 145 – 185, 1994,

[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms”. Cambridge University Press, 2003. www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/itila/

[3] M. Luby, “LT codes”, In Proceedings of The 43rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, November 16-19 2002, pages 271-282, 2002.

[4] Gallager, R. G., “Low Density Parity Check Codes”, Monograph, M.I.T. Press, 1963

[5] James S. Plank and Michael G. Thomason, “On the Practical Use of LDPC Erasure Codes for Distributed Storage Applications'', Technical Report UT-CS-03-510, University of Tennessee, September, 2003.

[6] Benjamin Gaidioz, Birger Koblitz and Nuno Santos, “Exploring High Performance Distributed File storage Using LDPC codes” Parallel Computing Volume 33, Issues 4-5, May 2007, Pages 264-274 Elsevier Science.

[7] Matthew Delco, Hakim Weatherspoon, Shelley Zhuang “Typhoon:

An

Archival

System

for

Tolerating

High

Degrees

of

File

Server

Failure”

www.cs.cornell.edu/~hweather/Typhoon/TyphoonReport.doc.

[8] Amin Shokrollahi, "Raptor Codes," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 52, pp. 2551-2567, 2006.

[9] Yu Kou, Shu Lin and Marc Fossorier, “Low Density Parity Check

codes Based on Finite Geometries: A rediscovery and More:” NASA

Technical

Report

http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/19990116999_199

9180400.pdf.

[10] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, "Coding theorems for ‘turbolike’ codes." Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control and Computing, Allerton, Illinois, Sept. 1998, pp. 201–210

[11] S.J. Johnson, S.R. Weller,” Practical interleavers for systematic repeat-accumulate codes, IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring 2006) 2006

[12] Sarah J.Johnson, “Introducing Low Density Parity-Check Codes”,

The

University

of

Newcastle,

http://sigpromu.org/sarah/SJohnsonLDPCintro.pdf.

[13] Luby, M.G. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, M.A. Spielman, D.A, “Efficient Erasure Correcting Codes” IEEE transactions on Information Theory,2001,Volume:47, Issue:2, Pages(s)569-584

[14] P.Elias, “Coding for two noisy Channels,” in information Theory, 3rd London Symp, 1955, pp 61-76.J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, 3rd ed., vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon, 1892, pp.68–73.

1589 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:10:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

