On Absorbing Sets of Structured Sparse Graph Codes
Lara Dolecek Electrical Engineering Department University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, 90095 Email: dolecek@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract—In contrast to the capacity approaching performance of iteratively decoded low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, many practical finite-length LDPC codes exhibit performance degradation, manifested in a so-called error floor. Previous work has linked this phenomenon to the presence of certain combinatorial structures within the Tanner graph representation of the code, termed absorbing sets. Absorbing sets are stable under the bit-flipping operations and have been shown to act as fixed points (“absorbers”) for a wider class of iterative decoding algorithms. Codes often possess absorbing sets whose size is smaller than the minimum distance: the smallest absorbing sets are deemed most detrimental culprits behind the error floor. This paper focuses on the elementary combinatorial bounds of the smallest (candidate) absorbing sets. For certain classes of practical codes we demonstrate the tightness of these bounds and show how can the structure of the code and the structure of the absorbing sets be utilized to increase the size of the smallest absorbing sets without compromising other code properties such as the node degrees and the girth. As such, this work provides a step towards a better code design by taking into account the combinatorial nature of fixed points of iterative decoding algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a class of errorcorrecting codes based on sparse graphs. These codes typically perform extremely well in the moderate bit-error-rate (BER) region. In the lower BER region, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) to BER curve changes its slope resulting in a so-called error-floor. This performance degradation is attributed to the suboptimality of iterative decoding algorithms on graphs with cycles: the decoder enters a non-codeword state from which it cannot escape.
For channels with additive noise, MacKay and Postol [17] early on observed that a class of non-codewords causes the decoder to fail. They referred to this objects as (a, b) nearcodewords, where (a, b) denotes a binary string of weight a whose syndrome has weight b. Subsequent pioneering work by Richardson [20] was the first to develop a semi-analytic method for predicting the error floors on AWGN channels. This approach was based on identifying so-called trapping sets as error patterns, and using them in the fast numerical performance prediction. Concurrent work on the performance of LDPC codes on binary erasure channels (BECs) introduced and studied a combinatorial object termed stopping set, [3], [19].

As counterparts of stopping sets and suitable for additive noise channels, combinatorial objects termed absorbing sets were introduced in [6], [25]. An absorbing set can be viewed as a special type of a near-codeword or a trapping set, in particular one that is guaranteed to be stable under a bitflipping decoder. Structural properties of absorbing sets for a representative class of LDPC codes were studied in [7]. Absorbing sets were also experimentally verified on a hardware emulator [27] to govern the low BER region performance for several representative LDPC code families.
One promising direction of improving the performance (and alleviating the error floors) of sparse graph codes is to suitably modify iterative decoding algorithms. Many different aspects of the decoding algorithm have been analyzed, and we only cite a few results: in [12] and [23] averaging techniques are proposed to smooth out the messages over consecutive iterations; in [1] and [11] better message-passing scheduling algorithms are proposed; in [2], [14], and [24] simplified quantization schemes were studied. A recent set of results provides concrete and effective techniques for avoiding or escaping absorbing sets. The idea in [26] is to devise a post-processing mechanism for weakening (strengthening) the messages incident to bits in the particular absorbing set of interest. The automation of this post-processing algorithm is crucially enabled by the isomorphic combinatorial structure of the dominant absorbing sets for the LDPC code under the study (this is the code used in the Ethernet standard). A way to alleviate the effects of so-called “weak” absorbing sets via better quantization schemes was proposed in [27].
An alternative way to tackle the issue of improved performance is to modify at the outset the parity check matrix by improving the spectrum of non codewords (i.e., trapping set/absorbing set spectrum) while maintaining original desirable code properties. While a comprehensive theoretical development is still lacking, our results provide a step towards the goal of a better code design. Recently, [8], [10], and [13] focused on introducing redundant or independent checks to decrease the trapping set spectrum. Unlike the existing works, we rely on the combinatorial properties of the absorbing sets to lead us to an improvement of the absorbing set spectrum via a code modification that is valid over the whole code family, while preserving the original code properties such as the structure, rate, girth, and node degrees.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

i7

i8

i1 (j1,k1)

(j2,k2)

i6

i4

i2

(j4,k4) i10

i5
(j3,k3) i3
i9

Fig. 1. Depiction of a (4, 4) absorbing set.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II contains relevant definitions. Elementary bounds on the smallest absorbing sets are provided in Section III. Section IV studies representative code families in the context of these bounds and illustrates how the absorbing set spectrum can be improved by suitably modifying the parity check matrix while preserving code properties. Section V concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND
We quickly revisit the definition of the absorbing sets [6], [25]. Let GH = (V, F, E) be the bipartite graph (Tanner graph) describing the parity-check matrix H, such that the set V corresponds to the columns of H, the set F corresponds to the rows of H, and E = e(i, j)|H(j, i) = 1. For a subset D of V , let O(D) be the set of neighboring vertices of D in F with odd degree with respect to D. For the integer pair (a, b), an (a, b) absorbing set is a subset D of V of size a, with O(D) of size b, and with the property that each element of D has strictly fewer neighbors in O(D) than in F \ O(D). If moreover, all variable nodes in V \ D have strictly fewer neighbors in O(D) than in F \ O(D), an (a, b) absorbing set is called a (a, b) fully absorbing set. An important property of fully absorbing sets is that they are stable under the bit-flipping operations.
An example of a (4, 4) absorbing set is shown in Figure 1. Black circles denote the bit nodes in D, white squares denote the check nodes in E(D), and black squares denote the check nodes in O(D). Each of the bit nodes has three neighboring satisfied and one neighboring unsatisfied check. For this absorbing set to be fully absorbing set all bit nodes not depicted (i.e., the set V \ D) should have strictly more satisfied than unsatisfied checks.
Due to the convenient partitioning of the parity check matrix, LDPC codes built from circulant matrices are particularly amenable for high-throughput applications and compact

hardware design. Given integers r and c, a mapping rule f (i, j) : (i, j) → N and a p × p permutation matrix σ of

the form

⎡ 0 0 ... 0 1 ⎤

σ = ⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢

1 0
...

0 1
...

... ...
...

0 0
...

0 0
...

⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥ ,

(1)

0 0 ... 1 0

we form the (rp) × (cp) parity check matrix Hpr,,fc as

⎡ σf (0,0)

σf (0,1)

σf (0,2)

...

σf (0,c−1) ⎤

Hpr,,fc = ⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢

σf (1,0) σf (2,0)
...

σf (1,1) σf (2,1)
...

σf (1,2) σf (2,2)
...

... ...
...

σf (1,c−1) σf (2,c−1)
...

⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥ .

σf (r−1,0) σf (r−1,1) σf (r−1,2) . . . σf (r−1,c−1)

(2)

We assume that f (i1, j) = f (i2, j) and f (i, j1) = f (i, j2) for i1 = i2 and j1 = j2 so that the girth of the code is at least

6.

We label each check node in GH with the unique label (j, k) that describes the corresponding column of Hpr,,fc , and we label each check node in GH with a label i if the corresponding row of Hpr,,fc belongs to the row group i.The following convenient
properties follow from the fact that the parity check matrix Hpr,,fc is a two-dimensional array of permutation matrices.
Bit Consistency: For a bit node, all its incident check nodes,

labeled is1 through isγ , must have distinct labels, i.e., these check nodes are in distinct row groups.

Check Consistency: All bit nodes, say (j1, k1) through

(jp, kp), participating in the same check node must have

distinct j values, i.e., they are all in distinct column groups.

For the illustration of the labeling, see Figure 1. Examples of codes that have the above descriptions are array-based LDPC code proposed by Fan [9]. Here f (i, j) = ij, and r is set to p, the size of σ. We will focus on this family as our illustrative example. Another example is the quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code proposed by Tanner et al. [22]. Here f (i, j) = ajbi where a and b are nonzero elements of GF (p) having multiplicative orders o(a) = c and o(b) = r. Several related classes of highperformance structured LDPC codes can be found in [16]. We start off with a useful result regarding the size of the smallest possible (a, b) absorbing set, expressed in terms of the bit node degree and the girth of the code. Here, “the smallest” refers to first selecting the smallest possible a, and then the smallest b based on this a.
III. LOWER BOUND

We consider a regular LDPC code with girth g, with all

check having degree c, and all bits having degree r. Let t =

r+1
2
needs

. By construction, to have at least t

each bit node satisfied checks

in the absorbing set

(and at most

r−1 2

unsatisfied checks).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For g = 4 the lower bound on the pair (a, b) is simply

(2, 2

v−1 2

), and is achieved by having both bit nodes in the

absorbing set share each one of the t satisfied checks. The

results are more interesting for larger girths.

Let us for a moment recall the definition of a stopping

set [19], which says that the stopping set is a subgraph in

the Tanner graph with the property that each check node

neighboring bit nodes in the stopping set is incident to at least

two bit nodes. Note that absorbing sets and stopping sets have

delineating topological properties: the former considers the

relative number of satisfied and unsatisfied checks per bit node

in the subgraph of interest, whereas the latter considers all

check nodes having degree more than 1 in the subgraph. As it

turns out the meeting point of the two configurations is at their

respective minimal values. Let us consider a smallest stopping

set. By the girth constraint, having a check node incident to

the stopping set and with the property that its degree is strictly

larger than 2, can only increase the size of the stopping set

relative to the configuration where all incident check nodes

have degree exactly equal to 2. It thus suffices to consider

degree-2 check nodes in the smallest stopping set. The lower

bound on the size of the smallest stopping sets is provided

in [18].

Recall that Lemma 1:

t= For

g

r+1 2
≥

for r 6, for

the the

bit node smallest

degree. (a∗, b∗)

absorbing

sets, a∗ is no less

and no less than 1

of 4, where l =

a∗ ·

r−1 2

.

than
+
g 4

1+

l−1 i=0

t(t

l i=0

t(t −

1)i

for

g

≡

− 1)i + (t − 1)l for g

2 a

mod 4, multiple

− 1. The quantity b∗ is no less than

Proof: Let us first inspect some of the values implied by the

lemma. For g = 6, the lemma says that the smallest absorbing

sets are at least (

r+1 2

+ 1, (

r+1 2

+ 1)

r−1 2

). For c = 3 this

is (3, 3), for c = 4 this is (4, 4), and for c = 5 this is (4, 8).

For g = 8, the lemma says that the smallest absorbing sets are

at least (2

r+1 2

,2

r+1 2

r−1 2

).

For

c=3

this

is

(4, 4), for

c = 4 this is (6, 6), and for c = 5 this is (6, 12).

Since we are focused on the smallest absorbing sets, it

suffices to consider the case when all satisfied checks are

incident to exactly two bit nodes in the absorbing set, all

unsatisfied checks are incident to one bit node, and each bit

node in the absorbing set has exactly t satisfied checks (as

otherwise, by taking the girth constraint into the account, the

overall number of bit nodes in the absorbing set can only

increase). We can now directly apply the result regarding the

smallest stopping sets [18] to the smallest absorbing sets by

interpreting the degree of the bit nodes in the minimal stopping

set as the smallest number of satisfied checks per bit node in the minimal absorbing set, the value t. The bound on a∗

follows. Note that the bound on a∗ immediately implies the bound
on b∗ as the latter simply counts the maximum allowed number

of unsatisfied checks per each of the bit nodes in the absorbing

set.

Pictorially the bound can be interpreted as follows. We

build a tree starting with a bit node in the absorbing set as

the root, grow the tree just deep enough to tightly meet the

girth constraint, and then close up the tree at the leaf node

level so that the shortest cycles correspond to the girth. For

the case g ≡ 2 mod 4 (g = 6, 10, 14, etc.) we proceed as

follows. For the root bit node (denoted level-0) emanate t

edges from it, one for each satisfied check. The end-points

at the end of the level-1 expansion are additional t bit nodes.

For each subsequent level k (k ≥ 1) emanate t − 1 edges

from each of t(t − 1)k−1 bit nodes at this level, until

g 4

+1

levels have been constructed, again one edge representing

one satisfied expansion is

check nodeg. The total number of

then 1+

4
k=1

t(t−1)k−1

,

of

which

nodes in

t(t−1)

g 4

this
−1

are leaf nodes. All the nodes in the tree excluding the leaf

nodes have t associated incident edges. We then “close up”

this expanding tree topology by creating the edges between

the suitable leaf nodes. Note that we cannot close up the

tree at any earlier level (thereby seemingly reducing the

total number of nodes in this topology) without violating the

girth constraint. Consider two leaf nodes for which the only

common ancestor is the anchor node itself. Creating an edge

between these two nodes closes a cycle spanning g/2 bit nodes

in this tree (or equivalently a cycle of length g in the Tanner

graph). If the two leaf nodes have an earlier common ancestor,

they cannot be connected. This property is then propagated

through all subsequent connections by carefully bookkeeping

the information of the existing connections. Likewise, for the

g ≡ 0 mod 4 case, Additional (t − 1)g/4−1

the tree is grown until nodes are introduced at

level

level

g 4

g 4

−

1.

. These

leaf nodes connect to the nodes at the previous level in a way

that no two connections for a fixed leaf node extend to bit

nodes that themselves have a common ancestor other than the

anchor node.

A consequence of the lemma is the following result for

codes with check degree equal to 3.

Corollary 1: For c = 3 and g = 6, if the minimum distance

dmin ≥ 6, the smallest (a, b) fully absorbing set is strictly less than the minimum distance. Likewise, for c = 3 and g = 8,

if the minimum distance dmin ≥ 8 the smallest (a, b) fully

absorbing set is strictly less than the minimum distance.

Proof. For the g = 6 case, Lemma 1 gives us (3, 3) as

the lower bound on the smallest absorbing set. Note that this

absorbing set must necessarily exist as it is underlined by a

single cycle of length 6. This absorbing set either is or is

not a fully absorbing set. If it is, the statement of the lemma

follows. If it is not, there would necessarily exist a bit node

outside of this (3, 3) absorbing set such that it connects to

at least two of the unsatisfied checks. If it connects to all 3

unsatisfied checks, the resulting configuration is a (4, 0) fully

absorbing set and thus a codeword, which is not possible by

the assumption regarding the lower bound on the minimum

distance. If the new bit node connects to exactly 2 unsatisfied

checks, the resulting configuration is a (4, 2) absorbing set.

Again, it either is or it is not a fully absorbing set. In the

former case, the statement of the lemma follows. In the latter

case, we enlarge the (4, 2) absorbing set into an absorbing

set with 5 bit nodes. The new bit node must connect to the

two unsatisfied checks so that the result is a (5, 1) absorbing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

set. Given that there is now exactly one unsatisfied check, the addition of a new bit node cannot decrease the number of unsatisfied checks. As a result the (5, 1) absorbing set is then also a fully absorbing set and the lemma follows. The proof for the g = 8 is analogous to the g = 6 case, where we successively build (4, 4), (5, 3), (6, 2) and (7, 1) absorbing sets, until a fully absorbing set configuration is reached.
Clearly, increasing the girth at the outset helps with the (lower bound on the) absorbing set spectrum. Sometimes however this is not possible because of the delicate balance among various code properties. For these reasons, we focus on a code modification that preserves code properties – such as the girth, node degrees, rate and the partitioned structure of the parity check matrix – while improving the absorbing set spectrum.

IV. ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES

A. Application: Array-based LDPC codes [9]

By construction, for the bit degree r > 2, the girth g

is 6. Thus the lower bound on the smallest absorbing set

is

r+1 2

+ 1, (

r+1 2

+ 1)

r−1 2

, where r is the bit node

degree.

For completeness, we start with some known results.

• For r = 3, the lower bound amounts to (3, 3), and

is tight for g = 6 as shown in previous section. A result

in [7] enumerates (3, 3) absorbing sets, as well as (4, 2) fully

absorbing sets as the smallest fully absorbing sets.

• For r = 4, the lower bound is (4, 4). This candidate

absorbing set is shown in Figure 1. It can be showed [7] that

only one labeling of the check nodes not violating the bit

consistency constraints corresponds to the (up to re-naming of

the labels)

(i1, i2, i3, i4, i5, i6) = (x, y, x, y, z, w)

(3)

assignment in Figure 1, where {x, y, z, w} = {0, 1, 2, 3}. The relationships amongst bit nodes and check nodes in this configuration dictate that the following must hold,

(z − x)(w − y) + (z − y)(w − x) ≡ 0 mod p (4)
As it turns out for {x, y, z, w} = {0, 1, 2, 3} eq. (4) cannot hold for large enough p, and hence (4, 4) absorbing sets do not exist for Hpp,,4(i·j) [7].
• For r = 5, the lower bound is (4, 8). This lower bound describes absorbing sets with bit nodes each having 3 satisfied and 2 unsatisfied checks.
We first prove the existence of (4, 8) absorbing sets, and then show how they can be eliminated by a better code design. Note that such (4, 8) have already been experimentally observed in the low BER region on a hardware emulator, [15], [27].
Lemma 2: (4, 8) absorbing sets exist in the Tanner code described by the parity check matrix Hpp,,5i·j.
Proof : The proof follows techniques developed in [7], so we only outline the main steps. A (4, 8) absorbing set is

the extension of the (4, 4) absorbing set shown in Figure 1, obtained by appending a new (fifth) unsatisfied check to each of the bit nodes. One can then show that under the bit consistency constraints applied to the bit nodes in the candidate (4, 8) absorbing set, there are only two possible non isomorphic check labelings: one using only four distinct labels (out of five available) and one using all five distinct labels. The former case reduces to the assignment (3), and subsequently to the constraint given in (4) for {x, y, z, w} ⊂ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}. The latter case amounts to the assignment

(i1, i2, i3, i4, i5, i6) = (x, t, w, y, z, z)

(5)

where {x, y, z, w, t} = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}. After some manipulations of equations relating relevant bit nodes and check nodes we arrive at the condition

(z−w)(x−t)(y−z)−(y−w)(x−z)(z−t) ≡ 0 mod p . (6)

There are 8 solution sets that always evaluate to zero on the
left-hand side of equation (6). For each of these solutions, once
the labels of the check nodes are selected (cf. Figure 1), the bit node labels (pairs (j1, k1) through (j4, k4)) can be selected in O(p3) ways, thereby completely characterizing the absorbing
set of interest.
An inspection of the solution sets shows that the values 4, 3, 2 and 1 appear as bracketed differences in (6) and in (4). A simple way to eliminate (4, 8) absorbing sets is to use a parity check matrix with a modified mapping rule f (i, j): instead of f (i, j) = i · j (0 ≤ i, j ≤ p − 1) use a sequence Ir of 5(= r) non-negative integers with the following property. For Jr the set of pairwise differences of the elements in Ir, we require that no two products of two elements of Jr is the same (to prevent the left hand side of (4) to become 0), and that no two products of three elements of Jr is the same (to prevent the left hand side of (6) to become 0). Here all calculations are taken mod p.
The new mapping rule becomes f (i, j) = Ir(i) · j mod p, while preserving the conditions f (i1, j) = f (i2, j) for i1 = i2 and f (i, j1) = f (i, j2) for j1 = j2. Note that such Ir still results in the parity check matrix of the type given in (2), and
therefore the girth is strictly larger than 4 in the associated
Tanner graph of the code, and the node degrees are unaltered. Some choices for the sequence Ir obtained by the greedy
construction, whereby the subsequent elements are added to Ir in an increasing order while making sure the properties of the set Ir are satisfied, are (for prime p large enough):
• Ir = (0, 1, 3, 8, 19); • Ir = (0, 1, 2, 5, 18). This modification choice with the property above preserves the girth of the code (e.g., in both examples of Ir, one can show the existence of a length-6 cycle covering passing
through checks in the first three row groups). Since the girth
is unaltered, cycles of length 6 (which are in fact the basic building blocks of candidate (4, 8) absorbing sets, cf. Figure 1)
are still present. The intuition of why the modified construction does not have (4, 8) absorbing sets even though it does have
length-6 cycles is that the intricate overlap of length6 cycles is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

sparsified enough to prevent the occurrence of these absorbing sets.
Note that the proposed code modification now leads a new code design with improved absorbing set spectrum.
Not all LDPC constructions meet the lower bound on the size of the smallest absorbing set. We conclude with a comment on one such code.
B. A remark regarding (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC codes[4]
An important practical code used in Ethernet standard is the (2048, 1973) Reed-Solomon based LDPC code [4]. This code has bit degree 8, check degree 32, and girth 6. A lower bound on the size of the smallest absorbing sets (5, 10) for this code. The work in [21] demonstrates via an exhaustive search-style algorithm based on the absorbing set topology that in fact this code does not have any (5, 10) absorbing sets (the smallest possible for these code parameters). This result is also consistent with previous works that studied this code [26], [5], and that identified (8, 8) absorbing sets as the dominant errors in the low BER region.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper we provided elementary bounds on the sizes of the smallest absorbing sets, and studied certain practical codes in the context of these bounds. We provided simple methods for a systematic modified code design that increases the size of the smallest absorbing sets without compromising existing desirable code properties. An interesting future direction involves a synthesis of improved codes design and improved practical decoding algorithms for practical systems requiring very low probabilities of error.
REFERENCES
[1] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot and R. D. Wesel, “Improving LDPC decoders via informed dynamic scheduling,” in Proc. Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, Lake Tahoe, California, Sept. 2 - 6, 2007.
[2] S. K. Chilappagari, M. G. Stepanov, M. Chertkov and B. Vasic, “Analysis of Error Floors of LDPC Codes under LP Decoding over the BSC”, in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Seoul, Korea, June - July, 2009.
[3] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Transactions on Infofromation Theory, vol. 48, no 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[4] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-density parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 7, pp. 317– 319, Jul. 2003.
[5] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Evaluation of the low frame error rate performance of LDPC codes using importance sampling,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sept. 2007, pp. 202–207.
[6] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. J. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of Absorbing Sets for Array-Based LDPC Codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Glasgow, UK, Jun. 2007, pp. 62616268.
[7] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. J. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, Jan. 2010.

[8] O. Fainzilber, E. Sharon and S. Litsyn, “Decreasing Error Floor in LDPC Codes by Parity-Check Matrix Extensions,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Seoul, Korea, June - July, 2009.
[9] J. L. Fan, “Array-codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. of Second Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 543– 546.
[10] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, August 2008, pp. 3763-3768.
[11] S. Kim, K. Ko, J. Heo, and J. Kim, Two-staged informed dynamic scheduling for sequential belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 13, no. 3, March 2009, pp. 193 195.
[12] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. of Wireless Comm., Hawaii, USA, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[13] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. Huber, “When does one redundant parity-check equation matter?” in Proceedings of the 49th annual IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM), San Francisco, California , USA, November 2006.
[14] J. K. S. Lee and J. Thorpe, “Memory-efficient decoding of LDPC codes,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Adelaide, Australia, July 2005.
[15] P. Lee, L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic and M. Wainwright, “Error Floors in LDPC Codes: Fast Simulation, Bounds and Hardware Emulation,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Toronto, Canada, July 2008.
[16] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, Prentice Hall, 2004.
[17] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, 2003.
[18] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of the Tanner code,” Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Lausanne, Switzerland, July 2002.
[19] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[20] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. of the 41st Annual Allerton Conference, Monticello, Ill., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[21] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang ”On the Dynamics of the Error Floor Behavior in (Regular) LDPC Codes,” submitted to IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 2009.
[22] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966 –2984, Dec. 2004.
[23] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, “Improvements in belief-propagation decoding based on averaging information from decoder and correction of clusters of nodes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 846 – 848, Dec. 2006.
[24] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC code,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems vol. 15, no.1, pp. 104 – 114, Jan. 2007.
[25] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation, Proc. of IEEE Global communications Conference (GLOBECOM), San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006.
[26] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, M.J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), New Orleans, LA, Nov. 2008.
[27] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: quantization and algorithm choices,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, Nov. 2009, pp. 3258–3268.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

