Degree-Dependent Decoding of LDPC Codes
Gottfried Lechner, Ingmar Land Institute for Telecommunications Research
University of South Australia Adelaide, Australia
Email: {gottfried.lechner,ingmar.land}@unisa.edu.au

Abstract—In this paper we present a new method to reduce the decoding complexity of LDPC codes. The variable nodes are grouped according to their degrees, and in each iteration only a subset of variable node groups is activated. The variable and check node message updates are associated with a certain cost, and the activation is then optimized such that the overall cost is minimized. The optimum activation order is determined by density evolution. The complexity savings are illustrated by some examples.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes together with message passing decoders are among the most powerful channel coding schemes known [1]. They allow performance close to the Shannon capacity while the decoding complexity grows only linearly in the code length. Even though the decoding complexity of LDPC codes is already relatively low, it may still be too high for some high speed applications.
There are several ways to reduce the decoding complexity in a practical decoder. One possibility is to modify the decoding algorithm, e.g. use the min-sum algorithm instead of the sumproduct algorithm. In general, such a reduction of the decoding complexity comes with a loss of performance (e.g. with a higher required signal to noise ratio) although it has been shown that the performance can get close to that of the optimal decoder by means of post-processing [2].
An interesting approach is to combine various decoding algorithms during the decoding process. One could start with a few iterations of sum-product decoding, followed for example by binary message-passing decoding in later iterations. Such a scheme, called gear-shift decoding, has been presented and analyzed in [3], and the authors show an efficient way to find the optimal activation sequence of the decoders.
Another possibility is to modify the schedule, i.e. the way in which the component decoders are activated. The aim is to either reduce the number of required iterations (i.e. faster convergence) or to reduce the cost per iteration (where the cost of the individual component decoders has to be defined in a proper way). For the case of decoding LDPC codes, the most common schedue is the flooding schedule where all variable nodes are processed at once followed by an update of all check nodes. An example for a scheme with a modified schedule is shuffled iterative decoding [4] of LDPC codes which achieves faster convergence compared to the standard

flooding schedule. When the iterative decoder consists of more than two components, an improvement in convergence can be achieved by optimizing the activation sequence of the decoders [5].
In this paper, we study a degree-dependent decoding scheme for LDPC codes. The variable nodes of irregular LDPC codes show different convergence behaviour, i.e. nodes of higher degree converge faster to large magnitudes of the a-posteriori L-values than nodes of lower degree. On the other hand, the computational effort of updating all messages of a variable node scales approximately with the variable node degree. The basic idea in the present paper is to update higher degree nodes less frequently than lower degree nodes; in this way the overall decoding complexity can be reduced.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II desribes the system model. In Section III we introduce the degree-dependent decoding scheduling. The optimization of the activation sequence is presented in Section IV. In Section V we provide some examples to show the effect of the new optimized decoding scheme. Conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Consider an LDPC code of rate R with regular check node degree dc. The variable node distribution is defined by the coefficients λk, k = 2, . . . , dv,max. We follow the common notation from [6]. (The concepts may be extended to checkirregular codes.) The codewords are uniformly distributed, and they are transmitted over a memoryless symmetric channel, such as an AWGN channel with BPSK input. The channel outputs are converted to channel L-values and then given to the iterative decoder.
III. DEGREE-DEPENDENT DECODING
When analyzing LDPC codes, it is usually assumed that the decoder applies a flooding schedule, i.e. all variable and all check nodes are updated in parallel. We note that for the asymptotic case of infinite block lengths and cycle-free graphs, the choice of the schedule has no influence on the decoding performance, i.e. the decoding threshold is independent of the scheduling. However, from a complexity point of view, the number of computed messages depends on the choice of the message schedule.

978-1-4244-5434-1/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

107

AusCTW 2010

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:13:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Scheduled Decoding
The degree-dependent decoder works as follows. In the first iteration, the messages from variable to check nodes are initialized with the channel messages followed by an update of all outgoing check node messages. In subsequent iterations, only a subset of the variable nodes is updated and the messages which are not updated in the current iteration keep their values from the previous iteration. The subset of the variable nodes that have to be updated in the current iteration is defined via their degree.
This degree-dependent decoder can be analyzed using a modified version of density evolution [6]. In standard density evolution, the probability density function of the variable-tocheck node messages is the mixture of those resulting for the individual variable node degrees weighted by the variable node degree distribution. For the degree dependent decoder, this mixture consists of probability density functions of the current iteration for the variable node degrees that have been updated, and the probability density functions of the previous iteration for the other variable node degrees.

B. Message Updating Complexity

To be able to compare various schedules, we have to define

the cost for a message update. In this work, we do not focus on

a specific hardware implementation and rather use an abstract

cost model, which is general and may be specialised to specific

implementations.

Let cv denote the cost of updating a single message at the

output of a variable node. The total cost of updating a variable

node of degree dv is therefore dvcv. In a similar way, we define cc to be the cost of updating an outgoing message of a check node. We note that the absolute values of cv and cc have no influence on the optimization algorithm in Section IV

but the ratio between these two costs is of relevance for the

optimization of the activation sequence. Therefore, we define

the

message

cost

ratio

cr

=

cc cv

,

i.e.

we

normalize

the

cost

for

a check node message update by the cost of a variable node

message update.

Let S(i) denote the set of variable node degrees that are

updated in iteration i. The fraction of updated nodes is

λk

Λk =

k∈S (i) λj

k

,

(1)

k∈S (i)

jj

where Λk denotes the fraction of nodes of degree k. Therefore, the fraction of updated edges is

Λkk =

k∈S(i) λk
λj

= d¯v

λk ,

(2)

k∈S (i)

jj

k∈S (i)

where d¯v denotes the average variable node degree. Then the

complexity increment for iteration i is given by

⎛

⎞

Ci = ccd¯v + cvd¯v

λk = cvd¯v ⎝cr +

λk⎠ . (3)

k∈S (i)

k∈S (i)

The overall complexity is then given by

⎛

⎞

C = Ci = cvd¯v ⎝cr +

λk⎠ .

(4)

i

i

k∈S (i)

This is the cost to be minimized in the following algorithm. In most implementations of the sum-product algorithm,
the check node decoder is more complex than the variable node decoder and therefore, one could assume that cr > 1 in general. However, when considering for example binary message-passing decoders, the situation can be quite different since the check node decoder of a binary message-passing algorithm performs just an exclusive-or operation of the incoming messages, which in general leads to cr < 1.

IV. OPTIMIZATION OF THE ACTIVATION SEQUENCE
In this section, we describe how the activation sequence can be optimized where our optimization criteria is to minimize the overall decoding cost. To do that in an efficient way, we need to quantify the average quality of the current messages with a kind of decoder state, thereby allowing a comparison of different activation sequences. Although it would be sufficient for our purpose to use a quantity which is just available in the analysis (e.g. the mutual information between the variable-tocheck messages and the transmitted codeword), we opt for a quantity that can also be measured by a real decoder. This allows an extension of our concepts to practical decoders.

A. Decoder State Based on Syndrome

We propose to measure information about syndrome bits that results from the assumption that the actual syndrome is not known. (Of course, the syndrome Hx is known to be zero for every codeword x.) In [7] the extrinsic error probability was used in a similar context.
Consider a check node of degree dc corresponding to the code bits Xn, n = 1, 2, . . . , dc. Define the syndrome bit

S := X1 ⊕ X2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Xdc ,

(5)

where by definition of the code, we know that S = 0. Consider

now the decoder for this check node. Assume that this check

node obtains the a-priori L-values Lac,n, n = 1, 2, . . . , dc, for

these code bits. The extrinsic L-value for Xdc is computed as [8]

Lac,dc := Lac,1 Lac,2 · · · Lac,dc−1.

(6)

Define now

Ls := Lac,1 Lac,2 · · · Lac,dc .

(7)

This L-value is obviously the extrinsic L-value for the syndrome bit S, as defined in (5). It corresponds to the probability of S being zero or one given the a-priori L-values for the dc code bits (and excluding the knowledge that S is zero by definition of the code).
Let pS(L) denote the probability density function of the L-values of the syndrome. For the analysis, this density can

108 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:13:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

easily be computed by means of density evolution. In a practical system the decoder computes the syndrome L-value for all check nodes which allows the estimation of pS(L). As we know that the actual values of the syndrome bits are zero, pS(L) is in fact the conditional distribution given S = 0. This can now be used to define a decoder state. Notice that this can be computed without knowledge of the transmitted data, as desired.
The decoder state should be a scalar value, for convenience, and it should capture the information in the distribution that is relevant for the iterative decoding process. Motivated by that, we define the decoder state as

IS := H

1 2

(pS

(L)

+

pS

(−L))

−H

pS(L) ,

(8)

where H(p) denotes the entropy of the probability mass function p. The value IS is the average bit-wise mutual information between the syndrome bit and the weight of the syndrome message, under the assumption that the codewords are randomly chosen over all binary vectors. Given this interpretation, we refer to the decoder state defined in (8) as syndrome information.

B. Trellis Representation
For the optimization of the activation sequence, we follow the ideas in [3]. An exhaustive tree search of all possible sequences would lead to an exponential complexity of the optimization algorithm. The basic idea is to reduce this complexity, by removing branches of the tree which cannot lead to the optimal solution. This is achieved using a trellis representation as depicted in Figure 1. The state nodes of the trellis represent the (sufficiently fine quantized) syndrome information. An edge in the trellis corresponds to one iteration, in which the variable node decoder updates the messages of a subset of the variable nodes; the edge starts at the value of the syndrome information at the beginning of the iteration and it ends at the value of the syndrome information after the iteration. The metric associated with an edge represents the cost of updating the corresponding subset of variable nodes. For convenience we define the cost of each horizontal edge (no change in mutual information) as zero. Note that the state transitions vary from iteration to iteration corresponding to a time-dependent trellis.
Since the metric is additive and non-negative, the path with the smallest overall cost can efficiently be found using a variant of the Viterbi algorithm. Whenever two paths arrive in the same state (i.e. leading to the same syndrome information), the path with the larger accumulated cost is discarded. For the survivor path, we keep the probability density function for all variable node degrees which are used to compute the syndrome information after the next iteration.

V. EXAMPLES AND DISCUSSION
To demonstrate the effect of the degree-dependent schedule, we use an irregular LDPC code of rate R = 1/2. All check

syndrome information

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
iterations
Fig. 1. Trellis representing the decoding process.

nodes have degree dc = 8, while the variable node degree distribution is shown in Table I. The threshold of this code over an additive white Gaussian noise channel is 0.69 dB when using the sum-product algorithm.

TABLE I VARIABLE NODE DEGREE DISTRIBUTION.

degree 2 3 20

λk 0.1302 0.4991 0.3707

First, we study the influence of the ratio between the cost

of variable and check node updates. Figure 2 compares the

overall decoding cost of the degree dependent decoder with the

flooding schedule as a function of the message cost ratio cr

with

Eb N0

=

1.19 dB, i.e. 0.5 dB away from the decoding

threshold.

From Figure 2 it can be seen that the overall decoding

complexity of the degree dependent decoder is smallest for

small values of cr, i.e. when an update of the check nodes is less complex than an update of the variable nodes. In the

limiting case of zero cost for the check node update, it is best

for the decoder to activate only one group of variable nodes

at a time in order to minimize the overall decoding cost. On

the other hand, if the cost for a check node update is large,

the degree dependent schedule becomes the flooding schedule

and all variable nodes are updated at each iteration.

Next, we study the cost of the flooding schedule compared

to the degree dependent schedule as a function of the gap to

the threshold. The results are shown in Figure 3 for cr = 0 and

cr = 1. In all cases, the overall decoding complexity increases

significantly when the gap to the decoding threshold is small.

Furthermore,

for

all

values

of

Eb N0

,

the

complexity

reduction

by

the degree dependent schedule is larger for cr = 0 as shown

before.

109 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:13:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

relative cost (optimized/flooding) overall cost

1

1200

flooding c =0

r

0.9

1000

optimized c =0
r
flooding c =1

r

800

optimized c =1
r

0.8

600

0.7 400

0.6 200

0.5 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 cr

0 0

0.5

Eb

1 gap

[dB]

1.5

N0

2

Fig. 2. Ratio of the overall decoding costs for the degree dependent and Fig. 3. Overall decoding cost for the degree dependent and flooding schedule

flooding schedule as a function of the message cost ratio cr.

as a function of the gap to the decoding threshold.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
We presented a schedule for the variable node decoder of LDPC codes that activates the variable nodes depending on their degree. Such a decoder can be analyzed using a modified version of density evolution and we showed how the schedule can be optimized in order to minimize the overall decoding cost. For a specific example we show the influence of the cost for a check node update compared to a variable node update. Furthermore, we studied the decoding cost as a function of the gap to the decoding threshold.
If the cost for updating the check nodes is large compared to the cost of a variable node update, the complexity reduction of the degree dependent schedule is small. However, if the cost for an update of the check nodes is small (e.g. in the case of binary message passing algorithms), the overall decoding cost can be lowered significantly.
In future work we will study how the code rate and the structure of the degree distribution affects the possible reductions of complexity. We will also investigate how to exploit the possible savings of complexity in practical decoders.

REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[2] G. Lechner and J. Sayir, “Improved sum-min decoding for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 4th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, 2006.
[3] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Gear-shift decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1235–1242, 2006.
[4] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, February 2005.
[5] F. Brannstrom, L. K. Rasmussen, and A. Grant, “Convergence analysis and optimal scheduling for multiple concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 3354–3364, September 2005.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[7] G. Yue and X. Wang, “A new binary iterative LDPC decoding algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes & Rel. Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, Sep. 2008.
[8] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Australian Research Council under ARC Discovery Grants DP0881160, DP0663567 and DP0558861.

110 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:13:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

