IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

1407

Analysis of Low-Density Parity-Check
Codes Based on EXIT Functions
Eran Sharon, Student Member, IEEE, Alexei Ashikhmin, Senior Member, IEEE, and Simon Litsyn, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We exploit extrinsic information transfer functions of single parity-check and repetition codes over the binary input additive white Gaussian noise (biAWGN) channel, derived by the authors, for asymptotic performance analysis of belief propagation decoding of low-density parity-check codes. The approach is based on a Gaussian approximation (GA) of the density evolution algorithm using the mutual information measure. We show that this method allows more accurate prediction of the decoding threshold in the biAWGN channel than the earlier known GA methods.
Index Terms—Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) functions, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, performance analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have been a subject of much interest in recent years, due to their excellent performance close to the Shannon limit, and low decoding complexity. Performance of LDPC codes exhibits a threshold phenomenon under iterative decoding; as the codeword length tends to infinity, the bit-error probability becomes arbitrarily small if the noise level is below some constant threshold. Richardson et al. [13], [14] developed the density evolution (DE) algorithm for determining the convergence threshold of message-passing decoders over various channels by tracking the densities of messages passed in the decoding process.
The DE algorithm can be used for designing capacity-approaching LDPC code ensembles [5]. However, due to its computational complexity, Gaussian approximation (GA) algorithms for DE over the binary input additive white Gaussian noise (biAWGN) channel were suggested. These algorithms convert the infinite-dimensional problem of iterative calculation of the message densities to a one-dimensional (1-D) problem of tracking a single parameter of the Gaussian distribution. Several methods for GA were investigated, differing in the way a non-Gaussian message is replaced by a Gaussian one. A method based on the mean value of the messages was suggested in [6]. A method based on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was used in analysis of turbo codes in [9]. A method
Paper approved by A. H. Banihashemi, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received March 9, 2004; revised June 27, 2005 and November 23, 2005. This paper was presented in part at the International Symposium on Information Theory, Chicago, IL, 2004.
E. Sharon and S. Litsyn are with the Department of Electrical EngineeringSystems, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978 Israel (e-mail: eransh@eng. tau.ac.il; litsyn@eng.tau.ac.il).
A. Ashikhmin is with Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA (e-mail: aea@research.bell-labs.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.878828

based on bit-error rate (BER) for analysis of LDPC and product codes was proposed in [10]. A method based on the mutual information measure was suggested in [2], [3], and [15]. This method uses extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) functions of constituent decoders in the iterative coding scheme that characterize how a priori information at the soft decoder input converts into extrinsic information at the soft decoder output. The exchange of extrinsic information between constituent decoders can be visualized as a decoding trajectory in an EXIT chart. EXIT charts provide a convenient tool for designing capacity-approaching iterative coding systems by matching the EXIT functions of the constituent decoders based on the area property of the functions [1], [3], [4].
Since iterative decoding of LDPC codes can be seen as a series of elementary decodings of repetition and single paritycheck constituent codes, analysis of LDPC codes depends on the EXIT functions of these codes. In previous research, the corresponding EXIT functions were determined by simulations, or using an approximation based on a duality property of EXIT functions over the binary erasure channel (BEC) [1]. In [16], we developed an analytical method for computing the EXIT functions for some block codes over the biAWGN channel, in the form of a series expansion with terms that are computed using the EXIT function of the same code over BEC. In this paper, we use exact expressions for the EXIT functions of repetition and single parity-check codes for analysis of belief propagation (BP) decoding of regular and irregular LDPC codes over biAWGN. In particular, we generalize the EXIT charts method suggested in [2]. The new method gives a fast and most accurate approximation of the DE algorithm.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide a brief background on LDPC codes. In Section III, we describe an algorithm corresponding to analysis of LDPC codes based on EXIT charts. In Section IV, we describe an improved algorithm having better accuracy. In Section V, we generalize the GA algorithms for analysis of irregular LDPC codes. We show that GA algorithms based on the mutual information measure produce more accurate results than other GA algorithms that track parameters such as mean value, SNR, or BER, especially for irregular LDPC codes.

II. BACKGROUND

A regular

-LDPC code is a linear block code defined

by a sparse parity-check matrix , such that each column of

contains ones, and each row in contains ones. The

code can also be represented by a bipartite graph, such that

the left nodes (called variable nodes) correspond to the code-

word bits, and the right nodes (called check nodes) correspond

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

to the parity checks. Each variable node emanates edges to

the check nodes it participates in. Each check node emanates

edges to the variable nodes that participate in it. The designed

rate of the code is given by

.

Regular LDPC codes can be generalized to irregular LDPC

codes [11] that exhibit better performance under iterative de-

coding. An irregular LDPC code is represented by an irregular

bipartite graph, where the degrees of left and right nodes vary.

The ensemble of irregular LDPC codes is defined by the left

and right degree distributions. Let

and

be the generating functions of the de-

gree distributions for the variable and check nodes, respectively,

where and are the fractions of edges belonging to degree-

variable and check node, respectively, and and are the

maximal left and right degrees, respectively. Then, the designed

rate of the code is given by

.

The degree distributions can be optimized in order to generate

a capacity-approaching code ensemble.

The most attractive feature of LDPC codes is their ability

to achieve a significant fraction of the channel capacity using

low-complexity iterative message-passing decoding algorithms.

These algorithms are based on the bipartite graph representation

of the code. Decoding is initialized with estimates of the vari-

able nodes based on channel observations. These estimates im-

prove through iterative extrinsic message passing between vari-

able and check nodes in the graph. An extrinsic message sent

from a node on edge is a function of all messages received by

the node on edges, other than . In this paper, we analyze the BP

message-passing algorithm [8], [12] over the biAWGN channel.

Let denote the binary phase-shift keying (BPSK)-modulated

codeword , i.e.,

. Let denote the output of a bi-

AWGN channel. An estimate of a transmitted (modulated) bit

given an observation can be expressed in several ways, for

example: 1) the bit’s log likelihood ratio (LLR),

; 2) the bit’s expectation, also known

as the “soft bit,”

.

The BP algorithm can be described in the LLR domain. Let

denote an initial LLR

channel message. For a biAWGN channel, given that

message is sent, and is the channel message associated

with the variable node.

A degree- check node implements the MAP decoding

function of a

parity-check code, and the extrinsic

check-to-variable message is given by

(3)

where

are the incoming messages from the

neighbors of the check node, except the variable node to which

the message is sent.

Asymptotic performance analysis of LDPC codes is usually

done assuming that the code’s underlying bipartite graph is tree-

like. When the channel is memoryless, this assumption implies

statistical independence of all incoming messages into a node

in the graph. The tree assumption is justified by a general con-

centration theorem [13] showing that the decoder’s performance

on random graphs converges to its expected performance as the

code length increases. This expected performance in the limit of

infinitely long codes can be determined from the corresponding

treelike graph. Another assumption that simplifies analysis is

that the all-zero codeword is transmitted. As shown in [13], due

to symmetry conditions satisfied by the decoder, its performance

is independent of the transmitted codeword.

Asymptotic analysis of LDPC codes under BP decoding can

be done using the DE algorithm by iteratively tracking message

densities. LLR message densities satisfy a consistency condi-

tion under BP decoding, i.e.,

[14]. Using this

observation, in GA algorithms for DE, the messages’ densities

are assumed to be consistent Gaussian densities. For a Gaussian

density, the consistency property is reduced to the condition

m. Thus, only a single parameter of the Gaussian den-

sity should be tracked.

III. GA BASED ON THE MUTUAL INFORMATION MEASURE

Let us denote the means of , and by

, and

, respectively. Taking the expectation of both sides of (2),

we get at the th iteration

(1)

(4)

where is the received bit energy,

is the one-sided spec-

tral noise density of the biAWGN channel, and is the mes-

sage’s expectation. Let and denote the check-to-variable

and the variable-to-check LLR messages, respectively. We de-

note the “soft bit” message corresponding to the LLR message

by

.

Under BP decoding, a degree- variable node implements

the maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding function of a

repetition code, and the extrinsic variable-to-check message

is given by

where

and is determined according to (1). The

all-zero codeword assumption guarantees an identical means for

all incoming messages. The statistical independence of all

incoming messages into the variable node guarantees that the

consistency condition of is maintained.

Deriving an update rule for is more tricky. Even if we

assume that all incoming messages to a check node have con-

sistent Gaussian densities and are independent, the output mes-

sage of the check node , which is given by (3), is not Gaussian,

due to the nonlinearity of the check-node computation rule (see

Fig. 1). (2) In order to keep tracking Gaussian messages, the output mes-

sage of a check node which is non-Gaussian should be re-

where

are the incoming messages from the placed by a Gaussian message . In the algorithm proposed in

neighbors of the variable node, except the check node to which [6], the non-Gaussian message is replaced by the Gaussian

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON EXIT FUNCTIONS

1409

Fig. 1. Check node output message’s probability density function (pdf) of a (3,6)-LDPC after the first iteration over a biAWGN channel (E =N = 3 dB), exact pdf (-), and the GA (- -).

Fig. 2. Upper and lower bounds on I(X; U ) for a length-6 single parity-check code as a function of the number of terms in series of (7), for a priori information of I(X; V ) = 0:2 and I(X; V ) = 0:8.

message , satisfying

.

In the algorithm proposed in [10], the non-Gaussian message

is replaced by the Gaussian message , maintaining the same

BER. These schemes, although computationally simple, do not

provide an accurate approximation. In this paper, we are inter-

ested in methods that are based on tracking mutual information

[2], [15]. Thus, we replace the non-Gaussian message by the

Gaussian message , which satisfies

,

where is the transmitted bit corresponding to the message .

We use the following update rule for :

“soft bit” inputs to the check node can be considered as originating from a symmetric, memoryless channel, we can use [16, Th. 4.5] to compute

(7)

By assuming that the check-node input messages are

Gaussian-

, we can compute

using

the following function [16]:

(5)

where , defined by

(8)

Together, (5), (7), and (8) define the update rule for from

. To summarize, we obtain the following update rules for

(6)

and :

is the mutual information

between a consistent

(9)

Gaussian random variable

and a

binary random variable

w.p.

w.p. as a

(10)

function of [1]. Now, it remains to show how to compute

from .

Using a finite number of terms in the series of (7), we can ap-

Proposition 3.1:

.

proximate

as accurately as we wish.

Proof:

. Remark: Expression (7) can also be written in the form of a

Here, the first equality is due to the invertibility of the

sign-alternating series

,

function and the data processing inequality [7].

thus, as explained in [16], its convergence is assured by the Leib-

Since the check nodes implement MAP decoding of single nitz test. The convergence rate of the series depends on the ac-

parity-check codes, and since under the tree assumption and the tual pdf of . However, since the series is sign-alternating, upper

symmetry conditions maintained by the BP decoder [13], the and lower bounds on

can be obtained by truncating the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

series appropriately. In general, the convergence of the series

becomes slower as

increases. Fig. 2 shows an example

of the series convergence rate for a length-6 single parity-check

code.

The functions

and

can be com-

puted using a preprocessed table, or by an approximation of the

functions. Thus, the complexity of the algorithm remains con-

stant per iteration.

The described algorithm is equivalent to the EXIT charts

analysis of LDPC codes, and the two update rules actually

describe the decoding trajectory that can be visualized on an

EXIT chart with the following two EXIT functions.

Variable Node EXIT Function:

Fig. 3. EXIT chart for a (3,6)-LDPC code over a biAWGN channel with
(11) E =N = 1:127 dB generated using (11) and (12).

where is the average extrinsic information at the output

of the variable-node decoder,

is the average

channel information, and

is the average a priori

information at the input of the variable-node decoder.

Check Node EXIT Function:

Proposition 4.1:

Proof: Under the tree assumption, the variable node implements MAP decoding, hence
(12)

where is the average extrinsic information at the output of

the check-node decoder, and

is the average a

priori information at the input of the check-node decoder.

If and given are independent random variables, then

Since the variable node’s a priori information is the check

node’s extrinsic information, and vice versa, we have

and

.

Fig. 3 shows an example of an EXIT chart for a (3,6)-regular

LDPC code over a biAWGN channel. The asymptotic decoding

trajectory is shown on the EXIT chart.

IV. GA BASED ON THE MUTUAL INFORMATION MEASURE—IMPROVED ALGORITHM

Using this expression and recursion, we obtain

To improve the accuracy of the algorithm, we can compute

the expected mutual information of a variable-to-check message

at the th iteration,

, directly from its expected mutual

information in the previous iteration,

. We then re-

place by a Gaussian message , which satisfies

. This way, we make a Gaussian assumption only on

the variable-to-check message , without making a Gaussian

assumption on the check-to-variable message . This provides

a better GA, since unlike a check-to-variable message pdf, the The term

is hard to compute, in general (due to the

variable-to-check message pdf is very close to a Gaussian pdf. term

). However, for

, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON EXIT FUNCTIONS

1411

variable node performs MAP decoding of the length-3 repeti-

tion code, and

remains simple to compute. This is not

surprising, since for the length-3 repetition code, the pMAP de-

coder defined in [16] and the MAP decoder coincide (see [16,

Ex. 3]), producing the following decoding rule for the variable

node:

(13)
Under the tree assumption and the symmetry conditions maintained by the BP decoder, the “soft bit” inputs to the variable node can be considered as originating from a symmetric, memoryless channel. Thus, applying [16, Prop. 4.3, Th. 4.4] for a length-3 repetition code, we get

0 0 00 Fig. 4. The pdf of U ( :); U ( ), and U + U ( ).

(14) Note that (14) and Proposition 4.1 imply that
(15)
Taking the expectation of both sides of (3) and noting that the check-node input messages are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) (due to the tree and zero codeword assumptions), we have

Then, we can replace

by the Gaussian variable

that satisfies

, i.e.,

is a consistent Gaussian variable with expec-

tation

. Then, we use

(17) to compute

, with

in the role of . Another way to understand the recursive

procedure described above is to think of a computation of

(2) as if it were done in

steps by the decoder, i.e.,

, and

after each step of addition, the resulting non-Gaussian variable

is replaced by a Gaussian variable having the same mutual

information with . The non-Gaussian variables that are being

replaced by Gaussian ones are very close to Gaussian, as can

be seen in Fig. 4. Thus, the GA is better than the one that

was suggested in the previous section, where we replaced the

non-Gaussian check-node message by a Gaussian message.

After computing

by the recursive procedure de-

scribed above using

and , we update

(16)

(18)

and

can be computed using (8) with and

, respectively, and substituted into (14) to obtain

The complexity of this GA algorithm is

per iteration.

The improved mutual information tracking GA algorithms

described in Sections III and IV were used for computing the

channel-noise standard deviation threshold values

and

, respectively, for various regular -LDPC codes over

a biAWGN channel and BP decoder. The threshold values were

compared with the approximated threshold value

and

, computed by the mean and BER tracking GA algorithms

(17) proposed in [6] and [10], respectively, and to the exact threshold

value

computed by the DE algorithm [5]. The results are

Using (17), we can obtain a good approximation for summarized in Table I. The table also shows the inaccuracy ,

. This can be done by measured in decibels, of the thresholds computed by the GA

computing

recursively. Let

. algorithms compared with the exact threshold computed by the

Assume we know

. DE algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006
TABLE I APPROXIMATE AND EXACT THRESHOLD VALUES FOR VARIOUS REGULAR LDPC CODES

V. GA BASED ON THE MUTUAL INFORMATION MEASURE FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

TABLE II IMPROVED GA ALGORITHM: GA

Analysis tools for LDPC codes are of great importance for irregular LDPC codes, where they can be used for design of the left and right degree distributions ( and ) of capacityapproaching irregular LDPC codes ensembles. We show here that the GA algorithm based on the mutual information measure produces very accurate results in predicting the performance and convergence of the decoding process for irregular codes, as well. This is especially important, since the mean and BER tracking GA algorithms proposed in [6] and [10] become inaccurate for irregular LDPC codes.
The algorithm described in Section III can be generalized for irregular codes by assuming that the messages at the check-node input are Gaussian messages, with extrinsic information equal to the average extrinsic information of the messages emanating from the variable nodes. The same assumption is used for the messages at the input of a variable node. The generalized update rules for and are given by

Check Node EXIT Function:

(22)

The algorithm described above is quite accurate; however, an

additional improvement of the algorithm can be made. Note that

(19) we introduce additional inaccuracy by assuming that the input messages of a node are Gaussian instead of Gaussian mixtures.

Unlike the BEC, where a mixture of BEC densities is a BEC

density, for an AWGN channel, this is not true, i.e., a mixture of

Gaussian densities is not a Gaussian density. Thus, even if the

messages emanating from the nodes are Gaussian, our analysis

will still be inaccurate, because we assume that the input mes-

(20) sages of a node are Gaussian. This additional inaccuracy can be avoided by tracking the extrinsic information of each degree-

Again, this is equivalent to the EXIT charts analysis of irregular LDPC codes with the following EXIT functions.
Variable Node EXIT Function:

node separately, instead of tracking only the average extrinsic information. This way, we can accurately compute the extrinsic information at the output of a node, assuming the input messages have a Gaussian mixture distribution.

We can generalize the algorithm described in Section IV for

the case of irregular LDPC codes. The generalized algorithm

tracks the extrinsic information of each degree- node sepa-

rately, and performs the extrinsic information computation as-

suming a node’s input messages have Gaussian mixture distri-

(21) butions. Since now the input message to a check node has a Gaussian mixture distribution, and by linearity of expectation,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES BASED ON EXIT FUNCTIONS
TABLE III RATE-1=2 IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

1413

TABLE IV APPROXIMATE AND EXACT THRESHOLD VALUES FOR VARIOUS IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

we can write the “soft bit” expectation at the input of a check node as

(23)

where is the soft bit message of a degree- variable node,

corresponding to the LLR message

. Fol-

lowing the same arguments, and substituting (23) into (16), we

get

Fig. 5. BER versus the number of iterations as predicted by the DE and GA algorithms for Code 1 over a biAWGN channel with E =N = 0:3 dB.

(24) where is the soft bit message of a degree- check node. Substituting (24) into (7) and (15), we get
(25)

The GA algorithms defined by (19) and (20) and by Table II

were used for computing the channel-noise standard deviation

threshold values and , respectively, for various irreg-

ular LDPC codes (defined in Table III) over a biAWGN channel

and BP decoder. The threshold values were compared with the

approximated threshold value

and , computed by

the mean and BER tracking GA algorithms proposed in [6] and

[10], respectively, and to the exact threshold value

com-

puted by the DE algorithm [5]. The results are summarized in

Table IV.

The convergence process of BP decoding of Code 1 (from

Table III) at

dB, as predicted by the DE algorithm

(with 10-bit quantization of the messages) and by the GA

algorithm is shown in Figs. 5 and 6.

VI. CONCLUSION (26)
We proposed several approximation methods to the DE algo-

rithm for BP decoding of LDPC codes, based on different strate-

The resulting algorithm is summarized in Table II.

gies of substituting non-Gaussian messages with Gaussian ones

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

Fig. 6. Decrease in BER versus BER as predicted by the DE and GA algorithms for Code 1 over a biAWGN channel with E =N = 0:3 dB.

[12] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufman, 1988.
[13] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[14] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[15] E. Sharon, “Analysis of belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes over the biAWGN channel using improved Gaussian approximation based on the mutual information measure,” in Proc. IEEE 22nd Convention, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 2002, pp. 262–264.
[16] E. Sharon, A. Ashikhmin, and S. Litsyn, “EXIT functions for binary input memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1207–1214, Jul. 2006.
Eran Sharon (S’06) was born in Israel, in 1976. He received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineering and computer science in 2001 from Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include coding and information theory.

having the same mutual information. These methods are sim-
pler than the DE algorithm, and provide better accuracy in pre-
diction of the convergence threshold, compared with other GA
algorithms, especially for irregular LDPC codes.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ashikmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel property,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[2] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806–808, 1999.
[3] S. ten Brink, “Designing iterative decoding schemes with extrinsic information transfer charts,” AEU Int. J. Electron. Commun., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 389–398, 2000.
[4] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikmin, “Detection and decoding of multi-antenna signals with low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[5] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[6] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[7] M. C. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[8] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[9] H. El Gamal and A. R. Hammons, Jr., “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 671–686, Feb. 2001.
[10] F. Lehmann and G. M. Maggio, “Analysis of the iterative decoding of LDPC and product codes using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2993–3000, Nov. 2003.
[11] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmather, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Analysis of low-density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1998, pp. 249–258.

Alexei Ashikhmin (M’00) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of Science, Moscow, Russia, in 1994.
From September 1995 to September 1996, he was with the Mathematics Department, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. From January 1997 to July 1999, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Computer, Information, and Communication Division of Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM. Since 1999, he has been with the Mathematics of Communications Research Department, Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ. His research interests include communication theory, the theory of error-correcting codes, and classical and quantum information theory. Dr. Ashikhmin currently serves as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY. He was honored by the IEEE Communications Society S. O. Rice Prize Paper Award in 2005 for a work on LDPC codes for MIMO information transmission.
Simon Litsyn (M’94–SM’99) was born in Khar’kov, U.S.S.R., in 1957. He received the M.Sc. degree from Perm Polytechnical Institute, Perm, U.S.S.R., in 1979, and the Ph.D. degree from Leningrad Electrotechnical Institute, Leningrad, U.S.S.R., in 1982, both in electrical engineering.
Since 1991, he has been with the Department of Electrical Engineering—Systems, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, where he is a Professor. His research interests include coding and information theory, communications, and applications of discrete mathematics. He is a coauthor of Covering Codes (Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1997). Dr. Litsyn received the Guastallo Fellowship in 1992. In 2000–2003, he served as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

