IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

1603

Nonlinear Programming Approaches to Decoding Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Kai Yang, Student Member, IEEE, Jon Feldman, and Xiaodong Wang, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We consider the decoding problem for low-density parity-check codes, and apply nonlinear programming methods. This extends previous work using linear programming (LP) to decode linear block codes. First, a multistage LP decoder based on the branch-and-bound method is proposed. This decoder makes use of the maximum-likelihood-certificate property of the LP decoder to refine the results when an error is reported. Second, we transform the original LP decoding formulation into a box-constrained quadratic programming form. Efficient linear-time parallel and serial decoding algorithms are proposed and their convergence properties are investigated. Extensive simulation studies are performed to assess the performance of the proposed decoders. It is seen that the proposed multistage LP decoder outperforms the conventional sum-product (SP) decoder considerably for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with short to medium block length. The proposed box-constrained quadratic programming decoder has less complexity than the SP decoder and yields much better performance for LDPC codes with regular structure.
Index Terms—Branch-and-bound, integer programming, iterative algorithms, linear codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, linear programming (LP) decoding, quadratic programming.
I. INTRODUCTION
P OWERFUL error-control codes such as turbo codes [1] and low-density parity-check (LDPC) [2] codes have received a lot of interest in the last few years. This is because they show great promise to tightly achieve the Shannon capacity of a given channel [3], [4]. Most work in the literature use the sum-product (SP) (message-passing) decoder for the decoding of LDPC codes [5]. Although this decoding algorithm has demonstrated satisfying performances for LDPC codes with long block length, it may fail to converge or it may give poor results for LDPC codes with short block length or certain regular structure. In addition, the SP decoder is hard to analyze due to the heuristic nature of the message-passing techniques. Recently, new decoding algorithms based on linear programming (LP) have been proposed [6]–[8]. These algorithms run in time

polynomial in the codeword length and offer performance similar to the SP decoder.
The LP decoder is based on a LP relaxation of the original maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding problem. This solid theoretical foundation often makes the LP decoder simpler to analyze than the conventional message-passing decoders such as belief propagation. Indeed, the relationship between the LP decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding has been analyzed in [6], [9], and [10], which suggests the decision regions of the LP decoder seem to give a tight characterization of the decoding regions of the min-sum algorithm decoder. However, for most codes tested [6], the LP decoder has worse efficiency (especially at large block lengths) than belief propagation, with no gain in error-correcting performance.
In this paper, we extend the LP decoder by employing nonlinear programming methods to achieve better decoding performance or reduce the computational complexity. We make two contributions toward this end.
• We give a new decoder based on branch-and-bound techniques that takes advantage of the ML certificate property of LP decoding, that is, the LP decoder either outputs the ML codeword, or declares an error. The proposed decoder has better error-correcting performance than belief propagation (which we demonstrate with experiments on LDPC codes) at the expense of an increase in computational complexity.
• We also introduce a box-constrained quadratic programming (QP) decoder as an approximation of the LP decoder. Making use of the special LDPC structure of the problem, we present efficient linear-time decoding algorithms to solve this QP. The convergence properties of these algorithms are analyzed. Unlike the conventional iterative decoding algorithms such as the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [11], these algorithms are shown to converge under mild assumptions. In addition, it has much better performance than the SP decoder for LDPC codes with certain regular structures.

Manuscript received August 29, 2005; revised February 28, 2006 and April 20, 2006. This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant DMS 0244583, and in part by the U.S. Office of Naval Research under Grant N00014-03-1-0039. This paper was presented in part at the 43rd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Allerton House, Monticello, IL.
K. Yang and X. Wang are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA (e-mail: kyee@ee.columbia. edu; wangx@ee.columbia.edu).
J. Feldman is with the Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA (e-mail: jonfeld@ieor.columbia.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2006.879405

A. Related Work
• Branch-and-bound. The branch-and-bound method is a general framework for solving integer programming problems [13]. This method uses bounds on the optimal cost to avoid searching the entire set of feasible solutions. It has been considered for decoding LDPC codes under the binary erasure channel [15]. In this paper, we apply these techniques to decode LDPC codes over general binaryinput memoryless symmetric channels.

0733-8716/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1604

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

• Iterative methods. Several other iterative methods for solving the LDPC linear program have been proposed in the literature. These include the “tree-reweighted max-product” algorithm [16], as well as iterative subgradient methods [6], [7]. It is not immediately clear which of these methods is most practical, or how they compare with the methods we propose here. The answer may depend on the code family being used, among other factors. A comprehensive study comparing these methods would be interesting. In addition, we compare the performance of the proposed decoder with that of the standard SP decoder, which updates the values on nodes simultaneously. Different scheduling methods and other strategies [17], [18] may improve the performance of the decoder and it would be interesting to perform comparisons between these methods.

vector nodes are satisfied.

is codeword if and only if all check

B. Integer Programming Formulation of ML Decoding
In this section, we give the integer programming formulation introduced in [8] and [19] for the problem of ML decoding of a binary linear code. This leads directly to the LP formulation via relaxation, and will also be the basis for the decoders given in this paper.
We let denote the original codeword sent over the noisy channel, and denote the received corrupted codeword. Given
, the ML decoding problem is to obtain the codeword that maximizes the likelihood of observing under the channel model.
If we define as the log-likelihood ratio given by

B. Outline

(1)

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the ML decoding problem of any arbitrary linear code is formulated as an integer programming problem. In Section III, the LP decoder is reviewed. Multistage LP decoders are proposed. These decoders make use of the ML-certificate property of the LP decoder and iteratively refine the results obtained by the LP decoder. Furthermore, it is shown that these decoders also have the ML-certificate property. The box-constrained QP decoder is presented in Section IV. Efficient linear-time successive and parallel decoding algorithms are proposed to solve the box-constrained QP problem. We also analyze the convergence properties of the proposed algorithms in this section. The simulation results are presented in Section V.

we can define ML decoding as finding the codeword that mini-

mizes

. We may interpret as the “cost” of decoding

.

Consider the set of variable nodes

that are

neighbors of a given check node . Of interest are subsets

that index an even number of variable nodes; each such

subset corresponds to a “local codeword,” defined by setting

variable node

for each index

, and

oth-

erwise. For each in the set

,

we introduce an auxiliary integer variable , which is an in-

dicator for the local codeword associated with . As indicator

variables, the variables must satisfy the constraints

II. BACKGROUND

(2)

A. Graph Representation of Linear Code
Any binary linear code with parity-check matrix can be represented by a Tanner or factor graph , which is defined as

In addition, since each parity-check can only be satisfied with one particular even-sized subset of nodes in its neighborhood set to one, we must have

follows. Let

and

be indices

for the columns and rows of the parity-check matrix of the

(3)

code. With this notation, is a bipartite graph with independent

node sets

and

. The nodes

in are referred to as variable nodes and the nodes in are We also introduce an indicator for each variable node , in-

referred to as check nodes. All edges in have one endpoint dicating a bit value of 0 or 1. This indicator must be consistent

in and the other in . For each and , the edge

is with each local codeword that includes the code bit; hence, we

included in if and only if

. The neighborhood of a have the constraints

check node , denoted by

, is the set of variable nodes

that are incident to in . Similarly, we let

repre-

sent the set of check nodes incident to a particular variable node

(4)

in . We will often use

to denote the set of indices

such that

; similarly,

denotes the set of in-

dices for which

. Generally, we will use to de-

note variable nodes (code bits), and to denote parity-checks.

Imagine assigning to each variable node a value in {0,1}, rep-

Let be the convex hull of the set of points

such that

(2)–(4) hold. Hence, the integer programming formulation of

the ML decoding problem is given by

resenting the value of a particular code bit. A parity-check node

is satisfied if the collection of bits assigned to the variable

nodes in its neighborhood

have even parity. The binary

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACHES TO DECODING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1605

III. MULTISTAGE LP DECODING

A. Adaptive Branch-and-Bound Decoding

The hardness of solving the integer programming problem in

(5) arises from the integer constraints

. By re-

laxing these integer constraints to be the constraints

, [19] achieves a LP relaxation of the original problem, given

by

(6)

Proof: Since consists of integers, it must be a feasible

codeword. Assuming it is not the ML codeword, its objective

value must be bigger than the objective value of the ML

codeword. On the other hand, one of the LPs solved to form

the group must contain the ML codeword as a feasible point,

and thus there is a pseudocodeword in

with objective

value no bigger than . Therefore,

.

However, from the assumption, we have

. Hence, the

obtained codeword must be the ML codeword.

The branch-and-bound method adopts a tree searching

approach. It selects certain sets and generates the corre-

sponding group of pseudocodwords

. It continues until

the stopping criteria is met or the maximum number of itera-

tions has been reached. In each step of this algorithm, it calls

the subroutine on the set as follows.

Efficient polynomial-time algorithms (such as interior point methods) exist for this LP problem [13]
One advantage of LP decoding over the conventional iterative decoding algorithms is its ML-certificate property; i.e., it either outputs an ML codeword or reports an error. Based on this characteristic, we propose multistage LP decoding methods. Assume the output of the LP solver (for the variables) is

Procedure

.

• Maintain a group of pseudocodewords .

• For all

:

— Set

according to .

— Solve the LP in (7) to obtain a pseudocodeword , and

add to .

. If

, then this is the optimal so-

lution of the original integer programming problem; i.e., the ML codeword. Otherwise, let be the set of code bit indices

B. Constant Depth (CD) Decoder

such that

. The branch-and-bound methods [13] we

propose will search the space of possible settings to the bits in

a subset

, solving special LPs along the way in order to

trim the search space. For a particular , and a particular set-

ting to the bits in , we get the following LP:

Different searching strategies can obtained by selecting dif-

ferent

. We first consider the CD method. In this method,

the depth, i.e., is set as constant, while we change the el-

ements in . A subset

is selected after the first-stage

LP decoding. Then, we will pick up all

with

and solve the corresponding LPs. Since

, we have the

freedom to choose . Assume

. A natural heuristic is

to choose the bits for which the LP decoder gave the least in-

formation; i.e., we rank the bits in ascending order in terms of

and chooses the bits for which

is min-

imum. Our experiments show that this heuristic gives a distinct

advantage over an arbitrary choice of bits. Please note that

(7) we may choose these bits based on other criteria, such as those given in [12]. This type of decoder is called the ordered constant

Defining

, there are in total possible choices for depth (OCD) decoder for future reference.

(the relevant bits of) , and so LPs to solve for a particular

. By solving these LPs, we may obtain the ML codeword if

certain stopping criteria are met in the searching process. We

first give the following two definitions.

Definition 1—Pseudocodeword: Any feasible solution

of the LP problem in (6) is defined as a pseudocodeword of

the original decoding problem. Note here any codeword is a

pseudocodeword.

Definition 2—Group of Pseudocodewords: For a given

, and a particular setting of the bits

, we can obtain

a pseudocodeword by solving the LP problem stated in (7). The

group of pseudocodewords

is defined as the set of pseu-

docodewords obtained by solving all LP problems for the

given .

Proposition 1: A pseudocodeword in

must be an

Procedure

• Obtain the initial pseudocodeword using the LP decoder.

• Obtain the set by choosing the bits in for which

is minimum.

• Maintain a codeword candidate .

• For all

where

:

— Call the subroutine

to generate

the group of pseudocodewords

.

— Stop if the stopping criteria presented in Proposition 1

is met, and output the ML codeword. Otherwise, if the

minimum-cost codeword in

(call it ) has cost

less than , replace with .

• Output .

ML codeword if it consists of integers and its corresponding

objective value is less than or equal to the objective values of all Since

and

, this algorithm solves

other pseudocodewords in the same group.

LPs in the worst case.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1606

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

Fig. 1. Graph illustration of the group of nodes and hypergroup of nodes.
C. Variable Depth (VD) Decoder

Our algorithm will try to find a hypergroup of nodes satisfying Proposition 2 by searching the tree in a breadth-first fashion, solving LPs along the way. Subtrees may be pruned if the pseudocodeword at the root of the subtree has higher cost than a codeword already found. If a pseudocodeword has lower cost, then its subtree may need to be explored in order to discover an appropriate hypergroup. In addition, similar to the CD decoder, an ordering operation considerably improve the performance of the proposed decoder. It is defined as ordered variable depth (OVD) decoder for future reference. We detail the steps of the algorithm below.

In the VD method, we increase step by step. After the

first stage of LP decoding, as before, we choose the bits for

which the LP decoder gave the least information. These bits Procedure (depth )

constitute the set .

As shown in Fig. 1, we create a depth- tree of nodes, each

node representing a partial setting of the bits. The root, at depth

zero, corresponds to setting none of the bits. A node at depth

has settings for the first bits (the ones for which the LP decoder

gave the least information). In general, each node at depth has

two children and at depth , corresponding to the two

settings of the

.

Each node corresponds to a pseudocodeword obtained by

solving the LP in (7) where the setting vector is made

consistent with the setting of the node. Note that the root of

the tree corresponds to the pseudocodeword obtained by the

original LP decoder. We also observe that the objective value of

a pseudocodeword on a node must be less than or equal to the

objective value of all pseudocodewords on nodes contained

in the subtree rooted at ; this is because nodes in the subtree

represent restricted versions of the LP at the node , and so their

• Maintain a first-in–first-out (FIFO) queue, and a

minimum-cost codeword .

• Obtain the initial pseudocodeword using the LP decoder.

Choose the bits in for which

is minimum.

Use these bits to construct the depth- tree of nodes

corresponding to partial settings of bits, as described.

• Initialize the queue to contain only the root of the tree,

and initialize to the codeword .

• While the queue is not empty:

— Remove the node from the front of the queue.

— Solve the LP corresponding to the node to obtain the

pseudocodeword .

— If the cost of is less than the cost of :

• If is a codeword, set equal to . Otherwise, if

the depth of is less than , put and at the end

of the queue.

solutions can only increase in value.

We now give some definitions relating to the stopping crite- The FIFO queue ensures that the tree is explored breadth-

rion of the VD decoding algorithm.

first. Note that the algorithm implicitly maintains a hypergroup

Definition 3—Group of Nodes: The set of nodes at the same of nodes, consisting of those in the queue, together with the

depth level of the tree is defined as a group of nodes.

“pruned” nodes; i.e., those nodes that were removed from the

Definition 4—Hypergroup of Nodes: A set of nodes is defined queue, but whose children were not placed into the queue in the

as a hypergroup of nodes if there exists a group of nodes in the final step of the algorithm.

subtrees rooted at these nodes, i.e., the children of certain nodes We need to solve

LPs in this variable-depth algo-

in this set together with other nodes in this set constitute a group rithm in the worst case. There exist many techniques in practice

of nodes, as shown in Fig. 1.

to reduce the complexity of the algorithm. For example, since

Definition 5—Hypergroup of Pseudocodewords: A set of all the LPs share the same constraints as the original LP, we can

pseudocodewords that corresponds to a hypergroup of nodes is use the solution of the original LP as the initial point of the mod-

defined as hypergroup of pseudocodewords.

ified LP so that less iterations are needed to solve the modified

Proposition 2: A pseudocodeword must be an ML code- LP. In addition, the depth-first or hybrid methods can be devel-

word if the following two conditions are satisfied.

oped in manners similar to those proposed in [13].

1) This pseudocodeword consists of integers.

The ML codeword can be obtained if we set and to be

2) It belongs to a hypergroup and the objective value of this in the multistage decoders. In addition, the proposed multistage

pseudocodeword is less than or equal to the objective LP decoding algorithm can be regarded as a “noise adaptive”

values of all other pseudocodewords in this hypergroup. algorithm: one whose running time is a function of the noise in

Proof: Since consists of integers, it must be a feasible the channel. When there is little or no noise in the channel, the

codeword. In addition, we must be able to find a group of pseu- first relaxation will usually be successful. As the noise increases,

docodewords that lies in the subtrees rooted at the nodes in more stages are needed to obtain the ML codeword. Although

this hypergroup. Because the objective value of the obtained its worst case complexity is the same as that of the ML decoder,

codeword is no bigger than the objective value of other pseu- which needs to search all the possible codeword, its average

docodewords in the hypergroup, its objective value must be no complexity is much lower, especially in the high signal-to-noise

bigger than that of the pseudocodewords in the corresponding ratio region.

group of pseudocodewords (by the subtree property explained Finally, in some sense the proposed methods are exploring

above). Hence, from proposition 1, we know it must be a ML the “sequential decoding tree” using the LP value as our “pri-

codeword.

ority metric.” Thus, the proposed multistage LP decoder can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACHES TO DECODING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1607

regarded as one kind of sequential decoding scheme [14]. However, since the strength of the lower bound that the LP gives on the ML codeword is not well understood, it is not immediately clear how to compare the proposed branch-and-bound method with the sequential decoding scheme. It would be interesting to carry out a comprehensive study comparing these methods. In addition, there exist many algorithms which and solve the LP problems exactly or approximately [13]. How to devise efficient algorithms according to the special structure of the LP problem is an interesting problem deserves future research efforts.

IV. BOX-CONSTRAINED QUADRATIC PROGRAMMING DECODER

Although there exist polytime algorithms such as the interior

point method [13] for general LP problems, their complexity

may become unacceptable in practice for real-time decoding,

especially with large block length. Unconstrained QP decoders

are introduced in [10] as an approximation of the LP decoder.

The “hard” constraints of the original LP are moved to the ob-

jective function by employing the Lagrange dual method. The

QP solution converges to the solution of LP when the dual factor

increased; however, since there are different Lagrange dual fac-

tors corresponding to different groups of constraints [10], it may

become difficult in practice to choose proper dual factors to

strike a balance between different groups of constraints. Fur-

thermore, it is unclear how to solve these problems for practical

decoding problems with long codeword lengths. In this section,

we present a box-constrained QP relaxation of the ML decoding

problem. Only one dual factor is employed to move part of the

constraints in (5) to the objective value. In addition, very effi-

cient linear-time serial and parallel iterative algorithms are pro-

posed to solve the resulting QP. It is shown by both theory and

simulation studies that these algorithms converge to the optimal

solution under mild assumptions.

The constraints in (5) can be divided into two categories. The

constraints in (2) are relatively simple, but make this problem

an integer programming problem, which is hard to solve. We

will keep this constraint and employ the Lagrange method to

move the other two constraint sets to the objective function.

Then, we relax the integer constraints (2) to be box constraints

. For simpler notation, we define

.

Constraints in (3) can be represented as

, where

satisfies

if corresponds to with otherwise

in (3) (8)

where is the dual factor satisfying

. The role of the dual

factor is to replace part of the “hard” constraints in the original

problem by “soft” constraints in the objective function, which

results in efficient iterative algorithms shown in the following

parts.

Proposition 3: When

, the solution of (10) is equal

to the solution of (9).

Proof: When

, the solution of (10) must satisfy

. Since

, the solution of (10) must be the

solution of (9).

Relaxing the integer constraints, we obtain a box-constrained

QP problem, given by

(11)

where

and

.

Proposition 4: When

, the solution of (11) is equal

to the solution of the LP decoder.

The proof of this theorem is similar to proposition 3 and is

thus omitted.

The matrix is positive semidefinite and thus the objective

function in (11) is convex for the vector . In addition, the con-

straint set of (11) is the Cartesian product of one-dimensional

(1-D) constraints

. We can therefore make use of the

special structure of this problem to derive efficient algorithms to

solve it. Assuming the length of the vector is , the original

-dimensional minimization can be decomposed into 1-D

minimization problems. The th

1-D minimization

problem is given by

(12)

Other variables

, are set as constants in the th

1-D optimization problem. These 1-D minimization prob-

lems can be performed successively or in parallel, resulting in

the nonlinear Gaussian–Seidel and Jacobi methods [20]. How-

ever, these algorithms may converge quite slowly in practice. In

this paper, we propose the projected successive overrelaxation

method and the parallel gradient project method; these algo-

rithms generalize the Gaussian–Seidel and Jacobi methods and

converge much faster if proper weight factors are taken.

A. Projected Successive Overrelaxation Method

Furthermore, if we assign a distinct for each

, , The successive overrelaxation method has been employed

with

, we can rewrite the constraints in to solve unconstrained optimization or linear systems, and

(4) as

, where

, and

converges much faster than the linear Gaussian–Seidel method

if corresponds to in (4)

if corresponds to in (4)

(9)

otherwise

We employ the Lagrange method to move the first constraint in this problem to the objective value, given by

[21]. Here, we propose a projected successive overralxation (PSOR) method to solve the problem in (11), which corresponds to a weight-controlled multistage successive decoding scheme. In this multistage decoder, the estimated data vector is obtained bit by bit successively. The data estimations in the previous stage are sent to the next stage as the initial estimation

value.

Denote

as the solution vector after the

(10) stage decoding. As shown in Fig. 2, this PSOR method is per-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1608

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

.

Therefore, the sequence is monotone nonincreasing. The se-

quence

is bounded below and the function is

differential and continuous. The constraint set is a closed

set. As a result, the sequence must converge to a real number

. We only need to show that it minimizes over the

constraint set. Based on Theorem 6, the limit point of the

sequence generated by Gauss–Seidel method will minimize

over . Here, we will show is also a limit point of

the sequence generated by Gauss–Seidel method. Suppose

is the initial point for both algorithms.

Since

, we have

. We divide all

elements in the vector into two categories. The first contains

those in (0,1). The second contains those in {0,1}. Denote the

results obtained by Gaussian–Seidel and PSOR methods before

projection as and , respectively. We can obtain

Fig. 2. Graph illustration of the PSOR method.

(15)

formed in two steps. In the first step, the tentative decision bit is obtained by
(13) where is the weight factor. The second step for this algorithm is to project the value to the interval [0,1], using

For each element in the first category, because

and

is the stationary point, we have

. Therefore,

. For each element in the second category, if

,

we can get

, because

,

.

That is to say

. Similarly, we have

if

. Therefore, is also the stationary point

for the Gaussian–Seidel method. All the above discussions show

that the sequence generated by the PSOR method when

is sure to converge to a limit point generated by the

nonlinear Gauss–Seidel method. Based on Theorem 6, this value

must minimize over . Note there may be multiple optimal

solutions for (11), because is positive semidefinite.

if

B. Parallel Gradient Projection Method

if

(14) The proposed PSOR method has to be performed succes-

otherwise

Note this algorithm is exactly the nonlinear Gaussian–Seidel

algorithm proposed in [20] if

.

Proposition 5: The weight-controlled successive decoding

scheme converges to a global optimal solution of problem in

(11) provided

.

To prove this, we will need the following result from [20].

sively which may lead to longer delay. Alternatively, we pro-

pose a parallel gradient projection method. This algorithm cor-

responds to a weight-controlled parallel decoder. We define

as the solution obtained after the th iteration for the QP problem

proposed in (11). The initial value is the all-ones vector. The so-

lution obtained after the

iteration can be described as

follows:

Theorem 6: [20, Prop. 3.9] (Convergence of the nonlinear

Gauss–Seidel algorithm) Suppose that is a function which is

(16)

continuously differentiable and convex on the set . The con- where denotes projection on the constraint set, as in (14).

straint set is the Cartesian product of each element and The parameters and are step sizes. In this problem, we set

is the closed convex subset of . Furthermore, suppose that for equal to 1 and equal to . Using these values, we will com-

each , is strictly convex function of when the values of pute the mean square error between and . The algorithm

the other components of are held constant, where is the di- will stop when the error is below a prespecified threshold value

mension of . Assume the sequence generated by the nonlinear or a maximum number of iterations have been reached. The con-

Gauss–Seidel algorithm is well defined. Then, every limit point vergence properties of this weight-controlled nonlinear parallel

of this sequence minimizes over .

decoding scheme are presented in the following parts. Other

Proof: [Proposition 5] (Sketch) In our problem,

parallel-type algorithms such as the scaled gradient projection

, and the constraint set is the Cartesian product method, and two-metric method [20] can also be applied to this

of constraints

. Denote

problem. However, even though they converge much faster in

as the solution we obtain after the iteration of the theory, their implementations may be too complicated for prac-

PSOR method, where stands for the element. Let tical systems.

. Because

Proposition 7: The weight-controlled parallel decoding

and the diagonal elements of the matrix is positive, we obtain scheme is sure to converge to a global optimal solution of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACHES TO DECODING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1609

problem in (11) provided

, where

is the

spectral radius (biggest eigenvalue) of the matrix.

In order to prove this proposition, we first present the fol-

lowing theorem in [20].

Theorem 8: Assume is continuously differentiable func-

tion. Let be a sequence generated by the gradient projec-

tion method with

and

for all . Assume for some

constant

, we have

(17)
for any and , where is the Euclidean norm. Then, if , every limit point of is stationary.
Proof: [Proposition 7] In our problem, it is easy to show that

(18)

Based on Theorem 8, if

, the sequence gen-

erated by this method is sure to converge to a stationary point.

Since

, similar to the approach employed in the proof of

Proposition 5, we can prove this stationery point must be a limit

point of the Gaussian–Seidel algorithm, and thus it is a global

optimal solution of (11).

We note here that the sparsity of the LDPC code can be ex-

ploited to speed up decoding time. Specifically, since

, is a symmetric matrix. Furthermore, since we use

the auxiliary integer variables in the formulation, the ma-

trix may have more columns than rows. Denote and ,

respectively, as the left and right degree of the factor graph of a

regular LDPC code. and are the number of rows and columns

of the corresponding check matrix. The number of columns of

is

, where

. On the other hand, due

to the special structure of the matrix , the number of nonzero

elements in each row of is bounded by

which is a constant independent of the code length and is much

smaller than

. Hence, the operations in (13) and (16) can

be modified to contain only the nonzero terms in the equations.

In most cases, this will simplify the operations considerably.

Fig. 3. WER performance of the LP, SP, and CD decoders for a random LDPC code, both m and g are set as 1. Code length is 60, the rate is 1/4, and the left and right degree of the corresponding Tanner graph is 3 and 4, respectively. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding errors in the simulations.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

Random LDPC Code: We consider data transmission over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel using a random LDPC code. The length of the LDPC code word is 60. The left degree is 3 and the right degree is 4. The LP problem is solved

Fig. 4. WER performance of the LP and OCD decoders for a random LDPC code with different m and g. Code length is 60, the rate is 1/4, and the left and right degree of the corresponding Tanner graph is 3 and 4, respectively. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding errors in the simulations.

by the embedded optimization function in MATLAB. In the next

section, larger scale problems are solved by COIN-OR [22], an

open source program for solving optimization problems. The significantly improve the performance of the decoder even when

maximum number of iterations in the SP decoder is set as 100. only one additional stage is performed. On the other hand, if the

Fig. 3 shows the word error rate (WER) performance of the ordering operation is not employed, i.e., we randomly select the

LP decoder, the belief propagation algorithm and the branch- bits for the branch-and-bound operations, the performance of

and-bound decoders. Both and are the set containing the the branch-and-bound decoder may degrade considerably.

first (least reliable) bit in , i.e.,

The performance of the VD decoder with different and

. Hence, one additional stage of LP decoding is performed in are presented in Fig. 4. The decoder performance can be im-

the worst case. The LP decoder and the BP decoder offer very proved by increasing the size of and . However, the cor-

similar performance, but the branch-and-bound approach can responding complexity increases. In practice, we can determine

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1610

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

Fig. 5. WER performance of the LP, SP, OCD (m = 2, g = 10), and OVD decoders (g = 7) for a random LDPC code. Code length is 60, the rate is 1/4, and the left and right degree of the corresponding Tanner graph is 3 and 4, respectively. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding errors in the simulations.

Fig. 7. Convergence behavior of projected successive overrelaxation method for the product code. Code length is 4 = 1024, the rate is (3=4) = 0:237, and E =N is 4 dB. The average MSE is obtained by averaging over 100 realizations.

branch-and-bound approach on the most unreliable bits. Thus,

it can offer better performance.

The performance of the LP, SP and VD decoders for an LDPC

code with longer block size are shown in Fig. 6. It is seen that

the proposed branch-and-bound method outperforms the SP de-

coder in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region even when

the block length of the LDPC code is more than 1000. Another

observation is that the OVD decoders fall faster than the SP de-

coder in the waterfall region. This property may be used in cer-

tain applications where very low WER is needed.

Product Code: In general, the LP decoder is inferior to

the SP decoder for long LDPC code decoding. This is not

surprising because the short cycle in the Tanner graph tends to

diminish when the length of the code increases. However, SP

may give very poor performance for certain codes with regular

structure. Here, we consider the product type LDPC code built

from simple parity-check codes. Typically, product code is

decoded by BCJR-type method ([23, Alg. 1]) or SP decoding

algorithm ([23, Alg. 2]). In addition, the SP decoder typically

Fig. 6. WER performance of the LP, SP, and OVD decoders (g = 10) for a random LDPC code. Code length is 1024, the rate is 1/4, and the left and right degree of the corresponding Tanner graph is 3 and 4, respectively. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding errors in the simulations.

outperforms the BCJR-type method because it only passes extrinsic information between the decoders in each dimension [23].
A product code is a relatively large code built from smaller

codeword blocks [23]. Although they have some similarities to

and for specific applications to strike a balance between the turbo codes which have been incorporated into recent standards

decoder performance and complexity.

for future cellular communication, product codes have different

Fig. 5 compares the performance of the OCD and OVD de- structure and characteristics. Their performance can be within

coders. As discussed in Section III, the OVD and OCD approach 1 dB of the Shannon limit [23]. We consider a five-dimension

need to solve

and

LPs, respectively, in the product code built from 4-bit single parity-check code in the

worst case. Hence, the OVD and OCD decoders with the con- simulations [23].

figurations shown in this figure have similar complexity. It is We compare the convergence behavior of the PSOR method

observed that the OVD decoder outperforms the OCD decoder. and the parallel gradient projection method in Figs. 7 and 8,

Because of the ordering operation, the OVD decoder applies the respectively. The parameter is set as 30. The length of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACHES TO DECODING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1611

Q Fig. 8. Convergence performance of parallel gradient projection method for the
product code. Code length is 4 = 1024, the rate is (3=4) = 0:237, 2=( ) is 0.00158, and E =N is 4 dB. The average MSE is obtained by averaging over
100 realizations.

Fig. 10. WER performance of the LP and QP decoder with different Lagrange
dual factors for the product code. Code length is 4 = 1024, and the rate is
(3=4) = 0:237. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding
errors in the simulations.

for the parallel gradient projection method with different weight

factors. It is seen that the solution oscillates when is bigger

than

, which has been indicated by proposition 7. In ad-

dition, it is seen that the parallel gradient projection method con-

verges much slower than the PSOR method, because the PSOR

method makes use of the updated information. Other methods

such as the Newton’s methods [20] can also be applied to accel-

erate the convergence speed of the algorithm.

The WER performance of the QP decoder after different

number of iterations for a product code are shown in Fig. 9. The

PSOR method is employed to solve the QP problem. It is shown

that the PSOR method converges after only seven iterations and

has much better performance than the SP decoder. In addition,

since Q is a sparse matrix, only 11 additions or subtractions are

required averagely to update the tentative decision bit in (13)

in each iteration for a product code consisting of 1024 bits. It

is much simpler than the SP decoder, in which we may need to

compute the complicated hyperbolic tangent function.

Fig. 9. WER performance of the QP and SP decoders with different number
of iterations for a product code. PSOR method is employed to solve the QP
problem.  is equal to 2, E =N is 4 dB, code length is 4 = 1024, and the rate is (3=4) = 0:237. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding
errors in the simulations.

In Figs. 10 and 11, the performance of the LP, BP, and QP decoders with different Lagrange dual factors is presented. We also present a lower bound of WER performance of the ML decoder by making using of the ML-certificate property of the LP decoder. This lower bound is obtained by counting only the de-

coding errors of the LP decoder which consist of integers in

code is

and its rate is

. In addition, the simulations. It is shown that the SP decoder gives very poor

we have

and

is 2. The average performance due to the regular structure of the code. The per-

mean squared error (MSE) between the obtained solution and formance of the box constrained QP decoder will improve with

the exact solution is calculated by averaging over 100 realiza- the increase of the dual factor and eventually approaches that of

tions. It is seen in Fig. 7 that the PSOR algorithm converges to the LP decoder, which is consistent with Proposition 3. In ad-

the original codeword when is less or equal to 2. The converge dition, the LP decoder achieve the ML lower bound of this spe-

speed increases with . However, when is bigger than 2, the cial kind of code, which is quite interesting and needs further

solution may diverge, which is consistent with the theory pre- theoretic analysis. Finally, as shown in [23], the SP decoder in

sented in Proposition 5. Fig. 8 shows the convergence behavior the log domain needs multiplications, additions, and table

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1612

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 24, NO. 8, AUGUST 2006

Fig. 11. WER performance of the SP, QP, and LP decoders for the product code. Code length is 4 = 1024 and the rate is (3=4) = 0:237. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding errors in the simulations. The lower bound of ML decoder is obtained by counting only the decoding errors of the LP decoder which consist of integers.

lookups (for tanh and arctanh) in each iterations. While the pro-

posed box-constrained QP decoder only needs

additions

and projections in each iteration. Since the multiplication and

table lookups are typically more complex than the projections,

the complexity of the proposed QP decoder is less than that of

the SP decoder.

VI. CONCLUSION
We considered the decoding of general LDPC codes by nonlinear programming techniques. For very short LDPC codes, we proposed a multistage LP decoder to refine the results when an error is reported. These multistage LP decoders outperformed the SP decoder for short-length LDPC codes at the cost of additional complexity. Second, we proposed a box-constrained QP decoder. Very efficient serial and parallel decoding algorithms are derived and their convergence properties are discussed. The proposed decoder can be used to decode LDPC codes with short to medium block size or regular structure.

[5] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[6] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[7] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Using linear programming-based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2002. [Online]. Available: http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/~wainwrig/#publications
[8] ——, “Using linear programming to decode linear codes,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Mar. 2003. [Online]. Available: http://www. eecs.berkeley.edu/~wainwrig/#publications
[9] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82.
[10] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Oct. 2004, pp. 991–996.
[11] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufman, 1988.
[12] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, “Belief-propagation with information correction: Improved near maximum-likelihood decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Oct. 2004, p. 343.
[13] D. Bertsimas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Introduction to Linear Optimization. Belmont, MA: Athena, 1997.
[14] V. Sorokine and F. R. Kschischang, “A sequential decoder for linear block codes with a variable bias-term metric,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 410–416, Jan. 1998.
[15] H. P. Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, Mar. 2004.
[16] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “MAP estimation via agreement on (hyper)trees: Message-passing and linear programming approaches,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2002. [Online]. Available: http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/~wainwrig/#publications
[17] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding Communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[18] ——, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[19] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[20] D. Bertsimas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Parallel and Distributed Computation: Numerical Methods. Belmont, MA: Athena, 1997.
[21] G. Strang, Introduction to Linear Algebra. Cambridge, MA: Wellesley-Cambridge, 1998.
[22] COIN-OR Computational Infrastructure for Operations Research. [Online]. Available: http://www.coin-or.org/
[23] D. M. Rankin and T. A. Gulliver, “Single parity check product codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1354–1362, Aug. 2001.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

Kai Yang (S’02) received the B.E. degree in electronic information engineering from the Radio Department, Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2000 and the M.S. degree in optimization and numerical methods from the Singapore-MIT Alliance, National University of Singapore, in 2002. He is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree at the Electrical Engineering Department, Columbia University, New York.
He was a Visiting Student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the Summer of 2001. From 2002 to 2004, he was an Associate Scientist in the Centre for Remote Imaging, Sensing and Processing, National University of Singapore, conducting research in signal processing and pattern recognition. His general research interest falls into the areas of signal processing, optimization, wireless communication, networking, and artificial intelligence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACHES TO DECODING LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

1613

Jon Feldman received the A.B. degree in computer science from Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, in 1997, and the S.M. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, in 2000 and 2003, respectively.
In 2005, he joined the research staff at Google, New York. His research interests include algorithms, coding theory, and mechanism design.
Dr. Feldman received an NSF Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship, in 2003, and conducted this fellowship in the Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York.

Xiaodong Wang (S’98–M’98–SM’04) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and applied mathematics (Highest Honor) from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 1992, the M.S. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, in 1995, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 1998.
From July 1998 to December 2001, he was on the faculty in the Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University. In January 2002, he joined the faculty of the Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University. Among his publications is a recent book Wireless Communication Systems: Advanced Techniques for Signal Reception(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2003). His research interests fall in the general areas of computing, signal processing, and communications. His current research interests include wireless communications, statistical signal processing, and genomic signal processing. Dr. Wang received the 1999 NSF CAREER Award, and the 2001 IEEE Communications Society and Information Theory Society Joint Paper Award. He currently serves as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:43:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

