2020 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW) | 978-1-7281-5962-1/20/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ITW46852.2021.9457630

2020 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

Concentrated Stopping Set Design for Coded Merkle Tree: Improving Security Against Data Availability Attacks in Blockchain Systems

Debarnab Mitra, Lev Tauz and Lara Dolecek Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
email: debarnabucla@ucla.edu, levtauz@ucla.edu, dolecek@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract—In certain blockchain systems, light nodes are clients that download only a small portion of the block. Light nodes are vulnerable to data availability (DA) attacks where a malicious node hides an invalid portion of the block from the light nodes. Recently, a technique based on erasure codes called Coded Merkle Tree (CMT) was proposed by Yu et al. that enables light nodes to detect a DA attack with high probability. The CMT is constructed using LDPC codes for fast decoding but can fail to detect a DA attack if a malicious node hides a small stopping set of the code. To combat this, Yu et al. used well-studied techniques to design random LDPC codes with high minimum stopping set size. Although effective, these codes are not necessarily optimal for this application. In this paper, we demonstrate a more specialized LDPC code design to improve the security against DA attacks. We achieve this goal by providing a deterministic LDPC code construction that focuses on concentrating stopping sets to a small group of variable nodes rather than only eliminating stopping sets. We design these codes by modifying the Progressive Edge Growth algorithm into a technique called the entropy-constrained PEG (EC-PEG) algorithm. This new method demonstrates a higher probability of detecting DA attacks and allows for good codes at short lengths.
I. INTRODUCTION
Blockchain systems typically have two types of nodes: i) Full nodes - they store the full blockchain ledger and can validate transactions by operating on the entire ledger, ii) Light nodes - they do not store the entire ledger and hence cannot validate transactions. Light nodes are implemented using the Simplified Payment Verification (SPV) technique [2]: For each block, a Merkle tree is constructed using the transactions in the block as leaf nodes, and the Merkle root is stored at the light nodes. Using the Merkle root, light nodes can verify the inclusion of transactions in a block via a Merkle proof [2] but not its correctness.
Networks in which light nodes are connected to a majority of malicious full nodes are susceptible to data availability (DA) attacks [1], [3] where a malicious full node generates a block with invalid transactions, publishes a Merkle root that satisfies the Merkle proof (thus allowing light nodes to successfully verify the inclusion of the transactions in the block), and hides the invalid portion of the block so that honest full nodes are unable to validate the block and notify the light nodes of the malicious behaviour. Light nodes can independently detect a DA attack if an anonymous request for a portion of the block is rejected by the full node that generates the block. As such, light nodes can randomly sample the block, i.e., randomly request for different portions of the block

transactions, to detect a DA attack. The detection, however, becomes increasingly unlikely as the block size increases since a malicious node can hide a very small section. To alleviate this problem, authors in [3] introduced the method of coding the block using erasure codes such that it forces the adversary to hide a larger portion of the block which, then, can be detected with a high probability by the light nodes using random sampling. Work in [1] extends the idea into a technique called Coded Merkle Tree (CMT) that uses LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) codes to encode each layer of the Merkle tree. The advantage of an LDPC code is that it enables the use of a polynomial time peeling decoder at the full nodes to decode the coded symbols.
A stopping set of an LDPC code is a set of variable nodes (VNs) such that every check node (CN) connected to this set is connected to it at least twice. The peeling decoder fails to fully decode a layer of the CMT if the malicious node hides coded symbols corresponding to a stopping set of the LDPC code used in the layer. Since the malicious node can hide the smallest stopping set of the LDPC code, the probability of failure (at a particular layer) for the light nodes to detect a DA attack using random sampling depends on the stopping ratio (size of the smallest stopping set divided by the codeword length [1]) of the LDPC code.
The CMT can be constructed using any LDPC code. In [1], authors used codes from a well studied random LDPC ensemble that guarantees a certain stopping ratio with high probability. Despite the high stopping set ratio, these codes were originally designed for other types of channels (i.e., BSC) and are not necessarily optimal for this specific application. In this paper, we provide a more specialized LDPC code design to significantly lower the probability of light node failure. We accomplish this goal by providing a deterministic LDPC code construction that focuses on concentrating stopping sets to a small set of VNs based on the Progressive Edge Growth algorithm [4] which we term as the entropy-constrained PEG (EC-PEG) algorithm. Intuitively, a greedy sampling strategy can now be used by the light nodes where they sample this small set of VNs to guarantee that a large number of stopping sets are being sampled. We shall demonstrate that this novel construction provides a much lower probability of light nodes failing to detect a DA attack than for an LDPC code chosen from a random ensemble. Additionally, using a deterministic algorithm, we can design LDPC codes for small to moderate

978-1-7281-596A2u-th1o/r2iz1e/d$l3ic1en.0se0d ©us2e 0lim2i1tedIEtoE:EYonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

blocklengths where random ensembles typically have trouble providing good codes. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we provide preliminaries and describe the system model. In Section III, we provide motivation for our design method. The description of the EC-PEG algorithm is provided in Section IV. Finally, we present our simulation results in Section V and concluding remarks in Section VI.

II. PRELIMINARIES AND SYSTEM MODEL

Similar to the Merkle tree introduced in [2], a CMT is

constructed by applying an LDPC code to each layer of the

Merkle tree before hashing the layer to generate its parent

layer. While we focus on the relevant issues of the CMT,

specific details regarding the CMT can be found in [1]. We

consider a blockchain network with full nodes and light nodes,

where only full nodes can produce new blocks. Light nodes

do not store the entire block but store the root of the CMT

and use it to verify block inclusions via Merkle proofs [1]. We

also assume that each light node is honest and is connected to

at least one honest full node. However, it may be connected

to a majority of malicious full nodes.

In this paper, we consider one layer of the CMT and assume

that it has n coded symbols generated using an LDPC code

with a binary parity check matrix H (having n columns).

Techniques developed for this layer can be applied to all

layers. A DA attack occurs when a malicious node 1) produces

a block that satisfies the Merkle proof for the light nodes to

accept it as a valid block, and 2) hides a small portion of the

coded symbols, corresponding to a stopping set of H, such

that honest full nodes are not able to decode the block fully

using a hash aware peeling decoder [1]. The goal of the CMT

is to prevent light nodes from accepting a block whose CMT

layer cannot be decoded by a full node. To accomplish this

goal, light nodes anonymously request coded symbols from

the block producer according to some sampling strategy and

accept the block if all the requested symbols are returned.

The malicious producer only returns coded symbols that are

not hidden from the system. Thus, a light node fails to detect

a DA attack if the samples requested are not hidden.

In this paper, we are concerned with the probability of

a light node failing to detect a DA attack. Let pf (s, µ) be the probability of failure for a given H and some sampling

strategy when the light node uses s samples and the mali-

cious node hides a stopping set with µ VNs. In the CMT

in [1], random sampling with replacement is employed and

pf (s, µ)

=

(1

−

µ n

)s.

For

a

given

s,

pf (s, µ)

is

maximized

if

the malicious node hides the smallest stopping set of H. In

[1], the LDPC code is chosen from a random code ensemble that, with high probability, has a stopping ratio β∗. Thus, the probability of failure becomes (1 − β∗)s, w.h.p.. The system is less secure when the stopping ratio of H is less than β∗,

which happens with a large probability at short block lengths.

To improve security, we seek to provide a deterministic LDPC

code construction and an associated sampling strategy that still

results in a low probability of failure pf (s, µ) for small µ. For

the rest of the paper, we assume that the malicious node is

unaware of the sampling strategy used by the light nodes and for a given size of the stopping set µ, it hides a randomly chosen stopping set of size µ.

Remark 1. In this work, compared to [1], we focus on a new design of the constituent LDPC code used for the construction of the CMT. As a result, performance metrics and their orderoptimal solutions provided in [1] are not compromised. In particular: i) the header remains as the CMT root and its size does not grow with the blocklength; ii) the decoding complexity of the hash-aware peeling decoder is still linear in the blocklength; iii) the incorrect coding proof size for our codes is empirically shown to be similar to codes from [1].

For a parity check matrix H with n columns V =

{v1, v2, . . . , vn}, let G denote the Tanner graph (TG) representation of H. We interchangeably refer to vi as the ith VN

in G and rows of H as CNs in G. For a set S, let |S| denote

its cardinality. Let gmin denote the girth of G. HQ and HQ,

Q ⊆ V, represent submatrices of H with columns {vi|vi ∈ Q}

and {vi|vi ∈ V \ Q}, respectively, and all non-zero rows. We

say that HQ has a cycle of length (called an -cycle) iff the

induced subgraph of G by the VNs in Q has an -cycle. For

a cycle (stopping set) in the G, we say that a VN v touches

the cycle (stopping set) iff v is part of the cycle (stopping

set). The set S = {vi1 , vi2 , . . . , vis } ⊆ V is a sample set if light nodes sample the VNs {vi1 , vi2 , . . . , vis }. We define the weight of a stopping set as the no. of VNs touching it. A

stopping set is hidden by a malicious node if all VNs present

in it are hidden. For any stopping set of weight µ hidden by the

malicious node, let Pf (S, µ) be the failure probability of light

nodes with the sample set S. For p = (p1, p2 . . . , pt) such

that pi ≥ H(p) =

0,
t
i=1

t i=1

pi

pi log(pi

= 1, we ) (assume

define that 0

the log

entropy 0 = 0).

function

III. DESIGN IDEA: STOPPING SET CONCENTRATION

In this section, we motivate our novel design idea of concentrating stopping sets to improve light node detection of DA attacks. It was shown in [5] that for LDPC codes with no degree one VNs, stopping sets are made up of cycles. Since working with stopping sets directly is generally computationally difficult, we focus on concentrating cycles. It is known that codes with irregular VN degree distributions are prone to small stopping sets. Thus, we consider VN degree regular LDPC codes of VN degree dv ≥ 3. We call such codes dv-reg LDPC codes.

Definition 1. Let Σ(dv, g) denote the minimum weight possible for a stopping set that only has cycles of length ≥ g and
all VNs have degree dv. Thus, in a dv-reg LDPC code, all stopping sets of weight < Σ(dv, g) have at least one cycle of length < g.

Closed form expressions for Σ(dv, 6), Σ(dv, 8) and a lower
bound for Σ(dv, g), g ≥ 10, are provided in [6], [7], e.g., Σ(dv, 10) ≥ 1+d2v. Next, we consider the following definition of a sample set followed by an immediate lemma:

Definition 2. A g-sample set Sg is a sample set such that HSg has no cycles of length < g.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

Lemma 1. For a dv-reg LDPC code, if light nodes sample a g-sample set Sg, then for all stopping sets of weight µ ≤ Σ(dv, g) − 1, Pf (Sg, µ) = 0.

Proof. The result follows from Definitions 1 and 2.

From the above lemma, if the sample set of the light node
includes a g-sample set, it fails only if the malicious node
hides a stopping set of weight ≥ Σ(dv, g) that can be caught using further random sampling. Clearly, we wish to use the
smallest g-sample set to improve efficiency, but this smallest
set is computationally hard to determine. Instead, we use a greedy method to find a g-sample set Sga of small enough size that is shown to perform well.
Let Cg denote a set that touches all g-cycles obtained using the following greedy method. For g = gmin, initialize Cgmin = ∅, otherwise Cg = ∪gmin≤g <g Cg . Purge all the VNs in Cg from G. Then, select a VN v at random from the VNs that
touch the maximum number of g-cycles in G. Add v to Cg, purge v from G, and repeat the process until no g-cycles are left in G. Our greedy g-sample set is Sga = Cg−2. A formal algorithm for the above can be found in [8, Appendix A].
Our goal is to design parity check matrices H that have small |Sga|. Let ζg = (ζ1g, ζ2g, . . . , ζng) be the VN-to-g-cycle distribution where ζig is the fraction of g-cycles touched by vi. Due to the construction of Sga, |Sga| is small if a majority of g -cycles, g < g, are touched by the same small subset
of VNs. This goal is achieved if for all g -cycles, g < g, distributions ζg are concentrated (i.e., have a high g -cycle
fraction) towards the same set of VNs. Later, we design the
EC-PEG algorithm that achieves concentrated distributions.

Definition 3. Let to-stopping set of

ssµ = weight

(ss1µ, ssµ2 , . . . µ distribution

,

ssnµ) where

be the ssiµ is

VNthe

fraction of stopping sets of weight µ touched by vi. Due to

Definition 1, by concentrating the distributions ζg for g < gc,

for some cycle length gc, we also concentrate ssµ, where

µ ≤ Σ(dv, gc) − 1.

The next lemma demonstrates that LDPC codes with concentrated ssµ results in a smaller probability of light node
failure when a malicious node randomly hides a stopping set of size µ and the light nodes use a sample set of size s.

Lemma 2. Let SSµ denote the set of all weight µ stopping sets in the LDPC code. If the malicious node picks a stopping set randomly from SSµ and hides it, the probability of failure at the light node pf (s, µ) using s samples and any sampling strategy satisfies pf (s, µ) ≥ 1 − maxS⊆V,|S|=s τ (S, µ), where τ (S, µ) is the fraction of stopping sets of weight µ touched by the sample set S. Let Sµopt = argmaxS⊆V,|S|=sτ (S, µ). The lower bound in the above equation is achieved when light nodes sample, with probability one, the set Sµopt.
Proof. Proof can be found in full paper [8, Appendix B].

According to the above lemma, for a fixed sampling size of
s, the lowest probability of failure is achieved when the light nodes sample the set Sµopt and hence, the optimal probability of failure becomes 1 − τ (Sµopt, µ). Thus, from Definition 3, by

designing LDPC codes that have concentrated ssµ, we increase the value of τ (Sµopt, µ) and reduce the probability of failure.
Sampling Strategy 1. We are unaware of an efficient method to find Sµopt, thus we construct a sample set using greedy techniques. Since we aim to concentrate the distributions ζg
for gmin ≤ g < gc towards the same VNs, we form a greedy sample set Sgreedy by greedily choosing s samples from Sgac (assuming s ≤ |Sgac |). Assume Cg˜ = ∅ for g˜ < gmin. Find the smallest g˜ that satisfies |Cg˜| > s. Then, select s − |Cg˜−2| samples from Cg˜ \ Cg˜−2 that touch the most g˜-cycles, which we define as C. As such, Sgreedy = Cg˜−2 ∪ C. Our sampling strategy is sampling with probability one the set Sgreedy. Thus, the same s samples are used irrespective of the stopping
set size µ. The probability of failure using this strategy is
pf (s, µ) = 1 − τ (Sgreedy, µ) (see proof of Lemma 2 in [8]).
We verify from simulations that by concentrating the distributions ζg for gmin ≤ g < gc, and using sampling strategy 1, we get a failure probability pf (s, µ) much lower than is achievable using the techniques in [1] for short block lengths.
Next, we provide our method to design LDPC codes that result in concentrated distributions ζg for gmin ≤ g < gc, for some upper bound cycle length gc. Choice of gc is a complexity constraint that determines how many cycles we keep track of
in the EC-PEG algorithm.

IV. ENTROPY-CONSTRAINED PEG ALGORITHM
Algorithm 1 presents our EC-PEG algorithm for constructing a TG G with n VNs, m CNs, and VN degree dv that concentrates the distributions ζg for all g -cycles with g < gc.

Algorithm 1 EC-PEG Algorithm

1: Inputs: n, m , dv, gc
2: Initialize G to n VNs, m CNs and no edges 3: Initialize λig = 0, for all g < gc and 1 ≤ i ≤ n 4: for j = 1 to n do

5: for k = 1 to dv do 6: if k = 1 then 7: cs = “first CN selection” procedure

8: else [K, g , F ] = P EG(G, vj)

9: if F = 0 or (F = 1 and g ≥ gc) then

10:

cs = “min degree CN selection” procedure

11: else

(g -cycles, g < gc, are created)

12:

cs = “entropy-constrained CN selection” procedure

13:

Update λg , αg and αgc

14: G = G ∪ edge{cs, vj}

15: Outputs: G, gmin

The PEG algorithm builds a TG in an edge by edge manner by iterating over the set of VNs and for each VN vj, establishing dv edges to it. Similar to the original PEG algorithm proposed in [4], the “first CN selection” procedure is just selecting a CN which has the minimum degree under the current form of the TG G. If multiple CNs exist with the same minimum degree, a CN is selected randomly.
When establishing the kth edge to VN vj, k ≥ 2, the PEG

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

algorithm encounters two situations: i) addition of the edge is possible without creating cycles; ii) addition of the edge creates cycles. In both the situations, the PEG algorithm finds a set of candidate CNs that it proposes to connect vj to, in order to maximize the girth. Without getting into the details of the PEG algorithm described in [4], we assume a procedure P EG(G, vj) that provides us with the set of candidate CNs K for establishing a new edge to VN vj under the TG setting G according to the PEG algorithm described in [4]. We also assume that the procedure returns flags F = 0 and F = 1 respectively for situations i) and ii) described above. For ii), it also returns the cycle length g of the smallest cycles formed when an edge is established between any CN in K and vj. For the case of k ≥ 2, we call the procedure P EG(G, vj). When F = 0, the CN candidates in K do not create any cycles and similar to the original PEG algorithm, a CN is selected from K with the minimum degree under the current TG setting G. If multiple CNs exist with the minimum degree, a CN is picked randomly. This is the “min degree CN selection” procedure.

When F = 1, g -cycles are created when a new edge

is established between any CN candidate in K and vj.

While progressing through the EC-PEG algorithm, for all

g -cycles, g < gc, we maintain VN-g -cycle counts λg = (λ1g , λg2 , . . . , λgn ), where λig is the number of g -cycles

that are touched by VN vi. We also maintain VN-g -cycle

normalized counts αg = (α1g , α2g , . . . , αng ), where αig =

λig

n i=1

λgi

if

n i=1

λig

= 0, else αig

= 0, and joint nor-

malized cycle counts αgc for g -cycles, g < gc, given

by αgc = (

, αg1
g <gc T

g

<gc

αg2 T

,...,

T = |{4, 6, . . . , gc − 2}|. Once the CN

g
cs

<gc

αgn T

)

where

is selected, we

update λg , αg , and αgc based on the new g -cycles, g < gc, created by the edge between cs and vj (Step 13 of Algorithm

1). Thus, for the case when F = 1, for each candidate CN

cca ∈ K, g -cycles are formed in the TG when an edge is

established between cca and vj. The cycles formed affect

αgc differently for each cca. In the “entropy-constrained CN

selection” procedure, we select the CN in K that results in the

minimum entropy H(αgc ) for the resultant joint normalized cycle counts αgc after the addition of the edge. If there are multiple candidate CNs that result in the same minimum

entropy, we select the CN with the least degree in the current

TG setting and then randomly if multiple CNs have the least degree. Once we select the CN cs, we update the TG G and also update λg , αg and αgc as mentioned before. If cycles formed are of length g ≥ gc, we again use the “min degree

CN selection” procedure. The intuition behind the EC-PEG

algorithm is that entropy is minimized when a distribution

is concentrated, thus, selecting a CN that minimizes entropy

leads to a much more concentrated distribution. Minimizing

the entropy of the joint normalized cycle counts also ensures

that the different cycle distributions are concentrated towards

the same set of VNs.

Remark 2. When the P EG() procedure in Algorithm 1 returns F = 1 and cycle length g < gc, only the g -cycles

are accounted for in the counts λg , αg , and αgc . It may so happen that along with the g -cycles, certain larger cycles of

length > g are also formed when a new edge is added to the

TG. In the EC-PEG algorithm, those cycles are not used for

updating their respective cycle counts. Simulations show that it

is sufficient to only consider the g -cycles, when we encounter F = 1 with g , in concentrating the final distributions ζg

(which includes all the g -cycles) as can be seen in Fig. 1a.

We call the cycles accounted for in the counts as “considered”

cycles. We conjecture that when considered g -cycles are

formed in the EC-PEG algorithm, the non-considered cycles

formed of length > g touch almost the same set of VNs as

the considered g -cycles. The EC-PEG algorithm concentrates

all the considered g -cycles for g < gc towards the same
set of VNs by minimizing H(αgc ). Thus, this procedure also concentrates the overall cycle distributions ζg for g < gc
towards the same set of VNs. It is however also possible to

use the larger cycles to update the counts but this approach

would incur higher complexity of finding all cycles of length

< gc each time a new cycle is created. V. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we present the performance of codes de-

signed using the EC-PEG algorithm and compare it with the

performance of the original PEG algorithm [4] when using the

greedy sampling (GS) strategy described in Strategy 1, and the

performance achieved by [1] using random LDPC codes and

random sampling (RS). For all codes designed using the EC-

PEG

algorithm,

we

choose

gc

=

10,

dv

=

4

and

rate

=

1 2

.

Fig.

1a shows the 6-cycle and 8-cycle distributions ζ6 and ζ8 gen-

erated using the EC-PEG and the original PEG algorithms for

n = 100 (gmin = 6 for both the codes). The x-axis in the figure
are the VN indices vi, arranged in the decreasing order of the 6-cycle fractions ζi6 and the y-axis are the respective cycle fractions. From Fig. 1a, we can clearly see that the EC-PEG algorithm generates significantly concentrated distributions ζ6 and ζ8 compared to the original PEG algorithm and also the

distributions are concentrated towards the same set of VNs.

This is because the same VNs that have a high 6-cycle fraction

also have a high 8-cycle fraction. Fig. 1b shows the variation of the greedy 10-sample set |S1a0| for different codeword lengths. We see that the EC-PEG algorithm has a lower |S1a0| than the original PEG algorithm which is a result of making the cycle

distributions concentrated towards the same set of VNs. Since

Σ(4, 10) ≥ 17, from Lemma 1, for all stopping sets of weight
µ < 17, Pf (S1a0, µ) is zero. Additionally, the green plot in Fig. 1b is the minimum number of samples s required to have
a pf (s, 16) ≤ 10−6 using random sampling as in [1]. We see that to have pf (s, 16) ≤ 10−6, a large number of samples are needed compared to |S1a0|.
Fig. 2 shows the stopping set distributions ssµ for LDPC

codes designed using the original PEG and the EC-PEG

algorithms for n = 100. The x-axis in all the plots are the

VN indices vi, arranged in the decreasing order of the 6-cycle fractions ζi6. Clearly, for the EC-PEG algorithm the stopping
set distributions are concentrated towards the same set of VNs

as that of the 6-cycle distributions since the VNs towards the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2020 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW)

ζg |S1a0 |

pf (s, µ)

VN index

No. of VNs n

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: Results for LDPC distribution using different

codes PEG

with

rate

=

1 2

,

dv

=

4;

algorithms for n = 100,

(a) (b)

Cycle |S1a0|

vs. the number of VNs.

ss11 ss12

VN index

VN index

Fig. 2: Stopping Set distributions ssµ for LDPC code with n = 100,

rate

=

1 2

,

fit slopes

dv = 4; for ssµ

left: µ = 11; right: µ = 12. indicating the graph slope.

The

lines

are

the

best

right (left) on the x-axis have low (high) stopping set fraction.

This motivates the sampling choice of Sgreedy to minimize pf (s, µ) according to Strategy 1. We note that a similar trend

does not hold for the original PEG algorithm.

In Fig. 3, the probability of failure pf (s, µ) is shown for µ = 10, 11, and 12 for varying codes with n = 100. The

top black line is the pf (s, µ) achieved using random sampling

and a random LDPC code as in [1] with stopping ratio β∗ =

0.064353. The value β∗ is the best stopping ratio obtained for

a

rate

1 2

code

following

the

method

in

[1,

section

5.3]

using

parameters (c, d) = (8, 16). The green lines represent pf (s, µ)

obtained using random sampling for different µ calculated as

pf (s, µ)

=

(1 −

µ n

)s

(when

the

malicious

node

randomly

hides

a stopping set of size µ, pf (s, µ) is still provided by this

expression). The red and blue curves demonstrate the use of

the greedy sampling strategy for codes designed by the original

PEG and the EC-PEG algorithms, respectively, and pf (s, µ)

is calculated according to the equation provided in Strategy 1.

Note that the codes designed by the EC-PEG and the original

PEG algorithms have a minimum stopping set size of 9, but

pf (s, 9) = 0, s ≥ 3 so we ignore these stopping sets. Also, the maximum CN degree d for the EC-PEG LDPC code is d = 11.

Thus the incorrect coding proof size, which depends on d,

is smaller than for the random construction with maximum

CN degree 16. Fig. 3 demonstrates the 3 major improvements

of our design. The first benefit is the use of deterministic

constructions to design finite-length codes that provide better

guarantees for the stopping set ratio than random ensembles, as

can be seen when comparing the black and green curves. The

second benefit comes from using a greedy sampling strategy as

opposed to random sampling, which can be observed by the

s

Fig. 3: pf (s, µ) for various coding schemes and sampling strategies

for

n

=

100

and

rate

=

1 2

.

significant reduction in pf (s, µ) between the green and red curves. Finally, pf (s, µ) is reduced further when the greedy sampling strategy is used on a concentrated LDPC code, as shown by comparing the red and blue curves. All of these benefits combine to significantly reduce pf (s, µ) for a fixed sample size, demonstrating the efficacy of our techniques.

VI. CONCLUSION In this paper, we proposed a modification to the PEG algorithm to design LDPC codes that have a concentrated stopping set distribution. We showed that our novel LDPC code design coupled with a greedy sampling strategy results in a much lower probability of failure compared to previous schemes. Our deterministic code construction allows for flexibility in code parameters including block length while providing good performance for this application. Ongoing research is focused on stronger adversary models where malicious nodes are aware of the greedy sampling strategy. Current research is showing that it is possible to use concentrated LDPC codes with a different sampling strategy to account for such strong adversaries and is the subject of future work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the Guru Krupa Foundation and
NSF-BSF grant no. 2008728 to conduct this research work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Yu, et al., “Coded Merkle Tree: Solving Data Availability Attacks in Blockchains,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01247, Oct. 2019.
[2] S. Nakamato, “Bitcoin: A Peer to Peer Electronic Cash System,” 2008. [Online] Available: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
[3] M. Al-Bassam, A. Sonnino, V. Buterin, “Fraud and data availability proofs: Maximising light client security and scaling blockchains with dishonest majorities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09044, Sept. 2018.
[4] X.Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou and D.M. Arnold,“Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, Jan. 2005.
[5] T. Tian, et al., “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun., May 2003.
[6] A. Orlitsky, et al., “Stopping Sets and the Girth of Tanner Graphs,” IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory, Jun. 2002.
[7] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization and Efficient Search of Non-Elementary Trapping Sets of LDPC Codes With Applications to Stopping Sets,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory, Feb. 2019.
[8] D. Mitra, L. Tauz, L. Dolecek, “Concentrated Stopping Set Design for Coded Merkle Tree: Improving Security against Data Availability Attacks in Blockchain Systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01247, Sept. 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:58:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

