2021 15th International Symposium on Medical Information and Communication Technology (ISMICT) | 978-1-7281-7724-3/20/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISMICT51748.2021.9434901

An decoding parameter optimization method for LDPC codes in 5G NR based on 3D EXIT chart

1st Wenyi Cheng Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China 2018140023@bupt.edu.cn
3rd Kai Niu Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China niukai@bupt.edu.cn

2nd Chao Dong Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing, China dongchao@bupt.edu.cn
4th Zhengzhen Zhang Beijing Union University
Beijing, China zzz@buu.edu.cn

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are channel code of fifth-generation(5G) New Radio(NR), and it is important to explore low-complexity decoding algorithms that are easy to implement on hardware. In order to realize 5G ultra-reliable low latency communication (URLLC), low-complexity decoding of short packets is necessary. For quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes in 5G NR, the layer offset min-sum (LOMS) algorithm and the layer normalized min-sum (LNMS) algorithm are two efficient algorithms with low complexity. The performance of these two simplified decoding algorithms is significantly affected by the values of the above two decoding parameters. In this paper, the 3D extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart is introduced as an analysis tool to indicate the performance of different values for the offset and normalization parameters. The simulation results show that with different values of the above two factors, the changing of the output information of EXIT chart is consistent with that of the block error rate (BLER) in decoding simulations. In addition, it is shown that this analysis method can be extended to the decoding with fixed-point inputs.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, Low-complexity, Shortlength.
I. INTRODUCTION
In 1963 Gallager proposed low-density-parity-check (LDPC) code [1]. MacKay discovered the LDPC code in 1996 and pointed out that LDPC code is a channel coding method with strong error correction capability [2]. The research results show that, due to its excellent performance in correcting bit errors, LDPC code is the channel coding that is able to approach Shannon channel capacity. To achieve this goal, iterative decoding algorithms with belief propagation (BP), such as the sum product algorithm (SPA), are applied to the LDPC decoder, which iteratively approximates the performance of the maximum likelihood decoding algorithm. However, during SPA decoding, a large number of exponential operations and logarithmic operations are performed, which
This work is supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2018YFE0205501), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61671080).

makes the algorithm complexity of the decoder very large. The min-sum algorithm was proposed as an approximate algorithm of SPA in [3] to reduce the complexity of physical devices.
The min-sum algorithm uses the minimum operation to replace the exponential and logarithmic operations in SPA, which greatly reduces the complexity of the algorithm with a non-negligible performance loss. The offset min-sum (OMS) algorithm and the normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm are two popular improvements of the min-sum algorithm and the two methods balance the algorithm complexity and error correction performance. For quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes in 5G NR, the layer decoding algorithm, known as turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm [8], is an alternative algorithm that can be quickly implemented on hardware. The key of decoding performance is the parameter selection. The optimal factors of these algorithms, such as the layer offset min-sum (LOMS) algorithm and the layer normalized min-sum (LNMS) algorithm, are related to the check matrix of a specific LDPC code. In previous work, density evolution was used to study the convergence performance of SPA in [7] and min-sum in [6]. The method of adaptive factor was proposed for NMS algorithm in [4] and OMS algorithm in [5] based trapping set in 5G NR base graph. So far, the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart has not been fully considered to optimize the parameters of the layer decoding algorithm in 5G NR.
In [12], 3D EXIT chart of 5G NR base graph was proposed to predict the convergence performance of SPA. Based on this approach, the parameters of LNMS and LOMS for short-length LDPC codes in 5G NR are optimized based on the 3D EXIT chart. The simulation results show that with different values of the parameters, the changing of the output information of EXIT chart is consistent with that of the block error rate (BLER) in decoding simulations. In addition, it is shown that this analysis method can be extended to the decoding with fixed-point inputs.
This paper is organized as follows. The Section II reviews

  ,(((

233
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:55:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LDPC decoding algorithms, including SPA, min-sum algorithm and modified min-sum algorithm. In Section III, we introduce 3D EXIT analysis method suitable for 5G NR LDPC check matrix and propode a method to obtain the external information transfer chart of the layer min-sum algorithm. According to EXIT chart, we optimized the paraments. The selection process of offset factor and normalization factor and simulation results are given in Section IV. The final conclusion is given in Section V.
II. REVIEW OF LDPC DECODING ALGORITHMS
The LDPC code is a linear block code, and the constraint relationship about its bits can be expressed by several check equations. Therefore, an LDPC code can be represented by a Tanner graph. There are two types of nodes in the Tanner graph, variable nodes (VNs) which correspond to the bits in the codeword and check nodes (CNs) which correspond to the check equations. Each VN is connected to several check nodes, indicating that the bits corresponding to the VN the constraint relationship of these check equations. The number of CNs connected to the VN is called the degree of VN, and is expressed by dv. Each CN is connected to several variable nodes, indicating that the check equation corresponding to the CN constrains these variable nodes. The number of VNs connected to the CN is called the degree of CN, and is expressed by dc.
In this article, we use M and N to represent the number of rows and columns of the parity check matrix H of the LDPC code, respectively. The encoded codeword vector c = (c0, c1, ..., cN−1)T is mapped to the signed symbol vector x = (x0, x1, ..., xN−1)T according to the rules (if cj = 0, xj = +1, otherwise xj = −1, here j = 0, 1, ..., N −1). The message sequence passes through the channel after x is modulated. The input information of the LDPC decoder is soft information, generally expressed by a log-likelihood ratio (LLR), which is generated by the demodulator at the receiver.

After the above two steps, VNj produces a decision based on Lkj,total, Lkj,total includes information of all neighbor nodes of
VNj

Ljk,total = Lj,ch +

Lki→j

(3)

i∈V N {j}

If Ljk,total ≥ 0, cj = 0 is made, otherwise cj = 1, briefly expressed as

cj =

0, if Ljk,total ≥ 0 1, otherwise

(4)

The SPA algorithm iteratively runs (1) to (4) until Hc = 0 or k reaches the maximum number of iterations.
In SPA, the expression (1) is applied in calculating the information updated from CN to VN. This method involves a large number of exponential and logarithmic operations. Therefore, it is necessary to use an approximate method to accelerate SPA and the improvement of SPA in academia is mainly on CN processor. For the improvement of SPA, a typical algorithm is the min-sum algorithm proposed by Fossorier [3]. Namely, min-sum algorithm replaces (1) with (5) and the ”box-plus” operation can also be calculated approximatily as

Lik→j =

sign(Ljk−→1i) · j

min (
∈CN {i}−{j}

Ljk−→1i

)

(5)

j ∈CN {i}−{j}

Compared with SPA, min-sum significantly reduces the computational complexity of the decoder, but it also brings a nonnegligible performance loss. For example, as for BER, the loss of min-sum algorithm is about 0.4dB [8] and 0.35dB [7] when K = 8000 with R = 1/2 and when K = 4550 with R = 0.9 respectively. The performance loss of min-sum mainly comes from the over-optimistic estimation of CN output information. NMS and OMS use α and β respectively to correct Li→j, as (6) and (7). α and β are the normalization factor and the offset factor.

A. Sum product algorithm and approximation

The decoding of LDPC codes can be realized by using
turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm. The decoding pro-
cess is the process of message propagation on the Tanner
graph. For the SPA algorithm, the decoder first receives the input information Lj,ch, and then initializes Lj0→i = Lj,ch, j = 1, 2, .., N, i ∈ V N {j}. The superscript here indicates the
number of iterations.
In the kth iteration, update the information sent from CNi to VNj for all i first.

Lik→j = j ∈CN {i}−{j}Ljk−→1i

(1)

Here, operation can be illustrated with the following example, a b = log(1 + ea+b) − log(ea + eb). Then update the
information sent from VNj to CNi for all j.

Lkj→i = Lj,ch +

Lik →j

(2)

i ∈V N {j}−{i}

Lki→j = α·

sign(Lkj −→1i

)·
j

min (
∈CN {i}−{j}

Ljk−→1i

)

(6)

j ∈CN {i}−{j}

Lik→j =

sign(Ljk−→1i

)

·

max{min
j

Lkj −→1i

− β, 0}

(7)

j ∈CN {i}−{j}

B. Layer decoding algorithm

The LDPC code in 5G NR can be decoded by layer decoding algorithm. According to the size of the elementary matrix Zc, M CNs are divided into L layers, L = M/Zc. For the kth iteration, when updating the lth layer, first obtain the message sent from the VN to the CN,

Lkj→ ,l i = Ljk,,tlo−t1al − Lik→−1j,l

(8)

then update the message sent from the CN to the VN through (6) or (7), and finally update the information for decision.

Ljk,,tlotal = Lkj→ ,l i + Lki→,l j

(9)

234
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:55:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LNMS and LOMS significantly improve the error correction performance of min-sum and accelerate the convergence speed. At the same time, the normalization factor and the offset factor have a significant impact on the performance of the layer algorithm. Previous work, such as the method of adaptive factor based on trapping set proposed in [4] [5] and the convergence performance based on density evolution theory in [6] and [7], have not given the optimal parameters of layer min-sum algorithm for 5G NR. In the next section, we will propose 3D EXIT chart of LNMS and LOMS for 5G NR and select the optimal offset factor and normalization factor based it.
III. EXIT CHART OF LDPC ITERATIVE DECODER
EXIT chart is a semi-analytical analysis tool, and its analysis results are independent of specific decoding algorithms. It is an important function of EXIT chart to show the relationship of information transfer between iterative decoding among the various component decoders. The key to study the EXIT chart of the LDPC decoder is to obtain the extrinsic information transfer characteristics of each component of the decoder. In this section, we first introduce the 3D EXIT chart of SPA for NR LDPC proposed in [12] and then propose the EXIT chart of LNMS and LOMS. Based that, a method to optimize the prarameters of layer decoding algorithm was proposed.
The LDPC decoder updates CNs with check node processor (CNP) and VNs with variable node processor (VNP) in turn. When decoding, the message is passed iteratively several times in these two processors. The EXIT charts of SPA are proposed in [7]. For that EXIT chart, output information IE,V of VNP and IE,C of CNP are calculated by taking all VNs and CNs as a whole respectively. However, the parity check matrix of 5G NR has special VNs that are different from the previous LDPC codes, which are degree-1 VNs. During decoding, the degree-1 VN only transmits channel information IH to CNs but cannot receive information from CNs. Namely, VNs only obtain channel information IH , when dv = 1. The result is that VNP’s information transfer curve IE,V (IA,V ) cannot reach (1,1) [12]. The conventional EXIT chart is not applicable to the LDPC base graph in 5G NR.
Fig. 1. 3D external information transfer trend diagram of LDPC decoder for 5G NR.
In order to solve the problem that traditional EXIT cannot accurately represent the decoding characteristics of the LDPC code of 5G NR, 3D external information transfer trend diagram was proposed in [12] as shown in Fig 1. According to the structure of the 5G NR basic graph, VNs are divided into two parts, core VNs with a degree greater than 1, and extension

VNs with degree one. Correspondingly, CNs are divided into two parts: core CNs only connected to core VNs and extension CNs connected to extension VNs. Extension VNs transmits channel information IH to extension CNs during decoding but extension CNs have not feedback information to extension VNs. The interactive transmission of information is carried out between core CNs and core VNs, and between core VNs and extension CNs. For core CNs and core VNs, Ivc,E as external information of core VNs depends on the output of core CNs and extension CNs. And the output of core CNs Icc,E only depends on Ivc,E. 3D EXIT chart Ivc,E(Ivc,A, Ive,A) and Icc,E(Icc,A) are drawn by (10)(11).

Ivc,E =

1

Nvc i=1

dvci

Nvc i=1

dv−c1i

J

(

σv2ci )

σv2ci = (dvci − 1)J −1(Ivc,A) + dveiJ −1(Ive,A) + J −2(IH )

(10a) (10b)

Icc,E =

Ncc

1

−

√ J ( dcci

−

1J −1(1

−

Icc,A))

i=1

d−cc1i

Ncc i=1

dcci

(11)

For core VNs and extension CNs, Ive,E as external information of core VNs depends on the output of core CNs

and extension CNs. And the output of extension CNs Ice,E only depends on Ive,E. 3D EXIT chart Ive,E(Ivc,A, Ive,A) and Ice,E(Ice,A) are drawn by (12)(13).

Ive,E =

1

Nve i=1

dvei

Nve i=1

dv−e1i

J

(

σv2ei )

σv2ei = dvciJ −1(Ivc,A) + (dvei − 1)J −1(Ive,A) + J −2(IH )

(12a) (12b)

Ice,E =

1

Nce i=1

dcei

Nce i=1

dc−e1i (1

−

J

(

σc2ei ))

σc2ei = (dcei − 1)[J −1(1 − Ice,A)]2 + [J −1(1 − IH )]2

(13a) (13b)

Here, Ncc and Nce represent the number of CNs in the core part and extension part, Nvc and Nve represent the number of VNs in the core part and extension part, dcci and dcei represent the degree of CNs in the core part and the extension part, and dvci and dvei represent the degree of VNs in the core part and the extension part, respectively. We can draw two 3D EXIT charts through above 4 formulas. Generally, 2D EXIT is a more intuitive visual representation of decoder characteristics. As shown in Fig 1, update Ive,E and Ice,E first until they converge and then update Ivc,E and Icc,E during each iteration, the 3D EXIT chart is projected to a 2D EXIT chart. Therefore, we only need to study the relationship between Ivc,E and Icc,E .
The 3D EXIT chart and 2D EXIT chart introduced above use J() to approximate the information transfer relationship. That is an analysis method based on Gaussian approximation, which is only applicable to the SPA decoder and not to minsum. In addiction, equation (10)-(13) are base the method that updates VNs after all CNs have been updated in each iteration, and these four formulas can not correctly analyze the performance of layer decoding algorithm. For LNMS and

235
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:55:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LOMS, which use the approximate calculation method of and update information layerly, Lik→j is influenced by α or β according to (6) and (7). And the value of α or β impacts Ivc,E and Icc,E at the same time. Inspired by [9], we use statistical methods to calculate the extrinsic information of each part
of the decoder. If the coded bits xj correspond to the log likelihood ratio Lj one-to-one, then the mutual information between Lj and xj is

IV. SIMULATION
In this section, the parameters α and β for LNMS and LOMS are determined by the analysis of 3D EXIT charts. In order to realize 5G ultra-teliable low latency communication for short packets, we use short length LDPC codes in 5G NR for analysis. In the experiment, the coding rate is R = 1/2 and the encoded sequence is modulated using quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK).

I(L; X) = 1 − E{log2 1 + e−L }

(14)

An approximate calculation method of mutual information was proposed in [9], and when the number of LLRs be counted is large enough (14) can be written as

I(L; X)

≈

1

−

1 N

N

log2

1 + e−xj Lj

(15)

j=1

Here N is the number of LLRs participating in the statistics.
For core VNs, Lj→i is output as a priori information of core CNs, and the output information is

1 Ivc,E = 1 − N

N

log2(1 + e−xjLj→i )

j=1

(16)

For core CNs, Li→j is output as a priori information of core VNs, and the output information is

1 Icc,E = 1 − N

N

log2(1 + e−xjLi→j )

j=1

(17)

Fig. 2. EXIT chart of decoder used LNMS with base graph 2 in 5G NR, code rate 1/2 and QPSK were used and channel SNR=0.7dB. α varies from 0.4 to 0.8 in step 0.1.

The algorithm to update Ivc,E and Icc,E is summarized in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 EXIT char of LNMS and LOMS for 5G NR.
Input: 0 < α < 1 for LNMS or β > 0 for LOMS, and channel information IH .
1: Initialize Icc,A, Ivc,A, Ive,A, Ice,A with 0, k = 0. 2: Initialize Lch according to IH . 3: while Ivc,A < 1 do 4: Calculate Lj→i by (8), i is the row index of core CNs. 5: Calculate Ivc,E(k) by (16). 6: k = k + 1 7: Icc,A(k) = Ivc,E (k − 1). 8: Calculate Li→j by (6) for LNMS, or (7) for LOMS, i
is the row index of core CNs. 9: Calculate Icc,E(k) by (17). 10: Ivc,A(k) = Icc,E (k). 11: Update Lj→i by (8) and Li→j by (6) for LNMS, or
(7) for LOMS layerly between extension CNs and core
VNs.
12: end while Output: Ivc,E and Ivc,A, plot Ivc,E (Ivc,A) curve.

Fig. 3. Decoding performance of LNMS algorithm with QPSK and code rate 1/2 when sending K = 154 bits. Different normalization factors were used.
According to the method described in Section III, the EXIT charts of LNMS were ploted, as shown in Fig 2. Because the information bits before encoding correspond to core VNs, only the information transfer of combine VNs decoder needs to be studied. When the channel noise level SNR=0.7dB, the information transfer curves of combine VNs decoder were

236
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:55:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

drawn. The abscissa and ordinate in Fig 2 represent the input information (prior information Ivc,A) and output information (extrinsic information Ivc,E) of combine VNs decoder, respectively. In order to choose the optimal α, we let α vary from 0.4 to 0.8, and each step of the change is 0.1. It can be seen from Fig 2 that for different α, as the prior information Ivc,A increases all the output information Ivc,E increase too, and it means that when α takes these values decoder can perform effectively. We can compare the external information Ivc,E when α continuously changes, in the case of the same prior information. When Ivc,A = 0.6, Ivc,E increases when α increases and reaches the maximum around α = 0.6, and then Ivc,E decreases when α increases. And the two curves of α = 0.6 and α = 0.7 almost overlap. As far as the information transfer relationship is concerned, the larger the size of output information, the better the decoding performance when the prior information is unchanged. Therefore, for LNMS, α takes an optimal value between 0.6 and 0.7.
In order to verify the prediction of the EXIT chart, we apply LNMS to decode the short length LDPC code of 5G NR, and to explore low-complexity decoder, LNMS decoding algorithms has performed 5 iterations. Fig 3 shows the decoding performance of LNMS with code rate 1/2 and QPSK when sending K = 154 bits. In the simulation experiment of decoding, the normalization factor α changes from 0.3 to 0.8, and each step of the change is 0.1. Fig 3 shows that LNMS achieves the best decoding performance when α = 0.6 and α = 0.7. When α takes other values, the decoding performance of LNMS decreases. This is because that for all α used in decoding, the combine VNs decoder with α = 0.6 or α = 0.7 can obtain the largest external information when the input prior information is the same. Compared with the method in [10], which takes an empirical value, α = 0.5, the proposed α = 0.6 or α = 0.7 obtained by the EXIT chart is better about 0.3dB when BLER=10−3. Therefore, the simulation results are consistent with the theoretical predictions and α = 0.5 is not the best choice in 5G NR.
The same research method is applied in the selection process of the offset factor β. We show the EXIT charts of combine VNs decoder in Fig 4 when LOMS was used and the channel noise level SNR=0.64dB at the same time. Similarly, β changes from 0.3 to 1.1 in steps of 0.1. Fig 4 shows that when β increases from 0.3 to 0.6, the output information also increases for any fixed prior information. But for the β in the interval [0.6,1.0], these information transfer curves show an indiscriminate situation. This indicates that when the β greater than 0.6 and less than 1.0 was used, the output information of combine VNs decoder is ambiguous, so there is no unique optimal offset factor. And then we apply LOMS to decode the LDPC code of 5G NR, and perform 5 iterations too. Fig 5 shows the decoding performance of LOMS with code rate 1/2 and QPSK when sending K = 154 bits. The BLER curves are intertwined and entangled with each other when 0.6 ≤ β ≤ 1.0. When β takes other values, including β = 0.15 used in [11], the decoding performance decreases. The analysis above shows that the change trend of BLER is

consistent with that of the output information in EXIT charts.
Fig. 4. EXIT chart of decoder used LOMS with base graph 2 in 5G NR, code rate 1/2 and QPSK were used and channel SNR=0.64dB. β varies from 0.3 to 1.1 in step 0.1.
Fig. 5. Decoding performance of LOMS algorithm with QPSK and code rate 1/2 when sending K = 154 bits. Different offset factors were used.
In addition, the actual physical decoder uses fixed-point values to represent the information of each step during decoding. Therefore, exploring the best modification factor for fixed-point algorithms is of great significance for realizing low-complexity decoder. For quantized LNMS, we uniformly quantize the transmitted information with 6 bits, where 2 bits represent the fractional part, and 3 bits represent the integer part, and 1 bit represents the sign. In this case, quantized normalization factors, such as 0.25, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75 were used. We completed the multiplicative attenuation of the quantized normalization factor by shifting and adding operations. For example, attenuation to 0.75 is equivalent to adding the result of shifting 1 bit and the result of shifting 2 bits. Decoding performance (BLER represented in dashed lines) of quantized

237
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:55:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LNMS is shown in Fig 6 and LNMS decoding algorithms has performed 5 iterations. Code rate 1/2 and QPSK are used when sending K = 154 bits. Corresponding to the result that the output information of combine VNs decoder is max when α is equal to 0.6 or 0.7 in Fig 2, Fig 6 shows that the quantized LNMS decoder has good performance when α is around 0.6. And for α = 0.625, in the interval [0.6,0.7], the decoder has an advantage of 0.3dB compared to α = 0.5 when BER=10−4. In addition, the fixed-point algorithm has an error floor, which is caused by the circles in the short code and quantization loss.

[6] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and A. Burg, ”Density Evolution for Min-Sum Decoding of LDPC Codes Under Unreliable Message Storage,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 849-852, May 2014.
[7] William E. Ryan, Shu Lin, ”Channel Codes Classical and Modern,” in Plastics, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2009, pp. 201–417.
[8] Jinghu Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier and XiaoYu Hu, ”Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288-1299, Aug. 2005.
[9] J. Hagenauer, ”The exit chart - introduction to extrinsic information transfer in iterative processing,” 2004 12th European Signal Processing Conference, Vienna, pp. 1541-1548, Dec 2004.
[10] Abedlhedi M, Tlili F, Slama L B H. ”Simulation-based validation of improved BP-Based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” International Symposium on Communications, Control and Signal Processing. IEEE, pp.58-61, 2008.
[11] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello and T. E. Fuja, ”A Threshold-Based Min-Sum Algorithm to Lower the Error Floors of Quantized LDPC Decoders,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 2005-2015, April 2020.
[12] S. Shao, Y. Zhang, R. G. Maunder and L. Hanzo, ”3D EXIT Charts for Analysing the 5G 3GPP New Radio LDPC Decoder,” in IEEE Access, 2020.

Fig. 6. Decoding performance of quantized LNMS with QPSK and code rate 1/2 when sending K = 154 bits. Quantized normalization factors were used.
V. CONCLUSION In this paper, we first reviewed the LDPC decoding algorithm SPA and its approximate algorithm Min-Sum, and introduced the improved algorithms LNMS and LOMS of min-sum. Then we introduced the 3D extrinsic information transfer chart and based that we proposed a method to plot the EXIT charts of LNMS and LOMS for 5G NR LDPC code. Based on this approach, we optimized the normalization factor of LNMS and offset factor of LOMS for short-length LDPC codes in 5G NR. The simulation results show that with different values of the above two parameters, the changing of the output information of EXIT chart is consistent with decoding performance in float and fixed-point case.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645– 1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced Complexity Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based on Belief Propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, May 1999.
[4] L. Fan, C. Pan, K. Peng, and J. Huang, “Adaptive Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm for LDPC Decoding,” IEEE, pp. 1081-1084, 2013.
[5] K. Le Trung, F. Ghaffari and D. Declercq, ”An Adaptation of MinSum Decoder for 5G Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Sapporo, Japan, 2019, pp. 1-5.
238
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:55:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

