 
An Efficient FPGA Implementation of LDPC Decoder 
for 5G New Radio 
 
R. Varshini Devi 
S. Rajaram 
PG Student, Dept of ECE 
  Professor, Dept of ECE 
Thiagarajar College of Engg 
Thiagarajar College of Engg 
Madurai, India 
Madurai, India 
varshiniraja99@gmail.com 
rajaram_siva@tce.edu 
 
Abstract— In this work, we present a new design approach 
for the implementation of an efficient FPGA architecture for the 
Low-Density Parity Check codes (LDPC) Decoder according to 
the 
specifications 
of 
5G 
New-Radio 
(NR) 
cellular 
communication standard, which has advantages such as high 
coding gain, good throughput, and low power dissipation. The 
complexity and time required for implementing 5G NR LDPC 
decoders using conventional HDL-based methods can pose a 
significant challenge. To solve this problem, we presented a 
methodology that utilizes high-level modeling tools to design 
LDPC decoders for 5G, making the process more efficient. This 
approach can support the programmable logic design and be 
used for FPGA implementation. The methodology has been 
tested 
by 
designing, 
simulating, 
and 
implementing 
representative LDPC decoders. The 5G NR LDPC decoder 
realization is achieved using a Circular Shift-Register-based 
model to decrease the difficulty. The data is decoded using the 
Normalized Min-Sum algorithm. FPGA implementation 
analyzes the system productivity and efficiency with hardware 
utilization of the chip and the timing parameters summary. The 
VLSI circuit design of this Decoder is executed using Xilinx 14.1, 
programmed with Verilog HDL and hardware operation is 
evaluated on the Virtex-7 FPGA kit. 
 
Index 
Terms 
- 
Field-Programmable 
Gate-Array 
(FPGA), Wireless communication, 5G New-Radio, LDPC 
Decoder, HDL, Normalized Min-Sum algorithm, Verilog HDL. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Robert G. Gallager introduced Low-Density Parity Check 
(LDPC) codes in 1963 while completing his Ph.D. at MIT [1]. 
He analyzed them and developed some decoding algorithms. 
Computer technology was not advanced enough at that time 
to fully test their potential. Due to the high difficulty of 
implementation, LDPC codes were not widely passed down 
for several decades. However, in 1995, a renewed interest in 
the codes was sparked by researchers such as David MacKay 
and Neal [2], who demonstrated that LDPC codes can 
effectively reach the Shannon Capacity on the channels such 
as Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) and also the 
Binary Erasure channel (BEC). Low-density parity-check 
codes, 
known 
for 
their 
excellent 
error-correcting 
performance, are increasingly being used in various 
applications such as storage devices and communication 
standards. Over the past two decades, LDPC codes have been 
generally adopted for Forward Error Correction (FEC) codes 
in cellular, and networked communication systems [3]. Their 
distinctive qualities include near-Shannon limit error 
correction performance, low complexity, and user-friendly 
hardware decoding. These attributes have led to the 
widespread application of LDPC codes in several 
communication standards such as IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX), 
IEEE 802.11n (Wi-Fi), and DVB-S2 (Digital Video 
Broadcasting) [4][5][6]. The 3rd-Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP) has standardized LDPC codes for 5G New 
Radio (NR) in new releases, marking the phase-I 
standardization for 5G NR in recent times [7]. Previously, 
turbo codes were the coding scheme for 3G and 4G standards 
[8][9], but they have been substituted with LDPC codes for 
5G NR. This is due to LDPC codes' efficient Raptor-like 
protograph formation, increased throughput, multi-edge 
design, better area efficiency, and more flexible shift-
coefficient design [10]. The utilization of LDPC codes in the 
latest 5G NR Standard has resulted in the development of 
hardware-focused belief propagation layered decoding 
algorithms and decoder architectures that are adept at 
achieving maximum efficiency with minimal power 
consumption in 5G NR. [11]. Therefore, the examination of 
a proficient 5G LDPC decoder hardware execution has 
gained increased attention and has led to a gradual shift from 
turbo codes to LDPC codes. LDPC codes are essential for 
transmitting messages over noisy transmission channels, and 
their ability to combat corrupted data has made them an ideal 
choice for a variety of applications. This demand for 
improved data rates has further driven the adoption of LDPC 
codes in 5G NR wireless communications and storage 
systems. For the implementation of present and upcoming 
communications 
technologies, 
an 
understanding 
of 
contemporary forward LDPC error correction techniques is 
crucial. LDPC codes have several advantages, but their 
implementation can be complex because of the random nature 
of the Parity Check Matrix (PCM). The challenge of 
designing 5G LDPC decoders in Verilog HDL is 
compounded when the decoder size increases, leading to 
greater routing congestion and decreased processing speed, 
and increased decoder size. 
 FPGA implementation of LDPC Decoder requires 
more number of LUTs, Registers, Flipflops, and MUXs. The 
design complexity shoots up as the number of operating 
modes rises, resulting in a decrease in throughput and area 
efficiency. This makes it difficult to achieve high throughput 
and requires significant time and an attempt to develop huge 
designs in Verilog. The implementation of hardware-based 
LDPC decoders continues to pose a challenge. To address this 
issue, this paper explores the use of high-level modeling and 
synthesis techniques in conjunction with industry tools. Our 
research has resulted in a novel approach for the 
implementation of LDPC decoders for eMBB (Enhanced 
Mobile Broadband) requirements in 5G NR wireless 
standards. To develop a new approach, this research uses 
library blocks of Simulink and high-level Matlab code blocks 
in conjunction with the Normalized Min-Sum decoding 
algorithm. This method is significantly more efficient than 
manually writing complex Verilog HDL code, this approach 
considerably decreases the complexity of the system, effort, 
and instant by up to fourfold. According to our calculations, 
2023 International Conference on Recent Advances in Electrical, Electronics, Ubiquitous Communication, and Computational Intelligence (RAEEUCCI) | 979-8-3503-3742-6/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/RAEEUCCI57140.2023.10134365
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the LDPC decoder can be effectively designed, simulated, 
and synthesized using this high-level methodology in a lot 
less time. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II 
provides an overview of LDPC codes and their specifications 
in 5G New Radio. Section III describes the proposed design 
methodology for an LDPC decoder. Section IV presents 
performance results and FPGA implementations. Finally, our 
paper concludes in Section V 
II.  THE LDPC CODES 
In this part, we began by recalling the principles of LDPC 
code structure. 
A. Principle of LDPC Codes 
       LDPC codes are commonly characterized to as linear 
block codes and are denoted by (n, k) or (n, 𝑤𝑐, 𝑤𝑟). Here, 
the message bit size is k, the code word size is n, 𝑤𝑐 
represents the column coefficient, which is the count of non-
zero constituents contained in the parity check matrix 
column, and 𝑤𝑟 is the row coefficient which is the count of 
non-zero constituents contained in the parity check matrix 
row. LDPC codes possess some important key features.  
Low Density:  The term "Low Density" refers to the sparse 
parity check matrix H, meaning that the PCM has fewer '1's 
than '0's. This sparsity of H results in low computational 
complexity. 
Parity Check: LDPC codes are described by a binary matrix 
known as the parity checker matrix (H) that satisfies the 
parity check error correction criterion (Odd parity & Even 
parity). The representation of these codes is of two types. The 
first method is using a matrix form called PCM (Parity Check 
Matrix), similar to other linear block codes. The other method 
is through a graphical illustration known as Tanner Graph.  
Parity Check Matrix: The PCM is given below in Fig. 1, here 
the row denotes the check node and the column denotes the 
variable node. whereabouts there is a 1 in the matrix H, which 
means that there is a contact between the Check nodes          
(C-node) and Variable nodes (V-node). 
 
           H = [
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
]                                          
                        
Fig. 1. H-Matrix, Parity Check Matrix. The row in the matrix represents the 
C-node and the column represents V-node. 
 
Tanner Graph: The Tanner Graph is shown in Fig. 2, which 
represents an LDPC code graphically, that denotes the above 
parity check matrix in Fig. 1. The 𝑛 V-nodes and                        
(𝑛−𝑘) C-nodes make up the Tanner graph. The edges or 
connections between the check node 𝐶𝑖  and the variable node 
𝑉𝑖  are made when the coefficient  ℎ𝑖𝑗 of matrix is 1. 
 
 
 Fig. 2. Tanner Graph,𝑉𝑖 represents V-node and 𝐶𝑖 represents C-node. 
B.   5G LDPC Code Structure 
 
The 5G standard uses LDPC codes, a sort of Forward 
Error Correction (FEC) coding, for the decoder. These codes 
use a sparse Parity-Check Matrix to find and fix the errors in 
the obtained data. LDPC codes are employed to lower the 
difficulty of the decoding procedure, improve the rate of 
production and reduce latency. For error correction, the 5G 
standard additionally includes Turbo and Polar codes. 
Base graphs: In the 5G requirements, a protograph is 
officially mentioned as a Base Graph is shown in Fig. 3 
[9][12]. In order to accommodate varied needs that are 
determined by the rate of the code or the length of the data 
symbols, Base Graphs (BGs) are typically of two sorts in 5G 
LDPC codes.  BG1 is for longer codes/higher code rates, and 
BG2 is for shorter codes/lower rates. BG1 is a 46 x 68 matrix 
with a rate of 1/3, and BG2 is a 42 x 52 matrix with a code 
rate of 1/5. The First 22 columns of BG1 and the first 10 
columns of BG2 matrix correlated to data symbols, with the 
first two columns always punctured. Each zero-valued entry 
in the base graph is replaced with a Z x Z all zero matrices, 
and each non-zero-valued member is replaced with a Z x Z 
permutation matrix, resulting in a parity check matrix for 
protograph codes. The Block structure of the base matrix, 
 
[𝐴
𝐸
𝑂
𝐵
𝐶
𝐼] 
    
 Fig. 3. Standard Base Graph matrix for 5G NR, where A, E, O, B, C, and I 
are sub-matrices. A represents information bits, E represents the dual-
diagonal matrix, O represents the zero matrix, B and C correspond to the 
extension Check matrix, and I denotes the identity matrix. 
 
C.   Decoding of LDPC Structure 
       5G NR LDPC decoder is a type of decoder that is used to 
decode LDPC codes in 5G wireless communication systems. 
Decoding LDPC codes for the 5G standard is crucial for the 
success of LDPC decoders, which use a message-passing 
iterative decoder with multiple rounds of iterations. A Single 
parity check is a key component in the decoder for an LDPC 
coder. Moreover, the varying sizes of code and degree of 
rows or columns present a difficult task in implementing 
hardware for reducing latency and improving throughput. To 
minimize the cost of the hardware and improve decoding 
throughput, the MS algorithm is implemented on parallel 
architectures using a columns-based layered scheduling 
approach to efficiently share processing units. The important 
difference between the two scheduling approaches is that 
column-based layers are vertically arrayed in columns, and 
row-based 
layers 
horizontally 
separate 
the 
rows. 
Furthermore, by adopting both update mechanisms, the 
frequency of data transfer can be increased to enhance the 
decoder’s convergency. It should be noted that the irregular 
PCM used in the 5G NR LDPC code has a wide range for 
both row and column degrees. Implementing a 5G LDPC 
decoder on hardware is a complex task due to its requirement 
for both low latency and high decoding performance across a 
vast number of scenarios. The practical significance and 
increased demand for 5G wireless communication systems 
make it a worthy endeavor to work with the FPGA 
implementation of 5G LDPC codes. 
 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
D.    Min-Sum Algorithm 
        The Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA) is an effective 
approach for decoding Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) 
code which minimizes the complex computational load and 
requirements of the Belief Propagation Algorithm (BPA). 
The Min-Sum Algorithm for LDPC decoders is an iterative 
algorithm that uses soft-decision information from a noisy 
communication channel to decode LDPC codes. The 
algorithm performs by repeatedly transferring messages 
between parity check nodes and variable nodes, attempting to 
find the most likely codeword given the channel information. 
The algorithm is based on the min-sum approximation, which 
utilizes the lowest-cost approximation of the Sum-Product 
Algorithm (SPA). The MS Algorithm is mostly employed in 
the design of 5G LDPC decoders, owing to its effortless and 
excellent productivity. 
 
E.    Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm 
       This section presents our FPGA design for the 
Normalized Min-Sum decoder, which can be extended to 
implement the LDPC decoder. Normalized min-sum 
decoding is a type of iterative decoding technique used for 
decoding LDPC codes. This decoding technique is based on 
the Min-Sum Algorithm and is used to decode Error-
Correcting Codes. In this approach, information is exchanged 
between the V-nodes and C-nodes up to an appropriate 
codeword is found. In this approach, all the messages in the 
graph are normalized before the min-sum operation is 
performed. This normalization helps to reduce the effect of 
large values and also helps to lower the number of iterations 
required for convergence. Normalized Min-Sum decoding 
can be applied to any LDPC code and can be used for both 
binary and non-binary LDPC codes. 
   III.  PROPOSED DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
 
This research investigates a novel method for 
constructing LDPC decoders through the use of high-level 
modeling and synthesis techniques. The proposed approach 
features an automated design methodology that enables the 
generation and validation of complex decoders. Rather than 
relying solely on handwritten Verilog code for the complete 
design, this study evaluates the design using high-level 
techniques by the use of Simulink, comprising a mixture of 
pre-defined library elements and Matlab codes incorporated 
within the blocks.  
 
Using Mathworks's Simulink HDL coder, a high-level 
Simulink model which is embedded with MATLAB codes 
can be automatically converted into a Verilog HDL code. 
This methodology provides the flexibility of combining 
various design techniques such as Matlab programs, 
Simulink models, and Verilog codes. To fully leverage the 
advantages of the high level abstraction that Simulink and 
Matlab programs offer, we strive to incorporate as many 
library elements of Simulink and Matlab modules as 
applicable into the decoder’s design, as long as they are 
compatible with the HDL coder for successful translation into 
Verilog codes.  
        Using the LDPC matrix as the input, the Matlab script is 
used to create Variable nodes and Check nodes in a Simulink 
model. Connections between these nodes are made according 
to the LDPC matrix. The block gives the capability to employ 
the Normalized Min-Sum (NMS) algorithm and also the   
Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA). And then the model is 
integrated into a top-level model. Then the generated code is 
synthesized in Xilinx Design suite 14.1 with the target FPGA 
device as Virtex-7. Automated HDL code generation reduces 
design effort and increases design productivity. The entire 
design flow is captured in Fig. 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
 
 
 
 
                     Fig. 4.   Design Flow of 5G NR LDPC Decoder 
 
 
Highlights of our methodology are enumerated as follows. 
1) The proposed Design is hardware-friendly, it 
provides faster execution for the data processing at 
multiple code rates and also for higher code lengths. 
2) The architecture of the design is developed using 
Simulink Library. The HDL code converter 
generates the Verilog code for 5G NR LDPC 
Decoder along with their Submodules and has been 
successfully Simulated in Xilinx Virtex-7 FPGA. 
The major Submodule code includes Variable Node, 
Check Node, Circular-Shift-Register, Look Up 
Table (LUT), Barrel Shifter, Barrel Rotator Codes. 
The Circular Shift-Register-based model plays a 
novel role to reduce the difficulty of the Decoder 
Design 
LDPC 
Decoder 
with 
5G 
Parameters using MATLAB 
Simulink 5G 
NR LDPC 
5G LDPC 
Matrix 
Automatic Generation of Simulink block 
from MATLAB Script 
5G NR LDPC Decoder Simulink Model 
Simulink HDL Coder (Automatic Code 
Generation) 
5G NR LDPC Decoder Verilog Module 
Simulation, Analysis and Synthesis in 
Xilinx Design Suite 14.1 
Implementation of LDPC Decoder in 
Virtex-7 FPGA kit 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
block.  The Resource utilization and Timing 
summary presented in this paper gives better 
performance for LDPC Decoder. 
  
 
         IV.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS  
The automatic generation of the LDPC Decoder 
model is augmented with a detailed automatic testing 
approach. This includes an automated process of creating and 
modulating the data, encoding the data, introducing noise and 
quantization, and utilizing the resultant validation data to 
evaluate the decoder being tested. In this project, we have 
utilized Matlab scripts and Simulink blocks as part of our 
design methodology, which offers a quick and productive 
mechanism to construct a comprehensive test model for the 
complete design. Our experimenting method is extensive and 
this provides for validating the LDPC decoder at the Simulink 
model, Verilog HDL modules, and the hardware FPGA 
implementation stages of the hierarchy. 5G NR LDPC 
Decoder block is configured to process Log-Likelihood Ratio 
(LLR) statistic values, a base graph number, a stream of 
control signals, and lifting size values. Decoded bits are 
output by the block. A 64-column vector containing data 
about LLR values is selected. The scalar base graph number 
(bgn) was chosen. The block executes BG1 when the bgn 
value is 0, the block executes BG2 when this value is 1. 
A scalar lifting size value is selected. For an incorrect lifting 
size, the block rejects the present frame and pauses the next 
frame. The iteration values are given as an integer in the 
extent from 1 to 63. If the iteration is specified to be greater 
than 63, the iter value will be automatically set to 8 and the 
decoding operation will be performed. The 5G NR LDPC 
Decoder block is displayed in the Figure. 5. The important 
modules present in LDPC Decoder include Variable Node, 
Check Node, Circular Shifter, Barrel Shifter, and Check 
Matrix LUT where the LDPC Encoder has 32 Dual Port RAM 
Blocks. The Verilog Programming of the Modules is 
Simulated and implemented in Xilinx ISE 14.1 Virtex-7 
FPGA for target device xc7vx485t-2ffg1761. The details of 
the device resource usage are shown in table 1. It provides 
data about the number of slices, number of flip-flops, number 
of LUTs, and also IoBs. Table 2 provides data of chip timing-
related specifications such as maximum frequency, minimum 
period, minimum input arrival time before the clock, 
maximum output required time after the clock, and 
combinational path delay. 
 
 
  data                                                                                                                   
data 
    
  ctrl                      
ctrl 
    
 bgn                    
Lifting Size 
            
Lifting             
nextFrame                                                                                                                              
Size                         
                            Fig. 5. 5G NR LDPC Decoder Block 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
HARDWARE RESOURCES UTILIZATION 
Hardware 
Decoder 
Slice Registers 
7385/126800 
Slice LUTs 
8713/63400 
LUT-FF pairs 
5581/10517 
Bonded IOBs 
165/210 
Block RAM/ FIFO 
4/135 
BUFG/ BUFGCTRLs 
2/32 
TABLE II.            TIMING PARAMETERS SUMMARY 
Timing parameter 
Decoder 
Maximum Frequency (MHz) 
165.787 
Minimum period (ns) 
6.032 
Minimum input arrival time before clock (ns) 
5.062 
Maximum output required time after clock (ns) 
1.321 
Maximum combinational path delay (ns) 
No path found 
Speed Grade 
-2 
                                      V.  CONCLUSION 
This work proposes a comprehensive testing 
approach for the LDPC decoders at various stages of 
implementation, from the broad-based Simulink modules to 
Verilog and up to hardware implementation. This strategy 
allows for concurrent evaluation of the LDPC decoders at all 
stages, making it easier for interactive problem-solving. This 
top-level design approach presented reduces design 
complexity and effort, while significantly reducing the time 
required to evaluate and test the design, thus ensuring that the 
ultimate design is productive and reliable. The Hardware 
Implementation of the LDPC decoder is done in FPGA using 
the NMS Algorithm has been realized. The perplexity of the 
5G NR LDPC decoder execution is also decreased with the 
help of the Circular-Shift-Register approach and the 
integrated circuit design is done using Verilog. The Virtex-7 
FPGA kit is utilized for the development of the target 
hardware platform xc7vx485t-2ffg1761. The hardware 
factors such as the number of slices, number of Flipflops, 
IoBs, number of LUTs, BUFG, and the timing parameters 
summary outcomes for the device have been obtained 
effectively from the Xilinx Software. An energy-efficient 
microprocessor can decode the 5G LDPC codes with the use 
of FPGA LUTs, making the developed decoder circuit design 
a favorable option for error rectification in the 5G New Radio 
communication system. 
   
 
          REFERENCES 
 
[1] Gallager, Robert. "Low-density parity-check codes." IRE Transactions 
on information theory 8, no. 1 (1962): 21-28. 
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of 
low-density parity-check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457-
458, 1997.  
[3] A. Jimenez Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic 
convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. on 
Info. Theo., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181-2191, 1999. 
[4]“IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks - Part 16: Air 
Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems - 
Amendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined 
Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands”, IEEE Std. 802.16e-2005 
and IEEE Std 802.16-2004/Cor 1-2005 (Amendment and Corrigendum to 
IEEE Std 802.16-2004), vol., no., pp.1-822, 28 Feb. 2006. 
[5]“IEEE Standard for Information technology, Telecommunications and 
information exchange between systems Local and metropolitan area 
networks Specific requirements - Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access 
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications”, IEEE Std. 
802.11-2016 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.11-2012), vol., no., pp.1-3534, 14 
Dec. 2016. 
 
 
 
5G NR LDPC Decoder 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[6] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, 
channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive 
Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications; Part 1: 
DVB-S2”, ETSI EN 302 307-1, V1.4.1, pp.1-80, 2014. 
[7] Chairman’s notes of AI 7.1.5 on channel coding and modulation for NR, 
doc. R1-1613710, 3GPP, Nov. 2016. 
[8] “3GPP: Technical Specification on Advance LTE; Evolved Universal 
Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Multiplexing and channel coding 
(Release 14),” 3GPP, TS 36.212, Rev. 14.2.0, 2017, standard. 
[9] “T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of Low-Density Parity Check 
Codes for 5G New Radio,” IEEE Comm. Magazine, vol. 56, no. 3, pp 28-34, 
March 2018. 
[10] “High performance and area efficient LDPC code design with compact 
protomatrix”, R1-1613059, 3GPP, Nov. 2016. 
[11] O. Boncalo and A. Amaricai, “Ultra High Throughput Unrolled Layered 
Architecture for QC-LDPC Decoders,” 2017 IEEE Computer Society 
Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), Bochum, 2017, pp. 225-230. 
[12] Bai, X. Mu, J. Zhang, and H. Xu, “Algebra-Assisted Construction of 
Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for 5G New Radio,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 
50229-50244, 2018. 
[13] Borwankar, Saumya, and Dhruv Shah. "Low-Density Parity Check 
Code (LDPC Codes) Overview." arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.08645 (2020). 
[14] Devrari, Aakanksha, Adesh Kumar, Himanshu Chauhan, and Amit 
Kumar. "Design and FPGA Implementation of LDPC Decoder chip for 
Communication system using VHDL." International Journal of Recent 
Technology and Engineering 8, no. 2 (2019): 200-206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.        
[15] Nadal, Jeremy, and Amer Baghdadi. "Parallel and flexible 5G LDPC 
decoder architecture targeting FPGA." IEEE Transactions on Very Large 
Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 29, no. 6 (2021): 1141-1151. 
[16] Verma, Anuj, and Rahul Shrestha. "A new partially-parallel VLSI-
architecture of quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder for 5G new-radio." In 2020 33rd 
International Conference on VLSI Design and 2020 19th International 
Conference on Embedded Systems (VLSID), pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2020. 
[17] Verma, Anuj, and Rahul Shrestha. "A new VLSI architecture of next-
generation QC-LDPC decoder for 5G new-radio wireless-communication 
standard." In 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems 
(ISCAS), pp. 1-5. IEEE, 2020. 
[18] Wang, Lifang. "Implementation of Low-Density Parity-Check codes for 
5G NR shared channels." (2021). 
[19] Cao, Shan, Ting Lin, Shunqing Zhang, Shugong Xu, and Chuan Zhang. 
"A reconfigurable and pipelined architecture for standard-compatible LDPC 
and polar decoding." IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 70, no. 6 
(2021): 5431-5444. 
[20] Lam, Hing-Mo, Silin Lu, Hezi Qiu, Min Zhang, Hailong Jiao, and 
Shengdong Zhang. "A high-efficiency segmented reconfigurable cyclic 
shifter for 5G QC-LDPC decoder." IEEE Transactions on Circuits and 
Systems I: Regular Papers 69, no. 1 (2021): 401-414. 
[21] Song, Suwen, Hangxuan Cui, and Zhongfeng Wang. "A Universal 
Efficient Circular-Shift Network for Reconfigurable Quasi-Cyclic LDPC 
Decoders." IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) 
Systems 30, no. 10 (2022): 1553-1557. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
