 
VLSI Architecture of a High Speed Polar Code 
Decoder using Finite Length Scaling LDPC Codes 
Kandi Naveen*, Vishnubhatla Sai Lakshmi Manonmai, Murala Sri Jaya Nikhitha, Vasireddy Pradeep, 
Gundugonti Kishore Kumar # 
 
* Department of Electronics and Communication,  
V.R. Siddhartha Engineering College, Vijayawada 520007, India 
*kandinaveen25@gmail.com 
# gkishorekumar@vrsiddhartha.ac.in 
Abstract—In this concise a polar decoder form propagation 
based on belief is formulated which employ finite length LDPC 
systems. Here the belief sum-product Propagation (BP) is 
designed for LDPC system beyond affecting the binary 
communication erasure channels. Belief decoding is parallel and 
iterative in nature, as it own iteratively nature the required 
idleness and energy dissemination increments straightly. The 
prompt report stated that unstable node (VNs) is reduced 
during individual iteration than as BP. Declination of erased 
VNs reduces decoding process cause a forceful decrease in 
complexity, compared among polar decoder that is designed 
based on CSFG. CSFG is implemented with Quarter-way 
scheduling algorithm, a sub-factor graph reduces valuations of 
taken by belief decoder but due to different variable nodes used 
in the process it has large complication during design. To 
overcome this BPD with LDPC codes is designed. Simulation 
and synthesis results in the progressive art reveal that LDPC 
system drawn better in performance in contrast with belief 
based propagation.  
Keywords— Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC), Polar Codes, 
Very Large-Scale Integration(VLSI) 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
As of late, the provable limit accomplishing codes, 
called group of limit moving toward codes, were created, By 
being the group of codes known to accomplish the channel 
limit with unequivocal development, codes have pulled in a 
ton of consideration since their creation. Turbo codes pre-
claimed in demand of cell portable spread where conceding 
Repeat- Accumulate (RA) codes are pushed off in collection 
dispersion for unobtrusive multifaceted nature mistake 
adjusting framework. Polar codes claim to show perfect the 
limit with respect to parallel information symmetric 
memory-less channels other than discrete and consistent 
memory-less channels. A dull development modus for polar 
codes apportion and it is demonstrated that they can be 
proficiently encoded and decoded with many-sided quality 
O (n log n), where n is the code space. 
Proposed System: LDPC direct tradition opened by 
Gallager. An equality check medium H of framework degree 
n by in lines, grid H is a bi-graph. after individual component 
anxiety of configuration involve n vertices perceived as 
conflicting hubs and therefore the particular segment 
comprises of m check hubs. Individual checking hub is 
identified with a progression of fairness lattice and each 
factor hub with a section, A checking association related to 
temperamental hub if push combined with the testing 1 in it 
have a 1 in the segment corn pan n g to the conflicting hub. 
Since there arc available different conceivable equality 
check lattices for a specific straight code. there arc plenteous 
likly bi-partitc chart incorporated among that code. A LDPC 
frame work assignment strategy is information-passing 
framework where correspondence are affirmed by a 
demanding plan of a gathering.  
  
 
Fig. 1.1 Block diagram of LDPC decoder. 
  
Objective: BPD has practically equivalent to preparing 
framework which has its remuneration in short idleness. In 
spite of the fact that BPD persists as of accentuation 
character, amid the order redirection and the basic inertia 
raise straightly by the amount of accentuation. The polar 
disentangle based conviction proliferation is insurance 
regulation which has its remuneration in short dormancy. 
Anyway BPD encounters from reiteration character, through 
this the effort scattering additionally sudden required 
suspension 
amplifies 
directly 
by 
the 
measure 
of 
accentuation. Low thickness equality check codes have been 
affirmed to accomplish to a great degree ensured to the 
Shannon limit while interpret accentuation by means of a 
information passing development. It is perceived that it 
needs to require the develop direct square codes from 
importance bit. In this undertaking it is have favoured the 
determination name low thickness equality check codes for 
information correspondence. To affirm ordinary information 
bits the ensuing piece supplement strategy. Also. to perceive 
the mix up circumstance it is accept for disorder innovation 
proce.  
2023 Second International Conference on Electrical, Electronics, Information and Communication Technologies (ICEEICT) | 979-8-3503-9763-5/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICEEICT56924.2023.10157091
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
II. LITERATURE SURVEY 
  
A. A 4.68 GB/S BELIEF PROPAGATION POLAR DECODER 
WITH BIT-SPLITTING REGISTER FILE. 
  
A 1.48minz 1024-piece conviction spread polar 
decipher is designed at 6Snm CMOS. Memory size is being 
reduced to 45Kb by an unidirectional handling, also 
upgrades the preparing component.4.6 GB/s throughput had 
been empowered by an two-fold segment 1024parallel 
engineering. Somewhat part lock based enlist document suits 
rationale in memory for a 8S% thickness. The design and 
circuit procedures decrease the ability to 478mW for a 
productivity of IS. SpJ/b/cycle at LO V. At 47SmV. the 
proficiency is enhanced to 3.6pJ/b/cycle for a throughput of 
780Mb/s.  
B. Early Stopping Criteria    for    Energy   Efficient Low- 
Latency Belief-Propagation Polar Code Decoders. 
 
Most extreme accomplishing polar ciphers has been 
expanded essential idea beginning late. Right when all is said 
in done. polar ciphers can be deciphered by either powerful 
wiping out (SC) or the conviction spread (BP) estimation. 
Regardless, instead of SC decoders. execution updates for BP 
deciphers had not been completely scrutinized. Herein this 
article, we inspect novel rathe(early) halting formula for polar 
BP unraveling to basically diminish centrality scrambling and 
deciphering inaction. Regardless, we suggest two zone make 
novel early ceasing formula for recognizing liberal yields. 
For polar (1024.512) ciphers, these two ceasing formulae can 
reduce the measure of cycles by up to 42.5% at 3.5 dB. By 
this point, it is been proposed a novel channel condition 
estimation approach which can help to select indubitable 
ceasing formula in numerous SNR locale. What’s more, the 
apparatus structures of polar BP deciphers with the proposed 
ceasing formula are appeared and made. Blend results display 
that with the use of the proposed completion criteria, the 
essentialness scrambling, and normal latency of polar (1024, 
512) BP decipher can be precised by 1 0% 30% with 2°%-5% 
equip aloft, and normal throughput can be reached out by 
2O%-55%.  
C. Low Complexity Belief Propagation Polar Code Decoder  
Since their improvement, polar codes have gotten 
an impressive proportion of thought because of their 
capacity achieving execution and low encoding and 
unraveling diserse quality. Dynamic intersection Out 
disentangling (SCD) and conviction inciting unraveling 
(BPD) are Iwo systems for deciphering polar codes. SCD 
can achieve extraordinary’ mix-up overhauling execution 
and is less computationally exorbitant when diverged from 
BPD. In any case SCD encounters long lethargy due to the 
successive thought of the dynamic intersection out figuring. 
I3PD is parallel in nature and in this manner is all the more 
charming for low inactivity applications. In any case. since 
it is iterative, the required inaction and essentialness 
dispersing additions straightforwardly with the amount of 
emphasis. In this work, getting the likelihood of SCD and 
propose a novel arrangement subject to sub-factor-graph 
cementing to reduce the typical number of Counts and 
what’s more the ordinary number of cycles requited by BPD. 
which particularly changes over into lower idleness and 
imperativeness scrambling. Amusement results exhibit that 
the proposed arrangement has no execution degradation and 
achieves basic reduction in figuring multifaceted nature over 
the present strategies.  
  
III. METHODOLOGY 
  
Low-thickness equality check codes is having 
scarcely of weight implies these codes doesn’t have more 
number 
to 
speak 
to 
the 
information, 
In 
Binary 
correspondence deletion channel, subsequent to going the 
information through it the information section rotate LDPC 
convention may get affected by fundamental commotion. So 
recuperate the blunders we require a mistake rectifying 
rationale in beneficiary side. Limited length scaling almost 
manages the scaling mistake likelihood in LDPC codes. 
Considering transmission on parallel correspondence 
deletion with practicality eradication c. In this segment. 
consecutive, parallel and conviction aggregate item 
proliferation are presented. Here SPD and PPD is detailed 
concerning information's sent, and are being split by the 
information's conveyed from CNs to VNs in the forward 
information's if the CN is supplement to pristine diagram and 
in reverse information's if all different VNs clasp to the 
separate CN are as of now settled. In the proposed conviction 
spread LDPC compose has successive peeling decoder, 
parallel peeling decoder, conviction whole item engendering 
decoder.  
  
3.1. Code Constructions of SC-LDPC: 
 
The presentation two kinds of developments, 
arbitrarily built normal codes as suggested and a 
development is dependent on protographs. In the wake of 
characterizing the distinguished BEC the leftover diagram 
stage circulation after the transmission. All components of 
the E(i,j,k) vector are zero apart from the progress at 
situations i,j and k which are 1,here 1 shows that the passages 
will be ones. It likewise characterize where the example is 
set to 0 for any as L standard is the whole of all passages of 
v, Mean by X==(X1...Xn) be vector of n non-uniform factors 
(RVs). The information go from CN c to VN v in cycle 1 is 
specified by Ue-->v(l) here it specify the arrangement of 
VNs and (CNs) associated with a particular CN of c (VN of 
v). 
  
3.1.1 RANDOMLY CONSTRUCTED (L, R, L)U SC-LDPC 
CODES: 
  Consider there are L detached (1,r) consonant  codes of 
LDPC here I be degree of VN and r be degree of CN, r <= l, 
l/r E N. Here M VNs will have (1.r) normal LDPC and 
1,r,M,CNs are arranged at L successive locations. The (I, r, 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
L)u cipher will be acquired on increasing 1 of each edge of 
VN along successive positions, so each CN at site of U is 
couplted with  VN at positions u. . .  u + 1 — 1 and a series 
of associated codes will be acquired as presented with a 
precedent in Fig.4. 1.1. At the point when each position of the 
CN are selected aimlessly, the most extreme degree is 
resolved to r. Notwithstanding, quantity of associations have 
the irregularity with particular position of the VNs. Record 
that there are (1—1) extra locations toward the finish of the 
coupled codes chain with no VNs however with CNs 
associated with VN codes over places of the fetters. The rate 
of the code is likely r(I,r,L)u = I-1/r for huge L. 
 
  
Fig.3. 1.1 Erection of (1, r, L)u=(3, 6, 4)u connected proto-graph incudes 
M= 4 codes for single VNs. The CNs placed at 3 and 4 are consistent and 
consists degree r = 6. 
  
3.1.2 Protograph-BASED (L. R. L) SCLDPC CODES: 
 
The protographs are repeated earliest for N events 
before fringes of the identical kind are improved to clear little 
runs in the successive code. The bi-contagiousness lattice B 
is declared slightly with the help of protograph and this is 
called the base framework. N x N stage network is being 
replaced with the each 1 of B.M= Nv VNs are obtained for v 
VNs that are present in protograph. Every single conceivable 
network H got from every single conceivable mix of N x N 
stage grids offer a cipher group. The structure rate r of this 
cipher gathering can be filed from the proto-graph as the 
graph(chart) of the Tanner H fetches the degree of dispersion 
(DD) and diagram layout of community of the proto-graph.  
  
  
  
Fig. 3.1.2. (l,r,L) = (3,6,3) coupled proto-graph construction 
Couple (l,r)-Consistent LDPC codes as indicated by r/I = k  € 
E N. (1, r, L)coupled proto graph are being associated by the 
L proto graph by backing each position u at VN, 1<=u<=l to 
the locations u of CN……U + 1 — 1 as appeared in Fig. 4. 
1.2for L = 3. Each detached proto graph has v = k VNs and a 
single CN with the goal as they obtain M=2N, VNs per 
combined cipher in the wake of raising the development. A 
cipher length N= kLN pinch(bit) and a cipher(code) rate of 
r(I,l) = 1 —(L+i-1)/kL are achieved. 
  
3.2 CHANNEL OF A BINARY ERASURE  
 
Specified by X (t) € {O, 1} the coupled channel 
contribution of an individual time-period (t) and the relating 
channel yield Y(t)  € (0,1,∆} where ∆  means a deletion. Lists 
for time is being dropped where possible and utilize if Y € 
{0, 1) is understood and recognized. An image is deleted in 
the middle of transmission with probability so that have Nc 
(Nv). P(y(t)=∆) With consistently circulated info i.e P (X= 
1)=P(X==0)=1/2, the curb of the BEC is CBsc=H(Y)-
H(Y/X)=1- €   
  
Fig. 3.2 (1. r, L) (3, 6. 3) coupled protograph construction. 
  
3.2.1 Residual Degree Distribution 
 
Graph after Transmission  
  
Subsequent to transferring VNs v1…vn atop of 
BEC, a definite portion of VNs is removed as represented in 
Fig. 3.2. The grid-edges are associated with the removed VNs 
is regularly defied as the leftover diagram as it says about 
classification of equality conditions that stay to be untangled 
and convalesce the entire codeword.  
 
  
Fig. 3.2.1. Residual graph after transmission over a BEC. 
  
To identify the degree dissemination (DD), each 
boundary(edge) is marked at the proto-graph interfacing an 
alternate match of hubs of 1 to m. As we can see in Tanner 
diagram portrayal of the equality survey grid H of a cipher 
caused by a proto-graph, here specified by a sort of specific 
edge which was mimeographed with j€{1,2,..,m}which 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
indicates the category of  VN with v=(d1.... .dm). Likewise, 
its typify this kind of CN of c enunciate the quantity for VNs 
(CNs)  sort v (c) in the Tanner chart of H with Lv(Rc). The 
firm of VN(CN) varieties in the diagram is meant by Fv (Fe). 
Fig. 4.2.2 demonstrates the naming of an uncoupled (2, 4) 
LDPC troupe for instance and conceivable results of CNs in 
the lingering diagram after transmission. We talked about the 
numerous mixes of familiar and uncertain boundaries are 
workable by a CN compose before transmission. As we 
stipulated by ranging the CN composes after the 
transmission with Fe. There should not be extra VN 
composes after the transmission with the goal that 
arrangement of VN composes in the remaining chart is still 
Fv.  
  
  
Fig 3.2.2 CN Lypes after transmission. 
  
3.3 DECODERS FOR THE BINARY  
ERASURE-CHANNEL  
Let us say the transmission over a BEC with erasure 
probability. Progressive peeling unwinding (SPD). PPD and 
BP are viewed here. The definition PPD and SPD to the 
extent transformations carried and hew the information 
transferred from VNs to CNs into further information's if  
CN is related with rest of the chart, thereby in turn around 
information's if all unique VNs related with the different CN 
are starting at now settled.  
 
3.3.1 Sequential Peeling Decoder  
 
We know that VNs of the graph and their 
interconnected margins(edges) arc evicted to procure the 
remaining figure. A dcg-1 CN is defined as a CN of residue-
chart having one associated obscure VN. In every urgency 
1,a reclusive deg-l of CN of c is picked and the connected 
with the VN of v and will be settled. The cleared v and every 
single nearby edge to CNs c‘ €  Nv from the leftover 
diagram. To figure information.  
 
𝜇𝐶→𝑣(𝑙) = {𝑠, 𝑡𝑓 𝜇𝑣′ →𝑐(𝑙) = 𝑠, 𝑣′ ∈𝑁𝑐{𝑣}
0,                  𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒
}…(1) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Assuming for any of the VN v and any of the  CN c 
in the diagram.  
Assuming  μc------>v(l),c€Nv is settled, at that point v is 
settled amid winds up settled, and all cordial μv--->Nv(l+1) 
remain settled in further cycles l+i:  
 
𝑢𝑣→𝑐(𝑙+ 1) = {𝑠, 𝑡𝑓 𝜇𝑐′ →𝑣(𝑙) = 𝑠 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑐′ ∈𝑁𝑣
0,                  𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒
}…(2) 
 
 The following call of [μv--->c(l+1)==f(μc-->v(l))]the 
information will be moved at v and [μv--->c(L+1)=f(μc--
>v(l))]information will provide backwards. Assume that 
with the SPD μv-->c (l+1)  is a function of μc-->v (l).  
  
  
Fig. 3.3.1. Decoding using SPD. 
  
A case of the SPD is outlined in the Fig. 4.3.1 for 
the remaining chart displayed in the Fig. 3.2.1. As in each 
cycle the deg-l CN must be settled is selected erratically. The 
arrangement of leftover charts for a few interpreting 
acknowledge may contrast for a given transmission 
acknowledgment.  
 
3.3.2 Parallel Peeling Decoder  
 
PPD utilizes an unpredicted preparation for 
differentiating to SPD. Rather than settling just a solitary 
deg-l CN per it priority, all attainable deg-l CNs are resolved. 
Fig. 4.3.1 delineates PPD emphasis for the leftover diagram 
of the Fig. 4.2.1. Here PPD is destined for the given 
transmission acknowledgment. Every accessible CNs of 
deg-1 are settled in each progression, accordingly grouping 
of lingering diagrams does not vary.  
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Fig. 3.3.2. Decoding using PPD 
  
3.3.3. Decoder Of the Belief Propagation 
 
For BP unraveling, iterative information is applied  
and going as portrayed in the wake of instating the VNs with 
their associating channel yield after transmission. From VNs 
to their neighboring CNs information is being passed and 
again are appeared in the model in the Fig. 4.3.3, The work 
of  CN is undefined for PPD. In any case, each μv-->c (l)  
from VN of v to nearby of any CN of c be dependent on just  
details acquired from other verging of CNs in Nv \ {c} 
 
𝑢𝑣→𝑐(𝑙+ 1) = {𝑠, 𝑡𝑓 𝜇𝑐′ →𝑣(𝑙) = 𝑠 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑐′ ∈𝑁𝑣{𝑐}
0,                  𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒
} 
  
As μv--->c (l+1) is obtained backwards will not rest 
on μc-->v(l), the information's passed in the two headings 
can be contrast. BP for the Fig. 4.2.1 is portrayed in the Fig. 
4.3.3. As every information is being placed. Now just 
examine the information's in the leftover diagram. BP is 
additionally deterministic.  
 
 
Fig. 3.3.3. Decoding using BP 
 
3.3.4 Equivalence of PPD and SPD  
 
Organization of PPD and SPD. It is characterized 
as ceasing sets and demonstrate that with boundlessly 
numerous emphases. the two decoders give a similar 
outcome. A suspending set S is the part(subset) of 
arrangement for all VNs in the code C with the end goal 
that all neighbors CNs of S are associated with S 
somewhere around double.  
a)The identical outcome for SPD and PPD: SPD and PPD 
dependably acquire a similar unraveling result. This can be 
clarified naturally since deciphering on the BEC measures 
up to fathoming a direct arrangement of conditions. 
Consequently, SPD and PPD dependably come Up short 
for under determined parts of the arrangement of 
conditions, and in this manner acquire a similar translating 
result. 
b) Information’s sent inside S stay deleted: Consider 
utilizing SPD,PPD and BR. The elements of CN of every 
one of the decoders are mostly identical and they can settle 
VN of  v linked with CN of  c having the other approaching 
information's with c from VNs ‘v  € Nc \{v} are familiar 
within the priority 1. Entire neighboring CNs->VNs->S are 
correlated with unsettled VNs of the S somewhere around. 
Along these lines, no decoders can complete any of the 
information μc—>v(I), v € S. c € Nv transferred at nearby 
VNsv € Nc in an priority 1. Remember not just information 
go inside a ceasing set S can never be settled. yet in addition 
sent from S to whatever remains of the leftover chart can 
never be settled amid the interpreting procedure. Remember 
PPD composed of continuation of the (inspected)conditions 
of specific acknowledgment of the irregular SPD. Equality, 
PPD and BP as per the eradication likelihood of each VN is 
monotonically diminishing in the middle of  the translating 
procedure. Di appeared in an repetitious decoder will get a 
particular answer for a given acknowledgment of the code 
word transmitted on the top of BEC. Be that as ii may, the 
conduct of various decoders amid unraveling isn’t talked 
about in detail.  
 
IV. RESULT ANALYSIS 
 
VHDL module code is composed and it is 
mimicked and defended by modelsim 6.4b and the code is 
additionally integrated by. utilizing Xilinx ISE 13+2 with 
item forms target gadget xc3s500e-5fg320. family gadget 
Spartan 3E.  
  
4.1 Simulation Results  
 
Here information bits are transmitted preceding 
LDPC framework along distinguishing the mistake utilizing 
LDPC decoder blunder can remedied independent from 
anyone else utilizing disorder, In conviction aggregate item 
proliferation process is planned by less number of XOR 
entryways differentiate by successive and parallel peeling 
decoders. A code word is of 8- bit degree is transmitted by 
an uproarious class of data likewise disorder is figured [lien 
in the wake of supplementing blunder bit get right code word 
that implies adjust information and equality. Here one 
information grasp S-bit of information give with no 
relatively interface among sources of info and yields. Take 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
an info information 10101010 as featured in fig +7,1 as the 
condition expressed in code is that fifth and eighth spot is to 
be checked. Secluded expansion must be done in those 
situations to get the yield. The yields are 0 at that point 
supplement the unused positions i.e.0 1011100. Straightly 
according to code secluded expansion somewhere in the 
range of 0101 1100 and 00001001 is to execute yield is 
00001000,  
 
 
Fig. 4.1 Simulation waveform of belief sum-product propagation 
  
4.2 Timing Report  
 
In this consideration work simulation of 4-bit belief 
sum-product propagation is realized the timing report 
exhibited.  
  
  
 4.3 RTL Schematic  
  
In integrated circuitry, RTL logic composition is a 
frame isolation that represents an identical numeracy circuits 
concerning digital signals flow connects to the logical 
operations. registers. The accomplishment of urge schematic 
is shown in Fig.9 using Xilinx 13.2 which illustrates the 
advanced device representation on collective design such as 
AND gates. OR gates. adders etc that are liberated about 
selected Xilin device.  
  
 
Fig.4.3 Register transfer level of belief sumproduct 
propagation 
  
4.4 Design Summary: 
 
The prompt synthesis of 4-bit belief sum product 
propagation is bringing out where the usage of logic slices is 
elementary module units in scheme FPGA. Although 
corresponding every slice includes a number of bonded input 
outputs. logic carry elements, look-up table that unveil the 
logic analysis prototype beyond survey. The slices logic used 
are 1 lacking of 4656 with usage of 0 %The number of LUTI 
is a compact nonparallel SRAM drawn attain lime 
independent logic. The number of LUT’s input used are 1 
lacking of 9312 with usage of 0%. The number of bonded 
lOBs is a input output buffer, imposition the number of 
constrain on device, uses 35 lacking of 232 with use of 15%.  
  
Table.1 Device utilization summary of belief sum -product propagation 
Device Utilization summary of Belief sum-product propagation 
(Estimated values) 
LOCAL 
UTILIZATION 
USED 
AVAILABLE 
UTILIZATION 
Number of slices 
1 
4656 
0% 
Number of 4 
inputs LUTs 
1 
9312 
0% 
Number of 
bonded IOBs 
35 
232 
15% 
  
V. CONCLUSION 
 
In this content, finite length LDPC protocol 
existence concern in some communication approach by its 
excellent performance A method based on connected sub 
factorgraph freezing (CSFG for propagation form belief 
polar cipher with quarter-way scheduling method this early-
stopping strategy not either remove average complexity of 
the BPD, therefore it will be reducing consumption of energy 
during deciphering but it still taking more number of 
iterations. It is shown that sequential peeling decoding 
(SPD), parallel-peeling decoding (PPD) and Belief-sum-
product Propagation decoder (BPD) takes fewer repetitions 
when the codes passed through binary erasure channel. The 
Sum-product belief propagation LDPC decoder achieves 
more speed with lessen convolution.  
 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
REFERENCES 
  
[1]  
Erdal Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing 
capacity achieving codes for symmetric binary input memoryless 
channels” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory ,Volume: 
55, Issue: 7, July 2009. 
[2]  
F.R.Kschischang and A.Alamdar-Yazdi, “A simplified successive 
cancellation decoder for polar codes,” IEEE Communications 
Letters, Vol. 15, No. 12, December 2011. 
 [3]  
E. Arikan, “A performance comparison of polar codes and Reed-
Muller codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, Vol. 12, No. 6, June 
2008. 
 [4]  
A. Liu. Z. Ye. C. Gong. Y. Zhang. X. Pan “A modified belief 
propagation polar decoder,” IEEE Commun. Lett.. vol. 18. no. 7. 
pp. 109 1—1094, Jul. 2014.  
[5]  
K, Chen and K. Niu, “Stack decoding of polar codes.” Electron. Lett., 
vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 695—696, Jul. 2012.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[6]  
Z. Yan and J. Lin. “An efficient list decoder architecture for polar 
codes.” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) 1Syst., vol. 23, 
no. 
11, 
pp. 
2508—2518. 
Nov. 
2015. 
doi: 
10.1 
IO9JTVLSI.2014.2378992. 
[7]  
A. Vardv and I. Tal. ‘List decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE 
Int. 5,vmp. Jr/ Theory iSIT,, Jul/Aug. 2011, pp. 1—5.  
[8]  
C. Xiong. Z. Yan. J.Lin and “Reduced complexity belief propagation 
decoders for polar codes.” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. 
Syst. (SiPS) Oct. 2015, pp. 16.  
[9]  
Z. Wang. J. Lin. and J.Sha. “Stage-combined belief propagation 
decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. 
(JSCAS,), May 2016. pp. 421—424.  
[10]  J.Chen, Y.Fan, C.H.Tsui. S.M.Abbas. “High-throughput and energy-
efficient belief propagation polar code decoder” IEEE Transactions 
on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems , Volume: 
25, Issue: 3, March 2017. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:19:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
