3872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Analysis of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for the Gilbert–Elliott Channel
Andrew W. Eckford, Member, IEEE, Frank R. Kschischang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Subbarayan Pasupathy, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Density evolution analysis of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in memoryless channels is extended to the Gilbert–Elliott (GE) channel, which is a special case of a large class of channels with hidden Markov memory. In a procedure referred to as estimation decoding, the sum–product algorithm (SPA) is used to perform LDPC decoding jointly with channel-state detection. Density evolution results show (and simulation results confirm) that such decoders provide a significantly enlarged region of successful decoding within the GE parameter space, compared with decoders that do not exploit the channel memory. By considering a variety of ways in which a GE channel may be degraded, it is shown how knowledge of the decoding behavior at a single point of the GE parameter space may be extended to a larger region within the space, thereby mitigating the large complexity needed in using density evolution to explore the parameter space point-by-point. Using the GE channel as a straightforward example, we conclude that analysis of estimation decoding for LDPC codes is feasible in channels with memory, and that such analysis shows large potential gains.
Index Terms—Density evolution, estimation-decoding, GilbertElliott channel, low-density parity-check codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], a class of codes with very sparse parity-check matrices, have generated a great deal of interest as a result of their excellent error-correction performance using simple iterative decoding algorithms. These codes may be decoded by applying the sum–product algorithm (SPA) in a factor-graph representation of the code, as described, e.g., in [2]. Because of the presence of cycles in the graph, this algorithm does not provide minimum symbol-error-rate performance; nevertheless, simulations involving transmission over memoryless channels demonstrate that LDPC codes can be highly effective. Indeed, irregular LDPC codes are among the best known block codes, in the sense that they closely approach the Shannon limit [3], [4]. Density evolution (DE) analysis [3], [5] provides performance thresholds for LDPC codes of a given construction, establishing a region of channel parameters over which iterative decoding is successful (symbol-error-rate bounded below a given value) in the limit of long block length.
Manuscript received October 25, 2002; revised May 28, 2005. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 41st Annual Allerton Conference on Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, October 2003.
The authors are with The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada (e-mail: andrew.eckford@utoronto.ca; frank@comm.utoronto.ca; pas@comm.utoronto.ca).
Communicated by A. Kavcˇic´, Associate Editor for Detection and Estimation. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.856934

The application of LDPC codes to channels with memory has attracted increasing interest in the literature. The conventional approach is illustrated in [6], where an LDPC code was applied to a correlated Rayleigh-fading channel. The authors noted that, for sufficiently long block length, the random construction of the code acts implicitly as an interleaver, destroying any latent channel memory effects. However, many recent papers have pointed out that joint estimation-decoding algorithms can result in significantly improved performance for channels with memory. Early work in this area includes that of Wiberg [7], who discussed the inclusion of estimation on the same factor graph as the LDPC decoder, and that of Worthen and Stark [8], who implemented such an integrated estimation-decoding system for a block fading channel. The theory of adapting the factor graph representation of a decoder to incorporate the random behavior of a channel with memory was advanced in [9], [10]. More recently, a joint estimation-decoding scheme was proposed for the Gilbert–Elliott (GE) channel for turbo codes in [11] and LDPC codes in [12]. In particular, [12] shows empirically that joint estimation-decoding strategies can result in reliable communication at rates above the capacity of the equivalent memoryless channel (though, of course, below the capacity of the channel with memory). A similar estimation-decoding algorithm for more general Markov noise sources was presented in [13]. DE was used to analyze an estimation-decoding scheme for LDPC codes in an intersymbol interference channel in [14], and to compare the performance of LDPC codes and other turbo-like codes in partial response channels in [15]. All of this work shows that the performance of LDPC codes continues to be excellent, and that taking channel memory into account leads to improvements in performance.
The DE algorithm establishes bounds on the ultimate performance of LDPC codes in the limit of long block length, allowing the calculation of a threshold in a memoryless channel with a one-dimensional parameter space. The DE algorithm implements a decision function, taking channel parameters as inputs, and determining whether or not the decoder achieves a very small probability of error for these parameter values. As such, the DE technique can only be used to probe individual points within the space of channel parameters. Efficient characterization of this space requires knowledge of the implications of the status of decoding at each point in as many dimensions of the channel parameter space as possible. If the decoder achieves small probability of error for one particular channel with memory, ideally this point should induce a multidimensional decoding region within the parameter space within which every set of channel parameters also achieves the same

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3873

or smaller probability of error. For instance, if a memoryless channel having a single parameter is monotonic, then an interval of parameter values is induced by each point for which small probability of error is achieved [5], resulting in a threshold. Similarly, if the DE algorithm returns the result that some point has probability of error bounded away from zero, this point should induce a region in which every point has the same or greater probability of error. In this way, the parameter space is partitioned into a decoding region, a nondecoding region, and an uncertain region. The size and shape of the uncertain region then guides the selection of new points to test using the DE algorithm.
In this paper, we present a DE-based analysis of LDPC decoding over the GE channel. The GE channel is used for two reasons: first, it is one of the simplest nontrivial channels with memory, and second, it is a coarse approximation for more practical and complicated channels with memory, such as fading channels. Our objectives are as follows:
• to make DE analysis feasible in a channel with memory, by providing an efficient means of characterizing the parameter space; and
• to show that joint estimation decoding in the GE channel is a quantifiably good strategy under a wide range of parameters.

a (discrete) random variable . Thus,

.

Likewise, the probability density function (pdf) of a continuous

random variable will be denoted as

. When no confu-

sion can arise, we will let the argument of the pmf or pdf identify

the corresponding random variable, writing for

and

for

. Thus, and are, in general, different

functions. Likewise, we will write

for

Vectors will be denoted in bold letters, e.g., we may have and

where

.

A. LDPC Estimation Decoding

The GE channel is a binary-input, binary-output channel in

which the channel output vector

in response to the

channel input vector

is given as

The contributions of this work include the following results. We prove in Section II that density evolution analysis is applicable to GE channels by showing that various necessary conditions are satisfied. In Section III, we state several theorems which characterize the space of GE channel parameters, showing that any point for which estimation decoding is known to converge to small probability of error induces a region of successful decoding in the parameter space, generalizing the notion of thresholds from [5]. Conversely, we show that a point for which estimation decoding does not converge to small probability of error induces a region of unsuccessful decoding. In Section IV, we derive the density evolution algorithm for the GE channel. In Section V, we provide results from the DE algorithm demonstrating the partitioning of GE channel parameters into decoding, nondecoding, and uncertain regions. The decoding regions are shown to be significantly larger than the regions of parameters where estimation decoding converges to small probability of error under the assumption of perfect interleaving (i.e., the assumption that all channel memory is destroyed). All these results indicate that analysis of LDPC decoding is feasible in channels with memory, and that large gains are possible using joint estimation-decoding techniques.

II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PREREQUISITES

In this section, we discuss the necessary channel and decoder

models to motivate the remainder of the paper. We begin by

introducing the factor-graph model for an estimator decoder for

LDPC codes in the GE channel. Subsequently, we show that this

decoder satisfies the necessary conditions for DE analysis.

Throughout this paper, random variables will be denoted with

upper case letters, and specific values from the corresponding

sample space with corresponding lower case letters. We will use

the notation

to represent the probability of an event ,

and

to represent the probability mass function (pmf) of

where

is a noise sequence, and denotes com-

ponentwise modulo- addition. The noise sequence arises

from a two-state hidden Markov process with state sequence

, such that

,

where we define

. The state represents

a “bad” binary-symmetric channel (BSC) with relatively large

crossover probability, whereas state represents a “good” BSC

with relatively smaller crossover probability. The state transition

probabilities are given by

and

resulting in marginal steady-state probabilities of

and

, and an average

inversion probability of

(1)

Throughout this paper, we assume that the GE Markov process

is in steady state. We define the GE parameter space as the

set of all -tuples

representing points in the GE

parameter space, such that

(i.e., nonin-

verting channels) and

(i.e., nondeterministic

channels). In this paper, we restrict our analysis to the param-

eter space represented by .

Now let the channel inputs be codewords from a given binary

LDPC code with an

parity-check matrix . We will

assume that the LDPC code is regular with check degree and

variable degree , so that each row of contains exactly

ones and each column of contains exactly ones. The th

row of is denoted , and the transpose of is denoted

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Let

be a codeword indicator function,

where

if

and

otherwise. Let

be the indicator function for the th row of ,

defined so that

if and only if

, i.e., if and

only if satisfies the parity-check equation represented by the

th row of . The function may be considered as a function

only of those codeword positions that actually participate in this

parity-check equation, i.e., we may write as

, where

represents the restriction of to those positions where ones

appear in . Since is a valid codeword if and only if it satisfies

all parity-check equations, we have

a factorization that can be represented using a factor graph as explained in [2]. Assuming that each codeword of is equally likely to be selected by the transmitter, we have
, where denotes the number of codewords of . Likewise, the pmf for the state sequence can be factored, since it is a Markov chain, as

Fig. 1. GE-LDPC decoder graph.

The joint pmf of the channel output , codeword , and state
Fig. 2. A depiction of the message flow through the Markov subgraph.
sequence is therefore given by
We first define some useful quantities for message calculation. Let be the all-one column vector with components. Let be the state transition probability matrix, so that

(2)

Using this model and message-passing decoding using the SPA,

since there are loops in the factor graph, an estimate for the a

posteriori probability

for each of the transmitted sym-

bols may be obtained through marginalization and subse-

quent normalization, using the definition of conditional proba-

bility. This probabilistic model results in a factor graph formed

by connecting the LDPC factor graph and the GE Markov chain

Let

be the function that translates be-

tween the two types of binary random variables, where

if

and

if

. Let

be defined as

(3)

factor graph, so that edges are created to connect the appro-

priate symbol-variable nodes and channel factor nodes. This GE-LDPC decoder is depicted graphically in Fig. 1. For clarity, we will refer to variable and factor nodes in the LDPC subgraph as symbol-variable nodes and parity-check nodes, respec-

If is the log-likelihood ratio turns . Furthermore, let

, then

re-

, and let

tively, and variable and factor nodes in the Markov subgraph as

state-variable nodes and state-factor nodes, respectively.

B. Sum–Product Messages

where is the

identity matrix.

The forward message and the backward message carry

In terms of message passing using the SPA, the two messages summarized information about a channel state . Under the

in the LDPC subgraph, which are messages from symbol-vari- SPA, the messages are functions of

, so and

able nodes to parity-check nodes and vice versa, are now joined are two-element vectors, with each element corresponding to a

by four new messages, depicted in Fig. 2: the vector forward point of the function. In both cases, the first element of the vector

message, represented by ; the vector backward message, rep- corresponds to the state.

resented by ; the scalar channel message, represented by ; Referring to Fig. 2, the message is calculated from an

and the scalar extrinsic message, represented by .

input forward message extrinsic information message ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3875

and channel output . Using the SPA, following some manipulation it is straightforward to show that

(4)

Similarly, the backward message is a function of an input backward message , extrinsic information message , and channel output . The SPA gives the relation

(5)

noting that the denominator terms in (4) and (5) are both scalar.

The denominator terms are normalization constants, which are

optional for intermediate messages; they are used here to force (that is, the elements of and can be
treated as probabilities). The channel message conveys information about the
channel observations from the Markov subgraph to the LDPC

N M Fig. 3. The two types of directed local neighborhood, and . The
defining difference is whether the message along e is passed from variable node to factor node or vice versa; the variable nodes or factor nodes could each be from either the GE or LDPC subgraph.

subgraph. The message carrying the channel information is

expressed as a log-likelihood ratio (as is the convention in results from this section, and not the methods, are used in the

LDPC decoding), so the channel message may be given as

rest of the paper.

Cycle-Free Local Neighborhoods and the Independence

(6) Assumption. We are interested in subgraphs of the GE-LDPC

The extrinsic message is calculated in the same manner as messages from a symbol-variable node to a parity-check node, and is also passed as a log-likelihood ratio. However, all incident messages from parity-check nodes are included in the calculation, and the incident channel message is excluded.
Finally, an appropriate message-passing schedule must also be specified. Although there are many choices, the schedule which is most relevant to the remainder of this work is defined as follows:

factor graph that contain only those nodes and edges involved in the calculation of a message along an edge after a given number of iterations; we will refer to such a subgraph as the directed local neighborhood of , previously defined in [5], and use the message-passing schedule given in the previous section.
Formally, the directed local neighborhood of depth for an edge connecting a parity-check node and a symbol-variable node is defined as the graph including all nodes and edges traversed by all paths containing edges and originating at variable node such that is not the first edge traversed by

any such path. We will say that is the apex of the local neigh-

Message-Passing Schedule. Divide the set of nodes in the factor graph into the set of factor nodes (both parity-checks and channel factors), and the set of variable nodes (both symbol variables and channel states). A full iteration proceeds in two steps: first perform the SPA at each factor node (in any order), passing the appropriate messages to each attached variable node; then calculate the SPA at each variable node (in any order), passing the appropriate messages to each attached factor node.
This is a simple extension of the customary message-passing schedule for LDPC decoding, and alternatives are available. For instance, one proposed schedule uses iterations in the LDPC code for every iteration in the Markov chain [17]; our schedule is equivalent to this schedule for . We do not consider the question of optimal scheduling in this work.

borhood.

We use the notation if the starting direction of the edge

is reversed, i.e., is the set traversed by all paths of length

originating at parity-check node such that is not the first edge

traversed. These two types of local neighborhoods are depicted

in Fig. 3. From the message-passing schedule, it is easy to see

that is the set of nodes and edges involved in the calculation

of the message passed from a variable node to a factor node

along after iterations. (This includes messages passed in the

GE Markov chain.)

To make analysis tractable, we require the messages passed

within a local neighborhood to be independent, a condition

which is called the independence assumption. A necessary

condition for the independence assumption is that the directed

local neighborhood of an edge be cycle free to some fixed

depth with

as the block length

. To show

C. Conditions for Density Evolution

this, the stochastic properties of the LDPC subgraph must be defined. Let the ensemble of LDPC subgraphs be identical to

Two conditions are required of a decoder for the efficient ap- the ensemble defined in [5], as follows. Let be the number of

plication of DE analysis: the independence assumption and sym- sockets (i.e., connection points for an edge) in both the set of

metry, each of which is outlined in the following. We do not con- symbol-variable nodes and the set of parity-check nodes. Since

sider the concentration theorem [5], since this theorem is not re- the LDPC graph is bipartite, the number of sockets is the same

quired to show that the symbol error probability becomes small in both sets. Label the symbol-variable and parity-check node

for a regular (as opposed to an irregular) LDPC code. Only the sockets from to , and obtain a permutation on

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3876

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

where the permutation is selected at random with a uniform distribution over all such permutations. Finally, draw edges from symbol-variable socket to parity-check socket .
Using this ensemble, it is known that the LDPC subgraph satisfies the cycle-free property, and the GE-LDPC graph can be shown to satisfy the property as well. Although this result and its proof are similar to the claim and proof, given in [5], that the LDPC local neighborhoods are cycle free, we include these results because of the importance of cycle-free local neighborhoods in our later exposition.

Theorem 1: For any fixed

is cycle free

as

.

Proof: Here we present a sketch of the proof; a rigorous

proof can be obtained by following the arguments from [5, Ap-

pendix A]. First, calculate

is cycle free

is cycle free

for some . Let and represent the number of variable

and factor nodes, respectively, in a local neighborhood . A

loop is formed: 1) if a parity-check node is selected twice, or 2) if

the time index of a symbol-variable node is sufficiently close to

the time index of an already selected node (because the Markov

factor graphs will join as the graph is further constructed). Under

N the second condition, if a symbol variable is selected, then at Fig. 4. A segment of the local neighborhood of edge e.
most symbol variables are forbidden in order to prevent cy-

cles. Following [5], it is straightforward to show that

is bounded below by

, which approaches

is cycle free

is cycle free

as

, since is constant with respect to . How-

ever, this is still true if the constant is replaced with some

function of , say , with the properties

and

. An example of such a function

is

. Since the subscripts of symbol variables in

where is the check degree and is the variable degree; and the local neighborhood may therefore be arbitrarily separated

taking the product of these conditional densities from

to with

, the mutual information between their associated

states goes to zero, so the state sequences contributing to the

is cycle free

channel message at each symbol variable may be assumed to be independent.

Since does not depend on .

is cycle free

Symmetry. Recall the definition of

from the previous

as section. A channel message is symmetric if it can be written

, where is the symbol corresponding to the mes-

An example GE-LDPC local neighborhood is given in Fig. 4. sage , and is a random variable independent of the trans-

The cycle-free condition is necessary, but not sufficient, mitted codeword. If channel messages are symmetric then the

to prove the independence assumption, because the Markov performance of the decoder is independent of the transmitted

memory of the channel states implies that these states can be codeword. This dramatically reduces the complexity of calcu-

dependent (however weakly) over long periods of time. In lating DE, in that it allows us to perform the calculations with

fact, if local neighborhood

is selected from the factor respect to a fixed codeword—in most cases, the all-zero code-

graph for a finite-length code, this means that the independence word—with the guarantee that all codewords will perform iden-

assumption cannot hold.

tically. We need only establish the symmetry condition on the

However, if the block length of the code approaches , we channel messages, since if these are symmetric, all messages

may make the following argument. Let

be a code- passed within the LDPC subgraph are also symmetric [5].

word, and let

be the difference in sub- We proceed in two steps: first, we show that is symmetric if

script between two codeword symbols and . In defining the forward and backward messages, and , are independent

the channel, we assumed that symbols are transmitted in order of the transmitted codeword; and second, since and are

of subscript, so

measures the separation of two sym- obtained from the extrinsic message , we verify that and

bols in time. Suppose is in a particular local neighborhood satisfy this independence as long as is symmetric.

. As a consequence of Theorem 1, the probability that no In the first step, we note that is a function of the probability

symbol-variable nodes are selected such that

of the channel state , which is itself a function of and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3877

. Under the SPA, is calculated as in (6), which can also be Theorem 2: For SPA decoding in the GE channel, if all mes-

written

sages satisfy the symmetry property, then all messages sat-

isfy the symmetry property, and so the probability of error for

any symbol is independent of the transmitted codeword.

Proof: This statement follows from the arguments given

above, as well as the definition and proof of the symmetry con-

However, since

is the pmf of a binary-symmetric dition given in [5].

channel, it is easy to show that

No equivalent “symmetry condition” exists for and ,

(7) which are passed as functions of the channel state. The symmetry condition simplified DE in the LDPC subgraph by

Furthermore, there exists a random variable

, se-

lected by the channel and independent of , so that for given

values

and

. Substi-

tuting this for in (7), both and everything under the

logarithm are independent of the transmitted codeword (under

the assumption that and are independent of the codeword),

so satisfies the symmetry condition.

The second step proceeds by induction. In the initial step of

the induction, there is no input value of , so we use the prior

density instead. A look at Fig. 2 shows that the SPA calcu-

lation of is a marginalization over and . (We will drop

the subscripts for convenience, so this is a marginalization over

allowing DE to assume that every symbol variable was set to zero, so a lack of symmetry for messages as a function of
implies that each possible channel state sequence must be considered separately. Fortunately, this does not pose an undue burden. The channel state messages can be shown to form a Markov process, so the complexity scales with the size of the state space, which is small. This property follows from the calculation of the channel state messages incident to a channel factor node. In the derivation of the DE algorithm, an intermediate step in the calculation of each message is the conditioning of that message on both possible values of the state, which also simplifies the subsequent marginalization operations.

and .) The marginalization can occur in either order, so we will consider first. The marginalization over for particular

III. ANALYSIS OF GE-LDPC DECODING

values of the channel observation

and future state

, designated

sum–product form by

, current state

,

, is given in

In Section II, we established that the requirements of density evolution are satisfied by GE-LDPC decoders. In this section, we present the main contribution of our work: characteriza-

tion of a three-dimensional decoding region induced by points

in the GE parameter space where successful decoding occurs.

(Since the GE parameter space is four-dimensional, ideally we

where

. Expanding the expression for each would like a four-dimensional characterization; a result for the

value of , and recalling that is the inversion probability in remaining dimension is a subject of active research.)

state , we may write

We introduce this section with some notation. Let

rep-

resent the probability of symbol error for the factor-graph de-

coder represented by the cycle-free local neighborhood ,

where is an edge from a symbol-variable node to a parity-

check node (that is, for a sufficiently long code,

is the a

posteriori probability of symbol error after the th iteration of

GE-LDPC decoding). To designate this quantity for a specific

where represents the logical inverse of . However, by as- point

sumption, is symmetric and can be written

,

in the GE parameter space, we write

or

.

where is a random variable independent of the transmitted

codeword. Also, remember that substitution, we may write

. Making the A. Side Information Analysis of decoders using DE depends only on the struc-

ture of the local neighborhood , which is a subgraph of the

which is independent of the transmitted codeword. The subse-

quent marginalization over

, cannot introduce

a new dependence on the codeword, so we can conclude that

is independent of the codeword as long as is symmetric. In

the induction step, if the input message is independent of the

transmitted codeword, the only difference is that there is a dif-

overall GE-LDPC factor graph. Furthermore, using the subset

of observations associated with this subgraph, connects a

symbol variable node to a parity-check node. The SPA and DE

both assume that, if the local neighborhood is cycle free, then the

pmf of , along with the appropriate hidden variables, is com-

pletely described by the local neighborhood; and therefore, the

SPA calculates

. We will not prove that the SPA actually

ferent , which is still independent of the transmitted code- calculates

in a general setting (though we conjecture

word. Thus, by induction, the messages are independent of the that it is so, under conditions that hold with

). However,

transmitted codeword. The same argument can be used for . under the independence assumption and the symmetry condi-

Thus, we may make the following statement.

tion, we need only examine the factor graph to obtain the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3878

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

probability of error for decoding at the th iteration of the SPA. Furthermore, since this factor graph is cycle free, under the SPA, it implements an optimal a posteriori detector for given .
Our general approach in the sequel will be to take two GE channels, and , with different parameters, and show that the local neighborhood for can be constructed from the local neighborhood for and the factor graph representing some side information . Since the cycle-free local neighborhood represents an optimal decoder up to depth for the symbol
, the deletion of cannot improve the probability of error, so we can order the probabilities of error under and . We formalize the consequences of deleting side information with the following straightforward lemma.

Lemma 1 (Side Information): Let

and

be

the outputs of two independent channels with common input

. Let

denote the detection function that

minimizes probability of error, i.e., that minimizes

Practically, when an LDPC code over a given channel is ana-

lyzed with DE, the result may be that

approaches zero

to within the precision of a computer representation. A system

designer is normally only interested in whether the probability

of error is at or below some very small but acceptable value

(say, , which is comparable to the limits of machine preci-

sion). Furthermore, a system designer is normally constrained

by a maximum number of iterations, designated . Letting

be the maximum acceptable error probability, we will be in-

terested in the cases where

, which will

correspond to the case of successful decoding, and from The-

orem 3, we know that

for some

implies

that both

and

, which

guarantees successful decoding. We will also be interested in

cases where

. The set of points

where

will be referred to as the decoding region

(i.e., the region of parameters where the decoding is successful),

while the set of points where

will be referred

to as the nondecoding region.

when both channel outputs are observed, and let

denote

the detection function that minimizes probability of error when

only is observed. Then

.

Proof: The key to the proof is that

always has

the option to throw out . Define

so that

for all and , meaning that

is only trivially (or formally) a function of . Since

is the detector which minimizes as a function of

and , then obviously

Lemma 1 is a generalization of a technique used in the Proof

of Theorem 1 in [5], which proved monotonicity for physically

degraded channels.

As our first result from Lemma 1, and to give a flavor of its

use, we give the following useful results that

is monoton-

ically nonincreasing with , and that its limit exists, generalizing

the result from [3, Theorem 7]) to the GE-LDPC case.

Theorem 3: For any integer and any GE channel :

•

and

•

exists (and is finite).

B. BSC Concatenation

Our first result arises from the observation that a GE channel

concatenated with a BSC results in a different GE channel. Con-

sider a GE channel with parameters

, whose

output is passed through a BSC with parameter . Since the BSC

is independent of the channel state sequence, the state transition

probabilities are unchanged, so from the above, the output is a

GE channel with different inversion probabilities.

Intuitively, concatenating a GE channel with a BSC should in-

crease the probability of error. For a given channel , there

will be a set of channels in that result from the concatenation

of with a BSC; there will also be a set of channels in that,

when concatenated with a particular BSC, result in . We will

argue that any channel in the former set has higher than

under LDPC decoding, while any channel in the latter set has

lower than .

Formally, define the function

so that

returns the channel that results from concatenating with

a BSC having parameter , where

. The set

(the former set from the intuitive discussion) is defined as

s.t.

Proof: To prove the first statement, let represent the

observations in , and let represent the observations in

, both of which are assumed to be cycle free. Note that

is the probability of error for the optimal decoder for

. Furthermore, under iterative decoding, clearly all the evi-

dence is included in . That is, if an observation is used

by the decoder after iterations of decoding, it is also used

after

iterations of decoding. Since

is the

probability of error for the optimal decoder for , which con-

tains and possibly some extra observations, discarding those

extra observations cannot decrease the probability of error, so

.

To prove the second statement, the sequence

is

bounded between and for all (by the definition of prob-

ability), and is nonincreasing in (by the first statement). Thus,

a finite limit must exist.

while the set defined as

(the latter set from the intuitive discussion) is

s.t.

The following lemma relates geometrically to the channels in and .

Lemma 2: Let channel, and let and have the following:
• for constant satisfying

represent a GE be defined as above. Then we
consists of all

(8)

where

and

, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3879

• for constant

consists of all

satisfying (8), where

and

.

Proof: Consider the first part of the lemma. If is formed by concatenating with a BSC having parameter , then

and

Solving both equations for , and a minor manipulation, lead to

(8). The first part then follows by observing that

implies that

and

.

In the second part of the lemma, is formed by concatenating

with a BSC having parameter . Now

and

Again, solving for leads to (8), though in this case,

implies that

and

.

The importance of Lemma 2 is to give a geometric interpre-

Fig. 5. One-dimensional decoding region, showing a region formed as a result
 of applying Theorem 4 to a point which converges to P [` ] . All points  along the solid line also have P [` ] .

tation to and . If and are fixed, the set of possible

values of and can be represented on a plane, and the line segments representing and can be plotted on this plane

One may also say that

using (8). The line represented by (8) passes through , and the

segments of this line described in each part of the lemma termi-

nate at . For ease of visualization, it is easy to show that this line

also passes through

for any . These re-

sults can be easily generalized to the case where

.

Side information consisting of the BSC noise sequence al-

lows the original channel to be restored. This observation leads

directly to the following theorem.

because the channel

is physically degraded with

respect to

. The results in Theorem 4 are depicted

in Fig. 5.

The converse of the theorem may be stated briefly as follows:

if

for some point

, then any

point

cannot have better

if that point

was formed by concatenating

with a BSC. Using

Theorem 4 (BSC Concatenation): Let

be the first part of Lemma 2, we have the following corollary.

a point in for which

. Then all points

along the line segment satisfying (8), where

and

, also converge to

.

Proof: If there exist pairs

and

such that

and

, and lying along the given line, then

Corollary: Let

be a point for which

. Then

for all points

along the line segment satisfying (8) where

and

, and for which

are kept constant.

from Lemma 2 there exists a BSC with parameter

such

that a GE channel with inversion probabilities

con-

catenated with that BSC has inversion probabilities

.

Let

be the noise sequence of this BSC. Furthermore, let

and be the channel outputs for the channel with inver-

sion probabilities

and

, respectively, where

. Knowing and

can be easily re-

covered. Since

is independent of , an optimal decoder

with knowledge of

and is equivalent to an optimal

decoder with knowledge of . Thus, an optimal decoder for

with side knowledge of

is equivalent to an optimal de-

coder for . From the side information lemma, this is sufficient

to show that

C. State Scrambling

Our second result implies that for constant , as defined in (1),

increasing the difference between and leads to a decrease

in

. In other words, we are proving the intuition that, all else

being equal, a larger contrast between and is better than

a smaller contrast, because the states are easier to distinguish.

To show this, we introduce a proof technique called state scram-

bling. Intuitively, state scrambling acts like a partial interleaver,

which selects a subset of the channel outputs and subjects only

that subset to a random permutation, while leaving the rest alone.

Ideally, for the time instants within the subset, the corresponding

channel states would be completely randomized, independent of

each other and the states in the complementary, noninterleaved

subset. The decoder could then be provided with side informa-

tion consisting of the identity of this subset and the permutation

and, therefore, that if

, then used by the interleaver, which would allow the operation to be in-

as well.

verted. However, to avoid difficult arguments related to perfect

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3880

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

interleaving, we simply replace the channel state at randomly

selected instants with an independently selected state.

Consider a GE-like channel with a state sequence gener-

ated in the following manner. Let be a state sequence with

state transition probabilities

, generated as usual for a

GE channel. Let

represent the marginal pmf for the

th element of . Let be a scrambled state sequence with

independently distributed elements, i.e.,

Proof: To show the first part of the lemma, we show that

any noise sequence generated by the scrambler has the same

probability as the given GE channel. To calculate the probability

of a noise sequence generated by the state scrambler, we may

write

, where

where

and

(i.e., the

states are independent but the marginal state probabilities

are the same). Let

be a random scrambling se-

quence with independent Bernoulli-distributed elements, where

. The resulting channel state sequence is

generated from , and through the relation

and is unchanged from the regular GE case. The inner term

arises from the fact that if

is depen-

dent on , while if

is dependent on the indepen-

dently selected state . Evaluating these expressions, the inner

sum reduces to

, where

and

For a channel

, if a state sequence gener-

ated in this way, where the state transition probabilities

are used to obtain and (i.e.,

and

), we say that the state scrambler with pa-

rameter is applied to this channel .

We will show that applying state scrambling to a GE channel

results in a different GE channel. Our argument here is similar

to our argument in the case of BSC concatenation: given a GE

channel , there are channels which can be generated by ap-

plying state scrambling to , and channels for which can be

generated by applying state scrambling with a particular param-

eter value. For some

, let

be the

function so that

returns the channel that results from ap-

plying state scrambling with parameter to . Similarly to the

previous section, define

s.t. and
s.t.

which is equivalent to a GE channel with the given inversion probabilities. The second and third parts of the lemma follow straightforwardly from manipulations similar to those used in Lemma 2.

Again, a line is described by the condition in (9), divided into

two segments by the point

.

As we argued intuitively at the beginning of the section, the

effect of state scrambling can be reversed using side informa-

tion. We justify this statement in the following theorem.

Theorem 5 (State Scrambling): Let

be a point

in such that

. Then all points

in

having the same

and satisfying (9), with

, also have

.

Proof: Using the result in Lemma 3, channels representing

all points

along the given line segment may

be applied to a state scrambler to generate

. The

remainder of the proof is in the Appendix, part A.

Again, the converse of this result follows similarly to the BSC concatenation theorem:

The sets and are geometrically related to through the following lemma.

Lemma 3: Let

represent a GE

channel, let

, and let and be

defined as above. Then we have the following.

• If

, then

Corollary: Let

be a point in such that

. Then all points

along the line

segment satisfying (9), where

for

and the same , also have the property that

.

For fixed , the results in Theorems 4 and 5 operate on

the plane formed by pairs of inversion probabilities

.

Since the result from Theorem 4 implies a one-dimensional

decoding region on this plane that is not (in general) collinear

• For constant satisfying

, consists of all

with the one-dimensional decoding region implied by the state scrambling theorem, these two results taken together imply a two-dimensional decoding region, as given in Fig. 6. For some

point

on this plane for which

, any point

(9) within the two-dimensional decoding region may be reached

by combining moves provided by each theorem. Similarly,

and where

.

by combining the converses of these theorems, a two-dimen-

• For constant

consists of all

sional nondecoding region is induced by each point for which

satisfying (9), and where

.

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3881

  Fig. 6. Two-dimensional decoding region, showing a region formed as a result of applying Theorems 4 and 5 simultaneously to a point which converges to
P [` ] . All points enclosed by the solid lines also have P [` ] .

D. Segmentation

returns the channel that arises from applying segmentation with

parameter to . Also, let

Here we show that increasing the length of the channel

memory decreases

. We make use of a proof technique,

s.t.

which we call segmentation, similar to a method used in the and

proof of [19, Proposition 5].

s.t.

Consider a set

of state sequences, where the

sequences are independent and identically distributed, and

all have the same state transition probabilities . From ,

we construct a state sequence as follows. Let

be a

random sequence of nondecreasing integers such that

,

and for all

, where

is an in-

dependent Bernoulli random variable for each , with

The sets and are geometrically related to through the following lemma.

Lemma 4: Let

channel, let

, and let

as above. Then we have the following.

represent a GE and be defined

. For example, a valid sequence of

would be

. Given

, the elements of

• If

, then

the sequence are defined as

. In other words, the

state sequence is formed from segments of each independent

state sequence . Again, for some point

,

we say that segmentation with parameter is applied to this

• For constant satisfying

consists of all

channel if is generated such that the state transition proba-

bilities

are used to generate each in .

The effect of segmentation is to introduce additional state

(10)

transitions to an existing state sequence, and we will show that

a noise sequence arising from segmentation is equivalent to a

so that

.

noise sequence arising from a GE channel. As we have argued • For constant

consists of all

in the cases of BSC concatenation and state scrambling, given

satisfying (10), so that

.

a GE channel , there are channels which can be generated by

Proof: To show the first part of the lemma, consider

applying segmentation to , and channels for which segmenta- the state transition probability pair

that corresponds to

tion applied with a particular parameter results in . For some the pair . To show that is a GE state sequence, we

, let

be the function so that

may consider the sequence of increments

, with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3882

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

independent elements, such that

. Since the

sequences in are independent and identically distributed, we

may write

where

, the state transition

probability given by the original parameters , and where

, the marginal state probabilities

for . Thus, we may equivalently write

where

0 0 Fig. 7. Three-dimensional decoding region. To visualize a three-dimensional
region in four-dimensional space, we define  := 1 b g, as in Section
 III-D. The two-dimensional region of Fig. 6 for a given point which converges
to P [` ]  is extended along the  axis.

and thus the state sequence is a GE state sequence with new memory. From the second part of Lemma 4, if segmentation

state transition probability pair

with parameter is used to obtain a channel

with

, from a channel

with

, then it is straightforward to show that

.

Thus, from Theorem 6 and its corollary,

is pre-

Defining an inversion probability function

with an ap- served for increasing , while

is preserved for

propriate pair of inversion probabilities

results in a GE decreasing . Similarly to our arguments in the previous sec-

channel, which proves the first part of the lemma.

tions, by considering the line formed by fixing and and

The second and third parts of the lemma follow from straight- allowing to vary, for a given point on this line for which

forward manipulations, analogous to Lemmas 2 and 3.

, all values of

will result in a one-di-

Note that the condition in (10) forms a line, partitioned into

two segments by

.

Once again, we apply the side information lemma to obtain

the following theorem.

mensional decoding region. Combined with our earlier results

for the plane of inversion probability pairs

, this result

implies a three-dimensional decoding region in the GE param-

eter space, as the two-dimensional region is projected through

decreasing , depicted in Fig. 7. Conversely, for a given point

Theorem 6 (Segmentation): Let

be a point in for which

, a three-dimensional nondecoding

such that

. Then all points

in region is obtained in conjunction with our earlier results.

having the same

and satisfying (10), with

, also have

.

Proof: Using the result in Lemma 4, if

satisfies (10),

IV. DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR GE-LDPC DECODERS

with the same

and

, then segmentation In Sections II and III, we established the feasibility and prop-

may be used to obtain the channel corresponding to the point erties of a DE algorithm for GE-LDPC decoders. In this section,

from the point

. The remainder of we obtain this algorithm, which is derived as a modification to

the proof is in the Appendix, part B.

the DE algorithm from [5]. We will first discuss the iterative

Again, the converse straightforwardly follows.

construction of local neighborhoods, which will provide a basis for our derivation. Consider an edge connecting variable

Corollary: Let

be a point in such that and factor , and its local neighborhood . Let be the set

. Then all points

along the of edges attached to , and let

be the set of all edges

line segment satisfying (10), for constant

and attached to except . Then assuming is a tree, for each

, also have the property that

. edge in

, one may obtain the set of all paths of length

To visualize this result in three dimensions, for some point

emanating from the factor attached to , such that is

, define a quantity

, which was not the first edge traversed. If the edge and the variable node

introduced in [19], and measures the persistence of the channel are appended to this set, we have a set which corresponds to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3883

the message calculations were given in Section II. In the sequel,

we will use an abbreviated notation for the message pdfs. For ex-

ample, for the channel message , the density is written ,

but we will write . We will extend this notation by writing

to represent the density

at the th iteration of den-

sity evolution.

Parity-check to symbol-variable messages (and vice

versa). The message-passing rules for messages exiting

parity-check nodes and symbol-variable nodes are well known,

and have been thoroughly discussed elsewhere (such as in [2],

[3], [5]). Thus, density evolution is virtually the same as in the

memoryless case. Let and be, respectively, the messages

at the output of a symbol-variable node and a parity-check node

during decoding. From [5], in a memoryless channel, we have

that is a complicated functional of , and

(11)

M N Fig. 8. Recursive construction of a local neighborhood

from local

neighborhoods

. Notice that e connects a symbol variable and a parity

check; the input local neighborhoods therefore include the output of a channel

factor.

the definition of

. Furthermore, we have a (partial) set of

paths of length emanating from , such that is not the first

edge in the path. is then obtained by taking the union of the

set of neighborhoods

where represents the Fourier transform, and where is the number of checks attached to a symbol variable node. Since the
term represents the channel information, in the case of a GE channel we replace this with the density of channel messages at each iteration, which is given below.
We briefly sketch the calculation of from , as described in [5]. We know that the message is calculated from input messages by

The product becomes a sum by taking the log of both sides,

and appending the edge and the factor , noting that the vari-

able is common to all these local neighborhoods. A similar ar-

gument can be made in forming

from a union of

.

Thus, local neighborhoods are constructed recursively, which is

depicted in Fig. 8.

Since DE calculates the density of the message along the

edge at the apex of the local neighborhood, this implies that

DE is calculated iteratively, by taking the densities of all input

messages to a node and applying the transformation implicit

in the node from the SPA. We shall use this approach to ob-

tain a DE algorithm for the GE-LDPC decoder. To decode the

channel outputs provided by the model in (2), we use mes-

sage-passing techniques, with the SPA to calculate messages.

Because our objective is to calculate DE, our focus is on mes-

sage passing within local neighborhoods, although our method

can be straightforwardly applied to the more general task of de-

coding in the GE-LDPC factor graph. Furthermore, since we

and the density of the sum of the resulting random variables

can be evaluated using the characteristic function, though this is

complicated by the fact that both sides can take negative values.

Define the ordered pair

.

Then using the generalized Fourier transform over

, and using

as the density of , which can be ob-

tained straightforwardly from , we form an intermediate den-

sity

. This density may then be converted to

through a straightforward variable transformation.

Symbol-variable to channel-factor messages. This mes-

sage, labeled , conveys the code’s extrinsic information to the

Markov subgraph. As a log-likelihood ratio, it is calculated by

taking the sum of all incoming parity-check to symbol-variable

messages (taking care to exclude the channel message). The

density of this message is designated (for the th iteration

of density evolution), and the evolution of this message is

calculated by

iteratively assemble local neighborhoods, we need only con-

(12)

cern ourselves with the transformations at the common node in

the assembly of new local neighborhoods. This allows a sim- in a manner similar to (11).

plification of notation: we eliminate all time-index subscripts in Forward and backward messages. The calculation of these

message calculation; the assumed time index is the index of the messages, designated and , respectively, was given in (4)

common node, while all remaining subscripts correspond to the and (5). Since the vectors and are normalized as probabil-

iteration number for DE.

ities, once the value of one element is known, the other is fixed.

The evolution of various kinds of messages in a local neigh- Without loss of generality, they may be completely character-

borhood must be tracked; these message types are differenti- ized as random variables by considering only the first element

ated by the types of nodes at each end of the apex edge of the in each vector: and , respectively. We write their densities

local neighborhood, as we outline in what follows. Recall that at the th iteration as

and , respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3884

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Since is a function of and , following our pre-

ceding discussion of assembling local neighborhoods, the den-

sity

is calculated from

and . After some ma-

nipulation on (4), it is straightforward to show that the transfor-

mation from to is of the form

where

(13)

where

recalling the definition of from (3). Clearly,

and

are merely functions of the random variables and ,

which allows us to calculate a conditional probability transfor-

mation

given these variables. However, notice that

and are dependent, since they are both related to the state

which gives rise to the noise element . This complication is

removed if we obtain pdfs conditioned on the state and sub-

sequently marginalize, since is a function of a set of obser-

vations , which is conditionally independent of given .

Using Bayes’ rule, we first calculate

Finally, we must specify the calculation of messages from

state-variable nodes to channel-factor nodes. Every state-

variable node has degree , so by the SPA the input message is

passed directly to the output without processing. No calculation

or density evolution is required at these nodes.

Channel messages. This message, designated , conveys the

channel information from the Markov subgraph to the LDPC

subgraph, and its density at the th iteration of DE is given by

. The calculation of this message was given in (6).

The recursion of from

and

can be obtained

similarly to the above, with minor modifications on account of

the logarithm. From (6), the message is already a scalar, and

can be expressed in the form

(17)

where

is as defined in Section II, and

(14)

where

, and where

if

and

if

. With this quantity calculated,

using a well-known result of functions of random variables (see,

for example, [18, Ch. 4]), the transformation in (13) may be

expressed as

so

and are functions of the random variable

, which allows us to specify a conditional density. Again,

to simplify later calculations, we condition and on ,

since these quantities are conditionally independent given .

We first obtain

, as in (14), then apply the transformation

required by (17), which results in

(15)

which is marginalized with respect to

and . Thanks to

the conditioning on , the marginalization is expressed simply

by

(18) and finally marginalize the conditional density, which results in

where

, and where

on the

assumption that the all-zero codeword is transmitted. Finally,

.

Similar expressions to (13)–(15) may be derived for the iter-

ation from

and to

. Again, the calculation of

the message is of the form

which gives , the density that replaces in (11). The DE algorithm then proceeds as follows, in accordance
with the message passing schedule defined in Section II.
1) Initialization step. Let . Set the following densities:

(16)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3885

where is the Dirac delta function, and is the average inversion probability.

2) Parity-check nodes. Calculate from to the procedure outlined in [5].

according

3) Channel-factor nodes.

• Calculate

from

and , and calcu-

late

from and , according to (15).

• Calculate

from and , according to

(18).

4) Symbol-variable nodes. • Similarly to (11), calculate

(19)

where is the degree of the symbol-variable nodes,

and the density is calculated from through

the procedure outlined in [5].

• If

, let

(20)

else let

.

5) Channel-state nodes. No calculation required; messages from the channel factor nodes are unchanged.

6) Let

. If

or

to 2).

, stop; else go

Fig. 9. Decoding and nondecoding regions for a GE-LDPC decoder with
 (3; 6) regular LDPC code. Points for which P [` ]  are represented 2 with “ ,” and points for which P [` ] >  are represented with “+.” The
dotted lines represent the individual decoding and nondecoding regions induced by each point, while the solid outline represents the union of these regions.
V. DISCUSSION AND RESULTS

As an aside, we briefly describe the modifications that are In this section, we consider the implementation of the DE al-

required to calculate DE for irregular LDPC codes; the reader is directed to [3] for more details. Let and be the probabilities that a given edge in the LDPC subgraph is attached to a symbolvariable node of degree and a parity-check node of degree ,

gorithm introduced in Section IV, and the consequences of the theorems from Section III. We will first discuss the formation of a decoding region using the proposed DE algorithm. Suppose a set of channels representing points in are found by our DE

respectively. Also, let be the probability that a given symbol- algorithm to converge to

. Then the decoding re-

variable node in the LDPC subgraph has degree . Then (19) is gion induced by these points is the union of the regions induced

replaced with

by each point. An example of such a union of regions is given in

Fig. 9, for a -regular rate- LDPC code, where for ease

of visualization we fix

, so that and form

a plane. From the figure, the space of parameters is partitioned

into a region where

, a region where

, and

where

represents the maximum variable degree, and (20) an uncertain region, which guides the selection of new points

is replaced with

for DE. As

, we see from the figure that large gaps

of uncertain decoding can form. This is because the “teeth” of

the decoding regions are offset with respect to each other, and

because they sweep out less area since they are closer to the

boundary of . Thus, points at closer intervals should be evalu-

Meanwhile, let represent the density of a message at the ated as

.

output of a parity-check node of degree after the th iteration. A three-dimensional characterization of the decoding region

These can be easily calculated from using the procedure is given in Fig. 10 for the -regular rate- LDPC code,

in [5], which we sketched earlier in this section. In step 2), we and in Fig. 11 for the

-regular rate- LDPC code. In

calculate using

these figures, we used

and

. For clarity,

we show only the decoding region, and trace the boundary on

this region by joining points in the parameter space found to

have

(the assumed nondecoding region is the comple-

ment of this region). In both cases, we fix

and depict

where is the maximum parity-check degree. However, we the three-dimensional decoding region with respect to the triples

note that a concentration theorem (as in [3]) would be required

, where

. Tremendous possible gains

to establish the accuracy of the DE results returned for irregular in performance over the memoryless assumption are observed in

LDPC codes over the GE channel.

Figs. 10 and 11. The performance improvement is particularly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3886

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Fig. 10. Contour plot for (3; 6)-regular rate-1=2 code, looking down through the increasing  axis. The contours (solid lines) give the estimated boundary of the decoding region for constant . The dashed line at top represents the
! Shannon limit for rate–1=2 codes at  = 0:98. The dotted line at bottom
represents the limit as  0 (i.e., the memoryless limit).

Fig. 12. Experimental results for a (3; 6)-regular rate-1=2 LDPC code, with b = 0:01; g = 0:01; and  = 0:01, for probability of symbol error versus  . Notice that the probability of error decreases everywhere below the GE-LDPC threshold as block length increases. For this family of channels, the Shannon limit for rate 1=2 is reached at  = 0:269, not shown on the figure.
block length required to approach the threshold performance, as observed in the figure. The assumption made in deriving the DE algorithm is that the block length is infinite, and although the GE-LDPC decoder clearly beats the memoryless threshold, it approaches the GE-LDPC threshold quite slowly—significantly more slowly than is the case in memoryless channels.
It is natural to compare these results to the channel capacity. In [19], the capacity of the GE channel was given as

(21)

where

is the binary entropy function, and

is the

noise vector up to time

. A significant gap to the GE

channel capacity remains in each figure. However, in the case

of the

code, we observe that communication is possible

with

in channels where the

for the mem-

oryless assumption, which corresponds to an inversion proba-

bility of , an observation also made empirically for certain

GE-LDPC decoders in [12]. Thus, the GE-LDPC decoder beats

the best possible code which uses the memoryless assumption,

which further justifies the use of joint estimation decoding in

this channel. Whether capacity may be approached through the

Fig. 11. Contour plot for (3; 4)-regular rate-1=4 code, looking down through the increasing  axis. The contours (solid lines) give the estimated boundary of the decoding region for constant . The dashed line at top represents the
! Shannon limit for rate–1=4 codes at  = 0:98. The dotted line at bottom
represents the limit as  0 (i.e., the memoryless limit).

use of irregular LDPC codes remains an open problem.

It should be pointed out that our geometric results obtained

in Section III are sufficient to show that a set of points is in the

decoding region, but not necessary. In two dimensions, we have

seen that each point for which

induces a trian-

gular decoding region, and from the figure the union of these re-

noted when the contrast between and is large, and when gions produces a sawtooth-shaped region, and a similarly rough

is very close to . This is understandable, since it is under nondecoding region. In three dimensions, the union of these re-

these circumstances that the GE factor graph has the best abil- gions is no more smooth. However, we have observed through

ityto observe a state for a long period of time and differentiate experimentation that the boundary on the decoding region may

between the two states.

be traced with reasonable accuracy by simply joining adjacent

Empirical results are presented in Fig. 12 which support our points of successful decoding, as found by DE. We feel that a

claims. Below the GE-LDPC decoding threshold, the decoder more accurate characterization of the parameter space, as well

performance improves everywhere as block length increases. as any solution to the problem of expanding the existing de-

However, the effect of long channel memory is to increase the coding regions, may require proof techniques beyond the Side

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3887

Information Lemma. In fact, the Side Information Lemma may

be a more stringent tool than necessary, since results following

from this lemma imply that

for one channel dominates

for another channel at every value of , not only in the

limit of large . Finding alternative strategies is a subject of on-

going research.

We finally note that our restriction to a three-dimensional

induced decoding region may not represent an undue burden,

since in many practical cases only the three parameters

are required to express a family of related chan-

nels. From [19], the space formed by pairs of state transition

probabilities

may be expressed as pairs

, where

, representing the overall ratio of state to state in

the state sequence. By varying and fixing , we may represent

the practically interesting case of increasing the symbol rate

in a physical system. For example, if the GE channel is the

model for a system in which the symbol transmission rate can

be varied, and the channel state process can be modeled as an

independent process sampled at the transmission rate, we would

expect the proportion of and states to remain the same

(i.e., constant ), while the observed channel memory would

increase as a result of the increased symbol rate (increasing ),

which from Theorem 6 is known to improve the probability of

error.

In forthcoming work, we intend to build on the foundation

laid in this paper, extending these results by generalizing the

decoding region theorems to discrete-valued Markov channels

with an arbitrary number of states, in addition to continuous-

valued Markov channels, which are of much practical interest.

To accomplish these tasks, analysis could be done similar to that

in this paper, though with the complication that the channel mes-

sages would be passed as vectors, and thus would have multi-

variate densities. Alternatively, a Monte Carlo method could be

used to obtain the channel message densities without directly

calculating DE through the Markov chain. Work is also pro-

gressing in extending these ideas to the optimization of irregular

LDPC codes, which have been shown in memoryless channels

to have capacity-approaching performance. Clearly, the work in

this paper has demonstrated that the strategy of joint estimation

decoding for LDPC codes in the GE channel is quantifiably su-

perior to ignoring or destroying the channel memory. This was

done by providing the analytical tools to obtain the ultimate per-

formance of such decoders, and by applying these tools in a va-

riety of instances of the GE channel. As well, we have demon-

strated that DE is a feasible analytical tool in the GE channel,

since the complexity of multidimensional parameter spaces has

been successfully mitigated through theoretical analysis of de-

coding regions.

Fig. 13. Illustration of the proof technique. Consider two channels c and c, where side information may be used to transform c into c . Start with a local neighborhood for c (top). Partial side information disconnects the factor graph, and the nodes left behind are a subgraph of a local neighborhood for c , represented by white nodes (middle). Using the missing nodes as a generative model, additional side information completes the local neighborhood (bottom).

pair

arose from a channel with inversion probabili-

ties

applied to a state scrambler with parameter ,

and where the scrambling sequence is . Under the indepen-

dence assumption (which implies that the local neighborhood is

cycle-free), the local neighborhood implements an optimal de-

tector for the symbol at the apex of the local neighborhood, so

the side information lemma may be applied. The general proof

technique is illustrated in Fig. 13.

The state transition probabilities are fixed. Let rep-

resent the cycle-free local neighborhood to depth of an edge

from a GE-LDPC factor graph with channel inversion prob-

ability pair

, and let

and represent the ob-

servations, symbol variables, and channel states associated with

this local neighborhood, respectively. Then the pmf of

,

and may be written as

APPENDIX

A. Proof of Theorem 5

(22)

In this part of the appendix, we complete the Proof of The-

orem 5 by showing that channel outputs in a local neighbor- where

and are, respectively, index sets for the factors

hood in the factor graph for a GE channel with inversion prob-

and

in ; and is a con-

abilities

, combined with carefully chosen side infor- stant. The variable node connected to edge is the objective

mation, result in a factor graph which is identical to a local for the local neighborhood, so the decoding task is to calculate

neighborhood with inversion probabilities

, where the the a posteriori probability of , using the SPA. We wish to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3888

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

show that side information transforms the model in (22) to a model equivalent to

(23)

where

implements the GE inversion probabilities

.

We provide side information to the model in (22) in two steps.

First, suppose the scrambling sequence

is given, and

let

be the local neighborhood pmf with this

information, noting that this local neighborhood now depends

on the scrambled states . Then (22) becomes

where the bracketed term is an independent factor. Since this

factor does not contain , it is eliminated by the SPA with no

effect on messages passed to , and may be disregarded.

We can now rewrite every term

as a func-

tion of either alone or alone. Furthermore, the set nor-

mally contains indices corresponding to both and . Since

we eventually wish to show that this model is equivalent to (23),

we will relabel all

to , noting that this rela-

beling does not affect the structure of the model. Thus, we have

where

is defined as follows:

and since

implements the GE inversion proba-

(24) bility pair

, the model represented by

contains a subset of the factors in the model

from

(23). To complete the proof, we add further side information,

as follows. Consider the set of factors in

that are

not present in the above representation of

. Gen-

erate side information with a pmf precisely equal to the obser-

vations in the “missing” factors from

(that is,

these missing factors are a generative model). More precisely,

let

be a generative model, such that

where, as before,

is the conditional inversion

probability of the

GE channel. In other words, when

, the original inversion probabilities

are a func-

tion of , and when

, these probabilities are a function

. Furthermore, if

, the term

is independent of . Since the channel factor node function

then factors into independent terms,

this implies that an edge in the local neighborhood is broken

for each

. As well, since the factor graph of is cycle

free, this implies the resulting factor graph is disconnected;

that is, the model can be factored into terms that represent

independent pmfs. Since these terms share no variables, their

factor graphs share no edges. Thus, there exist index subsets

and

, each dependent on , such that

no factor indexed by any of

or contains , nor does

a path exist from any of them to in the factor graph; and

where

and are the observations, symbols, and channel

states in the generative model. Thus, we have chosen side infor-

mation whose factor-graph model

is equivalent to

. Then the set of observations

results in a decoder equivalent to

,

and applying the SPA clearly results in identical results in

either

or

. Further-

more, for each

is identical to

, so this is also true for every . By the Side

Information Lemma this is sufficient to show that

which completes the proof.

B. Proof of Theorem 6

In this part of the appendix, we complete the Proof of The-

orem 6. Since the proof proceeds almost identically to the Proof

of Theorem 5, we will merely sketch this proof. Recalling the

definitions for

and , let represent the cycle-free

local neighborhood to depth of an edge from a GE-LDPC

factor graph with state transition probabilities governed by

, and again let represent the observations associated

with this local neighborhood. Then, the probabilistic model for

and may be written similarly as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(25)

ECKFORD et al.: ANALYSIS OF LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES FOR THE GILBERT–ELLIOTT CHANNEL

3889

while the objective is again to obtain

(26)

where

is the state transition probability governed

by

. Providing the segmentation sequence to the de-

coder, the model becomes

(27) where

and where the former term is the same as the unseg-

mented channel, and the latter is independent of . Again

we have a break in the factor graph, disconnecting nodes

wherever

. The remainder of the argument fol-

lows identically to the Proof for Theorem 5: the model

factors into independent terms, all but one

of which may be discarded, while replacing the factors with

further side information with model

, constructed

from the “missing” factors in

results in a

model

which is equivalent to

. By the Side Information Lemma, this is suffi-

cient to show that

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their many helpful comments. They would also like to thank Chris Nicola of Queen’s University for his helpful comments on an early version of this paper.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[3] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[4] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code optimization of low-density parity-check codes on rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 924–934, May 2001.
[7] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[8] A. P. Worthen and W. E. Stark, “Low-density parity check codes for fading channels with memory,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 1998, pp. 117–125.
[9] A. P. Worthen and W. E. Stark, “Unified design of iterative receivers using factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 843–849, Feb. 2001.
[10] S. German and K. Kochanek, “Dynamic programming and the graphical representation of error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 549–568, Feb. 2001.
[11] J. Garcia-Frias and J. D. Villasenor, “Turbo decoding of Gilbert-Elliott channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 357–363, Mar. 2002.
[12] J. Garcia-Frias, “Decoding of low-density parity-check codes over finitestate binary Markov channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1840–1843, Nov. 2004.
[13] T. Wadayama, “An iterative decoding algorithm of low density parity check codes for hidden Markov noise channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory and Its Applications, Honolulu, HI, Nov. 2000.
[14] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution, and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1636–1652, Jul. 2003.
[15] J. Li, K. R. Narayanan, E. Kurtas, and C. N. Georghiades, “On the performance of high-rate TPC/SPC codes and LDPC codes over partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 723–734, May 2002.
[16] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[17] N. Varnica and A. Kavcˇic´, “Optimized LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000, p. 197.
[18] A. Leon-Garcia, Probability and Random Processes for Electrical Engineering, 2nd ed. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1994.
[19] M. Mushkin and I. Bar-David, “Capacity and coding for the GilbertElliott channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1277–90, Nov. 1989.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:50:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

