3890

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

LDPC Codes From Generalized Polygons
Zhenyu Liu, Student Member, IEEE, and Dimitris A. Pados, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We use the theory of finite classical generalized polygons to derive and study low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The Tanner graph of a generalized polygon LDPC code is highly symmetric, inherits the diameter size of the parent generalized polygon, and has minimum (one half) diameter-to-girth ratio. We show formally that when the diameter is four or six or eight, all codewords have even Hamming weight. When the generalized polygon has in addition an equal number of points and lines, we see that the nonregular polygon based code construction has minimum distance that is higher at least by two in comparison with the dual regular polygon code of the same rate and length. A new minimum-distance bound is presented for codes from nonregular polygons of even diameter and equal number of points and lines. Finally, we prove that all codes derived from finite classical generalized quadrangles are quasi-cyclic and we give the explicit size of the circulant blocks in the parity-check matrix. Our simulation studies of several generalized polygon LDPC codes demonstrate powerful bit-error-rate (BER) performance when decoding is carried out via low-complexity variants of belief propagation.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, cyclic codes, generalized polygons, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, sum–product algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]–[3] are currently capturing the interest of coding theory researchers and communication systems practitioners alike. LDPC codes can be very long, and yet can be decoded effectively and practically via the iterative belief-propagation (BP) algorithm (also known as sum–product) [2]. “Good” LDPC codes are usually generated randomly by computer. Decoder-aware (BP processing) generator tuning [4] has produced codes performing extremely close to the Shannon limit. These codes, however, also exhibit several disadvantages. Frequently, they have small minimum distance inducing an early error floor. Most are irregular codes with no easy way to describe. Their generator matrices are not sparse at all, hence, the encoding complexity is by all accounts high.
Lately, more and more LDPC codes with explicit algebraic/ combinatorial construction have been reported [5]–[9]. Compared with random LDPC codes, algebraic LDPC codes have
Manuscript received December 29, 2004; revised May 16, 2005. This work was supported in part by the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory under Agreement FA8750-04-2-0179 and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Grant FA9550-04-1-0256. The material in this paper was presented in part at the First IEEE Upstate New York Workshop on Communications and Networking, Rochester, NY, November 2004.
Z. Liu was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260 USA. He is now with Marvell Semiconductor, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA 94089 USA (e-mail:zhenyuliu@ieee.org).
D. A. Pados is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14260 USA (e-mail:pados@eng. buffalo.edu).
Communicated by Ø. Yitrehus, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.856936

a more symmetric structure, better minimum distance, and are

easier to describe and encode. A commonly used approach when

searching for good LDPC code designs is the maximization of

the girth of the associated Tanner graph [6], [10], [11]. It is

well known that high girth decreases the dependence between

passing messages in the BP algorithm and improves the min-

imum distance of the code. An opposing, less used, objective

may be the minimization of the diameter of the Tanner graph.

Low diameter enables efficient BP message passing and reduces

the required number of decoding iterations. For example, the

codes based on two-dimensional finite geometries [5] have di-

ameter six or eight and are known to converge very fast com-

pared with similar rate and length random codes.

Obviously, maximum girth and minimum diameter are

conflicting requirements since in any graph the girth is al-

ways upper-bounded by two times the diameter length. The

graphs achieving exactly this bound are called generalized

polygons (GPs) and were, to the best of our knowledge, first

researched by Tits [12]. According to the celebrated theorem

of Feit and Higman [13], nontrivial finite GPs exist only with

diameter

or . In this paper, we call these objects finite

generalized triangles, quadrangles, hexagons, and octagons,

respectively, and use them to derive corresponding LDPC

codes. Interestingly, among them the finite generalized triangle

codes are precisely the two-dimensional projective geometry

LDPC (PG-LDPC) codes in [5]. These codes were seen to

perform extremely well especially at low-to-medium lengths.

However, having the diameter at its smallest value (three, that

is) makes the connectivity of the Tanner graph very strong

and the row/column weight of the parity-check matrix grows

quickly with the code length (roughly proportional to the square

root). This makes the parity matrix not as “sparse” as in random

codes and greatly increases the decoding complexity. By using

higher diameter/girth GPs, the connections of the Tanner graph

become weaker with reduced associated decoding cost. Some

codes based specifically on generalized quadrangles were

discussed earlier in [14].

In this paper, we derive and study LDPC codes based on all

classical generalized polygons [15]. In particular: i) We show

that even-diameter ( or ) polygons define codebooks of

even-weight codewords. ii) We observe that even-diameter poly-

gons with equal number of points and lines have a regular/non-

regular dual form that gives rise to two LDPC codes of the

same length and rate but of different minimum distance. The-

oretically, we see that the nonregular polygon code has min-

imum distance that is better at least by two over its regular dual.

Numerical upper-bound studies indicate that the difference in

minimum distance may be increasing significantly in favor of

the nonregular polygon code as the code length increases. iii)

For LDPC codes from even-diameter nonregular polygons with

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU AND PADOS: LDPC CODES FROM GENERALIZED POLYGONS

3891

equal number of points and lines we produce a tighter minimum distance bound than the one in [16]. iv) Using the intersection of the Singer group and the automorphism group [17] of the polygon, we prove that all codes based on classical generalized quadrangles are quasi-cyclic and give the explicit size of circulant blocks in the parity-check matrix. Our simulation studies demonstrate that the LDPC codes that we derived from generalized polygons, especially from split Cayley hexagons, have superior performance, fast convergence, and very low decoding complexity (due to the low weight of the parity-check matrix). We also find that many GP codes can be decoded very effectively by the low-complexity normalized BP-based algorithm of [18] and, somewhat surprisingly, the induced bit-error rate (BER) can be even lower than full BP decoding.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present a brief overview of the theory of finite generalized polygons and introduce our notation. In Section III, we examine basic properties of LDPC codes derived from GPs. Simulation findings on the performance of some selected codes are presented in Section IV. A few concluding remarks are given in Section V.

is regular and has order . Generalized polygons with

finite point and line sets

are called finite. It can be proved

that every finite generalized polygon has an order. Therefore, a

finite weak generalized polygon is a finite generalized polygon

if and only if

and

. The incidence matrix of

is the matrix with rows labeled by the lines of , columns

labeled by the points of , and entries or depending on the

corresponding point-to-line incidence.

For each incidence structure

, by exchanging

the roles of and we obtain a dual structure

, where

if and only if

. It is

obvious that the dual of a (weak) generalized polygon is again

a (weak) generalized polygon. The incidence matrices of and

are the transpose of each other.

Finally, we say that two generalized polygons and are

isomorphic if there exists a one-to-one mapping such that

and

if and only if

is called an isomorphism. The automorphism is an isomorphism

from to itself. All automorphisms of put together form the

automorphism group

.

C. Finite Generalized Polygons

II. GENERALIZED POLYGONS: DEFINITIONS AND NOTATION

A. Finite Fields as Projective Spaces

Consider a finite field

GF and an

-dimen-

sional vector space over . Define the -dimensional pro-

jective space over denoted by PG

or PG

with

points the equivalence classes

for

all

(all one-dimensional subspaces with

the zero vector excluded). The lines of PG

are the two-di-

mensional subspaces

,

denoted by . As in [5] and [17], for example, we may set

equal to the extension field

GF

which can also

be viewed as a vector space over with dimension

. In

Finite generalized polygons with diameter

are trivial

(each point is incident to every line). By Feit and Higman [13],

finite generalized polygons with diameter

and order

exist only in the following cases:

1)

,

2)

,

3)

is a square,

4)

is a square.

If

, then is a projective plane. This case encompasses

the two-dimensional projective geometry developments (and

derived codes) in [5], as explained in the Introduction. We will

focus in the sequel on the cases

.

this form, if is a primitive element of then

D. Classical Finite Generalized Quadrangles (GQs)

is a primitive element of . The equivalence classes for points The so-called classical finite generalized quadrangles (GQs)

become

are constructed based on either the totally isotropic subspaces

of a nondegenerate (unitary or symplectic) polarity1 of index

two or a nondegenerate quadric2 of index two on some finite

and the line

is simply

projective space PG . The point set is the set of all totally isotropic points (also called absolute points) of or the set of

points of , respectively. The line set is the set of all totally

isotropic lines of or the set of all lines that are contained in ,

respectively. The incidence set is the set of all pairs

B. Incidence Structures

We say that a point

is incident to a line

if

and only if

and we call

an incidence structure. Two points incident to a common line

are called collinear. The point-line incidence graph or simply

incidence graph of is an undirected bipartite graph with

vertex partitions the sets and and edges the elements of .

We say that is a weak generalized polygon if and only if the

diameter of is half of its girth. is a generalized polygon if

and only if it is a weak generalized polygon and each vertex of

has degree at least three. If all point vertices have the same

degree and all line vertices have the same degree , then

such that in PG

point is on line . In the case

of a unitary polarity, symplectic polarity, or a quadric, we have

unitary, symplectic, or orthogonal classical GQs, respectively.

For every finite field , a nondegenerate quadric of index

two on PG

exists (uniquely) only if

or and

0 1A nondegenerate polarity on an n-dimensional projective space is an involu-
tary permutation of its subspaces that sends a rank r subspace to a rank n+1 r
subspace and inverts the inclusion relation. A totally isotropic subspace with respect to a nondegenerate polarity is completely contained in its image under the polarity. The index of the polarity is the rank of the maximal totally isotropic subspaces with respect to the polarity.
2A nondegenerate quadric is the set of all points x that satisfy a nondegenerate quadratic form q(x) = 0. The index of is the rank of the maximal subspaces
in .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3892

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005
TABLE I GP-LDPC CODES: RATE AND MINIMUM DISTANCE

the quadric is of hyperbolic, parabolic, or elliptic type, respectively. For two points in the space represented by vectors and
, the canonical quadratic forms are

if

(hyperbolic)

if

(parabolic)

if

elliptic)

(1)

and the corresponding symmetric bilinear forms are

(2)

where is an irreducible binary quadratic form in . In this

setup, a point is in if and only if

and two points

and are collinear if and only if

. The GQs gen-

erated from such quadrics are usually denoted by

and

have order

[15]. Note that when

, the order be-

comes ; therefore,

are weak.

A nondegenerate unitary polarity of PG

exists if and

only if is a square. Assume then that

. The polarity has

index if and only if

or and is again unique for each

up to isomorphism. The canonical Hermitian forms are

(3)

The absolute and collinear conditions are the same as in unitary

types. However, it can be shown that

for any ;

therefore, all points in PG

are absolute in this case. The

generated GQs are denoted by

and have order

[15].

is isomorphic to the dual of

is self-dual

(isomorphic to its dual) if and only if is even.

E. Classical Finite Generalized Hexagons and Octagons

The classical generalized hexagons

known as split

Cayley hexagons and

known as twisted triality

hexagons have order

and

, respectively [15]. A

split Cayley hexagon is self-dual if and only if is a multiple of

three. The classical Ree–Tits generalized octagons

have

order

and exist only when

.

Explicit constructions for these hexagons and octagons can be

found in [15] and will not be needed here.

III. LDPC CODES FROM GENERALIZED POLYGONS

In the remainder of this paper,

is always a fi-

nite generalized polygon with order and even diameter ,

and

GF is the base field of the corresponding under-

lying projective space.

where

is the unique involutary field automorphism of

. A point is absolute if and only if

and two

points and are collinear if and only if

. The gen-

erated GQs are denoted by

and have order

[15]. It can be shown that

is isomorphic to the dual of

.

A nondegenerate symplectic polarity of PG

with index

exists (uniquely) only when

. The canonical alternating

form is

A. Code Construction
It is straightforward to construct an LDPC code from a given generalized polygon . We simply use the incidence graph of
as the Tanner graph of the code. Without loss of generality, we view the point-set vertices as bit nodes and the line-set vertices as check nodes. It is easy to verify that the parity-check matrix of the constructed code is exactly the incidence matrix of . In the sequel, when there is no fear of ambiguity, we will call our codes by their polygon-origin name, for example

(4)

etc.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU AND PADOS: LDPC CODES FROM GENERALIZED POLYGONS

3893

Fig. 1. Tree structure example of a generalized quadrangle. Active (inactive) bits, checks, and edges are denoted by solid (open) circles, squares, and lines,
respectively. (a) Tree structure. (b) Tree structure after removing C and all inactive elements.

B. Rate and Minimum Distance It is known [14] that the length of polygon codes is

and the number of checks is

Since all finite generalized polygons have order, all GP-LDPC

codes are regular LDPC codes with fixed row weight

and column weight

. Code rates or rate bounds can be

found/extracted from the early works by Bagchi et al. [16], [19],

[20] on “codes associated with generalized polygons” before

the rediscovery and wide-spread recognition of the importance

of BP-decoded LDPC codes. The minimum distance bound

of [21] is in fact tight (holds with equality)

for the regular polygons

and

[16]. We observed and note that the recent “bit-ori-

ented bound” in [22] is tighter for some very low rate codes

(

and ). These findings are

summarized in Table I.

A new result on polygon LDPC codes is given below in the

form of a proposition.

Proof: Using an arbitrary check node as the root we ar-

range the incidence graph of the polygon in the form of a tree

excluding the deepest check-node level, as depicted in Fig. 1(a)

where check nodes are represented by squares and bit nodes by

circles. Following the terminology of [22], we say that a bit node

is active for a codeword

if

; an edge

is active if it connects to an active bit node; a check node is ac-

tive if it is connected to at least one active bit node. In Fig. 1, ac-

tive bits, edges, and checks are indicated by solid circles, lines,

and squares, respectively. The set of nodes at each depth level

from the bottom up (checks, bits, checks, bits, ) is denoted

by

. If an active node is connected to its

parent by an inactive edge or has no parent, then we call that

node an active root. Since all edges connected to an active bit

are active, an active root is necessarily an active check. We re-

move now the bottom level and all inactive elements, as in

Fig. 1(b). The graph structure becomes a forest and each active

root node becomes the root of a tree. As a result, every active

bit node is connected to a unique active root.

We denote the number of active bit nodes that are descendents

of a node , including itself if active, by . For any ,

we claim that if is in level and is not an active root, then

(5)

Proposition 1: If a generalized polygon has even diameter The claim can be proved by induction. For

, the result is

, then all codewords of the corresponding LDPC clear. Assume (5) holds true for some arbitrary level

. If

code have even Hamming weight.

is odd and is in level , then is a check node (but not an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

active root) and has an odd number, say , of bit node children. So
(6)

transformation by the primitive element ) and ically, if the resulting subgroup is generated by has order

. Specif, then it

If is even and is in level

, then is a bit node with

check node children (none of them is an active root). So

and each orbit of the set has the same size . If, in addition,

we require that each circulant block has the same size

,

then every orbit of the set should have the same size as well

under this subgroup. We continue with the following lemma.

(7)

Expressions (6) and (7) establish that (5) is valid for any

when is not an active root. If

is an active root, then it

has an even number, say , of bit node children and

(8)

The codeword weight is

where is the set of all

active roots. By (8), the weight is even.

Bagchi and Sastry [16] showed that the minimum-distance

bound

for generalized polygon codes is tight only if

the corresponding polygon contains a proper subpolygon.

As a particularly interesting case, we recognize that

with odd are nonregular (in fact, anti-regular) and do not

contain any proper

subpolygon. The same holds true

for

. Therefore, we can state the

following two corollaries.

Corollary 1: The LDPC codes derived from the orthogonal

classical finite generalized quadrangles

odd, have

.

Corollary 2: The LDPC codes derived from the split Cayley

classical finite generalized hexagons

have

.

The results for

odd, and

not a power

of , are also included in Table I. Experimentally, numerical

upper bound (small-weight codeword) search via the procedure

in [23] suggests that may in fact be growing much larger

than

and

, respectively, as the code length

increases.

Lemma 1: For any

and

, if acts

on fixed-point-freely and

, then each line of

has the same orbit size under the action of . In particular,

acts fixed-point-freely on as well.

Proof: Suppose

is such that

for any .

Since

, the order of , say , must divide . Since

and is fixed by

acts fixed-point-freely on the

points of . Therefore, every point of has orbit size under

and divides

. We conclude that divides

and is the identity element.

According to Lemma 1, if we arrange the parity-check

matrix so that all bits in the same orbit under such a group

are next to each other and all checks in the same orbit are

next to each other, then the parity-check matrix is divided into

circulant blocks, each of size

. As explained

earlier, the classical GQ codes are of the following six types:

and

.

Among them,

and

are the dual of

the others. If a parity-check matrix is block-wise cyclic, then

its transpose, i.e., the parity-check matrix of the code from the

dual polygon, is also block-wise cyclic. Hence, we only need

to consider three quadrangle types, say

and

.

First we deal with

. Consider

in the projective

space PG

where the points of PG

are identified by

the element classes of GF . Define the form

where

and, for convenience,

denote the field GF by . We claim that is a nondegen-

erate symplectic form on

. Certainly, is -bilinear

and alternating. Since

is a basis of over , for any

we have (note that

)

C. Encoding of Finite GQ LDPC Codes

In [24], it was shown that it is possible to have a quasi-cyclic

structure for certain finite GQ codes. In this subsection, we Thus, is a symplectic form on

prove that a quasi-cyclic structure exists for all classical finite nonzero

suppose

. In addition, for any . Then

GQ codes and we give the exact size of the circulant blocks.

In our derivations, we will be following the common ap-

proach of arranging the parity-check matrix of the code in a Therefore, is nondegenerate. Define

block-wise cyclic form and applying the “transform theory” where is the trace function from to . Then, is

[25]. In doing so, we use a cyclic subgroup of

acting -linear, alternating, and nondegenerate since is non-

fixed-point-freely on both and . A choice of such an auto- degenerate [17]. Therefore, is a nondegenerate symplectic

morphism group that is fixed-point-free on is the intersection form on PG

and generates the unique GQ

. We can

of the Singer group (that is, the cyclic group generated from the now verify that

is an element of

since it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU AND PADOS: LDPC CODES FROM GENERALIZED POLYGONS

3895

preserves

. The order of in

and

or

, for

is

, so

even and odd, respectively;

and

or

, for

and

,

even odd

respectively;

(9)

and

.

and

for both even and odd . According to

Lemma 1, we can arrange the parity-check matrix of

in

The following section is devoted to simulation studies and demonstrations.

a block-wise cyclic form where each circulant block is of size

or

, if is even or odd,

respectively.

Next, we consider

in the projective space PG

whose points are identified by the element classes of

GF . Define the form

where

is the unique involutary automorphism of the field and is

the trace function from to . For any

; hence, is -Hermitian. Similar to the

case, is

nondegenerate as well. Therefore, is a nondegenerate unitary

form on PG

and generates the GQ

.

is an element of

since it preserves . The order of in

is

, so

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we examine the error rate performance of a

few selected generalized polygon LDPC codes. In Fig. 2 we

consider the

code with rate . Decoding

is performed by either BP or the low complexity “normalized

BP-based” procedure of [18] (the normalization factor is set

to ). For code comparison purposes, we generate a second

LDPC code using the progressive edge-growth

(PEG) algorithm [10]. The PEG code generator has been known

to produce some of the best LDPC codes. The bit node degree

sequence used in the construction is density evolution opti-

mized with maximum degree and was seen by experimental

(10) trials to offer the best performing PEG LDPC codes for this setup. The exact degree sequence used, as returned by [26],

and

. By Lemma 1, the size of each circulant

block is

.

Finally, we consider

in the projective space PG

whose points are identified by the element classes of

GF . The form

is a nondegenerate quadratic

form on

since is in fact the norm function from

to

GF . Then,

is the nondegenerate

quadratic form on PG

where is the trace function from

to . According to [17], and are both elliptic; thus,

defines the unique GQ

.

is an element of

since it preserves . The order of is

and

even odd.

is

. We can see that at

BER , the BP decoded generalized polygon code

is

only 2.7 dB away from the Shannon limit and 0.25 dB away

from the PEG code. Moreover—and quite interestingly—the

normalized BP-based algorithm works exceptionally well on

and outperforms BP decoding in the high signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR) area with significantly lower computational cost.

For illustration purposes, Fig. 2 also includes the regular

polygon dual of

, which is of the same length

and rate (decoded by BP). The minimum distance of

is

. Using the algorithm provided in [23] to

search for the small-weight codeword, we see that the minimum

distance of

may be as high as (returned upper bound).

However, this time

so we try a smaller subgroup.

If

, we take

. Then,

the circulant block size is

While the BER difference of

and

in Fig. 2 is not

that pronounced, we do observe an error floor forming in the

high-SNR area for . Fig. 3 shows that the block-error-rate

of

is clearly inferior to . In fact, in decoding

as

. If

take

. Then

(11) we find a small amount of undetected errors (incorrect code-

word decisions) while in decoding , we errors (decoding failures).

all errors are detected

Since GP-LDPC codes have the strongest connectivity in

their Tanner graph for a given girth, convergence of the BP (12) decoder is very fast. In Fig. 4, we plot the BER curve of

and

.

We have established that all classical finite generalized quad-

rangles create quasi-cyclic LDPC codes and we have found the

size of the circulant blocks. We summarize these findings in the

form a proposition as follows.

under maximum BP iteration number 10, 15, and 50. At BER , the performance gap between 10 and 50 iterations is
about 0.2 dB; the gap between 15 and 50 iterations narrows down to about 0.1 dB. Rapid BP convergence is a GP-LDPC property shared with some of the other algebraically generated codes such as EG-LDPC codes [5]. GP-LDPC codes, in ad-

Proposition 2: All classical finite generalized quadrangle dition, have small row and column weight (for example, five

LDPC codes are quasi-cyclic. Their circulant block size is as for this

code) which coupled with normalized BP-based

follows.

decoding makes the decoding cost exceptionally low.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Fig. 2. BER performance of the (1365; 378) H(4) and H(4) hexagon codes and a best available (1365; 378) PEG generated code.

Fig. 3. Block-error-rate performance comparison of the H(4) and H(4) (1365; 378) codes.

As a final example, we plot in Fig. 5 the BER performance of (nearly) tight—can be a big improvement over the minimum

the

code with rate

. Its dual polygon distance

of

for which an obvious error

code, , is also included in the study as well as a best avail- floor can be seen. It is arguably surprising to report that

able PEG code of the same length/rate generated with bit node low-complexity normalized BP-based decoding [18] performs

degree sequence

that much better than full BP decoding on

; at BER

from [27]. Normalized BP-based decoded

the gain is about 0.25 dB. The identified quasi-cyclic

outperforms the PEG code. The minimum distance of nature of quadrangle codes makes the encoding cost of

searched with [23] is upper-bounded by , which—if very manageable as well.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU AND PADOS: LDPC CODES FROM GENERALIZED POLYGONS

3897

Fig. 4. Performance progression of belief-propagation decoding of H(4).

Fig. 5. BER performance of the (400; 175) Q(4; 7) and W (7) quadrangle codes and a best available (400; 175) PEG generated code.

V. CONCLUSION

of LDPC codes with the same length and rate but different

minimum distance that favors the nonregular polygon code

We derived algebraic LDPC codes from finite classical gen- constructions. For such LDPC codes (from the nonregular

eralized polygons and established new codebook properties for

and

polygons) a new minimum-distance bound

even-diameter (four, six, or eight) polygon codes. In particular, was presented. Finally, we were able to prove that all quad-

we showed that all codewords have even Hamming weight. We rangle LDPC codes are quasi-cyclic and we found their exact

observed that the dual regular/nonregular quadrangles

circulant block size.

and

and the dual regular/nonregular (split Cayley) Simulation studies demonstrated that very low error rates

hexagons

and

give rise to corresponding classes can be achieved by nonregular polygon LDPC codes even for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

small code lengths. For all polygon LDPC codes, BP decoding exhibits rapid convergence with low cost per iteration due to the inherently small row and column weights. Interestingly, low-cost normalized BP-based decoding was seen to outperform in error rate full-cost BP decoding on nonregular polygon codes. If we also take advantage of the reported quasi-cyclic structure of quadrangle-based codes for encoding purposes, then the overall performance versus encoding/decoding complexity tradeoff point appears quite attractive.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2]

, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

1963.

[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of

low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646,

Aug. 1996.

[4] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of

capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[5] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes

based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[6] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles

and low-density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, pp. 71–78, 1982.

[7] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Resolvable 2-designs for regular low-

density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 9, pp.

1413–1419, Sep. 2003.

[8] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-den-

sity parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.

[9] J.-L. Kim, U. N. Pelde, I. Perepelitsa, V. Pless, and S. Friedland, “Ex-

plicit construction of families of LDPC codes with no 4-cycles,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2378–2388, Oct. 2004.

[10] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular pro-

gressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51,

no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

[11] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth

(PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.

8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, Dec. 2004.

[12] J. Tits, “Sur la Trialité et Certains Groupes qui s’en Déduisent,” Inst.

Hautes Etudes Sci. Publ. Math., vol. 2, pp. 14–60, 1959.

[13] W. Feit and G. Higman, “The nonexistence of certain generalized poly-

gons,” J. Algebra, vol. 1, pp. 114–131, 1964.

[14] P. O. Vontobel and R. M. Tanner, “Construction of codes based on fi-

nite generalized quadrangles for iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int.

Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 223.

[15] H. van Maldeghem, Generalized Polygons. Basel, Switzerland:

Birkhäuser-Verlag, 1998.

[16] B. Bagchi and N. S. N. Sastry, “Codes associated with generalized poly-

gons,” Geom. Dedicata, vol. 27, pp. 1–8, 1988.

[17] B. Huppert, “Singer-Zyklen in klassischen Gruppen,” Math. Z., vol. 117,

pp. 141–150, 1970.

[18] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propa-

gation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.

[19] B. Bagchi and N. S. N. Sastry, “Even order inversive planes, generalized

quadrangles and codes,” Geom. Dedicata, vol. 22, pp. 137–147, 1987.

[20] B. Bagchi, A. E. Brouwer, and H. A. Wilbrink, “Notes on binary codes

related to the O(5; q) generalized quadrangle for odd q,” Geom. Dedi-

cata, vol. 39, pp. 339–355, 1991.

[21] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 6, pp. 533–547, Nov. 1981.

[22]

, “Minimum-distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.

[23] X.-Y. Hu and M. P. C. Fossorier. On the computation of the minimum

distance of low-density parity-check codes. [Online]. Available: http://

www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/MINDIST/main.pdf

[24] P. O. Vontobel, “Algebraic coding for iterative decoding,” Ph.D. disser-

tation, Swiss Federal Inst. Technol., Zurich, Switzerland, 2003.

[25] R. M. Tanner, “A transform theory for a class of group-invariant codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 752–775, Jul. 1988.

[26] LDPCopt, An Efficient Optimization Program for LDPC Codes [On-

line]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/

[27] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold. Source code for progres-

sive edge growth parity-check matrix construction. [Online]. Available:

http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/PEG/PEG.tar.gz

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:48:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

