Implementation Aspects of An Early Decision Decoder for LDPC Codes

Anton Blad, Oscar Gustafsson, and Lars Wanhammar

Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden, {antonb, oscarg, larsw}@isy.liu.se

Abstract
Low-density parity-check codes have recently received extensive attention as a forward error correction scheme in a wide area of applications. The decoding algorithm is inherently parallelizable, allowing communication at high speeds. One of the main disadvantages, however, is large memory requirements for interim storing of decoding data. In this paper, we propose an architecture for an early decision decoding algorithm. The algorithm significantly reduces the number of memory accesses. Simulation results show that the increased energy dissipation of the components is small compared to the reduced dissipation of the memories.
1. Introduction
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were invented by Robert G. Gallager [1] in the early 60’s. However, despite excellent performance and a practical decoding algorithm, they were largely neglected for over 30 years until they were rediscovered by MacKay and Neal [2] in the mid 90’s. Since then, LDPC codes have been found to have performances comparable to, and in some cases exceeding, those of Turbo codes.
The main problem in coding theory is to build a practical and efficient decoder. The decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is inherently parallelizable, and thus suitable for communication at high speeds. However, the random structure of the codes limits the parallelizability, such that fully parallel decoders are not feasible for codes much longer than 1000 bits. In a partly-parallel architecture, the internal communication translates to large memories for interim storing of decoder data.
A typical code with a length of 6000 bits might require up to a million memory accesses for the decoding of a single word. Other work indicates that up to 95% of the power is consumed in the memories [3], thus reducing the amount of memory accesses becomes an important concern, especially in low-power hand-held devices.
Recently , the idea of early decision decoding was introduced [4]. The early decision decoding algorithm is a modification to the usual probability propagation algorithm. The idea is to exploit the different convergence rates of the bits, to deactivate computations for bits that are likely to be known. The result is a reduction of the amount of memory accesses.
As a base for the proposed architecture, the partly-parallel decoder architecture in [5] is used, although the algo-

v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7 v8 v9 v10

c1

c2

c3

c4

c5

Figure 1. Tanner graph of an example LDPC code with (N, j, k) = (10, 2, 4).

rithm is not locked to this particular architecture. The modifications are primarily in the variable node processing elements, where an additional memory is added to store for which bits the computations are disabled.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 and 3 briefly describes low-density parity-check codes, and the sum-product decoding algorithm, respectively. In Section 4, early decision decoding is introduced. Section 5 describes the proposed architecture, while Section 6 contains simulation results.

2. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

LDPC codes are defined as the null space of a very sparse parity check matrix H with M rows and N columns. For regular LDPC codes, H has a constant column weight of j, and a constant row weight of k. The parity check matrix is usually visualized as a bipartite graph between M check nodes and N variable nodes, as shown in Fig. 1. Every variable node of the graph corresponds to a column of H, while every check node corresponds to a row. The variable nodes assume binary values corresponding to the bits of the code word, while each check node is set to the modulo-2 sum of its neighbors. The code is then the set of words where all check nodes are zero. For a formal definition of LDPC codes, see [1] and [2].
In this paper, we consider regular LDPC codes, where all variable nodes have a constant degree of j, and all check nodes have a constant degree of k. Moreover, we assume the codes to have a particular structure, with the top and middle part of the parity check matrix each consisting of k2 shifted identity matrices of size L, and the bottom part of the matrix is a restricted random construction. The code structure is further described in [5]. During simulations, the column and row weights used were j = 3 and k = 6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:53:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3. The Sum-Product Decoding Algorithm

The decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is defined directly over the Tanner graph of the code. Here follows a brief algorithmic description. For a more detailed description, see [6].

3.1. Initialization For every variable node, the prior log-likelihood ratios γ n are initialized with the prior probabilities from the receiver. The variable-to-check messages αmn are initialized to the values of the prior log-likelihood ratios. Also,
the hard-decision values xˆ n are initialized based on the prior log-likelihood ratios.

γ n = log pn0 ⁄ pn1

αmn = γ n, ∀m, n:H m, n = 1

(1)

xˆ n

=

 10,,

γn γn

> <

0 0

Here, pan is the prior probability that bit n has the value a.

3.2. Horizontal step
In the horizontal step, the check-to-variable messages βmn are updated according to the equation

∏ βmn =


n'

∈

sign
N (m)\n

αmn'

⋅

,

(2)

∑ φ n'

∈

N

φ(
(m)\n

α m n'

)

where N (m)\n represent the variable nodes adjacent to

check node m, except node n, and the function φ( x) = 2 ⋅ arctanh( exp ( x)) = log ( tanh( x ⁄ 2)) .

Also, the hard-decision vector xˆ is verified. If

H xˆ = 0 , xˆ is reported as the decoded word.

3.3. Vertical step

In the vertical step the variable-to-check and the pseudo-posterior log-likelihood

mraetsisoasgeλsnαmarne

computed according to

αmn = γn +

∑

β m' n

m' ∈ M (n)\m

∑ λn = γ n +

β m' n

(3)

m' ∈ M (n)

The hard-decision to 1 if λn < 0 .

xˆ n

of bit n is set to 0 if

λn > 0 , and

The horizontal and vertical steps are repeated until

either a valid word is found or a preset maximum number

of iterations is reached.

4. Early Decision Decoding

At the end of each iteration the pseudo-posterior likelihood ratios λn are computed for every variable node n. Generally, the values converge quickly towards either
positive or negative infinity. We try to exploit this fact by
deciding variables with high likelihoods. We use the magnitude value of λn as a measure of the reliability of vari-

DIS_RAM

ED_LOGIC hard disable decision

disable decided

33

EXT_RAM_1 w

INT_RAM

VNC

hard decision
DEC_RAM

w

ww

EXT_RAM_2 w

EXT_RAM_3 w

w+2

w+2

w+2

Figure 2. Processing element for j = 3.
able n. We define a threshold t, and whenever the reliability of a variable is greater than t we declare the variable decided and stop updating its messages. In later iterations, we use the highest possible value as the magnitude of αmn .

5. The Proposed Architecture

The overall architecture is similar to that of [3] and [5]. k2

processing elements (PEs, shown in Fig. 2), each contain-

ing a variable node component (VNC), are connected to

jk check node components (CNCs) through j bidirectional

permutation networks π1 , π2 , ..., π j . The VNCs per-

form the vertical step of the decoding algorithm, i.e. com-

pute the variable-to-check messages αmn . Each

computation takes j+1 inputs corresponding to the j

hcchhoeeoccdkkr-amtotie-ovssaγarngiaebfsolerαammvneasrasianagdbelteshneβ,mpasnneduadnpodro-ptdhouesctepesrriijoovrr avlroaigalu-bleliekλ-etnloi.--

On the CNC side, the k variable-to-check messages

αmn their

corresponding to check node m are received, corresponding check-to-variable-messages βmn

and are

computed. Also, the most recently computed hard-deci-

sion values of the source variable nodes are received, and

their modulo-2 sum is computed to verify if check m is sat-

isfied.

Each VNC processes L consecutive variables (corre-

sponding to L adjacent columns in H) in time-multiplexed

fashion, while each CNC processes L consecutive checks

(corresponding to L adjacent rows in H). The computa-

tions of the VNCs and the CNCs are separated in time.

The PEs also contain memories for storage of interim

messages. In [5], five memories INT_RAM, DEC_RAM

and EXT_RAM_i, i = 1, 2, 3, are used. The INT_RAMs

contain the prior log-likelihood ratios, i.e. the soft outputs

from the channel receiver. The DEC_RAMs contain the

hard-decision values of the variable nodes, i.e. the

decoder’s current guess at the sent code word. Last, the

EXT_RAMs contain the variable-to-check and check-to-

variable messages. The sizes of each INT_RAM and

EXT_RAM_i are wL bits, while the sizes of the

DEC_RAMs are L bits. In the proposed architecture, a

memory DIS_RAM is added to each PE. DIS_RAM con-

tains the decided state of the PE’s L variables, and is used

to disable VNC processing and memory accesses for

decided variables. The size of each DIS_RAM is L bits,

and at the beginning of each frame the memories are ini-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:53:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

disable

β w REG

β w REG

β w REG

LUT

LUT

LUT

SM−to−2C SM−to−2C SM−to−2C

γ w REG

0111
Y = 1011X 1101
1111

w+2

w+2

w+2

w+2 sign

decided 2C−to−SM 2C−to−SM 2C−to−SM

magn t

t

LUT w

LUT w

LUT w

α

α

α

Figure 3. Variable node component with j=3.

tialized with zeros. For each variable processed by the VNC, the magnitude of the pseudo-posterior log-likelihood ratio λn is compared to the threshold t. If λn > t , the decided bit is set to one, and is stored by ED_LOGIC in DIS_RAM. In subsequent iterations, ED_LOGIC will set disable for n, which causes VNC computations and memory operations to be turned off.
During check node processing, the disable bits of the involved variables is sent along with the variable-to-check messages. Thus, for the decided variables, only the disable and the sign bit is changed. Then the magnitude bits are generated locally in the CNC, such that the message corresponds to a variable with high reliability. The benefit is reduced switching activity in the routing network.
5.1. Variable Node Computations The variable node component is depicted in Fig. 3. Three check-to-variable messages β , and the prior log-likelihood ratio γ are received, and their corresponding variable-to-check messages α are produced. The changes are the disable signal to the registers at the inputs, and the compare block on the pseudo-posterior value. The decided value is set to one when the reliability of the variable is high enough, i.e. greater than the threshold t.
5.2. Check Node Computations Figure 4 shows a k-input check node component. The input consists of k variable-to-check messages α . From these, the check-to-variable messages β and the paritycheck is produced. The changes involve a MUX at each input, and an enable signal to the bus drivers at the outputs. When the variable corresponding to an input message α has been decided, the magnitude of that message is set to all zeros, while the sign bit is set to the hard-decision bit. This corresponds to a variable with no uncertainty. By also disabling the bus drivers at the outputs, additional energy can be saved.

disable α

hard decision 0
w−1

α 0
w−1

w

w

w

w

α 0
w−1

w

w

w

w

∏ ∑ Y i = 

sign

X

 j

⋅



X j 

j≠i

j≠i

ws

ws

w
parity check ws

w

w

w

REG

REG

REG

β

β

β

Figure 4. k-input check node component. After the

summation block, ws = w + log 2k – 1 .

5.3. Early Decision Logic The ED_LOGIC block in Fig. 2 controls the deactiva-
tion of computations and memory accesses. In VNC processing, the block is particularly simple. While computations for one variable node is carried out, the decided state of the next is read from DIS_RAM. If the next variable is already decided, the disabled bits to the VNC and the EXT_RAM_is are set to one.
In CNC processing, decision values are read from several locations in DIS_RAM and DEC_RAM, corresponding to the variables that are sent to the CNCs. As the address generators in the EXT_RAM_is are simple counters, decision values may be read several bits at once for several consecutive checks. This alleviates the need to read from several memory locations simultaneously.
5.4. Energy Dissipation of Memories The DIS_RAM overhead may be characterized as fol-
lows, assuming a wordlength of w=5. During VNC processing, 5 bits are read from each of INT_RAM and the three EXT_RAM_is, while 5 bits are written to each of the EXT_RAM_is, and 1 bit to DEC_RAM. During CNC processing, 5 bits are read from each EXT_RAM_i, while 3 bits are read from DEC_RAM. After processing, 5 bits are written to each EXT_RAM_i. The processing amounts to a total of 38 bits read and 31 bits written for each PE and iteration. The DIS_RAM overhead can be characterized as 1 bit read and written during VNC processing, and 3 bits read during CNC processing. Thus the total read overhead is 4 ⁄ 38 ≈ 10.5% , while the write overhead is 1 ⁄ 31 ≈ 3.2% .
6. Simulation Results
Figure 5 shows the typical performance of the early decision decoding algorithm using floating-point precision. The efficiency is the reduction of the number of memory accesses, compared to regular sum-product decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:53:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Efficiency

Bit error probability

100

0.7

Prob. prop. BEP

10−1

Thres. BEP, t=6 Efficiency, t=6

0.6

10−2

0.5

10−3

0.4

10−4

0.3

10−5

0.2

10−6

0.1

10−7

0

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Eb/N0 (dB)

Figure 5. Typical performance of the early decision decoding algorithm.

100

Energy dissipation/clock cycle [pJ]

80

60

40

Standard VNC

20

Early decision VNC

Standard CNC

Early decision CNC

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Decision ratio

Figure 6. Energy dissipation of standard and early

decision components.

Slightly higher efficiencies can be obtained by using dynamic thresholds as described in [4]. However, the components have to be modified accordingly, as discussed in Section 7.
A 3-input VNC and a 6-input CNC have been synthesized and simulated using 0.35 µm technology. Table 1 shows the speed and area of the synthesized components.
The speed is insignificantly reduced, while the areas of the VNC and CNC are increased by 11% and 15%, respectively. The energy dissipation of the components is shown in Fig. 6. The average decision ratio is slightly lower than the memory access reduction (efficiency), because in the iteration that a variable is decided the results is not written back to the memories, but the VNC computation was carried out. Decoding of a received word will start with a low decision ratio, and typically increase as more variables are decided.
For a (3, 6)-code, there are twice as many VNCs as CNCs. Thus it can be seen that above a decision ratio of 0.1, the early decision components consume less energy than the standard components. Most of the energy, however, as shown in [3], is consumed in the memories. This energy dissipation is reduced by the efficiency factor, which is clearly higher than the read and write overheads calculated in Section 5.4.

Component
CNC ED-CNC

Speed [MHz] 198.4 192.3

Area
µ m2
39239 45027

Component
VNC ED-VNC

Speed [MHz] 86.1 85.7

Area
µ m2
31486 35071

Table 1. Speed and area of synthesized components.

7. Discussion

Several aspects of the architecture may be discussed. The errors shown in the performance graph are detected errors. Thus, as the block error rate is only 0.1–1%, these blocks can be redecoded to lower the error rate to that of the regular sum-product decoder. However, the overhead has not been characterized.
The width of the busses to the CNCs has not been discussed. The proposed architecture requires an additional wire for the disable bit to be added. This wire may be used to return the parity-check bit from the CNC, which allows implementation of the soft decision decoding scheme used in [4]. On the other hand, a quite high decision ratio is required before the energy dissipation of the early decision CNC is reduced, thus it may not be worthwhile to include the wire at all.

8. Conclusions

In this paper, we propose an architecture for an early decision decoder for LDPC codes. The algorithm reduces the memory accesses in order to reduce the energy dissipation of the decoder. The variable and check node components were synthesized using 0.35 µm technology.
With the example code, a 35% reduction of memory accesses is achieved with a 0.6 dB increase in required SNR at a BER of 10-5. Adjusting for the additional memory overhead, this amounts to a memory read reduction of 25% and a write reduction of 32%. The overhead of the logic is comparatively small.

References

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] Y. Li, M. Elassal, and M. Bayoumi, “Power efficient architecture for (3,6)-regular low-density parity-check code decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Vancouver, Canada, May 2004, vol. 4, pp. 81–84.
[4] A. Blad, O. Gustafsson, and L. Wanhammar, "An early decision decoding algorithm for LDPC codes using dynamic thresholds," European Conf. Circuit Theory Design, Cork, Ireland, Aug. 2005.
[5] T. Zhang, and K. K. Parhi, “An FPGA implementation of (3,6)-regular low-density parity-check code decoder,” EURASIP J. Appl. Signal Processing, vol. 2003, no. 6, pp. 530–542, May 2003.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:53:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

