IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

1973

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Block-Differential Modulation Over Doubly Selective Wireless Fading Channels
Alfonso Cano, Xiaoli Ma, and Georgios B. Giannakis
Abstract—Differential encoding is known to simplify receiver implementation because it bypasses channel estimation. However, over rapidly fading wireless channels, extra transceiver modules are necessary to enable differential transmission. Relying on a basis-expansion model for time- and frequency-selective (doubly selective) channels, we derive such a generalized block-differential (BD) codex and prove that it achieves maximum Doppler and multipath diversity gains, while affording low-complexity maximumlikelihood decoding. We further show that existing BD systems over frequency-selective or time-selective channels follow as special cases of our novel system. Simulations using the widely accepted Jakes model corroborate our theoretical analysis.

of efficient encoding of QC-LDPC codes. Two methods are presented to find the generator matrices of QC-LDPC codes in systematic-circulant form from their parity-check matrices given in circulant form. Based on the systematic-circulation form of the generator matrix of a QC-LDPC code, various types of encoding circuits using simple shift registers are devised. It is shown that the encoding complexity of a QC-LDPC code is linearly proportional to the number of parity bits of the code for serial encoding, and to the length of the code for high-speed parallel encoding.
Z. Li is with the Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC), Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA.
L. Chen, L. Zeng, and S. Lin are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA.
W. Fong is with the Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA, Greenbelt, MD 20771 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.858628

A. Cano is with the Area of Signal Processing and Communications (TSC), Rey Juan Carlos University, 28943 Fuenlabrada, Madrid, Spain.
X. Ma is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849 USA.
G. B. Giannakis is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.858640
Performance of Multicarrier DS/SSMA Over Fast Rayleigh Fading Channels With Doppler Diversity
Jin Zhang and James S. Lehnert

Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Over Compound Channels
Ilan Sutskover and Shlomo Shamai (Shitz)
Abstract—We present a setting for decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes jointly with channel estimation, suitable for transmission over memoryless compound channels. We show that the performance of the combined scheme can be rigorously evaluated by means of density evolution, and focus on density evolution as a tool for designing a channel estimator that matches not only to the channel, but also to the LDPC ensemble, as well. The utility of the concept is exemplified for a compound binary symmetric channel and an unknown-phase additive white Gaussian channel.

Abstract—The significant loss in performance of multicarrier direct-sequence spread-spectrum multiple-access (DS/SSMA) systems over fast-fading channels is investigated. First, the channel model for individual subchannels is obtained using a canonical decomposition to a wide-sense stationary, uncorrelated scattering channel. Next, a receiver structure, which features both Doppler diversity and frequency diversity, is presented and analyzed. It is found that large Doppler spreads cause the average magnitude of the desired signals to diminish dramatically. Expressions for the bit-error rate are derived for both uncoded and coded systems by applying the standard Gaussian approximation. Numerical results, which show that Doppler diversity is preferable over frequency diversity in fast-fading channels, are provided for different combinations of the diversity orders. Numerical results, which show that the intersymbol and intersubchannel interference can be effectively suppressed, are also provided. It is show that the multiple-access interference tends to degenerate into a wide-sense stationary process with a statistical periodicity destroyed by the fast-fading channel.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2035 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.858638
Efficient Encoding of Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Zongwang Li, Lei Chen, Lingqi Zeng, Shu Lin, and Wai Fong
Abstract—Quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes form an important subclass of LDPC codes. These codes have encoding advantage over other types of LDPC codes. This paper addresses the issue

The authors are with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, The Technion— Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.858637
Asymptotic Analysis of MIMO Wireless Systems With Spatial Correlation at the Receiver
Chao-Kai Wen, Jiunn-Tsair Chen, and Constantinos Papadias
Abstract—With a unified approach, this paper investigates the asymptotic performance, or equivalently, the large-system properties, of various point-to-point systems with antenna-array-based multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) channels having spatial correlations. Using the replica method originally developed for statistical physics, we provide analytical solutions to the input–output mutual information of MIMO systems at the transmit side, with arbitrary inputs, and at the receive side, with either the optimum space–time joint decoding, or various suboptimum spatial equalizers followed by a bank of temporal decoders. Important physical meanings revealed though the analytical solutions to those more practical combinations, such as how the input–output mutual information is affected by the channel spatial correlations, are highlighted along our derivation. Moreover, we provide a novel waterfilling algorithm to determine the data-rate-maximizing transmit signal covariance matrix when only the channel long-term spatial correlations are available at the transmitter.
C.-K. Wen and J.-T. Chen are with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30055, Taiwan, R.O.C.
C. Papadias is with the Wireless Research Lab, Bell Labs, Lucent Technology, Holmdel, NJ 07733 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2005.858629

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

