IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

3697

MAP Estimation Via Agreement on Trees: Message-Passing and Linear Programming
Martin J. Wainwright, Member, IEEE, Tommi S. Jaakkola, and Alan S. Willsky, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We develop and analyze methods for computing provably optimal maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) configurations for a subclass of Markov random fields defined on graphs with cycles. By decomposing the original distribution into a convex combination of tree-structured distributions, we obtain an upper bound on the optimal value of the original problem (i.e., the log probability of the MAP assignment) in terms of the combined optimal values of the tree problems. We prove that this upper bound is tight if and only if all the tree distributions share an optimal configuration in common. An important implication is that any such shared configuration must also be a MAP configuration for the original distribution. Next we develop two approaches to attempting to obtain tight upper bounds: a) a tree-relaxed linear program (LP), which is derived from the Lagrangian dual of the upper bounds; and b) a tree-reweighted max-product message-passing algorithm that is related to but distinct from the max-product algorithm. In this way, we establish a connection between a certain LP relaxation of the mode-finding problem and a reweighted form of the max-product (min-sum) message-passing algorithm.
Index Terms—Approximate inference, integer programming, iterative decoding, linear programming (LP) relaxation, Markov random fields, marginal polytope, maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) estimation, max-product algorithm, message-passing algorithms, min-sum algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
I NTEGER programming problems arise in various fields, including communication theory, error-correcting coding, image processing, statistical physics, and machine learning (e.g., [35], [39], [8]). Many such problems can be formulated in terms of Markov random fields (e.g., [8], [14]), in which the cost function corresponds to a graph-structured probability distribution, and the goal is to find the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) configuration. It is well known that the complexity of solving the MAP estimation problem on a Markov random field (MRF) depends critically on the structure of the underlying graph. For cycle-free graphs (also known as trees), the MAP problem can be solved by a form of nonserial
Manuscript received September 21, 2003; revised May 13, 2005. This work was supported in part by ODDR&E MURI under Grant DAAD19-00-1-0466 through the Army Research Office; by the Office of Naval Research under Grant N00014-00-1-0089; and by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Grant F49620-00-1-0362. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 40th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, October 2002.
M. J. Wainwright is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and the Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu).
T. S. Jaakkola and A. S. Willsky are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: tommi@csail.mit.edu; willsky@mit.edu).
Communicated by A. Kavcˇic´, Associate Editor for Detection and Estimation. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2005.856938

dynamic programming known as the max-product or min-sum algorithm (e.g., [2], [14], [15]). This algorithm, which entails passing “messages” from node to node, represents a generalization of the Viterbi algorithm [40] from chains to arbitrary cycle-free graphs. In recent years, the max-product algorithm has also been studied in application to graphs with cycles as a method for computing approximate MAP assignments (e.g., [1], [21]–[23], [29], [43]). Although the method may perform well in practice, it is no longer guaranteed to output the correct MAP assignment, and it is straightforward to demonstrate problems on which it specifies an incorrect (i.e., nonoptimal) assignment.
A. Overview
In this paper, we present and analyze new methods for computing MAP configurations for MRFs defined on graphs with cycles. The basic idea is to use a convex combination of tree-structured distributions to derive upper bounds on the cost of a MAP configuration. We prove that any such bound is tight if and only if the trees share a common optimizing configuration; moreover, any such shared configuration must be MAP-optimal for the original problem. Consequently, when the bound is tight, obtaining a MAP configuration for a graphical model with cycles—in general, a very difficult problem—is reduced to the easy task of examining the optima of a collection of tree-structured distributions.
Accordingly, we focus our attention on the problem of obtaining tight upper bounds, and propose two methods directed to this end. Our first approach is based on the convexity of the upper bounds, and the associated theory of Lagrangian duality. We begin by reformulating the exact MAP estimation problem on a graph with cycles as a linear program (LP) over the so-called marginal polytope. We then consider the Lagrangian dual of the problem of optimizing our upper bound. In particular, we prove that this dual is another LP, one which has a natural interpretation as a relaxation of the LP for exact MAP estimation. The relaxation is obtained by replacing the marginal polytope for the graph with cycles, which is a very complicated set in general, by an outer bound with simpler structure. This outer bound is an exact characterization of the marginal polytope of any tree-structured distribution, for which reason we refer to this approach as a tree-based LP relaxation.
The second method consists of a class of message-passing algorithms designed to find a collection of tree-structured distributions that share a common optimum. The resulting algorithm, though similar to the standard max-product (or min-sum) algorithm (e.g., [23], [43]), differs from it in a number of important

0018-9448/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3698

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

ways. In particular, under the so-called optimum specification C. Outline

criterion, fixed points of our tree-reweighted max-product algorithm specify a MAP-optimal configuration with a guarantee of correctness. We also prove that under this condition, fixed points of the tree-reweighted max-product updates correspond to dual-optimal solutions of the tree-relaxed linear program. As a corollary, we establish that the ordinary max-product algorithm on trees is solving the dual of an exact LP formulation of the MAP estimation problem.
Overall, this paper establishes connections between two approaches to solving the MAP estimation problem: LP relaxations of integer programming problems (e.g., [7], [38]), and

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides necessary background on graph theory and graphical models, as well as some preliminary details on marginal polytopes and a formulation of the MAP estimation problem. In Section III, we introduce the basic form of the upper bounds on the log probability of the MAP assignment, and then develop necessary and sufficient conditions for these bounds to be tight. In Section IV, we first discuss how the MAP integer programming problem has an equivalent formulation as an LP over the marginal polytope. We then prove that the Lagrangian dual of the problem of optimizing our upper bounds has a natural in-

(approximate) dynamic programming methods using message terpretation as a tree relaxation of the original LP. Section V is

passing in the max-product algebra. More specifically, our work devoted to the development of iterative message-passing algo-

shows that a (suitably reweighted) form of the max-product or rithms and their relation to the dual of the LP relaxation. We

min-sum algorithm is very closely connected to a particular conclude, in Section VI, with a discussion and extensions to the

linear programming relaxation of the MAP integer program. analysis presented here.

This variational characterization has links to the recent work

of Yedidia et al. [47], who showed that the sum–product al-

II. PRELIMINARIES

gorithm has a variational interpretation involving the so-called Bethe free energy. In addition, the work described here is linked in spirit to our previous work [41], [44], in which we showed how to upper-bound the log partition function using a “convexified form” of the Bethe free energy. Whereas this convex variational problem led to a method for computing approximate marginal distributions, the current paper deals exclusively with the problem of computing MAP configurations. Importantly, and in sharp contrast with our previous work, there is a nontrivial set

This section provides the background and some preliminary developments necessary for subsequent sections. We begin with a brief overview of some graph-theoretic basics; we refer the reader to the books [9], [10] for additional background on graph theory. We then describe the formalism of Markov random fields; more details can be found in various sources (e.g., [12], [14], [34]). We conclude by formulating the MAP estimation problem for a Markov random field.

of problems for which the upper bounds of this paper are tight, in which case the MAP-optimal configuration can be obtained by the techniques described here.

A. Undirected Graphs

An undirected graph

consists of a set of nodes or

vertices

that are joined by a set of edges . In

B. Notes and Related Developments

this paper, we consider only simple graphs, for which multiple edges between the same pair of vertices are forbidden. For each

We briefly summarize some developments related to the ideas described in this paper. In a parallel collaboration with Feldman and Karger [19], [18], [20], we have studied the tree-relaxed LP and related message-passing algorithms as decoding methods for turbo-like and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, and provided finite-length performance guarantees for particular codes and channels. In independent work, Koetter and Vontobel [30] used the notion of a graph cover to establish connections between the ordinary max-product algorithm for LDPC codes and a particular polytope equivalent to the one defining our LP relaxation. In other independent work, Wiegerinck and Heskes [46] have proposed a “fractional” form of the sum–product algorithm that is closely related to

, we let

denote the set

of neighbors of . A clique of the graph is a fully connected

subset of the vertex set (i.e.,

for all

). The

clique is maximal if it is not properly contained within any

other clique. A cycle in a graph is a path from a node back

to itself; that is, a cycle consists of a sequence of distinct edges

such that

.

A subgraph of

is a graph

where

(respectively,

) are subsets of (respec-

tively, ). Of particular importance to our analysis are those

(sub)graphs without cycles. More precisely, a tree is a cycle-free

subgraph

; it is spanning if it reaches every

vertex (i.e.,

).

the tree-reweighted sum–product algorithm considered in our previous work [44]; see also Minka [36] for a reweighted B. Markov Random Fields (MRFs)

version of the expectation propagation algorithm. In other An MRF is defined on the basis of an undirected graph

work, Kolmogorov [31], [32] has studied the tree-reweighted

in the following way. For each

, let be a

max-product message-passing algorithms presented here, and random variable taking values in some sample space .

proposed a sequential form of tree updates for which certain This paper deals exclusively with the discrete case, for which

convergence guarantees can be established. In followup work,

takes values in the finite alphabet

.

Kolmogorov and Wainwright [33] provided stronger optimality By concatenating the variables at each node, we obtain a random

properties of tree-reweighted message passing when applied to vector

with

elements. Observe that

problems with binary variables and pairwise interactions.

itself takes values in the Cartesian product space

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3699

. For any subset

, we let denote More specifically, our development in the sequel makes exten-

the collection

of random variables associated with sive use of an overcomplete representation in which the basic

nodes in , with a similar definition for .

building blocks are indicator functions of the form

—the

By the Hammersley–Clifford theorem (e.g., [34]), any function that is equal to one if

, and zero otherwise. In

Markov random fields that is strictly positive (i.e.,

particular, for an MRF with interactions between at most pairs of

for all

) can defined either in terms of certain Markov variables, we use the following collection of potential functions:

properties with respect to the graph, or in terms of a decom-

position of the distribution over cliques of the graph. We use

for

(3a)

the latter characterization here. For the sake of development

for

(3b)

in the sequel, it is convenient to describe this decomposition

in exponential form (e.g., [3]). We begin with some necessary which we refer to as the canonical overcomplete representation.

notation. A potential function associated with a given clique This representation involves a total of

is mapping

that depends only on the subcollection

. There may be a family of potential func-

tions

associated with any given clique, where

is an index ranging over some set

. Taking the union potential functions, indexed by the set

over all cliques defines the overall index set

.

The full collection of potential functions

defines

a vector-valued mapping

, where

is

the total number of potential functions. Associated with is a

(4)

real-valued vector

, known as the exponential

parameter vector. For a fixed

, we use

to de-

note the ordinary Euclidean product in between and .

With this setup, the collection of strictly positive Markov

The overcompleteness of the representation is manifest in various linear constraints among the potentials; for instance, the relation

random fields associated with the graph and potential

functions can be represented as the exponential family

, where

holds for all

. As a consequence of this overcomplete-

ness, there are many exponential parameters corresponding to a

(1) given distribution (i.e.,

for

). Although

this many-to-one correspondence might seem undesirable, its

Note that each vector

indexes a particular Markov

random field

in this exponential family.

Example 1: The Ising model of statistical physics (e.g., [5])

provides a simple illustration of a collection of MRFs in this

form. This model involves a vector

, with a distri-

bution defined by potential functions only on cliques of size at

most two (i.e., vertices and edges). As a result, the exponential

family in this case takes the form

usefulness is illustrated in Section V.

The bulk of this paper focuses exclusively on MRFs with in-

teractions between at most pairs

of random variables,

which we refer to as pairwise MRFs. In principle, there is no

loss of generality in restricting to pairwise interactions, since

any factor graph over discrete variables can be converted to this

form by introducing auxiliary random variables [23]; see Ap-

pendix, part A for details of this procedure. Moreover, the tech-

niques described in this paper can all be generalized to apply di-

rectly to MRFs that involve higher order interactions, by dealing

with hypertrees as opposed to ordinary trees.1 Moreover, with (2) the exception of specific examples involving the Ising model,

we exclusively use the canonical overcomplete representation

Here is the weight on edge , and is the parameter for (3) defined in terms of indicator functions.

node . In this case, the index set consists of the union Note that the set of potentials

. C. Marginal Distributions on Graphs

is a basis for all multinomials on

of maximum degree Our analysis in the sequel focuses on the local marginal distri-

two that respect the structure of .

butions that are defined by the indicator functions in the canon-

When the collection of potential functions do not satisfy any linear constraints, then the representation (1) is said to be minimal [3], [4]. For example, the Ising model (2) is minimal,

ical overcomplete representation (3). In particular, taking expectations of these indicators with respect to some distribution yields marginal probabilities for each node

because there is no linear combination of the potentials

(5)

that is equal to a constant for

all

. In contrast, it is often convenient to consider

an overcomplete representation, in which the potential functions

do satisfy linear constraints, and hence are no longer a basis.

1For brevity, we do not discuss hypertrees at length in this paper. Roughly speaking, they amount to trees formed on clusters of nodes from the original graph; see Wainwright et al. [42] for further details on hypertrees.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3700

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

and for each edge (6) (7)

Note that (5) and (6) define a -dimensional vector

of marginals, indexed by elements of defined

in (4). We let

denote the set of all such marginals

realizable in this way

and

for some

(8)

The conditions defining membership in

can be ex-

pressed more compactly in the equivalent vector form

where denotes a vector consisting of the potential functions

forming the canonical overcomplete representation (3). We

refer to

as the marginal polytope associated with

the graph .

By definition, any marginal polytope is the convex hull of

a finite number of vectors—namely, the collection

. Consequently, the Minkowski–Weyl theorem [37] ensures

that

can be represented as an intersection of half-

spaces

where is a finite index set and each half-

space is of the form

for

some

and

. These half-space constraints in-

clude the nonnegativity condition

for each

.

Moreover, due to the overcompleteness of the canonical over-

complete representation, there are various equality2 constraints

that must hold; for instance, for all nodes

, we have the

constraint

.

The number of additional (nontrivial) linear constraints

required to characterize

, though always finite,

grows rapidly in for a general graph with cycles; see Deza

and Laurent [16] for discussion of the binary case. It is straight-

forward, however, to specify a subset of constraints that any

must satisfy. First, as mentioned previously,

since the elements of are marginal probabilities, we must

have

(meaning that is in the positive orthant). Second,

as local marginals, the elements of must satisfy the normal-

ization constraints

On the basis of these constraints,3 we define the set

as all

that satisfy constraints (9a), (9b), and (10). Here,

it should be understood that there are two sets of marginaliza-

tion constraints for each edge : one for each of the vari-

ables and . By construction,

specifies an outer

bound on

; moreover, in contrast to

, it

involves only a number of inequalities that is polynomial in .

More specifically,

is defined by

inequalities, where

. Since the number of edges

is at most , this complexity is at most

. The con-

straint set

plays an important role in the sequel.

D. MAP Estimation

Of central interest in this paper is the computation of

maximum a posteriori (MAP) configurations4 for a given

distribution in an exponential form—i.e., configurations in the

set

, where

is a given vector of

weights. For reasons to be clarified later, we refer to

as

the target distribution. The problem of computing a MAP con-

figuration arises in a wide variety of applications. For example,

in image processing (e.g., [8]), computing MAP estimates

can be used as the basis for image segmentation techniques.

In error-correcting coding (e.g., [35]), a decoder based on

computing the MAP codeword minimizes the word error rate.

When using the canonical overcomplete representation

, it is often convenient to rep-

resent the exponential parameters in the following functional

form:

(11a)

(11b)

With this notation, the MAP problem is equivalent to finding a

configuration

that maximizes the quantity

(12)

Although the parameter is a known and fixed quantity, it is

useful for analytical purposes to view it as a variable, and define

a function

as follows:

(13)

(9a) Note that

represents the value of the optimal (MAP) con-

figuration as ranges over . As the maximum of a collection (9b) of linear functions, is convex in terms of .

Third, since the single-node marginal over must be consistent

with the joint marginal on

, the following marginaliza-

tion constraint must also be satisfied:

III. UPPER BOUNDS VIA CONVEX COMBINATIONS
This section introduces the basic form of the upper bounds on to be considered in this paper. The key property of

(10)

h i 2Any equality constraint a;  = b is equivalent to enforcing the pair of

h i  h0 i  0 inequality constraints a;  b and a

b.

f g 3Note that the normalization constraint on 

is redundant given the

f g marginalization constraint (10) and the normalization of  .

j 4The term a posteriori arises from applications, in which case one often wants
to compute maximizing elements of the posterior distribution p(x y; ), where

y is a fixed collection of noisy observations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3701

is its convexity, which allows us to apply Jensen’s inequality

[28]. More specifically, let be a finite collection of nonneg-

ative weights that sum to one, and consider a collection of

exponential parameters such that

. Then applying

Jensen’s inequality yields the upper bound

(14)

Note that the bound (14) holds for any collection of exponential

parameters that satisfy

; however, the bound

will not necessarily be useful, unless the evaluation of

is easier than the original problem of computing

. Ac-

cordingly, in this paper, we focus on convex combinations of

tree-structured exponential parameters (i.e., the set of nonzero

components of is restricted to an acyclic subgraph of the full

graph), for which exact computations are tractable. In this case,

each index in (14) corresponds to a spanning tree of the graph,

and the corresponding exponential parameter is required to re-

spect the structure of the tree. In the following, we introduce the

necessary notation required to make this idea precise.

A. Convex Combinations of Trees

For a given graph, let denote a particular spanning tree, and

let

denote the set of all spanning trees. For a given

spanning tree

, we define a set

Fig. 1. Illustration of edge appearance probabilities. Original graph is shown in panel (a). Probability 1=3 is assigned to each of the three spanning trees f T j i = 1; 2; 3g is shown in panels (b)–(d). Edge b is a so-called bridge in G, meaning that it must appear in any spanning tree. Therefore, it has edge appearance probability  = 1. Edges e and f appear in two and one of the
spanning trees, respectively, which gives rise to edge appearance probabilities  = 2=3 and  = 1=3.

corresponding to those indices associated with all vertices but

only edges in the tree.

To each spanning tree

, we associate an exponential

parameter that must respect the structure of . More pre-

cisely, the parameter must belong to the linear constraint

set

given by

such vector must belong to the so-called spanning tree poly-

tope [7], [17], which we denote by . See Fig. 1 for an illus-

tration of the edge appearance probabilities. Although we allow

for the support

to be a strict subset of the set of all span-

ning trees, we require that

for all

, so that each

edge appears in at least one tree with nonzero probability.

Given a collection of tree-structured parameters and a dis-

tribution , we form a convex combination of tree exponential

parameters as follows:

(15)

(18)

By concatenating all of the tree vectors, we form a larger vector

, which is an element of

. The

vector must belong to the constraint set

(16)

In order to define convex combinations of exponential parameters defined on spanning trees, we require a probability distribution over the set of spanning trees

Let

be the target parameter vector for which we are in-

terested in computing , as well as a MAP configuration of

. For a given , of interest are collections of tree-struc-

tured exponential parameters such that

. Accord-

ingly, we define the following constraint set:

(19)

For any distribution , we define its support to be the set of trees to which it assigns strictly positive probability; that is,
(17)

It can be seen that

is never empty as long as

for

all edges

. We say that any member of

specifies

a -reparameterization of

.

Example 2 (Single Cycle): To illustrate these definitions,

consider a binary vector

on a four-node cycle, with

the distribution in the minimal Ising form

In the sequel, it will also be of interest to consider the probability

that a given edge

appears in a span-

ning tree chosen randomly under . We let

In words, the target distribution is specified by the minimal pa-

represent a vector of these edge appearance probabilities. Any rameter

, where the zeros represent the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3702

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

fact that

for all . Suppose that is the uniform dis-

tribution

for

, so that

for each

edge . We construct a member of

, as follows:

where the last equality uses the fact that

.

Now for each

, the term

is nonnegative, and equal to zero only when belongs to

. Therefore, the bound is tight if and only if

for some

.

With this choice, it is easily verified that .
B. Tightness of Upper Bounds It follows from (14), (18), and (19) that for any
there holds

so that ,

(20)

Our first goal is to understand when the upper bound (20) is

tight—that is, met with equality. It turns out that this equality

holds if and only if the collection of trees share a common op-

timum, which leads to the notion of tree agreement.

More formally, for any exponential parameter vector

,

define the collection

of its optimal configurations as

follows:

for all

(21)

Note that by the definition (13) of , there holds

for any

. With this nota-

tion, we have the following.

Proposition 1 (Tree Agreement): Let

,

and let

be the set of configurations that

are optimal for every tree-structured distribution. Then the fol-

lowing containment always holds:

The preceding result shows that the upper bound (20) is tight

if and only if all the trees in the support of agree on a common

configuration. When this tree agreement condition holds, a MAP

configuration for the original problem

can be obtained

simply by examining the intersection

of

configurations that are optimal on every tree for which

.

Accordingly, we focus our attention on the problem of finding

upper bounds (20) that are tight, so that a MAP configuration can

be obtained. Since the target parameter is fixed and assuming

that we fix the spanning tree distribution , the problem on which

we focus is that of optimizing the upper bound as a function of

. Proposition 1 suggests two different strategies for

attempting to find a tight upper bound, which are the subjects of

the next two subsections.

Direct minimization and Lagrangian Duality: The first ap-

proach is a direct one, based on minimizing (20). In particular,

for a fixed distribution over spanning trees, we consider the

constrained optimization problem of minimizing the RHS of

(20) subject to the constraint

. The problem structure

ensures that strong duality holds, so that it can be tackled via its

Lagrangian dual. In Section IV, we show that this dual problem

is an LP relaxation of the original MAP estimation problem.

Message-Passing Approach: In Section V, we derive and an-

alyze message-passing algorithms, the goal of which is to find,

for a fixed distribution , a collection of exponential parame-

ters

such that belongs to the constraint set

of (19), and the intersection

of config-

urations optimal for all tree problems is nonempty. Under these

conditions, Proposition 1 guarantees that for all configurations

in the intersection, the bound is tight. In Section V, we develop

a class of message-passing algorithms with these two goals in

mind. We also prove that when the bound is tight, fixed points of

these algorithms specify optimal solutions to the LP relaxation

derived in Section VI.

(22)

IV. LAGRANGIAN DUALITY AND TREE RELAXATION

Moreover, the bound (20) is tight if and only if the intersection

on the left-hand side (LHS) is nonempty.

Proof: The containment relation is clear from the form of

the upper bound (20). Let belong to

. Then the dif-

ference of the right-hand side (RHS) and the LHS of (20) can

be written as follows:

In this section, we develop and analyze a Lagrangian refor-

mulation of the problem of optimizing the upper bounds—i.e.,

minimizing the RHS of (20) as a function of

. The

cost function is a linear combination of convex functions, and

so is also convex as a function of ; moreover, the constraints are

linear in . Therefore, the minimization problem can be solved

via its Lagrangian dual. Before deriving this dual, it is conve-

nient to develop an alternative representation of as a linear

program.

A. Linear Program Over the Marginal Polytope for Exact MAP Estimation

Recall from (13) that the function value

corresponds

to the optimal value of the integer program

. We

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3703

now reformulate this integer program as an LP, which leads to an alternative representation of the function , and hence of the exact MAP estimation problem. In order to convert from integer to linear program, our approach is the standard one (e.g., [7], [38]) of taking convex combinations of all possible solutions. The resulting convex hull is precisely the marginal polytope defined in Section II-C. We summarize in the following.

Lemma 1: The function

has an alternative represen-

tation as a linear program over the marginal polytope

(23)

where

is shorthand for the sum

Proof: Although this type of LP reformulation is standard

in combinatorial optimization, we provide a proof here for com-

pleteness. Consider the set

of all possible probability distributions over . We first claim

that the maximization over

can be rewritten as an equiv-

alent maximization over as follows:

(24)

On one hand, the RHS is certainly greater than or equal to the

LHS, because for any configuration , the set includes the

delta distribution that places all its mass at . On the other

hand, for any

, the sum

is a convex

combination of terms of the form

for

, and so

cannot be any larger than

.

Making use of the functional notation in (11), we now expand

the summation on the RHS of (24), and then use the linearity of

expectation to write

B. Lagrangian Dual
Let us now address the problem of finding the tightest upper bound of the form in (20). More formally, for a fixed distribution over spanning trees, we wish to solve the constrained optimization problem

(25)

As defined in (16), the constraint set consists of all vectors

such that for each tree , the subvector

respects

the structure of , meaning that

.

Note that the cost function is a convex combination of convex

functions; moreover, with fixed, the constraints are all linear

in . Under these conditions, strong duality holds [6], so that

this constrained optimization problem can be tackled via its La-

grangian dual. The dual formulation turns out to have a sur-

prisingly simple and intuitive form. In particular, recall the set

defined by the orthant constraint

, and the

additional linear constraints (9a), (9b), and (10). The polytope

turns out to be the constraint set in the dual refor-

mulation of our problem.

Theorem 1: The Lagrangian dual to problem (25) is given

by the LP relaxation based on

. Given that strong

duality holds, the optimal primal value

(26)

is equal to the optimal dual value

(27)

Proof: Let be a vector of Lagrange multipliers corre-

sponding to the constraints

. We then form the

Lagrangian associated with problem (25)

Here

and We now compute the dual function

As ranges over , the marginals range over

.

Therefore, we conclude that , as claimed.
Remarks: Lemma 1 identifies

is equal to as the support function

this minimization problem can be decomposed into separate problems on each tree as follows:

[28] of the set

. Consequently,

can be inter-

(28)

preted as the negative intercept of the supporting hyperplane to

with normal vector

. This property underlies

the dual relation that is the focus of the following section.

The following lemma is key to computing this infimum.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3704

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Fig. 2. (a) The constraint set LOCAL(G) is an outer bound on the exact marginal polytope. Its vertex set includes all the integral vertices of MARG(G),
which are in one-to-one correspondence with optimal solutions of the integer program. It also includes additional fractional vertices, which are not vertices of MARG(G). (b), (c) Solving an LP with cost vector  entails translating a hyperplane with normal  until it is tangent to the constraint set LOCAL(G). In (b), the point of tangency occurs at a unique integral vertex. In (c), the tangency occurs at a fractional vertex of LOCAL(G) that lies outside of MARG(G).

Lemma 2: The function (29)

has the explicit form

if

(30)

otherwise

where

Proof: See Appendix, part B

.

Using Lemma 2, the value of the infimum (28) will be equal

to

if

for all

, and

otherwise. Since every edge in the graph belongs to at least one

tree in

, we have

marginal polytope

, since any valid marginal vector

must satisfy all of the constraints defining

. Thus,

the dual LP (27) is simply a relaxation of the original LP (23),

obtained by replacing the original constraint set

by the set

formed by local (node and edgewise)

constraints. Note that for a graph with cycles,

is a strict superset of

. (In particular, Example

3 to follow provides an explicit construction of an element

.) For this reason, we call any

a pseudomarginal vector.

An additional interesting connection is that this polytope

is equivalent to the constraint set involved in the

Bethe variational principle which, as shown by Yedidia et al.

[47], underlies the sum–product algorithm. In addition, it is

possible to recover this LP relaxation as the “zero-temperature”

limit of an optimization problem based on a convexified Bethe

approximation, as discussed in our previous work [44]. For

binary variables, the linear program (27) can be shown to be

equivalent to a relaxation that has been studied in previous

work (e.g., [27], [11]). The derivation given here illuminates the

critical role of graphical structure in controlling the tightness

of such a relaxation. In particular, an immediate consequence

of our development is the following.

Corollary 1: The relaxation (27) is exact for any problem on

a tree-structured graph.

so that the dual function takes the form
if otherwise.

Since the LP relaxation (27) is always exact for MAP esti-

mation with any tree-structured distribution, we refer to it as a

tree relaxation. For a graph with cycles—in sharp contrast to

the tree-structured case—

is a strict outer bound on

Thus, the dual optimal value is

; by

strong duality [6], this optimum is equal to the optimal primal

value (25).

, and the relaxation (27) will not always be tight.

Fig. 2 provides an idealized illustration of

, and its

relation to the exact marginal polytope

. It can be

seen that the vertices of

are all of the form , corre-

The equivalence guaranteed by the duality relation in The- sponding to the marginal vector realized by the delta distribution

orem 1 is useful, because the dual problem has much simpler that puts all its mass on

. In the canonical overcomplete

structure than the primal problem. For a general distribution , representation (3), each element of any such is either zero

the primal problem (25) entails minimizing a sum of functions or one. These integral vertices, denoted by , are drawn with

over all spanning trees of the graph, which can be a very large black circles in Fig. 2(a). It is straightforward to show that each

collection. In contrast, the dual program on the RHS of (27) is such is also a vertex of

. However, for graphs

simply an LP over

, which is a relatively simple with cycles

includes additional fractional vertices

polytope. (In particular, it can be characterized by

that lie strictly outside of

, and that are drawn in gray

constraints, where

.)

circles in Fig. 2(a).

This dual LP (27) also has a very natural interpretation. Since

is also a polytope, the optimum of the LP

In particular, the set

is an outer bound on the relaxation (27) will be attained at a vertex (possibly more than

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3705

one) of

. Consequently, solving the LP relaxation

using

as an outer bound on

can have

one of two possible outcomes. The first possibility is that op-

timum is attained at some vertex of

that is, also a

vertex of

. The optimum may occur at a unique in-

tegral vertex, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (b), or at multiple integral

vertices (not illustrated here). In this case, both the dual LP re-

laxation (27), and hence also the primal version in (20), are tight,

and we can recover an optimal MAP configuration for the orig-

inal problem, which is consistent with Proposition 1. Alterna-

tively, the optimum is attained only outside the original marginal

polytope

at a fractional vertex of

, as il-

lustrated in Fig. 2(c). In this case, the relaxation must be loose,

so that Proposition 1 asserts that it is impossible to find a con-

figuration that is optimal for all tree-structured problems. Con-

sequently, whether or not the tree agreement condition of Propo-

sition 1 can be satisfied corresponds precisely to the distinction

between integral and fractional vertices in the LP relaxation (27).

Example 3 (Integral Versus Fractional Vertices): In order

to demonstrate explicitly the distinction between fractional

and integral vertices, we now consider the simplest possible

example—namely, a binary problem

defined on

the three-node cycle. Consider the parameter vector with

components defined as follows:

(31a)

(31b)

Suppose first that is positive—say

. By construction of

, we have

for all

. This inequality is

tight when is either the vertex corresponding to the config-

uration

, or its counterpart corresponding to

. In

fact, both of these configurations are MAP-optimal for the orig-

inal problem, so that we conclude that the LP relaxation (27) is

tight (i.e., we can achieve tree agreement).

On the other hand, suppose that

; for concreteness, say

. This choice of encourages all pairs of configurations

to be distinct (i.e.,

). However, in going around

the cycle, there must hold

for at least one pair. There-

fore, the set of optimal configurations consists of

, and

the other five permutations thereof. (That is, all configurations

except

and

are optimal.) The value of any such

optimizing configuration—i.e.,

—will be

, corresponding to the fact that two of the three pairs

are distinct.

However, with reference to the relaxed polytope

, a larger value of

can be attained. We begin

by observing that

for all

.

In fact, equality can be achieved in this inequality by the

following pseudomarginal:

(32a)

(32b)

Overall, we have shown that

which establishes that the relaxation (27) is loose for this partic-

ular problem. Moreover, the pseudomarginal vector defined in

(32a) corresponds to a fractional vertex of

, so that

we are in the geometric setting of Fig. 2(c).

V. TREE-REWEIGHTED MESSAGE-PASSING ALGORITHMS

The main result of the preceding section is that the problem of

finding tight upper bounds, as formulated in (25), is equivalent

to solving the relaxed linear program (27) over the constraint

set

. A key property of this constraint set is that it

is defined by a number of constraints that is at most quadratic in

the number of nodes . Solving an LP over

, then,

is certainly feasible by various generic methods, including the

simplex algorithm (e.g., [7]). It is also of interest to develop

algorithms that exploit the graphical structure intrinsic to the

problem. Accordingly, this section is devoted to the develop-

ment of iterative algorithms with this property. An interesting

property of the iterative methods developed here is that when

applied to a tree-structured graph, they all reduce to the ordi-

nary max-product algorithm [23], [43]. For graphs with cycles,

in contrast, they remain closely related to but nonetheless differ

from the ordinary max-product algorithm in subtle but impor-

tant ways. Ultimately, we establish a connection between partic-

ular fixed points of these iterative algorithms and optimal dual

solutions of the LP relaxation (27). In this way, we show that

(suitably reweighted) forms of the max-product algorithm have

a variational interpretation in terms of the LP relaxation. As a

corollary, our results show that the ordinary max-product algo-

rithm for trees (i.e., the Viterbi algorithm) can be viewed as an

iterative method for solving a particular linear program.

We begin with some background on the notion of max-

marginals, and their utility in computing exact MAP estimates

of tree-structured distributions [2], [14], [15], [43]. We then

define an analogous notion of pseudo-max-marginals for graphs

with cycles, which play a central role in the message-passing

algorithms that we develop subsequently.

A. Max-Marginals for Tree Distributions

Although the notion of max-marginal can be defined for any

distribution, of particular interest in the current context are the

max-marginals associated with a distribution

that is

Markov with respect to some tree

. For each

and

, the associated single-node max-marginal is

defined by a maximization over all other nodes in the graph

(33)

Here

is some normalization constant, included for con-

venience, that is independent of but can vary from node to

node. Consequently, the max-marginal is proportional to

the probability of the most likely configuration under the con-

straint

. Note that is obtained by maximizing over

the random variables at all nodes

, whence the termi-

nology “max-marginal.” For each edge , the joint pairwise

max-marginal is defined in an analogous manner

(34)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3706

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Once again, the quantity is a positive normalization constant that can vary from edge to edge but does not depend on .
It is convenient to represent all the values associated with a given node, and the values
associated with a given edge in the functional form

and all edges can be directed from parent to child

.

To find a configuration

, begin by choosing

an element

. Then proceed recursively

down the tree, from parent to child , at each step choosing the

child configuration from

. By con-

struction, the configuration so defined is MAP-optimal; see

[15], [43] for further details.

(35)

It is well known [14] that any tree-structured distribution can be factorized in terms of its max-marginals as
follows:
(36)

This factorization, which is entirely analogous to the more familiar one in terms of (sum)-marginals, is a special case of the more general junction-tree decomposition [15], [14]. Moreover, it can be shown [15], [43] that the ordinary max-product (min-sum) algorithm computes this max-marginal factorization. The fact that this factorization can be computed in a straightforward manner for any tree is exploited in the algorithms that we develop in the sequel.
The max-marginal factorization (36) yields a local criterion for assessing the validity of tree max-marginals. The following lemma provides a precise statement.

Lemma 3: A collection

are valid max-marginals for

a tree if and only if the edgewise consistency condition

(37)

holds5 for every edge

.

Proof: Necessity of the edge consistency is clear. The suf-

ficiency can be established by an inductive argument in which

successive nodes are stripped from the tree by local maximiza-

tion; see [15], [43] for further details.

The max-marginal representation (36) allows the global

problem of MAP estimation to be solved by performing a set

of local maximization operations. In particular, suppose that

the configuration belongs to

, meaning that is

MAP-optimal for

. For a tree, such configurations are

completely characterized by local optimality conditions with

respect to the max-marginals, as summarized in the following.

Lemma 4 (Local Optimality): Let

be a valid set of

max-marginals for a tree-structured graph. Then a configuration

belongs to

if and only if the following local

optimality conditions hold:

(38a)

(38b)

Proof: The necessity of the conditions in (38) is clear. To

establish sufficiency, we follow a dynamic-programming pro-

cedure. Any tree can be rooted at a particular node

,

A particularly simple condition under which the local opti-

mality conditions (38) hold is when for each , the max-mar-

ginal has a unique optimum . In this case, the MAP config-

uration is unique with elements

that

are computed easily by maximizing each single-node max-mar-

ginal. If this uniqueness condition does not hold, then more than

one configuration is MAP-optimal for

. In this case, max-

imizing each single-node max-marginal is no longer sufficient

[43], and the dynamic-programming procedure described in the

proof of Lemma 4 must be used.

B. Iterative Algorithms

We now turn to the development of iterative algorithms for a

graph

that contains cycles. We begin with a high-

level overview of the concepts and objectives, before proceeding

to a precise description.

1) High-Level View: The notion of max-marginal is not lim-

ited to distributions defined by tree-structured graphs, but can

also be defined for graphs with cycles. Indeed, if we were able

to compute the exact max-marginals of

and each single-

node max-marginal had a unique optimum, then the MAP esti-

mation problem could be solved by local optimizations.6 How-

ever, computing exact max-marginals for a distribution on a gen-

eral graph with cycles is an intractable task. Therefore, it is again

necessary to relax our requirements.

The basic idea, then, is to consider a vector of the so-called

pseudo-max-marginals

, the properties of which

are to be defined shortly. The qualifier “pseudo” reflects the fact

that these quantities no longer have an interpretation as exact

max-marginals, but instead represent approximations to max-

marginals on the graph with cycles. For a given distribution

over the spanning trees of the graph and a tree for which

, consider the subset , corresponding to those

elements of associated with —i.e.,

(39)

We think of

as implicitly specifying a tree-structured

exponential parameter via the factorization (36), i.e.,

(40)

which, in turn, implies that is associated with a collection of tree-structured parameters—viz.

(41)

Now suppose that given , we have a vector that satisfies the following properties.

a) The vector specifies a vector

, meaning that

is a -reparameterization of the original distribution.

5Here  is a positive constant that depends on both the edge, and the variable

6If a subset of the single-node max-marginals had multiple optima, the situa-

over which the maximization takes place.

tion would be more complicated.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3707

b) For all trees

, the vector

consists of figurations

and

achieve

for

exact max-marginals for

; we refer to this con- all vertices

, and

for all edges

dition as tree consistency.

. This finding is consistent with Example 3, where we

Our goal is to iteratively adjust the elements of —and hence,

implicitly, as well—such that the -reparameterization condi-

tion always holds, and the tree consistency condition is achieved

upon convergence. In particular, we provide algorithms such

that any fixed point satisfies both conditions a) and b).

The ultimate goal is to use to obtain a MAP configuration

for the target distribution

. The following condition turns

out to be critical in determining whether or not is useful for

this purpose:

demonstrated that both configurations are MAP-optimal for the

original problem, and that the LP relaxation (27) is tight.

Conversely, suppose that

. In this case, the require-

ment that belong to the set

for all

three edges means that

for all three pairs. Since this

condition cannot be met, the pseudo-max-marginal fails the OS

criterion for

. Again, this is consistent with Example 3,

where we found that for

, the optimum of the LP relax-

ation (27) was attained only at a fractional vertex.

Optimum Specification (OS): The pseudo-max-marginals 2) Direct Updating of Pseudo-Max-Marginals: Our first

satisfy the optimum specification (OS) criterion if algorithm is based on updating a collection of pseudo-max-

there exists at least one configuration that satisfies the local marginals

for a graph with cycles such that -repa-

optimality conditions (38) for every vertex

and edge rameterization (condition a)) holds at every iteration, and

on the graph with cycles.

tree consistency (condition b)) is satisfied upon convergence.

Note that the OS criterion always holds for any set of exact At each iteration

, associated with each node

max-marginals on any graph. For the pseudo-max-marginals up-

is a single node pseudo-max-marginal , and with each

dated by the message-passing algorithms, in contrast, the OS edge

is a joint pairwise pseudo-max-marginal .

criterion is no longer guaranteed to hold, as we illustrate in Ex- Suppose that for each tree in the support of , we use these

ample 4 to follow.

pseudo-max-marginals

to define a tree-structured

In the sequel, we establish that when satisfies the OS cri- exponential parameter

via (36). More precisely, again

terion with respect to some configuration , then any such using the functional notation as in (11), the tree-structured pa-

must be MAP-optimal for the target distribution. In con- rameter

is defined in terms of (element-wise) logarithms

trast, when the OS criterion is not satisfied, the pseudo-max- of as follows:

marginals

do not specify a MAP-optimal configura-

tion, as can be seen by a continuation of Example 3.

(44a)

Example 4 (Failure of the OS Criterion): Consider the parameter vector defined in (31a). Let the spanning tree distri-

if otherwise.

(44b)

bution place mass on each of the three spanning trees as- The general idea is to update the pseudo-max-marginals it-

sociated with a three-node single cycle. With this choice, the eratively in such a way that the -reparameterization condition

edge appearances probabilities are

for each edge. We is maintained, and the tree consistency condition is satisfied

now define a -vector

of log pseudo-max-marginals as- upon convergence. There are a number of ways in which such

sociated with node , as well as a

matrix

of log updates can be structured; here, we distinguish two broad classes

pseudo-max-marginals associated with edge , in the fol- of strategies: tree-based updates and parallel edge-based up-

lowing way:

dates. Tree-based updates entail performing multiple iterations

of updating on a fixed tree

, updating only the

subcollection

of pseudo-max-marginals associated with

(42) vertices and edges in until it is fully tree-consistent for this tree (i.e., so that the components of are indeed max-marginals

For each of the three trees in

, the associated vector

of pseudo-max-marginals defines a tree-structured expo-

nential parameter

as in (40). More specifically, we have

for the distribution

). However, by focusing on this

one tree, we may be changing some of the and so that we

do not have tree-consistency on one or more of the other trees

. Thus, the next step entails updating the pseudo-

max-marginals

on one of the other trees, and so on, until

otherwise.

(43) ultimately the full collection is consistent on every tree. In contrast, the edge-based strategy involves updating the pseudo-max-

With this definition, it is straightforward to verify that

, meaning that the -reparameterization

condition holds. Moreover, for any

, the edgewise

consistency condition

holds.

Therefore, the pseudo-max-marginals are pairwise-consistent,

marginal on each edge, as well as the associated single-node max-marginals and , in parallel. This edgewise strategy is motivated by Lemma 3, which guarantees that is consistent on every tree of the graph if and only if the edge consistency condition

so that by Lemma 3, they are tree-consistent for all three

spanning trees.

(45)

Now suppose that

. In this case, the pseudo-max-mar-

ginal vector does satisfy the OS criterion. Indeed, both con- holds for every edge of the graph with cycles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3708

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Fig. 3. Edge-based reparameterization updates of the pseudo-max-marginals.

It should be noted that tree-based updates are computation-

ally feasible only when the support of the spanning tree distri-

bution consists of a manageable number of trees. When ap-

plicable, however, there can be important practical benefits to

tree-based updates, including more rapid convergence as well

as the possibility of determining a MAP-optimal configuration

prior to convergence. More details on tree-based updates and

their properties in more detail in the Appendix, part C. We pro-

vide some experimental results demonstrating the advantages of

tree-based updates in Section V-D.2.

Here, we focus on edge-based updates, due to their simplicity

and close link to the ordinary max-product algorithm that will be

explored in the following section. The edge-based reparameteri-

zation algorithm takes the form shown in Fig. 3; a few properties

are worthy of comment. First, each scalar appearing in (46b)

and (46a) is the edge appearance probability of edge

in-

duced by the spanning tree distribution , as defined in Section

III-A. Second, this edge-based reparameterization algorithm is

very closely related to the ordinary max-product algorithm [43].

In fact, if

for all edges

, then the updates

(47) are exactly equivalent to a (reparameterization form) of the

usual max-product updates. We will see this equivalence explic-

itly in our subsequent presentation of tree-reweighted message-

passing updates.

The following lemmas summarize the key properties of Algo-

rithm 3. We begin by claiming that all iterates of this algorithm

specify a -reparameterization.

for all

, so that -reparameterization holds for

.

We now proceed inductively: supposing that it holds for iteration

, we prove that it also holds for iteration . Using the update

equation (47) and (44), we find that for all

, the quantity

is equal to

Some algebraic rearrangement leads to an equivalent expression (up to additive constants independent of ) for the weighted sum

which, using (44), is seen to be equal to

.

Thus, the statement follows by the induction hypothesis.

Next we characterize the fixed points of the updates in step 2).

Lemma 6: Any fixed point of the updates (47) satisfies the tree consistency condition b).
Proof: At a fixed point, we can substitute at all places in the updates. Doing so in (47b) and canceling out common terms leads to the relation

Lemma 5 ( -Reparameterization): At each iteration

, the collection of tree-structured parameter vectors , as specified by the pseudo-max-marginals via (44), satisfies the -reparameterization condition. Proof: Using the initialization (46) and (44), for each tree

for all

, from which the edgewise consistency condition

(45) follows for each edge

. The tree consistency

condition then follows from Lemma 3.

, we have the relation

for all 3) Message-Passing Updates: The reparameterization up-

edges

, and

for all vertices

. dates of Algorithm 3 can also be described in terms of explicit

Thus, we have

message-passing operations. In this formulation, the pseudo-

max-marginals depend on the original exponential param-

eter vector , as well as a set of auxiliary quantities

associated with the edges of . For each edge

for all

and

is a function from the state space to the

positive reals. The function

represents information

that is relayed from node to node , so that we refer to it

as a “message.” The resulting algorithm is an alternative but

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3709

Fig. 4. Parallel edge-based form of tree-reweighted message-passing updates. The algorithm reduces to the ordinary max-product updates when all the edge weights  are set equal to one.

equivalent implementation of the reparameterization updates

of Algorithm 3.

More explicitly, let us define pseudo-max-marginals

in terms of and a given set of messages

as

follows:

sign, and once in the term

with a

negative sign. Therefore, the messages all cancel in the summa-

tion. This establishes that for all

, we have

(48a)

where

(48b)

As before, these pseudo-max-marginals can be used to define a collection of tree-structured exponential parameters
via (44). First, we claim that for any choice of messages, the set of tree-structured parameters so defined specifies a -reparameterization.

Lemma 7: For any choice of messages, the collection

is a -reparameterization of .

Proof: We use the definition (44) of

in terms of

to write

as

Expanding out the expectation yields (49)
Using the definition (48) of and , we have

The message-passing updates shown in Fig. 4 are designed to

find a collection of pseudo-max-marginals

that satisfy

the tree consistency condition b).

First, it is worthwhile to note that the message update (50)

is closely related to the standard [23], [43] max-product up-

dates, which correspond to taking

for every edge. On

one hand, if the graph is actually a tree, any vector in the

spanning tree polytope must necessarily satisfy

for

every edge

, so that Algorithm 2 reduces to the or-

dinary max-product update. However, if has cycles, then it

is impossible to have

for every edge

, so

that the updates in (50) differ from the ordinary max-product

updates in three critical ways. To begin, the exponential pa-

rameters

are scaled by the (inverse of the) edge ap-

pearance probability

. Second, for each neighbor

, the incoming message is exponentiated by the

corresponding edge appearance probability

. Finally,

the update of message —that is, from to along edge

—depends on the reverse direction message from

to along the same edge. Despite these features, the messages

can still be updated in an asynchronous manner, as in ordinary

max-product [23], [43].

Moreover, we note that these tree-reweighted updates are re-

lated but distinct from the attenuated max-product updates pro-

posed by Frey and Koetter [24]. A feature common to both al-

gorithms is the reweighting of messages; however, unlike the

tree-reweighted update (50), the attenuated max-product update

in [24] of the message from to does not involve the message

in the reverse direction (i.e., from to ).

By construction, any fixed point of Algorithm 2 specifies a

set of tree-consistent pseudo-max-marginals, as summarized in

the following.

Lemma 8: For any fixed point of the updates (50), the as-

sociated pseudo-max-marginals defined as in (48a) and (48b)

satisfy the tree-consistency condition.

Proof: By Lemma 3, it suffices to verify that the edge con-

As a consequence, each weighted log message

sistency condition (45) holds for all edges

. Using the

appears twice in (49): once in the term

with a plus definition (48) of and , the edge consistency condition (45)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

is equivalent to equating with

Pulling out all terms involving

, and canceling out

all remaining common terms yields the message update equa-

tion (50).

C. Existence and Properties of Fixed Points

defining is a fixed point of the update equation (50),

Lemma 8 guarantees that the tree consistency condition holds.

By the OS criterion, we can find a configuration that is node

and edgewise optimal for . By Lemma 4, the configuration

is optimal for every tree-structured distribution

.

Thus, by Proposition 1, the configuration is MAP-optimal

for

.

b) Let be a fixed point of the update equation (50), such

that the pseudo-max-marginals satisfy the OS criterion. The

proof involves showing that a linear combination of the vector

, defined by the element-wise logarithm of the

message fixed point, is an optimal solution to a particular La-

grangian dual reformulation of the LP relaxation (27). For this

proof, it is convenient to represent any pseudomarginal more

compactly in the functional form

We now consider various questions associated with Algo-

rithms 1 and 2, including existence of fixed points, convergence

of the updates, and the relation of fixed points to the LP re-

laxation (27). As noted previously, the two algorithms (repa-

rameterization and message-passing) represent alternative im-

plementations of the same updates, and hence, are equivalent

in terms of their fixed point and convergence properties. For

the purposes of the analysis given here, we focus on the mes-

sage-passing updates given in Algorithm 2.

With reference to the first question, in related work [43],

we proved the existence of fixed points for the ordinary max-

product algorithm when applied to any distribution with strictly

positive compatibilities defined on an arbitrary graph. The same

proof can be adapted to show that the message-update equation

(50) has at least one fixed point under these same condi-

tions. Unfortunately, we do not yet have sufficient conditions to

guarantee convergence on graphs with cycles; however, in prac-

tice, we find that the edge-based message-passing updates (50)

converge if suitably damped. In particular, we apply damping in

the logarithmic domain, so that messages are updated according

to

, where

is calculated

in (50). Moreover, we note that in follow-up work, Kolmogorov

[31] has developed a modified form of tree-based updates for

which certain convergence properties are guaranteed.

Finally, the following theorem addresses the nature of the

fixed points, and in particular, provides sufficient conditions for

Algorithm 2 to yield exact MAP estimates for the target distri-

bution

, and thereby establishes a link to the dual of the

LP relaxation of Theorem 1.

For each edge function

and element

(51) , define the linear

and let constraint

be a Lagrange multiplier associated with the . We then consider the Lagrangian

(52)

Note that we have rescaled the Lagrange multipliers by the edge

appearance probabilities

so as to make the connection

to the messages in Algorithm 2 as explicit as possible. For any

vector of Lagrange multipliers , the dual function is defined

by the maximization

, over the

constraint set

(53)

Theorem 2: Let be a fixed point of Algorithm 2, and sup- Now our goal is to specify how to choose a particular La-

pose that the associated pseudo-max-marginals satisfy the grange multiplier vector in terms of the log messages , or

OS criterion. Then the following statements hold.

equivalently, the pseudo-max-marginals and defined by

a) Any configuration satisfying the local optimality con-

ditions in the OS criterion is a MAP configuration for

.

b) Let

be the logarithm of the fixed point

taken element-wise. Then, a linear combination of

the messages

. To define the link between

and , we let be an arbitrary node of the graph, and suppose

that every tree

is rooted at , and the remaining

edges are directed from parent-to-child. More formally, for each

node , let

denote its unique parent. We now define

specifies an optimal solution to the dual of the LP relaxation (27) of Theorem 1.

(54)

Proof:

a) By Lemma 7, the pseudo-max-marginals specify a With this definition, the Lagrangian evaluated at takes a par-

-reparameterization of

. Since the message vector ticular form.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3711

Lemma 9: With defined in (54), the Lagrangian can be written as

where and are constants, and

is given by

(55)

Proof: See Appendix, part D

.

We now determine the form of the dual function

.

Note that

and

on the

constraint set defined in (53), so that the terms involving

and play no role in the optimization. Using the definition of

and Lemma 9, we write

(56)

which does not satisfy the OS criterion) necessarily specifies a dual- optimal solution of the LP relaxation. Indeed, in follow-up work, Kolmogorov [32] has constructed a particular fixed point, for which the OS criterion is not satisfied, that does not specify an optimal dual solution. However, for problems that involve only binary variables and pairwise interactions, Kolmogorov and Wainwright [33] have strengthened Theorem 2 to show that a message-passing fixed point always specifies an optimal dual solution.
However, on a tree-structured graph, the tree-reweighted maxproduct updates reduce to the ordinary max-product (min-sum) updates, and any fixed point must satisfy the OS criterion. In this case, we can use Theorem 2 to obtain the following corollary.
Corollary 2 (Ordinary Max-Product): For a tree-structured graph , the ordinary max-product algorithm is an iterative method for solving the dual of the exact LP representation of the MAP problem
(59)

Proof: By
tion as based on

Lemma 1, the MAP problem has the alternative LP representa. By Corollary 1, the relaxation is exact for a tree, so that

where

.

Now since satisfies the OS criterion by assumption, we

can find a vector that achieves

for every

node, and

for every edge. Consider the

pseudomarginal vector given by

from which (59) follows. For the case of a tree, the only valid choice of is the vector of all ones, so the tree-reweighted updates must be equivalent to the ordinary max-product algorithm. The result then follows from Theorem 2.

(57a) D. Additional Properties (57b) As proved in Corollaries 1 and 2, the techniques given here

The following lemma is proved in the Appendix, part E.
Lemma 10: For each tree , we have .

are always exact for tree-structured graphs. For graphs with cycles, the general mode-finding problem considered here includes many NP-hard problems, so that our methods cannot be expected to work for all problems. In general, their perfor-

This lemma shows that each of the maxima on the RHS of (56) are achieved at the same , so that the inequality labeled
in (56) in fact holds with equality. Consequently, we have
(58)

mance—more specifically, whether or not a MAP configuration can be obtained—depends on both the graph structure and the form of the parameter vector . In parallel and follow-up work to this paper, we have obtained more precise performance guarantees for our techniques when applied to particular classes

of problems (e.g., binary linear coding problems [20]; binary

Since by construction satisfies all of the marginalization con-

straints (i.e.,

), the Lagrangian re-

duces to the cost function, so that we have shown that the dual

value

is equal to

quadratic programs [33]). We discuss these results in more detail in the sequel.
In this section, we begin with a comparison of reweighted max-product to the standard max-product. In particular, we explicitly construct a simple problem for which the ordinary max-

product algorithm outputs an incorrect answer, but for which the

reweighted updates provably find the global optimum. We then

or, equivalently, by

,

which is the optimal primal value. By strong duality, the pair

are primal-dual optimal.

demonstrate the properties of edge-based versus tree-based updates, and discuss their relative merits.
1) Comparison With Ordinary Max-Product: Recall that for any graph with cycles, the tree-reweighted max-product algo-

For a general graph with cycles, the above proof does not rithm (Algorithm 2) differs from the ordinary max-product al-

establish that any fixed point of Algorithm 2 (i.e., one for gorithm in terms of the reweighting of messages and potential

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

succeeds for any submodular binary problem, of which the ex-

ample given in Fig. 5 is a special case. Although it is known

[26] that such problems can be solved in polynomial time via re-

duction to a max-flow problem, it is nonetheless interesting that

tree-reweighted message-passing is also successful for this class

of problems. An additional result [33] is that for any pairwise bi-

nary problem (regardless of nature of the pairwise couplings),

G Fig. 5. Simple diamond graph .

any variable that is uniquely specified by a tree-reweighted

fixed point (i.e., for which the set

is a sin-

functions, and the involvement of the reverse direction messages. Here, we illustrate with a simple example that these modifications are in general necessary for a message-passing algorithm to satisfy the exactness condition of Theorem 2 part a). More precisely, we construct a fixed point of the ordinary max-product algorithm that satisfies the OS criterion, yet the associated configuration is not MAP-optimal.
In particular, consider the simple graph shown in Fig. 5, and suppose that we wish to maximize a cost function of the form

gleton) is guaranteed to be correct in some globally optimal configuration. Thus, tree-reweighted fixed points can provide useful information about parts of the MAP optimal solution even when the OS criterion is not satisfied.
2) Comparison of Edge-Based and Tree-Based Updates: In this subsection, we illustrate the empirical performance of the edge-based and tree-based updates on some sample problems. So as to allow comparison to the optimal answer even for large problems, we focus on binary problems. In this case, the theoretical guarantees [33] described earlier allow us to conclude that the tree-reweighted method yields correct information about

(at least part of the) optimum, without any need to compute the

(60)

exact MAP optimum by brute force. Thus, we can run simply tree-reweighted message passing—either the edge-based or

tree-based updates—on any submodular binary problem, and be

Here the minimization is over all binary vectors

,

and and are parameters to be specified. By design, the

cost function (60) is such that if we make sufficiently posi-

tive, then any optimal solution will either be

or

. More concretely, suppose that we set

, and

. With these parameter set-

tings, it is straightforward to verify that the optimal solution is

. However, if we run the ordinary max-product algorithm on

this problem, it converges to a set of singleton and edge-based

pseudo-max-marginals of the form

for if

guaranteed that given a fixed point, it will either specify a glob-

ally optimal configuration (for attractive couplings), or that any

uniquely specified variables (i.e., for which

is a singleton) will be correct (for arbitrary binary problems).

Our comparison is between the parallel edge-based form of

reweighted message-passing (Algorithm 2), and the tree-based

Algorithm 3 described in the Appendix, part C. We focus on

the amount of computation, as measured by the number of mes-

sages passed along each edge, required to either compute the

fixed point (up to

accuracy) or—in the case

of tree-based updates—to find a configuration on which all

trees agree. In this latter case, Proposition 1 guarantees that the

shared configuration must be globally MAP-optimal for the

original problem, so that there is no need to perform any further

for

message-passing.

otherwise.

We performed trials on problems in the Ising form (2), de-

fined on grids with

nodes. For the edge-based updates,

we used the uniform setting of edge appearance probabilities

Note that these pseudo-max-marginals and the configuration

; for the tree-based updates, we used two spanning

satisfy the OS criterion (since the optimum is uniquely attained trees, one with the horizontal rows plus a connecting column

at

for every node, and at the pair

and the rotated version of this tree, placing weight

for every edge); however, the global configuration is not on each tree

. In each trial, the single-node potentials

the MAP configuration for the original problem. This problem were chosen randomly as

, whereas the edge cou-

shows that the ordinary max-product algorithm does not satisfy plings were chosen in one of the following two ways. In the at-

an exactness guarantee of the form given in Theorem 2.

tractive case, we chose the couplings as

, where

In fact, for the particular class of problems exemplified by

is the edge strength. In the mixed case, we chose

(60), we can make a stronger assertion about the tree-reweighted

. In both cases, we used damped forms of the updates

max-product algorithm: namely, it will never fail on a problem (linearly combining messages or pseudo-max-marginals in the

of this general form, where the couplings are nonnegative. logarithmic domain) with damping parameter

.

More specifically, in follow-up work to the current paper, Kol- We investigated the algorithmic performance for a range of

mogorov and Wainwright [33] have established theoretical guar- coupling strengths for both attractive and mixed cases. For

antees on the performance of tree-reweighted message-passing the attractive case, the tree-reweighted algorithm is theoreti-

for problems with binary variables and pairwise couplings. First, cally guaranteed [33] to always find an optimal MAP config-

it can be shown that tree-reweighted message-passing always uration. For the mixed case, the average fraction of variables in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3713

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. Comparison of parallel edge-based message-passing (Algorithm 2) and tree-based updates (Algorithm 3 described in the Appendix, part C) on a nearest
neighbor grid with n = 400 variables. (a) Attractive couplings. (b) Mixed couplings.

the MAP optimal solution that the reweighted message-passing it remains to further explore and analyze the range of problems

recovered was above 80% for all the examples that we consid- for which the iterative algorithms and LP relaxations described

ered; for mixed problems with weaker observation terms , here are suitable.

this fraction can be lower (see [36]). Fig. 6 shows results com-

paring the behavior of the edge-based and tree-based updates. In each panel, plotted on the -axis is the number of messages

VI. DISCUSSION

passed per edge (before achieving the stopping criterion) versus In this paper, we demonstrated the utility of convex combi-

the coupling strength . Note that for more weakly coupled nations of tree-structured distributions in upper-bounding the

problems, the tree-based updates consistently find the MAP op- value of the MAP configuration on an MRF on a graph with

timum with lower computation than the edge-based updates. As cycles. A key property is that this upper bound is tight if and

the coupling strength is increased, however, the performance only if the collection of tree-structured distributions shares a

of the tree-based updates slows down and ultimately becomes common optimum. Moreover, when the upper bound is tight,

worse than the edge-based updates. In fact, for strong enough then a MAP configuration can be obtained for the original MRF

couplings, we observed on occasion that the tree-based updates on the graph with cycles simply by examining the optima of the

could fail to converge, but instead oscillate (even with small tree-structured distributions. This observation motivated two ap-

damping parameters). These empirical observations are consis- proaches for attempting to obtain tight upper bounds, and hence

tent with subsequent observations and results by Kolmogorov MAP configurations. First of all, we proved that the Lagrangian

[31], who developed a modified form of tree-based updates for dual of the problem is equivalent to an LP relaxation, wherein

which certain convergence properties are guaranteed. (In par- the marginal polytope associated with the original MRF is re-

ticular, in contrast to the tree-based schedule given in the Ap- placed with a looser constraint set formed by tree-based consis-

pendix, part C, they are guaranteed to generate a monotonically tency conditions. Interestingly, this constraint set is equivalent

nonincreasing sequence of upper bounds.)

to the constraint set in the Bethe variational formulation of the

3) Related Work: In related work involving the methods de- sum–product algorithm [47]; in fact, the LP relaxation itself can

scribed here, we have found several applications in which the tree be obtained by taking a suitable limit of the “convexified” Bethe

relaxation and iterative algorithms described here are useful. For variational problem analyzed in our previous work [41], [44].

instance, we have applied the tree-reweighted max-product algo- Second, we developed a family of tree-reweighted max-product

rithm to a distributed data association problem involving mul- algorithms that reparameterize a collection of tree-structured

tiple targets and sensors [13]. For the class of problem consid- distributions in terms of a common set of pseudo-max-marginals

ered, the tree-reweighted max-product algorithm converges, typ- on the nodes and edges of the graph with cycles. When it is

ically quite rapidly, to a provably MAP-optimal data association. possible to find a configuration that is locally optimal with re-

In other colloborative work, we have also applied these methods spect to every single node and edge pseudo-max-marginal, then

to decoding turbo-like and LDPC codes [19], [18], [20], and pro- the upper bound is tight, and the MAP configuration can be ob-

vided finite-length performance guarantees for particular codes tained. Under this condition, we proved that fixed points of these

and channels. In the context of decoding, the fractional vertices message-passing algorithms specify dual-optimal solutions to

of the polytope

have a very concrete interpretation the LP relaxation. A corollary of this analysis is that the ordi-

as pseudocodewords (e.g., [22], [25], [29], [45]). More broadly, nary max-product algorithm, when applied to trees, is solving

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

the Lagrangian dual of an exact LP formulation of the MAP estimation problem.
Finally, in cases in which the methods described here do not yield MAP configurations, it is natural to consider strengthening the relaxation by forming clusters of random variables, as in the Kikuchi approximations described by Yedidia et al. [47]. In the context of this paper, this avenue amounts to taking convex combinations of hypertrees, which (roughly speaking) correspond to trees defined on clusters of nodes. Such convex combinations of hypertrees lead, in the dual reformulation, to a hierarchy of progressively tighter LP relaxations, ordered in terms of the size of clusters used to form the hypertrees. On the message-passing side, it is also possible to develop hypertree-reweighted forms of generalizations of the max-product algorithm.
APPENDIX

each factor . These pseudomarginals are required to be nonnegative, normalized to one, and to satisfy the pairwise consistency conditions
(62)

for all

and for all factor nodes . When the factor

graph defines an LDPC code, this procedure generates the LP

relaxation studied in Feldman et al. [20]. More generally, this

LP relaxation can be applied to factor graph distributions other

than those associated with LDPC codes.

B. Proof of Lemma 2

By definition, we have

.

We rewrite this function in the following way:

A. Conversion From Factor Graph to Pairwise Interactions

In this part of the appendix, we briefly describe how any factor

graph description of a distribution over a discrete (multinomial)

random vector can be equivalently described in terms of a pair-

wise MRF [23], to which the pairwise LP relaxation based on

specified by (9a), (9b), and (10) can be applied. To

illustrate the general principle, it suffices to show how to con-

vert a factor defined on the triplet

of random

variables into a pairwise form. Say that each takes values in

some finite discrete space .

Given the factor-graph description, we associate a new

random variable with the factor node , which takes values

in the Cartesian product space

. In this

way, each possible value of can be put in one-to-one

correspondence with a triplet

, where

. For

each

, we define a pairwise compatibility function

, corresponding to the interaction between and , by

where event

is a

-valued indicator function for the

. We set the singleton compatility functions as

and

where equality follows from Lemma 1, and equality

follows because

for all

. In this way,

we recognize

as the support function of the set

, from which it follows [28] that the conjugate

dual is the indicator function of

, as specified

in (29).

For the sake of self-containment, we provide an explicit proof

of this duality relation here. If belongs to

, then

holds for all

, with

equality for

. From this relation, we conclude that

whenever

.

On the other hand, if

, then by the

(strong) separating hyperplane theorem [28], there must exist

some vector and constant such that i)

for all

; and ii)

. Since conditions i) and

ii) do not depend on elements with

, we can take

without loss of generality. We then have

With these definitions, it is straightforward to verify that the augmented distribution given by
(61)

(63)

Note that conditions i) and ii) are preserved under scaling of

both

and by a positive number, so that can send the

quantity (63) to positive infinity. We thus conclude that

marginalizes down to

. Thus, our augmented

model with purely pairwise interactions faithfully captures the whenever

interaction among the triplet

.

lemma.

. This completes the proof of the

Finally, it is straightforward to verify that if we apply the

pairwise LP relaxation based on

to the augmented C. Tree-Based Updates

model (61), it generates an LP relaxation in terms of the vari- This part of the appendix provides a detailed description of

ables that involves singleton pseudomarginal distributions , tree-based updates. In this scheme, each iteration involves mul-

and a pseudomarginal

over the variable neighborhood of tiple rounds of message-passing on each tree in the support of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3715

Fig. 7. Tree-based updates for finding a tree-consistent set of pseudo-max-marginals.

. More specifically, the computational engine used within each

iteration is the ordinary max-product algorithm, applied as an

exact technique to compute max-marginals for each tree-struc-

tured distribution.

At any iteration , we let

denote a set of exponen-

tial parameters for the tree . To be clear, the notation

used in this part of the appendix differs slightly from its use

in the main text. In particular, unlike in the main text, we can

have

for distinct trees

at immediate

iterations, although upon convergence this equality will hold.

Each step of the algorithm will involve computing, for every

tree

, the max-marginals

, associated with

the tree-structured distribution

. (Once again, unlike

the main text, we need not have

for distinct

trees

.) Overall, the tree-based updates take the form

given in Fig. 7.

Termination: Observe that there are two possible ways in

which Algorithm 3 can terminate. On one hand, the algorithm

stops if in Step 2(b)(i), a collection of tree-structured distribu-

tions is found that all share a common optimizing configuration.

Herein lies the possibility of finite termination, since there is no

need to wait until the values of the tree max-marginals

all agree for every tree. Otherwise, the algorithm terminates in

Step 2(b)(ii) if the max-marginals for each tree all agree with

one another, as stipulated by (64).

A key property of the updates in Algorithm 3 is that they

satisfy the -reparameterization condition.

Lemma 11: For any iteration , the tree-structured parame-

ters

of Algorithm 3 satisfy

.

Proof: The claim for

follows from directly the ini-

tialization in Step 1. In particular, we clearly have

for any node

. For any edge

, we compute

To establish the claim for

, we proceed by induction. By

the claim just proved, it suffices to show that , as defined in

(65), defines the same distribution as .

We begin by writing

as

Using the definition (65), we can re-express it as follows:

(66)

Recall that for each tree , the quantities

are the max-

marginals associated with the distribution

. Using the

fact (36) that the max-marginals specify a reparameterization

of

, each term within curly braces is simply equal

(up to an additive constant independent of ) to

.

Therefore, by the induction hypothesis, the RHS of (66) is equal

to

, so that the claim of the lemma follows.

On the basis of Lemma 11, it is straightforward to prove the

analog of Theorem 2, part a) for Algorithm 3. More specifically,

whenever it outputs a configuration, it must be an exact MAP

configuration for the original problem

.

D. Proof of Lemma 9

We first prove an intermediate result.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3716

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2005

Lemma 12: Let and represent pseudo-max-marginals,

as defined as in (48), with the message

, where

the exponential is taken element-wise. Then the Lagrangian

can be written as

or, equivalently, as

where

where and are constants, and

is given by

Proof: Straightforward algebraic manipulation allows us

to re-express the Lagrangian

as

is the constraint. Note that for each fixed and , the term can be interpreted as a contribu-
tion to the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint .
Finally, since the Lagrangian is linear in the Lagrange multipliers, we can use Lemma 12 to express the Lagrangian
as

where is the vector of Lagrange multipliers with components

Using the definition of in terms of

then write

in terms of

, we can as

where the constants and arise from the normalization of and .

Recall that we root all trees a fixed vertex

, so that

each vertex

has a unique parent denoted

. Using the

parent-to-child representation of the tree , we can re-express

as

E. Proof of Lemma 10

Since by assumption the pseudo-max-marginals defined

by

(with the exponential defined element-wise)

satisfy the optimum specification criterion, we can find a con-

figuration that satisfies the local optimality conditions (38)

for every node and edge on the full graph .

Since the pseudo-max-marginals are defined by a

fixed point

(with the exponential defined

element-wise) of the update (50), the pseudo-max-marginals

must be pairwise-consistent. More explicitly, for any edge

and

, the pairwise consistency condition

holds, where is a positive

constant independent of . Using this fact, we can write

(67)
Moreover, since by assumption the pseudo-max-marginals satisfy the optimum specification criterion, we can find a configuration that satisfies the local optimality conditions (38) for every node and edge on the full graph . For this configuration, we have the equality
(68)

Recalling the definition of as

from (55), we can write and

(69)

for all

, where the final equality follows from (67).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WAINWRIGHT et al.: MAP ESTIMATION VIA AGREEMENT ON TREES

3717

Recall the definition of we have

from (57a). Using (68) and (69), (70)

for all

, and

(71)

for all

. Both (70) and (71) hold for all

(i.e., for all nonnegative such that

and

). Finally, inequalities (70) and (71)

imply that

as claimed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Jon Feldman and David Karger for helpful discussions.

REFERENCES
[1] S. M. Aji, G. Horn, R. J. McEliece, and M. Xu, “Iterative min-sum decoding of tail-biting codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Killarney, Ireland, Jun. 1998, pp. 68–69.
[2] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[3] S. Amari, “Information geometry on a hierarchy of probability distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. Jul., pp. 1701–1711, 2001.
[4] O. E. Barndorff-Nielson, Information and Exponential Families. Chichester, U.K.: Wiley, 1978.
[5] R. J. Baxter, Exactly Solved Models in Statistical Mechanics. New York: Academic, 1982.
[6] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1995.
[7] D. Bertsimas and J. Tsitsikilis, Introduction to Linear Optimization. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1997.
[8] J. Besag, “On the statistical analysis of dirty pictures,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc., ser. B, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 259–279, 1986.
[9] N. Biggs, Algebraic Graph Theory. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1993.
[10] B. Bollobás, Modern Graph Theory. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[11] E. Boros, Y. Crama, and P. L. Hammer, “Upper bounds for quadratic 0–1 maximization,” Oper. Res. Lett., vol. 9, pp. 73–79, 1990.
[12] P. Brémaud, Markov Chains, Gibbs Fields, Monte Carlo Simulation, and Queues. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[13] L. Chen, M. J. Wainwright, M. Cetin, and A. Willsky, “Multitarget-multisensor data association using the tree-reweighted max-product algorithm,” in Proc. SPIE Aerosense Conf., Orlando, FL, Apr. 2003.
[14] R. G. Cowell, A. P. Dawid, S. L. Lauritzen, and D. J. Spiegelhalter, Probabilistic Networks and Expert Systems, ser. Statistics for Engineering and Information Science. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
[15] A. P. Dawid, “Applications of a general propagation algorithm for probabilistic expert systems,” Statist. and Comput., vol. 2, pp. 25–36, 1992.
[16] M. Deza and M. Laurent, Geometry of Cuts and Metric Embeddings. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1997.
[17] J. Edmonds, “Matroids and the greedy algorithm,” Math. Programming, vol. 1, pp. 127–136, 1971.
[18] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Using linear programming to decode LDPC codes,” in Proc. Conf. Information Science and Systems, Baltimore, MD, Mar. 2003.
[19] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Linear programming-based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.

[20] , “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[21] G. D. Forney, Jr., F. R. Kschischang, B. Marcus, and S. Tuncel, “Iterative decoding of tail-biting trellises and connections with symbolic dynamics,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 239–264.
[22] G. D. Forney Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznick, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 101–112.
[23] W. T. Freeman and Y. Weiss, “On the optimality of solutions of the maxproduct belief propagation algorithm in arbitrary graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 736–744, Feb. 2001.
[24] B. J. Frey and R. Koetter, “Exact inference using the attenuated max-product algorithm,” in Advanced Mean Field Methods: Theory and Practice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
[25] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 766–781, Feb. 2001.
[26] D. M. Greig, B. T. Porteous, and A. H. Seheuly, “Exact maximum a posteriori estimation for binary images,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc., ser. B, vol. 51, pp. 271–279, 1989.
[27] P. L. Hammer, P. Hansen, and B. Simeone, “Roof duality, complementation, and persistency in quadratic 0-1 optimization,” Math. Programming, vol. 28, pp. 121–155, 1984.
[28] J. Hiriart-Urruty and C. Lemaréchal, Convex Analysis and Minimization Algorithms. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1993, vol. 1.
[29] G. Horn, “Iterative decoding and pseudocodewords,” Ph.D. dissertation, Calif. Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, 1999.
[30] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2003.
[31] V. Kolmogorov, “Convergent tree-reweighted message-passing for energy minimization,” in Proc. Int. Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Barbados, Jan. 2005.
[32] , “Convergent Tree-Reweighted Message-Passing for Energy Minimization,” Microsoft Research Tech. Rep., Jan. 2005. Submitted to IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intel..
[33] V. Kolmogorov and M. J. Wainwright, “On optimality properties of tree-reweighted message-passing,” in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. Edinburgh, Scotland, U.K.: Morgan-Kaufmann, 2005.
[34] S. L. Lauritzen, Graphical Models. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1996.
[35] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. McKay, and J. F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[36] T. Minka, “Power EP,” Dep. Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[37] G. Rockafellar, Convex Analysis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1970.
[38] A. Schrijver, Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efficiency. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[39] S. Verdú, Multiuser Detection. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.
[40] A. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimal decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 2, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.
[41] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “A new class of upper bounds on the log partition function,” Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 18, pp. 536–543, Aug. 2002.
[42] , “Tree-based reparameterization framework for analysis of sumproduct and related algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1120–1146, May 2003.
[43] , “Tree consistency and bounds on the max-product algorithm and its generalizations,” Statist. and Comput., vol. 14, pp. 143–166, Apr. 2004.
[44] , “A new class of upper bounds on the log partition function,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2313–2335, Jul. 2005.
[45] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[46] W. Wiegerinck and T. Heskes, “Fractional belief propagation,” Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 12, pp. 438–445, 2002.
[47] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Understanding belief propagation and its generalizations,” Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Tech. Rep. TR2001–22, Jan. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:55:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

