A Neural Network-aided Low Complexity
Chase Decoder for URLLC
Enrico Testi and Enrico Paolini
CNIT/WiLab, DEI, University of Bologna, Italy
Email:{enrico.testi, e.paolini}@unibo.it
Abstract—Ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC)
demand decoding algorithms that simultaneously offer high
reliability and low complexity under stringent latency constraints.
While iterative decoding schemes for LDPC and Polar codes
offer a good compromise between performance and complexity,
they fall short in approaching the theoretical performance limits
in the typical URLLC short block length regime. Conversely,
quasi-ML decoding schemes for algebraic codes, like Chase-II
decoding, exhibit a smaller gap to optimum decoding but are
computationally prohibitive for practical deployment in URLLC
systems. To bridge this gap, we propose an enhanced Chase-II
decoding algorithm that leverages a neural network (NN) to
predict promising perturbation patterns, drastically reducing
the number of required decoding trials. The proposed approach
combines the reliability of quasi-ML decoding with the efficiency
of NN inference, making it well-suited for time-sensitive and
resource-constrained applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
Emerging applications such as industrial automation and
vehicular networks demand communication systems capable of
achieving extremely high reliability with stringent latency re-
quirements—a paradigm referred to as ultra-reliable low-latency
communications (URLLC) [1]. Designing efficient decoding
algorithms for URLLC remains a fundamental challenge, where
reliability, latency, and complexity must be balanced.
Iterative decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check
(LDPC) and Polar codes, such as belief propagation and
successive cancellation decoding, are widely adopted due to
their favorable trade-off between performance and complexity
[2], providing a practical solution for many URLLC use
cases. However, in the typical URLLC short block length
regime iterative decoders show visible losses with respect to
theoretical limits, especially at low error rates. Short algebraic
codes—such as BCH and Reed-Solomon codes—paired with
quasi-maximum likelihood (ML) decoding algorithms, tend
to be very competitive in terms of error rate performance,
although decoding complexity remains often incompatible
with URLLC requirements. Among such decoders, the Chase-
II algorithm stands out, delivering near-ML performance by
exhaustively testing multiple perturbations of the hard-decision
vector [3]. Despite its reliability advantages, the Chase-II
decoder’s exponential complexity makes it unsuitable for real-
time deployment in latency-sensitive applications.
Recent advances in deep learning have opened new pathways
for enhancing decoding algorithms by incorporating data-driven
learning into traditional decoding frameworks. In [4], deep
learning is shown to improve belief propagation and min-sum
decoders by learning better message update rules. Recurrent
neural architectures have also been proposed to reduce param-
eter complexity while retaining strong performance. Several
works have applied neural networks (NNs) to decoding of Polar
codes. In [5], a deep neural network (DNN) is used to identify
which bits to flip in belief propagation flip decoding. Similarly,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been explored to
reduce decoding latency in [6]. Other approaches leverage
path metric information to simplify successive cancellation
list decoding, yielding near-optimal performance with reduced
complexity [7].
In the context of algebraic codes, learning-based decoding
has also shown promise. The work in [8] proposes a DNN
that uses syndromes and soft reliabilities to estimate channel
noise, improving generalization and reducing overfitting. A
different perspective is taken in [9], where a DNN is trained
as a denoiser to directly map noisy codewords to their clean
counterparts.
Building on this, our work focuses on reducing the com-
plexity of quasi-ML decoding—specifically, the Chase-II
algorithm—by leveraging machine learning. We propose a NN-
aided Chase-II decoder that significantly reduces the number of
required perturbation trials by learning to predict the most likely
error patterns. The decoder maintains the high reliability of the
Chase-II algorithm while achieving substantial computational
savings.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• We introduce a novel NN-aided Chase-II decoding frame-
work that achieves near-optimal decoding performance
with significantly reduced complexity, making it well
suited for URLLC scenarios.
• We develop and train a NN that learns to predict the
most promising perturbation patterns, enabling a selective
refinement strategy (named NN-ρ) to limit the number of
decoding trials.
• We provide a comprehensive complexity analysis in terms
of floating point operations per second (FLOPS) and
compare the runtime performance of the proposed scheme
with traditional Chase-II and bounded distance decoder
(BDD), showing substantial execution time savings.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
The user aims to transmit a k-bit information word u ∈
{0, 1}k using a binary linear block code C of length n,
arXiv:2506.10513v2  [eess.SP]  29 Jul 2025
dimension k, and minimum distance dmin. Let G denote the
generator matrix of code C. The information word u is encoded
into the codeword c = uG ∈{0, 1}n. Then, the encoded
sequence is modulated using binary phase-shift keying (BPSK)
modulation through the mapping τ : {0, 1} 7→{+1, −1},
resulting in the transmitted modulated codeword
x = τ(c).
(1)
The modulated codeword is transmitted over additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, such that the received soft-
symbols y ∈Rn can be expressed as
y = x + w
(2)
where w ∼N(0, σ2
NIn) is the vector of noise samples. The
log-likelihood ratios of the received symbols, γ = (γ1, . . . , γn),
can be expressed as
γi = log p(yi|ci = 0)
p(yi|ci = 1) = 2yi
σ2
N
, i = 1, . . . , n.
(3)
Let r = (|γ1|, |γ2|, . . . , |γn|) be the vector of reliabilities
corresponding to the received codeword symbols, where |γi|
indicates the reliability of the ith symbol. The vector of hard
decision symbols, q ∈{0, 1}n, is obtained by applying a hard
decision to the received sequence y. Specifically, qi = 0 if
yi ≥0, and qi = 1 otherwise. We also let e = c ⊕q be the
error pattern derived after performing binary decoding on q.
A. Chase-II Decoder Overview
The Chase-II algorithm stands out among algebraic soft-
decision decoding methods designed to improve the decoding
performance of linear block codes, such as BCH codes. The
Chase-II decoding algorithm can be summarized as follows:
• The decoding process starts by analyzing the received soft
information to identify the least reliable bitss (LRBs), i.e.,
the bits with the highest uncertainty. Those are the t =
⌊dmin−1
2
⌋bits having the lowest reliabilities. The received
soft symbols are sorted in ascending order of magnitude,
resulting in a permutation π(y). The same operation is
performed to the reliabilities and the hard decision vectors,
yielding π(γ), and π(q). The first t entries of the ordered
vectors correspond to the LRBs.
• Once the LRBs are identified, the Chase-II decoder
systematically generates and tests all possible perturbation
patterns for these bits. Each perturbation pattern corre-
sponds to a hypothesis about the transmitted codeword,
and the decoder evaluates them to determine the most
likely candidate. We denote by P the set of all possible
perturbation patterns pj ∈{0, 1}n with j = 1, . . . , 2t, i.e.,
sequences that contain 1’s in the location of the LRBs to
be inverted. By adding a test pattern, modulo-2, to the
received hard symbols, we obtain a new sequence
˜qj = q ⊕pj
(4)
and by running a BDD a new error pattern is obtained.
Such an error pattern may or may not differ from the
original error pattern e depending on wether or not ˜qj
falls within the decoding sphere of a new codeword.
• When the jth test pattern produces a valid codeword ˆcj as
the output of the BDD, the distance between this codeword
and the received soft symbols y is computed. Specifically,
for the jth pattern, the weighted distance is calculated as
wj = |y −τ(ˆcj)|1, where | · |1 denotes the ℓ1 norm of
the vector. This process is repeated for all the generated
test patterns, and the pattern that results in the smallest
weighted distance is selected as
l = arg min
j
wj.
(5)
The corresponding estimated codeword, ˆcl is then provided
as the output of the decoder.
The exhaustive search approach enables the Chase-II decoder
to achieve near-ML performance, making it suitable for
high-reliability applications. However, evaluating all possible
2t perturbation patterns imposes substantial computational
complexity, which grows exponentially with the number of
LRBs. This complexity makes Chase-II decoding impractical
for ultra-low latency scenarios, such as URLLC, where real-
time decoding is essential.
III. NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED CHASE-II DECODING
To reduce the computational complexity of the traditional
Chase-II decoder while preserving near-optimal decoding
performance, we propose a novel algorithm that integrates
an NN into the decoding pipeline. The core idea is to use the
NN to predict the most promising perturbation pattern, thereby
reducing the number of test patterns that must be evaluated
during decoding. This results in substantial computational
savings, making the approach particularly attractive for latency-
and resource-constrained applications such as URLLC.
A. Overview of the NN-Aided Decoding Framework
The proposed decoding algorithm leverages a trained NN
to guide the perturbation pattern selection process. During
training, the network learns to mimic the decisions of an
actual Chase-II decoder by observing perturbation patterns
that result in correct codeword recovery. Once trained, the
NN acts as a lightweight yet effective approximation of the
Chase-II exhaustive search, providing a perturbation pattern
that is likely to lead to successful decoding.
At inference time, given the received soft symbol vector
y, the decoder first identifies the set of LRBs. The neural
network processes a structured representation of the received
data—including soft symbols, reliabilities, and hard deci-
sions—and outputs a base perturbation pattern ˆp0 ∈P. This
pattern serves as the central candidate around which the decoder
builds a refined set of test patterns. Specifically, starting from
the NN-predicted base pattern, an expanded set of candidate
perturbation patterns is generated by systematically flipping all
HD
NN
PPG
BDD
𝑙= arg min
!
 𝑤!
𝒚
𝒒
𝒑$!
𝒫&
𝒄("
Fig. 1. Logical block diagram of the proposed NN-aided Chase-II decoder. The received soft symbols, the hard-decision vector, and reliability information are
fed into the neural network, which predicts a base perturbation pattern over the LRBs. The PPG block expands this base pattern by systematically flipping
small subsets of LRBs, producing a refined set of candidate test patterns. Each pattern is combined with the hard-decision vector and decoded via a BDD.
Among the decoded codewords, the one with minimum soft distance to the received symbols is selected as the final output.
Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code for the NN-aided Chase-II
Decoder
Input: Received signal y, reliability vector γ, hard
decision vector q, ρ
Output: Estimated codeword ˆcl
1 Ω←(y; γ; q; π(y); π(γ); π(q))
2 Generate base test pattern ˆp0 ←NN(Ω)
3 Generate the set of test patterns ˆP, with | ˆP| = NT, by
flipping all the subsets of bits of ˆp0 of size up to ρ
4 foreach ˆpj ∈ˆP do
5
Generate perturbed vector ˜qj ←q ⊕ˆpj
6
Perform BDD on ˜qj
7
if decoding successful then
8
Obtain codeword candidate ˆcj
9
Compute the metric wj ←|y −ˆcj|1
10
end
11 end
12 l ←arg minj wj
13 return ˆcl
subsets of LRBs of size up to ρ. We refer to this algorithm as
NN-ρ, which results in a total number of test patterns given by
NT =
ρ
X
i=0
t
i

.
(6)
Each test pattern is combined modulo-2 with the hard-decision
vector q, and the resulting sequence is decoded using a BDD.
Among all decoded codewords, the one with the minimum
soft-distance to y is selected as the final output. The decoding
flow is illustrated in the block diagram in Fig. 1, where the
perturbation pattern generation (PPG) module produces the
candidate set from the NN base prediction. The complete
procedure is also detailed in the pseudo-code in Algorithm 1.
Compared to the exhaustive Chase-II algorithm, which tests
all 2t patterns, the NN-ρ scheme drastically narrows the search
space while preserving decoding performance. The NN-aided
decoder thus achieves a favorable trade-off between complexity
and reliability, making it well suited for scenarios requiring
fast and efficient decoding.
TABLE I
NN ARCHITECTURE
Layer type
Layer size
Activation
Input
6n
Fully connected
NH
ReLu
Output
t
Sigmoid
B. NN Architecture
The perturbation prediction task is cast as a multi-label clas-
sification problem, where each of the t bits in the perturbation
pattern is independently predicted. This formulation allows the
network to selectively identify likely error positions within the
set of LRBs, replacing the need for a full combinatorial search.
The network’s input is the feature vector
Ω= (y, γ, q, π(y), π(γ), π(q)) ∈R6n
(7)
which includes soft symbols y, their reliability γ, and the hard
decision vector q, along with their permutations under the
sorting map π(·) that ranks bits by reliability.
The network consists of a single fully connected hidden layer
of size NH, followed by a rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation.
The output layer produces t soft values using sigmoid activation
σ(z) =
1
1 + e−z
(8)
indicating the likelihood of flipping each bit in the perturbation
pattern. The network is trained using binary cross-entropy loss
L(p, ˆp0) = −
t
X
i=1
 pi log(ˆp0
i ) + (1 −pi) log(1 −ˆp0
i )

(9)
where p is the true perturbation pattern obtained from the
Chase-II decoder and ˆp0 is the base one. After thresholding
the sigmoid outputs at 0.5, a binary perturbation vector is
obtained. This predicted pattern is zero-padded (on the non-
LRB positions) and reordered via inverse permutation, π−1(·),
to match the original bit positions. The resulting binary mask
is then applied to the hard-decision vector during decoding.
The neural network structure is summarized in Table I.
C. Decoding Complexity
1) Bounded Distance Decoder (BDD): The computational
complexity of a BDD depends on the specific decoding
algorithm used and can be measured in terms of finite-field
operations, typically multiplications and additions. Decoding
BCH codes via bounded distance decoding involves four main
stages: syndrome computation, solving the Berlekamp–Massey
algorithm, running Chien search, and performing error cor-
rection using Forney algorithm. The syndrome computation
requires evaluating 2t syndromes, each involving approxi-
mately n multiplications and n −1 additions [10]. Thus, this
stage has a complexity of 2t(2n −1) FLOPS. Solving the
Berlekamp–Massey algorithm, which yields the error locator
polynomial, has a computational complexity of approximately
t2 multiplications and t2 additions [11]. Finding the roots of the
error locator polinomial via Chien method requires nt additions
and nt multiplications [12]. Finally, Forney’s algorithm, used
for actual error correction, also involves approximately t2
multiplications and t2 additions [13]. Therefore, the total
computational complexity of the BDD decoder is approximately
CBDD = 6nt + 2t(2t −1)
(10)
FLOPS.
2) Chase-II decoder: Considering that the Chase-II algo-
rithm involves running 2t BDDs, and evaluating the weighted
distance for each codeword obtained, its overall complexity is
CChase = 2tCBDD
(11)
FLOPS.
3) NN-aided Chase-II decoder: The computational com-
plexity of the NN in terms of FLOPS is computed as follows.
The fully connected hidden layer requires 12NHn FLOPS
due to the matrix multiplication, while the subsequent ReLU
activation contributes additional NH FLOPS. Similarly, the
fully connected output layer has complexity 2tNH FLOPS,
followed by a sigmoid activation adding 4t FLOPS. Therefore,
the total complexity for the NN is
CNN = 12NHn + 2tNH + NH + 4t
(12)
FLOPS. Considering that the NN-aided Chase-II decoder
executes the BDD a total of NT times and selects the codeword
of minimum weight, the overall complexity is
CNN−ρ = NT CBDD + CNN
(13)
FLOPS. Considering that NN inference can be efficiently paral-
lelized on hardware platforms equipped with dedicated neural
processing units, such as GPUs or specialized accelerators,
the dominant component in (13) is the one related to the
execution of the BDD, so that the total complexity can be
further simplified as
CNN−ρ ≈NT CBDD
(14)
FLOPS.
dH = 1
dH = 2
dH = 3
dH = 4
dH = 5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
EPMF
SNR = 2 dB
SNR = 3 dB
SNR = 4 dB
Fig. 2. EPMF of the Hamming distance between the NN-predicted test patterns
and the ones selected by the Chase-II decoder, conditioned on prediction errors,
for various SNR values.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
This section presents a performance evaluation of the
proposed NN-aided Chase-II decoding scheme introduced in
Section III. The performance is assessed through extensive
Monte Carlo simulations and compared with the classical
Chase-II decoder and the standard BDD in terms of decoding
reliability, computational complexity, and execution time.
A. Simulation Setup
The simulations are conducted on a binary BCH code with
n = 127, k = 64 and minimum distance dmin = 21, which
allows correction of up to t = 10 errors. A distinct neural
network is trained and used for each simulated signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) value. For each SNR, the Chase-II decoder is
employed to generate training and test datasets composed of
1.6 × 106 and 10 × 106 samples, respectively. Each network
is initialized using He initialization [14] and trained using
the Adam optimizer [15] over 130 epochs with mini-batches
of 1024 samples. The initial learning rate is set to 10−3 and
reduced by a factor of 10 every 50 epochs. After empirical
tuning, the number of neurons in the hidden layer is fixed to
NH = 512 to balance performance and complexity.
B. Decoding Performance
1) Neural network behavior and pattern refinement: To
evaluate the quality of the NN predictions, we analyze the
distribution of Hamming distances between the predicted test
patterns and the corresponding ones selected by the Chase-II
decoder. Fig. 2 reports the empirical probability mass function
(EPMF) of these distances, conditioned on the event that the
NN fails to predict the correct test pattern. The results show
that the majority of mispredicted patterns are only one bit
flip away from the correct one (i.e., dH = 1), across all SNR
regimes. This supports the inclusion of the PPG module, which
systematically flips combinations of the least reliable bits to
1
2
3
4
5
6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
SNR [dB]
CER
BCH(127, 64), Chase-II
BCH(127, 64), NN-0
BCH(127, 64), NN-1
BCH(127, 64), NN-2
BCH(127, 64), BDD
LDPC(128, 64), NMS
Fig. 3. CER varying the SNR for the BCH(127, 64) code using the proposed
NN-aided Chase-II decoders (NN-0, NN-1, NN-2), the classical Chase-II
algorithm, and the baseline BDD. The figure also includes a performance
curve for the LDPC(128, 64) code from the CCSDS standard, decoded using
the NMS algorithm.
form additional candidate test patterns. Specifically, running the
NN-1 algorithm—where all single-bit flips of the NN prediction
are tested—captures most of the correct patterns while requiring
a significantly smaller candidate set than the exhaustive Chase-
II. Furthermore, the probability of mispredicting more than four
bits vanishes at high SNR, which is attributed to the sparsity of
the true error pattern in these regimes. This justifies limiting the
perturbation depth to small values of ρ in the NN-ρ decoding
framework.
2) Decoding performance comparison: Fig. 3 presents the
codeword error rate (CER) as a function of the SNR for several
decoding algorithms. The NN-1 and NN-2 decoders achieve
nearly identical performance to the full Chase-II decoder,
with NN-1 exhibiting a slight performance degradation in
the high-SNR regime. Both schemes outperform BDD by a
substantial margin, achieving over 1.5 dB of SNR gain at CER
10−4. While the NN-0 variant, which relies solely on the base
prediction of the neural network, does not match the Chase-
II performance, it still offers a notable improvement over the
standalone BDD, confirming the added value of the learned base
pattern. Additionally, the figure includes a performance curve
for the LDPC(128, 64) code from the CCSDS standard [16],
decoded using the normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm with
a normalization factor of 0.75 and a maximum of 100 iterations.
Interestingly, the NN-0 decoder for the BCH code achieves a
performance comparable to that of the LDPC code under these
conditions, despite being a one-shot decoder without iterative
processing. This result highlights the efficiency of the proposed
architecture. Furthermore, the BCH code with both NN-1 and
NN-2 outperforms the LDPC one with NMS, demonstrating
the strong potential of the proposed neural decoding strategies
even when compared with well-established iterative decoders.
TABLE II
COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS OF THE DECODING SCHEMES
Decoder
FLOPS
Runtime (s)
BDD
1.5 · 103
0.007345
Chase-II
8.19 · 106
2.115847
NN-0
1.18 · 106
0.012314
NN-1
1.27 · 106
0.034333
NN-2
1.63 · 106
0.133051
C. Computational Complexity and Runtime
The computational complexity of each decoder is evaluated
in terms of the number of FLOPS, based on the analytical
expressions provided in Section III-C. In particular, the com-
plexity of the NN-ρ algorithms is assessed using (13), which
reflects execution on a general-purpose CPU. Table II summa-
rizes the total number of FLOPS required for each decoder in
the considered case study. As expected, the Chase-II decoder
exhibits the highest complexity due to the exponential growth
in the number of test patterns with respect to the number of
LRB. In contrast, the NN-aided schemes demand significantly
fewer operations: NN-1 and NN-2 incur approximately 15%
and 20% of the Chase-II decoder’s FLOPS, respectively. The
BDD decoder remains the least complex, albeit with the poorest
performance. It is worth noting that these complexity estimates
are based on CPU execution. When deployed on hardware
platforms with dedicated neural processing capabilities—such
as GPUs or specialized accelerators—the cost of the NN-ρ
decoders can be further reduced, potentially approaching the
complexity of BDD while retaining their superior decoding
performance.
In addition to theoretical complexity, Table II reports the
empirical execution times measured in MATLAB on an Intel
Core i7 processor running Ubuntu. The execution time trends
are consistent with the FLOPS analysis but amplify the gap
between Chase-II and the other schemes. This is likely due
to implementation inefficiencies in MATLAB’s BDD function,
which may require more operations than predicted analytically.
As the Chase-II decoder invokes multiple instances of BDD,
this inefficiency compounds, resulting in considerably higher
runtime.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an NN-aided decoding frame-
work that significantly reduces the complexity of the Chase
decoder while retaining its near-optimal decoding performance.
By leveraging a trained NN to predict the most promising
perturbation pattern, the proposed scheme narrows the set
of test patterns that must be evaluated, thereby reducing
the number of BDD invocations. The resulting decoding
process achieves a favorable trade-off between reliability and
computational efficiency, making it well suited for URLLC.
Extensive simulations on a BCH(127, 64) code show that the
proposed NN-aided decoder achieves a CER close to that
of the classical Chase decoder, while reducing the required
number of floating-point operations and execution time by
over 80%. Among the possible future research directions there
is the possibility to develop a unified NN architecture that
generalizes across different SNR levels, avoiding the need to
train a separate model for each operating point. Moreover,
extending the NN-aided approach to other classes of quasi-ML
decoders may unlock further performance and complexity gains
in different decoding scenarios.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by the European Union un-
der the Italian National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP)
of NextGenerationEU, partnership on “Telecommunications of
the Future” (PE00000001 - program “RESTART”).
REFERENCES
[1] B. S. Khan, S. Jangsher, A. Ahmed, and A. Al-Dweik, “URLLC and
eMBB in 5G industrial IoT: A survey,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc.,
vol. 3, pp. 1134–1163, Jul. 2022.
[2] C. Yue, V. Miloslavskaya, M. Shirvanimoghaddam, B. Vucetic, and Y. Li,
“Efficient decoders for short block length codes in 6G URLLC,” IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 84–90, Jul. 2023.
[3] D. Chase, “Class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel
measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 18, no. 1, pp.
170–182, Jan. 1972.
[4] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and
Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear
codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131,
Jan. 2018.
[5] Y. Lee, U. Lee, H. H. Fisseha, and M. H. Sunwoo, “Deep learning aided
BP-flip decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Artificial
Intell. Circuits Syst., Incheon, Korea, Jun. 2022, pp. 114–117.
[6] W. Li, Q. Tian, Y. Zhang, T. Feng, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “A
rate-compatible punctured polar code decoding scheme based on deep
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Optical Commun. Netw., Shenzhen, China,
Aug. 2022, pp. 1–3.
[7] Y. Lu, M. Zhao, M. Lei, C. Wang, and M. Zhao, “Deep learning aided
SCL decoding of polar codes with shifted-pruning,” China Commun.,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 153–170, 2023.
[8] A. Bennatan, Y. Choukroun, and P. Kisilev, “Deep learning for decoding
of linear codes – A syndrome-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
Inf. Theory, Vail, CO, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 1595–1599.
[9] H. Zhu, Z. Cao, Y. Zhao, and D. Li, “A novel neural network denoiser
for BCH codes,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun. in China,
Chongqing, China, Aug. 2020, pp. 272–276.
[10] D. Schipani, M. Elia, and J. Rosenthal, “On the decoding complexity
of cyclic codes up to the BCH bound,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf.
Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul. 2011, pp. 835–839.
[11] K. Imamura and W. Yoshida, “A simple derivation of the Berlekamp-
Massey algorithm and some applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 146–150, Jan. 1987.
[12] R.
Chien,
“Cyclic
decoding
procedures
for
Bose-Chaudhuri-
Hocquenghem codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 357–363, Oct. 1964.
[13] G. Forney, “On decoding BCH codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 11,
no. 4, pp. 549–557, Jan. 1965.
[14] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectifiers:
Surpassing human-level performance on ImageNet classification,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision, Santiago, Chile, Dec. 2015, pp.
1026–1034.
[15] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: a method for stochastic optimization,”
in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learning Representations, San Diego, CA, USA,
May 2015.
[16] CCSDS 231.0-B-3, TC Synchronization and Channel Coding.
Blue
Book, 2017.
