Improved Decoding Method for LDPC-COFDM System

Lintao Li1, Member, IEEE and Yao Zhao2
1School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. 2School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
Email: Lintao.Li@ieee.org,

Abstract— In this paper, performance of LDPC-coded OFDM
system at the presence of DF and NBI has been studied. As DF and NBI will always lead to burst errors at the receiver’s end, these un-decodable frames can make the BER performance suf-
fering significantly degradation. In order to eliminate this problem, an improved decoding method for LDPC codes in LDPCCOFDM system is presented in this study. Firstly, a novel burst
error identification scheme based on syndrome is produced. Secondly, a LLR-ZF method that can improve the decoding performance is proposed. Finally, simulations to testify the effectiveness
of the proposed strategy are carried out. Index Terms—OFDM, LDPC, DF, NBI, LLR-ZF.

formance. Section IV shows the simulation results. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V.

A. OFDM

II. SYSTEM MODEL

Fig. 1 shows the system model of LDPC-COFDM system.

I. INTRODUCTION
Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) is a special case of multicarrier transmission scheme [1,2]. Because of its powerful ability to exterminate the influence of multi-path fading and high spectrum efficiency, it is widely used in wideband wireless communication nowadays. OFDM is used in IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16m, DVB-T and LTE [3]. Coded orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (COFDM) combines OFDM technique and error control codes, that the transmission reliability can be further enhanced. Low density parity check (LDPC) code is a kind of linear block code with
sparse parity check matrix H . It is one of the best channel
codes that can achieve near Shannon limit associate with belief propagation (BP) algorithm [4]. Performance of LDPC coded OFDM (LDPC-COFDM) system over AWGN and frequency selective fading channels has been investigated in [5, 6]. It shows that LDPC codes are effective in improving the bit error rate (BER) performance of OFDM system. However, when a large number of sub-carriers are undergoing deep fading or disturbing by narrow band interference, the LDPC code will lose its powerful error correcting capability [7,8].
In this study, a novel burst error identification scheme based on syndrome is proposed firstly. Then, an improved decoding method based on LLR-ZF (logarithm likelihood ratio-zero forcing) is presented. Hence, error spreading caused by burst errors in a codeword could be eliminated, and BER perfor-
mance of combating deep fading (DF)/narrow band interfer-
ence (NBI) for LDPC-COFDM system will be significantly
improved. Finally, simulations are implemented to testify the
effectiveness of the proposed decoding method.
The rest of this paper is organized as following. Section II introduces the system model of LDPC-COFDM and analyzes the BER performance at presence of frequency selective fading or NBI. Section III presents a novel burst error detect method and LLR-ZF scheme to improve LDPC decoding per-

Fig.1 LDPC-COFDM system model

At the transmitter’s end, the information bits are grouped into blocks every k bits. Each k bits are encoded into a codeword with n bits. Then, the codeword is mapped to signaling constellations. Subsequently, the serial modulated symbols are

converted into NFFT parallel streams. The time domain OFDM

symbol is generated via N-point inverse fast Fourier transform

(IFFT) as

xM (t) =

å 1
N FFT

X (K)e , 0 NFFT -1 M

j 2Kpt NFFT

£t

£

N FFT

K =0

-1

where XM (K) denotes the Mth transmit symbol at

the Kth subcarrier ( M = 0,1,, ¥ and K = 0,1,,NFFT -1 ).

In order to eliminate the inter-symbol and inter-carrier interference, guard interval (GI) such as cyclic prefix (CP) is always inserted at the beginning of the OFDM symbol. The length of guard interval is determined by the maximum multipath delay. At the receiver’s end, OFDM symbols are demodulated using FFT. For simplification, symbol/frequency synchronization and channel equalizer steps are ignored in this

work.

B. LDPC Code

The LDPC code can be completely described by the parity

check matrix H or the generator matrix G . H is a sparse matrix

with dimension (n - k)´n , and HCT = 0 that the superscript

‘T’

denotes

permutation

of

matrix.

C

=

{c1

,

c 2

, ,

cn

}

denotes

a

codeword with length n . The codeword C can be obtained via

multiplying the information bits by G as C = dG , in

which

d

=

{d1,

d 2

,,

dk

}

and

the

dimension

of

G

is

k

´n

.

978-1-7281-0716-5/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In practical systems, an iterative belief propagation decoding algorithm is always employed. Details of the normalized Min-sum algorithm is as following:
1) Initialization. The variable node information can be initialized to L(qri ) = L(pi ) , i = 1,2, 3,,n

where L(pi ) is the log-likelihood ratio of the ith bit in a code-

word; 2) Check node update(CNU). The CNU at the lth iteration

can be expressed as

L(rrli

)

»

h

⋅

( i

P
'ÎN (r )\i

a(qrl i-'1 )) i

min
'ÎN (r )\i

b(qrl i-'1 )

where h is a correction factor in the range of (0,1),

a(qrli-'1) = sign(qrli-'1) , and

b(qrli-'1) =

q l -1 ri '

.

3) Viable node update(VNU). The VNU at the lth iteration

can be expressed as

å L(pil ) = L(pi0 ) +

L(rrli-1 )

r ÎM (i)

L(qrli ) = L(pil ) - L(rilr-1) . 4) Decision. After completing each iteration, a decision is
made on L(pil ) . If L(pil ) ³ 0 ,then xˆi = 0 ; other-
wise xˆi = 1 . If HxT = 0 holds true or the maximum iteration number is reached, the decoding process terminated; otherwise, go to step 2).

The BER is growing up to 0.5 rapidly when the burst error number is increasing. Also, if the amplitudes of the polluted LLRs are enlarged, error spreading phenomenon will be arise.
Fig. 3. Performance of LDPC code combating burst errors over noiseless channel.
III. IMPROVED DECODING METHOD In this section, an improved decoding method for LDPC code is proposed. Before the iterative decoding algorithm can be conducted, it is required to compute the log-likelihood ratio for each codeword bit [9, 10]. As mentioned in the last section, DF and NBI will always result in burst errors which may lead to error spreading while iterative decoding. The main idea of the improved decoding method is to discard the corresponding initial LLRs polluted by the DF or NBI, hence, the error spread can be avoid because the wrong LLRs will not participate in iterative decoding.

Fig.2. LLR and error pattern caused by DF and NBI.
As shown in Fig.2, DF and NBI has great influence on LLR amplitude and error pattern. It is reveal that the LLR amplitude will be compressed or amplified when DF or NBI occurs in LDPC-COFDM systems. Consequently, burst errors with bit error rate (BER) near 0.5 are caused. Generally speaking, the burst errors cannot be corrected and the LDPC decoding performance will be significantly decreased.
In Fig. 3, the BER/frame error rate (FER) performance of LDPC (2048, 4096) over noiseless channel at the presence of DF and NBI are investigated. For DF scenarios, the power of sub-carriers affected by DF is assumed to be 10dB lower than the normal subcarriers. For NBI scenarios, the jamming to signal ratio (JSR) is also assumed to be 10dB. Simulation results show that the amplitudes and length of the polluted LLRs have great impacts on correction capability for burst errors.

Fig. 4. Block diagram of the improved decoding method.
The block diagram of the improved decoding method is depicted in Fig. 4. At the receiver’s end, soft demodulation is conducted and LLRs could be achieved. Here, we assume that the LLRs of one received codeword is given by LLR1, LLR2,, LLRn . Details of the proposed decoding method are described as following steps.
1) The hard decision is made according to the sign of LLRi (1 £ i £ n) . If LLRi ³ 0 , then cˆi = 0 ; otherwise, cˆi = 1 .
2) Calculate the syndromes as S = HCT , where Cˆ = {cˆ1 , cˆ2 ,, cˆn} and S = {S1,S2,,Sn-k } .
3) Estimate the possible burst error positions. The pseudocode for burst error identification algorithm is given as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BE R

 Initialize E = {E1,E2,, En } = 0 ;  Update E via following steps:
for row = 1 : n - k forcol = 1 : n if (H(row,col) = 1) and Srow = 1 Ecol = Ecol + 1 end if end for
end for  For all Ei (1 £ i £ n) , if Ei = wi where wi denotes the number of ‘1’ in the ith column of matrix H , then vi = 1 . Otherwise, vi = 0 ;  Using a sliding window of size win_len which is moving from the very left of vi(1 £ i £ n) to the very right. The sliding window is moving right by one position each time. We can calculate the ratio of ‘1’ in the sliding window each step. If the ratio exceed a given threshold Th, the corresponding win_len positions are all added into an index list set {index_del}. 4) For all LLRi (1 £ i £ n) , set LLRi = 0 if i is in the set {index_del}. 5) Decoding with modified LLRi based on the NMSA mentioned in section II.
IV. SIMULATIONS In this section, simulation experiments are designed to test the effectiveness of the proposed decoding method. Simulation results of BER versus Eb/N0 with various burst error length (BEL) are given in Fig. 5. In simulations, DF/NBI is assumed to be 10dB lower/higher than the normal sub-carriers. The LDPC (2048, 4096) code is employed, and NMSA is used with maximum iteration 50. The scaled factor is h = 0.8 which has proved to be optimal. The system model is as depicted in Fig.1 and Fig.4 and the modulation type is QPSK that LLRs can be easily obtained from the I/Q amplitudes.
Fig. 5. BER performance comparison of LDPC-COFDM with different decoding method at the presence of DF and NBI .

Simulation results of performance comparison show that, BER performance is mainly depends on the length and amplitude of LLRs polluted by DF or NBI. On one hand, the BER would be unacceptable high when NBI occurs. On the other hand, the improved decoding strategy can bring minor BER performance improvement when the BEL is not too large. But if the BEL is quite big, a high error floor will be caused with original decoding algorithm, and a significant improvement of BER performance can be achieved by employing the proposed decoding strategy.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel decoding method to improve the error performance of LDPC-COFDM system when DF and NBI exist. DF and NBI always leads to burst errors that cannot be corrected by LDPC decoder, as a result, severe BER performance loss is caused. To solve this problem, we proposed a novel burst error identification method and an improved decoding scheme based on LLR-ZF. Thus, error spreading caused by burst errors can be avoid and BER performance is improved. The effectiveness of the proposed scheme is also demonstrated by simulations.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Marchetti, M.I.Rahman, S.Kumar, R.Prasad. OFDM: Principles and Challenges, pp 29-62, New Directions in Wireless Communications Research, Springer, 2009.
[2] Boelcskei H . MIMO-OFDM wireless systems: Basics, perspectives, and challenges. IEEE Wireless Communications, 2006, 13(4):31-37.
[3] E. Nurellari. LDPC Coded OFDM and its application to DVB-T2, DVB-S2 and IEEE 802.16e.M.S. Thesis, Electrical and Electronic Eng., Eastern Mediterranean Univ., Gazimagusa, North Cyprus, Sept 2012.
[4] S. Farheen, A. Hazreena, J. A. Mathew, G. Ahamed. Performance Evaluation of LDPC Codes Over Various Channels. Advanced Research in Electrical and Electronic Engineering, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 8-11, 2014.
[5] Futaki H., Ohtsuki T. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) coded OFDM systems with M-PSK[C].Vehicular Technology Conference. IEEE, 2002.
[6] Lei M., and Harada H. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) coded ultra high-data-rate OFDM system in frequency-selective fading. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference IEEE, 2005.
[7] K. Watanabe, S. Higuchi, K. Maruta and C. Ahn. Performance of polar codes with MIMO-OFDM under frequency selective fading channel. 2017 20th International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC), Bali, 2017, pp. 107-111.
[8] A. Sato, T. Shitomi, T. Takeuchi, M. Okano, K. Tsuchida. Transmission performance evaluation of LDPC coded OFDM over actual propagation channels in urban area. Examination for next-generation ISDB-T. IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB), 2017.
[9] A. Nakamura and M. Itami. A study on LLR calculation scheme under mobile reception of OFDM. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), Las Vegas, NV, 2018, pp. 1-2.
[10] S. Jo and J. Seo. Efficient LLR Calculation for FBMC. in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 1834-1837, Oct. 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:29:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

