Hard-decision iterative decoding of LDPC codes with bounded error rate
Paolo Santini, Massimo Battaglioni, Marco Baldi and Franco Chiaraluce Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione Università Politecnica delle Marche Ancona, Italy
Email: {p.santini, m.battaglioni}@pm.univpm.it, {m.baldi, f.chiaraluce}@univpm.it

Abstract—Differently from bounded-distance decoders used for algebraic codes, iterative decoders used for low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes are not characterized by a deterministic decoding radius. Therefore, the error rates of LDPC-coded transmissions are usually estimated heuristically through simulations. This is adequate for many applications like wireless communications, where a frame error rate (FER) in the order of 10−6 or higher is usually targeted. However, lower values of FER can barely be assessed through simulations, and this limits the use of LDPC codes in applications requiring a lower FER, like optical communications and code-based cryptography. In this paper we introduce and study a version of the classic bit flipping (BF) decoder for which we are able to devise and develop a theoretical characterization of the FER. In addition, we consider a two-iteration hard-decision decoder for LDPC codes derived from BF, and discuss its error rate performance. Our results are validated through numerical simulations.
Index Terms—Bit flipping decoder, error correction capability, LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, originally introduced by Gallager [1], are state-of-the-art error correcting codes, able to approach capacity under iterative decoding [2]. However, iterative decoders commonly used for LDPC codes are not characterized by a deterministic decoding radius and intensive numerical simulations are required to assess their error rate performance. In this paper, we investigate new methods for the analytical estimation of the error rate experienced by LDPC coded transmissions under hard-decision iterative decoding. The simplest form of hard-decision iterative decoder for LDPC codes was first described by Gallager [1], and is known as parallel bit flipping (BF). At each iteration of BF, all parity checks are computed and all bits that are involved in a number of unsatisfied parity-check equations overcoming some threshold b are flipped. Then, another iteration is performed until a zero syndrome is achieved or a maximum number of iterations is reached. A class of more advanced though more complex hard-decision iterative decoders have also been introduced in [1], known as Gallager (A/B) decoders.
In these algorithms, check nodes and variable nodes exchange binary messages along edges of the bipartite graph representing the code. The message from a check node to a neighboring variable node is the binary sum of all its incoming messages, other than that arriving from the target variable node. Then, in order to send a message to any neighboring

check node, a variable node counts the number of 1s and 0s sent by its neighboring check nodes other than the target check node. If the number of received 1s (0s, respectively) overcomes a threshold, the message is a 1 (a 0, respectively); otherwise, the message is the initial value of the variable node. The process is iterated until a valid codeword is obtained or a maximum number of iterations is reached.
The error correction capability of BF decoders over binary erasure channels (BECs) can be predicted starting from the analysis of stopping sets in the code Tanner graph [3], while the study of the binary symmetric channel (BSC) is more challenging. In [4] it is shown that BF can correct a linear fraction of errors for most LDPC codes in an ensemble with column-weight larger than three. For the special case of codes with parity-check matrix column-weight-three, it is proved in [5] that t errors can be corrected if the code has girth g > 2t. Based on trapping set analysis, an upper bound on the guaranteed error correction capability of BF decoding over the BSC is introduced in [6], [7], depending on the paritycheck matrix column-weight and girth. However, with the aim to find an upper bound on the frame error rate (FER) of a specific code, a lower bound on its guaranteed error correction capability is needed. Following the same approach, lower bounds are derived in [8], but they appear to be very weak, as recognized by the authors. In [9], a two-bit version of BF is introduced and sufficient conditions on the Tanner graph of a column-weight-four LDPC code are derived which guarantee the correction of all error patterns with up to three errors. However, this analysis is limited to a very narrow class of codes. Another special class of codes is studied in [10], where it is shown that an LDPC code with parity-check matrix column-weight-λ and girth g = 8 can correct up to λ−1 errors.
In this paper, we aim at finding guaranteed error correction capability for more general classes of LDPC codes. Differently from [11], where check-hybrid generalized low-density paritycheck (CH-GLDPC) codes are considered, in which single parity checks are replaced by super checks and achieve guaranteed error correction capability, we focus on classic LDPC codes with single parity checks. Our approach is also different from the one of studying the guaranteed error correction capability of ensembles of LDPC codes (see [12] and the references therein), which does not provide any guarantee about the error correction capability of a specific code in the ensemble.

978-1-5386-8A0u8th8o-r9iz/1e9d/$lic3e1n.0s0ed©u2s0e1l9imIiEteEdEto: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:31:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A target similar to ours has been addressed in [13], where the decoding failure probability of moderate-density paritycheck (MDPC) codes1 is analyzed. In [13], a majority-logic decoder is considered, which runs a single iteration of BF decoding and flips all the bits involved in more unsatisfied parity checks than satisfied ones. As shown in [13], its error correction capability depends on the maximum number of superimpositions between any two columns of the code paritycheck matrix. This allows deriving conditions under which a single iteration of this decoder corrects all errors up to a given weight. The probability that the first iteration results in a number of residual errors such that a second iteration corrects them all is also estimated in [13], under some assumptions.
In this paper, we improve and generalize the approach introduced in [13], by extending it to BF decoders characterized by different thresholds and providing more accurate expressions for their FER. We also extend it to LDPC coded transmissions over BSCs. Then, we propose a statistical analysis of a general version of the BF decoder. Finally, we consider a decoder obtained by feeding a BF decoder with known error correction capability with the output of a generic BF decoder performing one iteration and analyze its performance. This decoder achieves improved performance with respect to the single iteration BF decoder. Numerical simulations confirm the effectiveness of the analysis.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we introduce the notation and recall the basics of LDPC codes. Section III contains an analysis of the error correction capability of BF decoders. In Section IV we characterize the FER of LDPC codes under BF decoding. We draw conclusions in Section V.
II. NOTATION AND DEFINITIONS
Given a matrix H, its entry at position (i, j) is denoted as hi,j; given a vector e, we refer to its jth entry as ej. We denote the ith column of H as hi. The ex-OR operation is denoted as ⊕. The Hamming weight of any vector e is denoted as wt(e); its support as φ(e). The cardinality of a set ψ is denoted as |ψ|. The set of integers between a and b is denoted as [a, b]. The binary Galois field is denoted as F2.
A binary LDPC code is the null space of a binary paritycheck matrix H containing a small number of non-zero symbols compared to the total number of entries. Denoting the code blocklength as n and the code dimension as k, the parity-check matrix has r ≥ n − k rows and n columns. The syndrome of a binary vector e is defined as s = eHT , where T denotes transposition and the product is performed over F2. Any codeword belonging to the code defined by H has an allzero syndrome. The ith column of H has weight vi; the code is said to be (v, w)-regular if each column of H contains exactly v ones and each row contains exactly w ones. The girth g of a code is the length of the shortest cycle in its Tanner graph.
1An MDPC code is a code characterized by a parity-check matrix with a row-weight that increases as the square root of the code length, while for LDPC codes such a dependence is at most logarithmic.

III. ERROR CORRECTION CAPABILITY OF BIT FLIPPING
In [13] the majority logic decoder is studied. A crucial quantity for the study of this decoder is represented by the maximum column intersection: given a matrix H, we define the maximum column intersection δ as the maximum number of superimpositions between any two columns in H. An interesting property of the majority logic decoder, which relates the error correction capability of a code to the maximum column intersection, is stated in the following theorem [13].

Theorem 1 Consider a code defined by a parity-check matrix

for which every column has weight at least v and whose

maximum column intersection is δ∗. Majority-logic decoding

on this matrix allows the correction of all error vectors with

weight t ≤ tM , where tM =

v 2δ∗

.

In this section we show how the performance of a single iteration BF decoder can be studied in terms of a more general quantity. The idea is that, considering the interplay between more than two columns of H, the bound given in Theorem 1 can be improved. Let us first give some preliminary definitions.

Definition 1 Given H, let φ(hi) be the support of its ith
column, where i ∈ [0, n − 1]. We consider the rows of H
indexed by φ(hi) and put them into a matrix H(i). We define H(i) as the ith partial parity-check matrix. The jth column of H(i) is denoted as hj(i).

Definition 2 Given H(i), with i ∈ [0, n − 1], we define







δ(i)(H(i), z) = max

wt

ψ, |ψ|=z, i∈ψ 

h(ji)
j∈ψ

 ,


where the sum is performed over F2 and ψ is a set containing the indexes of z columns of H(i), except for the ith.

Definition 3 Given a parity-check matrix H, we call the maximum column intersection of order z, and denote as δ(H, z), the quantity defined as
δ(H, z) = max δ(i)(H(i), z) .
0≤i≤n−1

Basically, δ(i)(H(i), z) is the maximum weight of the vector
that can be obtained as the binary sum of z columns of H(i), except for the ith. Considering all partial parity-check matrices, and addressing the maximum value of δ(i)(H(i), z)
over all the possible values of i, then δ(H, z) corresponds to
the maximum column intersection of order z of a parity-check
matrix H. According to the above definitions, the weight of the jth column of H(i), ∀i, coincides with the number of
intersections between the supports of the jth and ith columns
of H. We remark that this is a more general way of computing
the quantity δ defined in [13]; in other words, δ(H, 1) = δ. We define e ∈ F2n as the error vector affecting a codeword.
We also define σ as the vector whose ith entry σi corresponds

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:31:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

to the number of unsatisfied parity-check equations in which
the ith bit participates. If that bit is affected by an error, that is, ei = 1, then we denote σi as σi(1), and we have





σi(1) = vi − wt 

hj(i) ,

(1)

j∈φ(e)\i

where the sum is performed over F2. Indeed, if an entry in j∈φ(e)\i h(ji) is a 1, this means that an odd number of errors
at positions other than i participate in the corresponding parity-
check equation, thus making the corresponding parity check
equal to zero. In the same way, when the ith bit is error free, that is, ei = 0, we denote σi as σi(0), and we have





σi(0) = wt 

h(ji) ,

(2)

j∈φ(e)

where the sum is performed over F2.

from which the following condition is derived

v − δ(H, t − 1) > δ(H, t).

(7)

According to (6), any b ∈ [δ(H, t) + 1, v − δ(H, t − 1)]
guarantees that, on the one hand, all bits such that ej = 0 are characterized by values of σj(0) that never exceed b and, thus, are not flipped; on the other hand, all bits such that ei = 1 are characterized by values of σi(1) larger than or equal to b, and thus are flipped.

Our analysis of the BF decoder shows that its performance can be characterized in terms of the maximum column intersection of orders t and t − 1. In particular, when δ(H, t) is a non decreasing function of t, then the largest value of t such that Theorem 2 is satisfied provides the maximum error correction capability of the code. We prove in Corollary 1 that this bound on the error correction capability is never smaller than that given in [13].

Theorem 2 Let us consider a code defined by a parity-check matrix H for which every column has weight at least v. Let t be an integer such that

v > δ(H, t) + δ(H, t − 1).

Then, one iteration of a BF decoder, with decoding threshold b ∈ [δ(H, t) + 1, v − δ(H, t − 1)], corrects all the error vectors of weight t.

Proof: One iteration of BF decoding can correct any error vector e of weight t if there exists a value of b such that

mein{σi(1)} ≥ b > meax{σj(0)}, ∀i ∈ φ(e), ∀j ∈ φ(e); (3)

indeed, the above condition guarantees that erred bits partic-

ipate in a number of unsatisfied parity-check equations that

is always larger than that of correct bits. Thus, erred bits can

always unambiguously be distinguished from correct ones.

Let us first consider a bit at position i ∈ [0, n − 1], such

that ei = 1; based on (1), we have





σi(1) = vi − wt 

h(ji)

j∈φ(e)\i





≥ v − wt 

h(ji)

j∈φ(e)\i

≥ v − δ(H, t − 1),

(4)

where wt j∈φ(e)\i h(ji) ≤ δ(H, t − 1) by definition. Let us also consider the jth bit, j = i, such that ej = 0;
based on (2), we have





σj(0) = wt 

hk(j) ≤ δ(H, t).

(5)

k∈φ(e)

By including (4) and (5) into (3), we obtain

v − δ(H, t − 1) ≥ b > δ(H, t),

(6)

Corollary 1 For a code defined by a parity-check matrix H for which every column has weight not smaller than v, let t(M2) be the largest integer such that Theorem 2 is satisfied, and δ(H, i) ≤ δ(H, j), ∀i < j ≤ t(M2). Let t(M1) denote the correction capability of BF decoding given in Theorem 1; then, t(M1) ≤ t(M2).
Proof: Let us remind that the maximum weight of the jth column of H(i), where i ∈ [0, n − 1] and j = i, corresponds to δ(i)(H(i), 1). The following expression holds

δ(H, z) ≤ zδ(H, 1).

(8)

Indeed, δ(H, 1) corresponds to the maximum weight of a column in any partial parity-check matrix H(i), excluding the ith; when we pick and sum z columns together, the weight of the resulting vector cannot be larger than the sum of the weights of the selected columns, which have weight larger than or equal to δ(H, 1). From Theorem 1, we have

t(M1) ≤

v 2δ(H, 1)

v

≤

.

2δ(H, 1)

(9)

Hence, by using (8), we can derive the following chain of inequalities

v ≥ 2t(M1)δ(H, 1)

> t(M1)δ(H, 1) + (tM (1) − 1)δ(H, 1)

≥ δ(H, tM (1)) + δ(H, tM (1) − 1).

(10)

This proves that any value of tM (1) satisfies Theorem 2. Since t(M2) is, by definition, the maximum value of t which satisfies Theorem 2, it must be tM (2) ≥ t(M1).
Computation of the gap between t(M2) and tM (1) implies to solve (7). However, computing the exact value of δ(H, z) may be prohibitively complex when n and z are high. For this reason, next we propose an upper bound on δ(H, z) and check
its reliability through some numerical examples.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:31:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. An approximation for δ(H, z)
The results described in Theorem 2 show that the error correction capability of the decoder is defined by the values of the maximum column intersection of orders t and t − 1. However, when considering a given matrix H, computing such quantities might result in a quite complex task, especially when n and t have non trivial values. In order to simplify computations, in this section we consider a generic order z, and derive an upper bound on the value of δ(H, z).

Definition 4 Given H and the ith partial parity-check matrix

H(i), ∀i, we define U (i)(H(i), z) = {u(0i), . . . , u(zi−) 1} as any of the sets containing the weights of the z columns of H(i),

except for the ith, with the largest weights, and µ(i)(H(i), z) =

z−1 j=0

uj(i),

where

the

sum

is

performed

over

the

set

of

integers

Z. We then define the maximum column union of order z,

denoted as µ(H, z), the quantity

µ(H, z) = max µ(i)(H(i), z) .

(11)

0≤i≤n−1

Lemma 1 Given a code with blocklength n defined by the parity-check matrix H, the following inequalities hold

δ(H, z) ≤ µ(H, z) ≤ zδ(H, 1), ∀z ≤ n − 1. (12)

Proof: Given H(i), ∀i, the sum of the weights of z columns with the largest weights, except for the ith, upper bounds the value of δ(i)(H(i), z). Then, the first inequality in (12) easily derives from Definition 3. Furthermore, z times the weight of the column of H(i) with the largest weight, except for the ith, cannot be smaller than the sum of the weights of its z columns with the largest weights, excluding the ith. This proves the second inequality.
The value of µ(H, z) can clearly be computed more easily than δ(H, z), as it only depends on the computation of the weights of the columns of the partial parity-check matrices. Additionally, we also have µ(H, i) ≤ µ(H, j), ∀i < j. Based on these premises, we can use the maximum column union values to determine a lower bound on the error correction capability of the decoder. In particular, the error correction capability of the decoder can be underestimated as

tM ≥ max {t s.t. v > µ(H, t) + µ(H, t − 1)} . (13)
t
Indeed, because of Lemma 1, condition (13) is always more restrictive than that of Theorem 2; then, setting the threshold of the decoder as µ(H, tM ) + 1 guarantees the correction of all error patterns with weight up to tM . It can be shown that, with a similar proof of that of Corollary 1 and also considering Lemma 1, the bound on the error correction capability of the decoder defined by (13) is never worse than that of Theorem 1. Notice that, for sparse matrices, we can expect δ(H, z) and µ(H, z) to be very close, unless z assumes very large values. Indeed, the columns of the partial matrices have weights that are much smaller than v with high probability. Then, when summing z such columns, the expected number of cancellations is low, which means that µ(H, z) exceeds δ(H, z) by a small quantity with high probability.

B. Numerical results

In order to validate our approach, we have performed

numerical simulations considering randomly generated parity-

check matrices. In order to speed up the simulations, we have

considered quasi-cyclic (QC) codes, described by parity-check

matrices formed by two circulant blocks of size p and weight

v.

These

codes

have

n

=

2p

and

rate

1 2

.

This

choice

is

motivated by the fact that, because of the QC structure, we

just need to analyze the partial parity-check matrices H(0) and H(p). In fact, it is straightforward to verify that, as a

consequence of the QC structure, partial matrices associated

to columns belonging to the same circulant block are formed

by the same columns which are, however, in a different order.

The girth g of these codes, for v > 2, is at most 6. For

g = 4 and g = 6, the bounds on error correction capability

given in [6] are 1 and

v+2 4

,

respectively.

When

g = 4,

the

error correction capability given by Theorem 2 is larger than

or equal to 1 if and only if δ(H, 0) + δ(H, 1) < v, that is,

being δ(H, 0) = 0 by definition, if δ < v. So, as long as

H does not contain repeated columns, the error correction

capability given by Theorem 2 after one decoding iteration

is never smaller than that given in [6]. When instead g = 6,

we have δ = 1 and the error correction capability given by

Theorem 1 becomes tM =

v 2

≥

v+2 4

. However, according

to Corollary 1, the bound we provide is always larger than

or equal to that expressed by Theorem 1 and, consequently,

that of [6]. We have verified that all the randomly generated

QC codes we have considered are characterized by g = 4 and

have error correction capability much larger than 1, especially

for large values of v and p.

The results of our simulations are shown in Tables I and II. In Table I, the exact value of δ(H, t) has been computed for small values of p and t, until δ(H, t + 1) + δ(H, t) ≥ v, which means that the error correction capability of the code has been reached and computing δ(H, t) for larger values of t is unnecessary. According to Theorem 1, tM = 2 for all cases, whereas tM = 3 according to Theorem 2. Table II relies on the computation of (13) and provides a lower bound on tM for larger values of p. The number of tested matrices and the number of occurrences of each value of tM are reported in the last column of the table. As we can see from the tables, our analysis provides results that considerably improve upon the ones obtained through the approach in [13].

TABLE I VALUES OF δ(H, t) FOR RANDOMLY GENERATED (v, 2v)-REGULAR QC
CODES

v p δ(H, 1) δ(H, 2) δ(H, 3) δ(H, 4)

20 500

4

20 600

4

20 1000

4

40 600

8

40 1000

7

7

10

≥ 10

8

11

≥9

8

11

≥9

16

22

≥ 18

14

19

≥ 21

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:31:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II ESTIMATED tM FOR RANDOMLY GENERATED (v, 2v)-REGULAR QC
CODES

v

p

tM Th. 1 [13] tM Th. 2 No. occurrences

≥ 16

31 out of 123

450 48000

13

≥ 17

91 out of 123

≥ 18

1 out of 123

≥ 22

2 out of 162

600 100000

18

≥ 23 ≥ 24

82 out of 162 75 out of 162

≥ 25

3 out of 162

≥ 31

1 out of 144

600 200000

25

≥ 32 ≥ 33

26 out of 144 111 out of 144

≥ 34

6 out of 144

≥ 43

2 out of 127

≥ 44

21 out of 127

900 400000

34

≥ 45

73 out of 127

≥ 46

26 out of 127

≥ 47

5 out of 127

IV. A STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF THE FER FOR THE BF
ALGORITHM

In this section we consider a BSC with crossover probability p0 and, by exploiting the previous considerations on σ, derive a theoretical characterization of the BF decoder. We perform a statistical analysis of decoding inspired by [1], but specialized to a finite-length regime, for BF decoders performing up to two iterations. In particular, we obtain a probabilistic analysis of the first iteration, which results in a good approximation of the actual decoder behavior, and use this approach to derive a conservative upper bound on the FER value after the second iteration, which holds under the assumptions we made in order to characterize the first iteration.
Inputs of the decoder are a syndrome s = eHT , where e is a length-n error vector, and the sequence b = [b0, b1] containing the threshold values for the two iterations.
Let us consider (v, w)-regular codes and focus on the first decoder iteration. We denote as e∗ the estimated error vector and as s the updated syndrome s = (e+e∗)HT = e HT . The channel introduces t errors, i.e., wt(e) = t, with probability

P {wt(e) = t} =

n t

p0t (1 − p0)n−t.

(14)

We denote as Nic the number of bits that are affected by errors and get flipped in the first iteration of the decoder and as Nci the number of bits that, on the contrary, are error free and
get flipped. For the sake of simplicity, we refer to Nic as the number of right flips and to Nci as the number of wrong flips. It is clear that wt(e∗) = Nic +Nci and wt(e ) = t−Nic +Nci.
We define the following probabilities

min[w−1,t] w−1 n−w

ρcc =

j t−j n−1

,

j = 0, j even

t

min[w−1,t−1]
ρic =
j = 0, j even

w−1 n−w

j

t−j−1 n−1

,

t−1

(15)

where ρcc is the probability that a bit is error free and a paritycheck equation involving it evaluates it correctly, that is, it is satisfied, whereas ρic is the probability that a bit is in error and a parity-check equation involving it evaluates it correctly,
that is, it is unsatisfied. As in [1, Section 4.2], [13, Section 3],
we assume that in the first iteration the parity-check equations are not correlated. An erred bit, say the ith, is flipped and, eventually, correctly evaluated if σi(1) ≥ b0, which happens with probability

v
Pic =

v j

ρjic (1 − ρic)v−j .

(16)

j=b0

An error free bit, say the jth, is wrongly estimated if σj(0) ≥ b0, which happens with probability

v
Pci =

v k

(1 − ρcc)k ρcvc−k.

(17)

k=b0

In other words, Pic is the probability of a right flip, while Pci is the probability of a wrong flip. Hence we have

P {Nic = z} =

t z

Pizc (1 − Pic)t−z ,

(18)

P {Nci = u} =

n−t u

Pcui (1 − Pci)n−t−u .

(19)

Then, the probability that e has weight equal to a given value t can be obtained as follows

P {wt(e ) = t | wt(e) = t} =

t

P {Nic = t − x} P {Nci = x}.

(20)

x=0

By considering all possible values of t, we obtain

P {wt(e ) = t } =
n
P {wt(e ) = t | wt(e) = t} P {wt(e) = t}. (21)
t=0
In Fig. 1 we show a comparison between the experimental distribution of the weights of e and the theoretical one, obtained through (21). We remark that the FER of a oneiteration decoder can be derived from (21) as

FER = 1 − P {wt(e ) = 0} .

(22)

In Fig. 2 we compare the theoretical value of the FER, obtained through (22), and the experimental one, assessed through Monte Carlo simulations. The codes we have considered are randomly generated (25, 50)-regular LDPC codes, obtained through Gallager’s construction [1]. From the figure we observe an excellent agreement between theoretical and experimental curves in the explored region of crossover probabilities, corresponding to the so-called waterfall region.
Let us analyze the second iteration; because of (13), we know that there is an integer tM such that one iteration of BF decoding, with b0 = µ(H, tM ) + 1, corrects all error vectors

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:31:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

they only hold under the assumption previously made in order to calculate (16) and (17).

TABLE III FER BOUNDS FOR (v, 2v)-REGULAR QC CODES, FOR p0 = 1.5 · 10−3.

p

v tM b0

FER

13000 45 ≥ 8 26 ≤ 10−15.4

15000 60 ≥ 10 34 ≤ 10−17.9

18000 60 ≥ 11 34 ≤ 10−21.7

Fig. 1. Distribution of the residual errors after one iteration of BF, for a (45, 90)-regular LDPC code with n = 9000 and rate 1/2. The decoding threshold has been set as b0 = 35 and the experimental evaluation is based on 106 decoding instances for each value of p0.

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

FER

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

10-3

Fig. 2. FER values for a (25, 50)-regular LDPC code with n = 10000 and rate 1/2, obtained with a BF decoder performing one iteration.

with weight ≤ tM . Then, choosing b1 = µ(H, tM ) + 1 allows obtaining a simple upper bound on the FER of a two-iterations BF decoder. Indeed, taking into account (21), we have

tM

FER ≤ 1 − P {wt(e ) = t }.

(23)

t =0

Notice that Theorem 2 does not give any information about error vectors with weight t > tM . Nevertheless, actual decoders are characterized by a non-zero probability of correcting some error patterns with weight t > tM and, for this reason, (23) only represents an upper bound. As in Section III-B, we have considered (v, 2v)-regular QC codes and assessed (23); the results are shown in Table III. We remark that the results in Table III are an approximation, as

V. CONCLUSION
We have characterized the error correction capability of a
broad class of BF decoders. We have also proposed a statistical
analysis of this family of decoders, in such a way as to
determine theoretically their frame error rate. A BF decoder
performing two iterations has been studied and its error rate
performance has been discussed.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes. M.I.T. Press, 1963. [2] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-
check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001. [3] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002. [4] D. Burshtein, “On the error correction of regular LDPC codes using the flipping algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 517–530, Feb. 2008. [5] S. K. Chilappagari and B. Vasic, “Error-correction capability of columnweight-three LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 2055–2061, May 2009. [6] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “On the guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT 2008), Jul. 2008, pp. 434–438. [7] S. K. Chilappagari, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “Guaranteed error correction capability of codes on graphs,” in Proc. 2009 Information Theory and Applications Workshop, Feb. 2009, pp. 50–55. [8] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasic, and M. W. Marcellin, “On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1600– 1611, Apr. 2010. [9] L. Sassatelli, S. K. Chilappagari, B. Vasic, and D. Declercq, “Two-bit message passing decoders for LDPC codes over the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT 2009), Jun. 2009, pp. 2156–2160. [10] W.-Y. Chen and C.-C. Lu, “On error correction capability of bit-flipping algorithm for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT 2011), Jul. 2011, pp. 1283–1286. [11] V. Ravanmehr, M. Khatami, D. Declercq, and B. Vasic, “Check-hybrid GLDPC codes: Systematic elimination of trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 1679–1692, Dec. 2016. [12] P. S. Rybin, “Correcting capabilities of binary irregular LDPC code under low-complexity iterative decoding algorithm,” Journal of Communications Technology and Electronics, vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1432–1439, Dec. 2016. [13] J.-P. Tillich, “The decoding failure probability of MDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT 2018), June 2018, pp. 941–945.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:31:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

