IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 5, MAY 2019

789

Hard-Decision Bit-Flipping Decoder Based on Adaptive Bit-Local Threshold for LDPC Codes
Yuanhua Liu and Meiling Zhang

Abstract— This letter presents two novel adaptive bit-local threshold bit-flipping algorithms for improving the hard-decision decoding performance of LDPC codes. The threshold of each bit can be changed adaptively to maximize the number of corrected errors during the iterations. The proposed methods require only logical operations during decoding and can be realized easily by hardware. Compared with the existing adaptive threshold BF algorithm, the proposed algorithms achieve better performance while removing the need for the delay-inducing global maximum operations, thus facilitating high-throughput decoding.
Index Terms— Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check codes, bit-flipping.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have been applied to modern systems such as IEEE 802.11n and long term evolution advanced (LTE-A) communications standards, due to their capacity-approaching performance. Although soft-decision belief propagation (BP) decoding has been proven to function exceptionally well, its hardware implementation is rather complicated, and the throughput is affected. On the other hand, hard-decision bit-flipping (BF) decoding which aims low-power portable application features significantly less complexity, yet its performance is somewhat far from satisfactory. To balance performance and complexity, many soft-information-aided BF decodings [1]– [2] have been proposed. The gradient descent bit-flipping (GDBF) decoding proposed in [1] has better performance than most BF decodings thanks to the aid of soft-information. In [2], multiple thresholds were used to improve the performance of BF decoding. Although these improved BF decodings have better performance than the original BF decoding, the operations involving real number are introduced, which greatly increases the complexity.
To overcome the aforementioned drawback, we focus on improving the performance of BF algorithm when harddecision messages are available. Although the BF decoder exhibits a weak error-correcting capability in comparison with the soft-decision decoders, it involves only logical operations
Manuscript received January 4, 2019; revised February 11, 2019 and March 24, 2019; accepted March 29, 2019. Date of publication April 4, 2019; date of current version May 8, 2019. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61471294 and the Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China under Grant 2016JQ6033. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Baldi. (Corresponding author: Yuanhua Liu.)
The authors are with the School of Communications and Information Engineering, Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi’an 710121, China (e-mail: yuanhliu@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2909207

with high speed and it is easy to be implemented in hardware. However, there are only a couple of improvements proposed for hard-decision BF algorithm. A multi-bit flipping (MBF) algorithm [3] was proposed to enhance the performance for NAND storage systems. At each iteration, MBF flipped up to a constant number of bits to prevent the overcorrection, for instance, at most 4 bits were flipped. The adaptive threshold BF (ATBF) [4] applied a threshold adaptation scheme to the BF algorithm and the meaningless no-flipping iterations were prevented. The flipping candidates were flipped with a probability in probabilistic GDBF (PGDBF) algorithm [5], and the performance was improved.
A shortcoming of the above-mentioned improved BF decodings is that a global operation (the maximization in [4] and [5] and N -to-4 sorting in [3]) is needed to locate a maximum value on the code length. For the long code length of common LDPC code, the hardware implementation of the maximum operation results in significant latency and limits the throughput. To solve this problem and further enhance the performance, this letter presents two new hard-decision BF algorithms based on adaptive bit-local threshold without the needs of global operations.

II. BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHM

A regular binary (γ, ρ)-regular (N, K) LDPC code is

defined by a sparse parity-check matrix H of dimension

M × N , where K is the length of information, and every

row and column of H has exactly ρ and γ “1”s, respectively.

Denote the element of H on the m-th row and n-th column as

hmn, variable neighborhoods involved in the m-th check node as N (m) = {n : hmn = 1}, and parity-check neighborhoods of the n-th column as M(n) = {m : hmn = 1}.
Suppose a codeword c = [c1, . . . , cN ] is transformed into x = [x1, . . . , xN ] after binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation, where cn ∈ {0, 1} and xn = 1 − 2cn. x is sent

through the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel,

and the channel output is denoted as r = [r1, . . . , rN ], where

rn = xn + vn, and vns are i.i.d. zero-mean Gaussian white

noises. Denote the hard-decision of r as z = [z1, . . . , zN ],

where zn = 0, if rn ≥ 0, and otherwise, zn = 1. The

syndrome (or parity-check sum) s = [s1, . . . , sM ] of z is

defined as sm =

N n=1

znhmn.

The

original

BF

decoding

uses the channel hard-information as the input values. In

each iteration, all the parity-check sums are computed and

the unreliable bit is flipped if the number of corresponding

unsatisfied check-sums is higher than or equal to a fixed

threshold T . The BF algorithm can be summarized as follows:

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

790

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 5, MAY 2019

Step 1: For each check node m, compute the check sum sm. If the check-sums are all satisfied, i.e. s = 0, then stop.
Step 2: For each variable node n, find the number of unsatisfied check-sums fn and flip zn if fn ≥ T .
Step 3: Repeat the above two steps until all the check-sums are satisfied or until a predefined iteration limit is reached.
Evidently, the BF decoder simply involves in logical operations and can be realized easily by hardware with small delay and high throughput. However, its performance is somewhat far from satisfactory and hence needs to be improved.
III. PROPOSED BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHMS
A. Adaptive Bit-Local Threshold BF Decoder
To enhance the performance of the standard BF decoder, the threshold adjustment was introduced into the decoding iterations in [4]. If no flipping occurs during iterations, the threshold would be reduced to the maximum value fmax of fn. However, this maximum operation would incur significant delay. Our proposed algorithms will employ adaptive bit-local threshold to avoid the requirement of maximum operations. In [2], multiple thresholds were used to improve the performance based on the rationale as follows: smaller magnitude of channel output |rn| for bit zn implies less reliability of zn, and thus a smaller threshold is required to increase the probability of flipping. Different thresholds based on the soft-information were utilized in [2], and the performance could be effectively improved. Although the MTBF decoding requires only logical operations during the iterations, however, it requires about γ/2N real comparisons to determine the thresholds before the iterations for each channel output sequence. In addition, for a specific type of LDPC code, the optimal value of the parameter α in MTBF needs to be determined via simulations with real operations. For a specific type of LDPC code, our proposed algorithms will compute the initial threshold with just logical operations only one time, and the same initial threshold will be used for all channel output sequences, i.e. no operation will be required to determine the initial threshold before the iterations, thus the complexity is decreased significantly. Moreover, as long as Tn is determined, the threshold of zn in MTBF is either Tn or Tn − 1 depending on the parity of the flipping order, which is almost a fixed threshold.
The principle of the BF algorithm suggests that the more unsuccessful check-sums containing a bit, the less reliable the bit is. The unreliable bit will be flipped when the number of unsatisfied parity-check neighborhoods is larger than or equal to a threshold. The optimal threshold depends not only on the parity-check matrix but also on the number of errors. The simulations in [4] show that the selection of threshold needs to change with the number of errors and the optimal threshold is relatively large when the number of errors is large. Based on this conclusion, we propose two improved BF algorithms with adaptive adjustment of bit-local threshold. At the beginning of the decoding, if the number of errors is relatively large, then large values should be chosen as the initial threshold, and all bits use the same large threshold for simplicity. The method of determining this initial threshold will be presented in detail in the next section. At each iteration, some bits are

flipped and the others remain unchanged. The bits that remain unchanged may contain errors, probably because the channel output amplitudes of some unflipped bits are small, and smaller thresholds should be chosen to increase the probability of flipping. During each iteration of the proposed algorithms, each bit zn uses a bit-local threshold Tn to determine whether to flip, and if zn remains unchanged, its threshold will be decreased by 1. After several iterations, the threshold of each bit is adjusted adaptively, and different bits may have different adaptive thresholds. The sufficiently small threshold for the error revealed only by fewer unsuccessful check-sums can improve the performance remarkably. In summary, the proposed Adaptive Bit-local Threshold Bit Flipping (ABTBF) decoding is given as follows.
Algorithm 1: Adaptive Bit-local Threshold Bit Flipping (ABTBF) Algorithm
1) Initialize Tn = T for n = 1, 2, . . . , N ; 2) Compute the syndrome s; 3) if s = 0 then
stop decoding with the output of z;
4) for n = 1 : N do find the number of unsatisfied check-sums fn for zn; if fn ≥ Tn then flip zn; else Tn = Tn − 1; if the current number of iterations is larger than (T − γ/2) then if Tn < γ/2 then Tn = γ/2;
5) if a predefined iteration limit is reached then stop and output the initially received codeword;
else go to step 2;
Each threshold can vary with γ/2 ≤ Tn ≤ γ during the decoding and the variation range is approximate γ/2, where γ is the column weight. The larger the column weight, the larger the variation range of threshold and the more likely that different bits have different thresholds. Thus, a large column weight will be of benefit to improving the performance.
It is easy to observe that the proposed ABTBF algorithm has almost the same low complexity as the original BF decoding and only logical operations are required. In each iteration of both algorithms, M (ρ−1)+M = M ρ operations are required to compute the check-sums and determine whether all checks are satisfied, while N (γ−1)+N = N γ operations are required to compute the number of unsatisfied check-sums for each bit and determine whether to flip or not. The difference is that the proposed ABTBF decoder needs t additional operations to lower the threshold of the unflipped bit, where t < N is the number of unflipped bits. For the LDPC codes with large column weight, t is much smaller than N γ, and the complexity of the t additional operations can be ignored.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU AND ZHANG: HARD-DECISION BF DECODER BASED ON ADAPTIVE BIT-LOCAL THRESHOLD FOR LDPC CODES

791

In addition, to avoid Tn < γ/2, N operations are needed after (T − γ/2) iterations. Fortunately, as can be seen in the next section, simulations of three LDPC codes show that the
average number of iterations is small enough to ignore these operations when bit error rate (BER) is lower than 10−2. In a word, these additional operations can be neglected. However,
for ATBF in [4] and PGDBF in [5], the maximum value
fmax should always be computed, which leads to a noticeable additional operations.

B. Turbo Adaptive Bit-local Threshold BF Decoder
A hierarchical decoding method, called Turbo Decoding Message Passing (TDMP), was introduced into soft-decision decoding, in which the newest updated messages of variable nodes can be used to update the messages of the check nodes. The decoding performance after the same number of iterations is significantly improved. TDMP decoding is very attractive for high speed applications with small number of decoding iterations. In the light of TDMP decoding, the Turbo Adaptive Bit-local Threshold Bit Flipping (TABTBF) algorithm we will proposed here can update the sign of check-sums whenever the involved bits are flipped. During each iteration, for bit zn, if the number of corresponding unsuccessful checksums exceeds Tn, zn is flipped and all syndromes related to zn are subsequently updated, otherwise, Tn is decreased. The TABTBF algorithm can be elaborated as follows.
Algorithm 2: Turbo Adaptive Bit-local Threshold Bit Flipping (TABTBF) Algorithm
1) Initialize Tn = T for n = 1, 2, . . . , N ; 2) Compute the syndrome s; 3) if s = 0 then
stop decoding with the output of z;
4) for n = 1 : N do find the number of unsatisfied check-sums fn for zn; if fn ≥ Tn then flip zn; update all syndromes involving zn; else Tn = Tn − 1; if the current number of iterations is larger than (T − γ/2) then if Tn < γ/2 then Tn = γ/2;
5) if a predefined iteration limit is reached then stop and output the initially received codeword;
else go to step 3;
Since all syndromes involving zn are subsequently updated once zn is flipped in Step 4, Step 2 does not require repetition during the iterations. In each iteration of TABTBF algorithm, M operations are required to determine whether all checks are satisfied while N γ operations are required to compute the number of unsatisfied check-sums for each bit and determine

Fig. 1. Frame and bit error rates of the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code.
whether or not flipping should be done. Moreover, (N −t)γ +t operations are required to update the syndromes involving the flipped bits and decrease the thresholds of the unflipped bits, where t is the number of unflipped bits. Since M ρ = N γ is the number of “1”s in the parity check matrix of LDPC code, the total amount of operations per iteration is almost the same or less than the original BF algorithm. The difference is that the variable nodes are updated serially rather than parallel. The speed of each iteration may be slower but less iteration is required.
Meanwhile, when the decoding fails, i.e. the syndrome is nonzero when the iteration limit is reached, take the harddecision received bits as the outputs of the decoder, since the improper flipping would lead to the decoding failure and usually dramatically enlarge the number of errors.
IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS
It has been stated in [4] that a large column weight γ of LDPC codes is of benefit to BF decodings and the redundant check-sums can contribute to improve the performance of BF decodings. As a result, the performance of the proposed algorithms is illustrated with Euclidean Geometry LDPC (EG-LDPC) [6] codes and finite field QC-LDPC code [7] with large column weight. It is noticed that the proposed algorithms are available for many other LDPC codes with large enough column weight. Assume codewords are used in an AWGN channel with BPSK modulation. Error correcting performance of the proposed decodings is compared with the standard BF using optimal fixed threshold, the improved BF using adapting threshold in [4] and the PGDBF algorithm in [5].
The simulation results of the (32, 32)-regular EG-LDPC code (1023,781) and the (64, 64)-regular EG-LDPC code (4095,3367) [6] under several BF decodings are given in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. The maximum iterations are limited to 20. The standard BF uses the fixed thresholds T = 20 and 39, respectively. For ATBF and our proposed algorithms, the initial thresholds of these two codes are 24 and 41, respectively. The proposed BF algorithms achieve about 0.25dB and 0.15dB gain over the best fixed threshold BF at BER= 10−5. It is apparent that the proposed BF algorithms achieve slightly better performance than ATBF in [4] and PGDBF in [5]. It is worth noting that there is no need of global maximum operations for the proposed BF algorithms. The performance of the proposed algorithms is inferior to that of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

792

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 5, MAY 2019

Fig. 2. Frame and bit error rates of the (4095,3367) EG-LDPC code.

Fig. 4. Average number of iterations of proposed TABTBF algorithm for decoding three LDPC codes with maximum 20 iterations.

Fig. 3. Performance of the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code under TABTBF

algorithm with different initial thresholds.

Fig. 5. Frame and bit error rates of the (961,721) QC-LDPC code.

some soft-information-based BF algorithms. However, the soft-information-based BF algorithms, such as the MTBF algorithm, not only involve real number operations with high complexity and large decoding delay, but also are not suitable for the channel with only hard-decision information, such as BSC channel.
Fig. 3 depicts the performance of TABTBF algorithm with different initial thresholds. It can be noted that BER tends to be stable when T is relatively large. In fact, if T is large enough, all bits can adaptively optimize their own thresholds through iterations. There exist plenty of errors at the beginning of decoding with low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), therefore a large threshold is required. Moreover, smaller threshold will impact the performance. Higher SNR corresponds to smaller threshold, at the same time, good performance can be obtained with the cost of more iterations when a larger T is used. To obtain good performance at a wide range of SNR, we choose the optimal threshold of lower SNR as the initial threshold which can be determined via simulations to ensure optimum performance. And the initial value is identical for all SNRs.
Fig. 4 presents the average number of iterations of TABTBF algorithm for decoding three codes with maximum 20 iterations. Take the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code for example, to avoid Tn < 16, N additional operations are needed after T − 16 = 8 iterations. As shown in Fig. 4, the average number of iterations is small enough (smaller than 8) such that these operations can be ignored when BER is lower than 10−2.
Fig. 5 displays the performance of the (30, 30)-regular QC-LDPC code (961,721) based on finite field GF(25) [7] under several BF algorithms with maximum 20 iterations. The standard BF uses a fixed threshold T = 19, and the ATBF in [4] and our proposed algorithms use empirically determined initial threshold T = 21 and 22, respectively. The proposed

TABTBF algorithm performs slightly better than the ATBF in [4] without the need of global maximum operations.
V. CONCLUSION
The proposed adaptive bit-local threshold technique can increase the corrected errors during the decoding iterations by adaptively adjusting the threshold of each bit. The whole process of decoding only requires logical operations, which greatly simplifies the hardware complexity. Simulations indicate that these two proposed methods outperform the standard BF algorithm without the increase in complexity. Compared with the ATBF and PGDBF algorithms, the proposed algorithms achieve slightly better performance whilst removing the need for delay-inducing global maximum operations.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[2] Y.-H. Liu, X.-L. Niu, and M.-L. Zhang, “Multi-threshold bit flipping algorithm for decoding structured LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 127–130, Feb. 2015.
[3] J. Jung and I.-C. Park, “Multi-bit flipping decoding of LDPC codes for NAND storage systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 979–982, May 2017.
[4] J. Cho and W. Sung, “Adaptive threshold technique for bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 857–859, Sep. 2010.
[5] O. A. Rasheed, P, Ivaniš, and B. Vasic´, “Fault-tolerant probabilistic gradient-descent bit flipping decoder,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1487–1490, Sep. 2014.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:28:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

