IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

2577

Pseudocodeword Performance Analysis for
LDPC Convolutional Codes
Roxana Smarandache, Member, IEEE, Ali E. Pusane, Member, IEEE, Pascal O. Vontobel, Member, IEEE, and Daniel J. Costello, Jr., Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Message-passing iterative decoders for low-density parity-check (LDPC) block codes are known to be subject to decoding failures due to so-called pseudocodewords. These failures can cause the large signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) performance of message-passing iterative decoding to be worse than that predicted by the maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding union bound.
In this paper, we address the pseudocodeword problem from the convolutional code perspective. In particular, we compare the performance of LDPC convolutional codes with that of their “wrapped” quasi-cyclic block versions and we show that the minimum pseudoweight of an LDPC convolutional code is at least as large as the minimum pseudoweight of an underlying quasi-cyclic code. This result, which parallels a well-known relationship between the minimum Hamming weight of convolutional codes and the minimum Hamming weight of their quasi-cyclic counterparts, is due to the fact that every pseudocodeword in the convolutional code induces a pseudocodeword in the block code with pseudoweight no larger than that of the convolutional code’s pseudocodeword. This difference in the weight spectra leads to improved performance at low-to-moderate SNRs for the convolutional code, a conclusion supported by simulation results.
Index Terms—Convolutional codes, linear programming decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing iterative decoding, pseudocodewords, pseudoweights, quasi-cyclic codes.

to the fact that MPI decoding algorithms work locally on a Tanner graph and can give priority to a vector that fulfills the equations of a Tanner graph cover rather than the Tanner graph itself. The reason is that locally operating decoding algorithms cannot distinguish if they are operating on the original Tanner graph or any finite cover of this graph. Therefore, MPI decoding algorithms will automatically take into account all possible codewords in all possible covers of the original graph.
Let us be more precise and consider a binary linear code of length that is described by some parity-check matrix
, i.e.,
To such a parity-check matrix we can associate a Tanner graph [4]: it consists of variable nodes, check nodes, and an edge between the th variable node and the th check node if and only if the entry in the th column and th row of equals .
Example 1: Consider the parity-check matrix
(1)
that defines the code

I. INTRODUCTION
A LTHOUGH low-density parity-check (LDPC) block codes have very good performance under messagepassing iterative (MPI) decoding [1]–[3], they are known to be subject to decoding failures due to so-called pseudocodewords. These are real-valued vectors that can be loosely described as error patterns that cause nonconvergence in MPI decoding due
Manuscript received September 27, 2006; revised August 19, 2008. Current version published May 20, 2009. The work of R. Smarandache was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grants CCR-0205310 and DMS-0708033. The work of A. E. Pusane and D. J. Costello, Jr. was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grants CCR-0205310 and CCF-0515012 and by NASA under Grant NNX07AK536. The work of P. O. Vontobel was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant CCF-0514801. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Seattle, WA, July 2006.The work for this paper was partially done while R. Smarandache was on leave at the Department of Mathematics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA.
R. Smarandache is with the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92182 USA (e-mail: rsmarand@ sciences.sdsu.edu).
A. E. Pusane and D. J. Costello, Jr. are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: apusane@nd.edu; costello.2@nd.edu).
P. O. Vontobel is with Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA (e-mail: pascal.vontobel@ieee.org).
Communicated by T. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2018347

of length and dimension . The Tanner graph associated with the parity-check matrix is depicted in Fig. 1 (left).

The relevance of the Tanner graph comes from the fact that the operation of MPI decoding algorithms is tightly related to the structure of the Tanner graph. Namely, in one typical iteration, an MPI decoding algorithm sends messages from variable to check nodes along the edges, every check node processes the incoming messages and produces outgoing messages, these outgoing messages are then sent along the edges to the variable nodes, and finally every variable node processes the incoming messages and produces outgoing messages. What exactly is done when producing the outgoing messages from the incoming messages depends on the chosen MPI decoder. In any case, the crucial fact is that these algorithms operate locally, i.e., outgoing messages are computed based on locally available (at a check node or at a variable node) incoming messages. This locality, which is one of the reasons why MPI decoding algorithms are so efficient and popular, is also the main drawback of these types of algorithms.

Example 2: Consider again the code and its parity-check ma-

trix that were introduced in Example 1. Assume that a code-

word was transmitted over some memoryless channel and that

the vector

was received. Decoding this vector with

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

H Fig. 1. Left: Tanner graph associated with the parity-check matrix that was defined in (1). Right: a possible triple cover of the Tanner graph on the left. ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; Also shown is the vector (1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0), which is a valid codeword in this cubic cover.

an MPI decoding algorithm means that we are sending some it- Definition 3 (see, e.g., [8], [9]): Let be a graph with vertex

eration-dependent messages back and forth along the edges of set and edge set , and let denote the set of adja-

the Tanner graph in Fig. 1 (left).

cent vertices of a vertex

. An unramified, finite cover,

Consider now the Tanner graph in Fig. 1 (right). It is a “three- or, simply, a cover of a (base) graph is a graph along with

fold copy” of the Tanner graph in Fig. 1 (left) in the sense that a surjective map

, which is a graph homomorphism,

for every variable node in Fig. 1 (left) there are three variable i.e., which takes adjacent vertices of to adjacent vertices of

nodes in Fig. 1 (right) and for every check node in Fig. 1 (left) such that, for each vertex

and each

,

there are three check nodes in Fig. 1 (right). Moreover, for every the neighborhood of is mapped bijectively to . For

edge in Fig. 1 (left) there are three edges in Fig. 1 (right) such a positive integer , an -cover of is an unramified finite

that there is an edge between a copy of a variable and a copy cover

such that, for each vertex

of ,

of a check node only if there was an edge between the original

contains exactly vertices of . An -cover of is

variable and the original check node, and such that the degree of sometimes also called an -sheeted covering of or a cover

a copy of a variable (check) node equals the degree of the orig- of of degree .1

inal variable (check) node. A possible codeword in this Tanner It was then argued in [6], [7] that in order to understand MPI

graph is, e.g., the vector

.

decoders one has to study the set of all codewords in all finite

Now assume that we have received the vector covers. In fact, it turns out to be sufficient to study the set of all

and that we are pseudocodewords associated with all the codewords in all the

applying the same MPI decoding algorithm as above, simply finite covers.2 At first, this sounds like a formidable task, but it

this time on Fig. 1 (right) and not on Fig. 1 (left). Because the turns out that the closure of this latter set is a polytope, called

Tanner graph in Fig. 1 (right) looks locally like the Tanner the fundamental polytope

, and has a relatively simple de-

graph in Fig. 1 (left), and because of the way that the received scription in terms of the parity-check matrix .3

vector was defined, it is rather straightforward to see that at any In the following we will only consider binary linear codes and

iteration the messages that are sent along the three copies of an binary-input output-symmetric memoryless channels. For such

edge equal the message that is sent along the original edge.

codes and channels it is sufficient to consider the case where the

A similar observation can also be made about computation all-zero codeword was sent. This follows from the symmetries

trees [5]. Namely, for a given number of iterations, the compu- of the fundamental polytope. Therefore, understanding MPI de-

tation tree rooted at a variable node in Fig. 1 (right), together coding algorithms has a lot to do with understanding the set of

with the messages on it, equals the computation tree rooted at nonzero vectors in

. This is in contrast to maximum-like-

the corresponding original variable node in Fig. 1 (left), together lihood (ML) decoding that is characterized by the nonzero vec-

with the messages on it. Based on these observations, [6], [7] concluded that an MPI
decoding algorithm cannot distinguish if it is decoding the code defined by the Tanner graph in Fig. 1 (left) or the code defined by the Tanner graph in Fig. 1 (right).
Of course, there is nothing special about the “threefold copy” above, i.e., for any “ -fold copy” the same argument can be made. Such an “ -fold copy” is in graph theory better known as an -cover, as specified in the following definition.

1It is important not to confuse the degree of a covering and the degree of a vertex.
2To every codeword in any finite cover we associate a pseudocodeword
n by projecting the codeword onto a length- vector, e.g., with the codeword ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; (1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0) in Fig. 1 (right) we associate the pseudocodeword = ; = ; = (2 3 2 3 2 3). The exact definition of a pseudocodeword will be given in
Section II.
H P 3Note that the fundamental polytope ( ) is usually strictly larger than = ; = ; = ConvHull( ), the convex hull of the set of codewords embedded in . For
example, the above-mentioned pseudocodeword (2 3 2 3 2 3) cannot be written as a convex combination of the codewords in .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2579

tors in , especially the so-called minimal codewords.4 Under that paper, it was noted that the (nontrivial) convolutional ver-

MPI decoding, the role of minimal codewords is taken over sions of these codes significantly outperformed their block code

by so-called minimal pseudocodewords; these are pseudocode- counterparts in the waterfall region of the bit-error rate (BER)

words that correspond to (points on) origin-adjacent edges of curve, even though locally the graphical representations of the

the fundamental polytope

[7], [10].

MPI decoders were essentially equivalent.

In the same way as the Hamming weight

is a very im- In the following sections, we will study the connections that

portant characteristic of a nonzero codeword under ML de- exist between pseudocodewords in QC codes and pseudocode-

coding, the pseudoweight

is a very important character- words in the associated convolutional codes and show that this

istic of a nonzero pseudocodeword under MPI decoding.5 In connection mimics the connection between the codewords in

particular, in the same way as the minimum Hamming weight QC codes and their associated convolutional codes. One of our

goals will be to formulate analytical results (or at least efficient

procedures) that will allow us to bound the minimum pseu-

doweight of the pseudocodewords of the block and convolu-

tional codes.

is a very important characteristic for a binary linear code under We also note that our results have a bearing on the charac-

ML decoding, the minimum pseudoweight

terization of the behavior of the so-called linear-programming

(LP) decoder due to Feldman, Wainwright, and Karger [17],

[18]. This connection [7], [19] is not surprising, given the central

role of the fundamental polytope in the LP decoder formulation,

where a certain linear cost function is minimized over the funis a very important characteristic for a binary linear code damental polytope. under MPI decoding, especially for large signal-to-noise ratios

(SNRs).

A. Motivational Example

As a consequence, the large SNR performance of MPI decoding can be worse than that predicted by the ML decoding union bound, which constitutes a major problem when trying to determine performance guarantees. Addressing this problem from the convolutional code perspective, i.e., studying the pseudocodeword problem described above for low-density parity-check convolutional codes (in the following more concisely called LDPC convolutional codes), constitutes the major topic of this paper.6
We investigate a class of time-invariant LDPC convolutional codes derived by “unwrapping” certain classes of quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC block codes that are known to have good performance [12], [13]. Unwrapping a QC block code to obtain a time-invariant convolutional code represents a major link between QC block codes and convolutional codes. This link was first introduced in a paper by Tanner [14], where it was shown that the free distance of the unwrapped convolutional code, if nontrivial, cannot be smaller than the minimum distance of the underlying QC code. This idea was later extended in [15], [16]. More recently, a construction for LDPC convolutional codes based on QC-LDPC block codes was introduced by Tanner et al. [12], and a sliding-window MPI decoder was described. In

As a motivational example7 we simulated a rate

-regular LDPC convolutional code with syndrome

former memory

, together with three wrapped

block code versions: a

-regular QC-LDPC

block code, a

-regular QC-LDPC block code,

and a

-regular QC-LDPC block code, with

parity-check matrices of increasing circulant sizes

,

, and

, respectively, while keeping the same

structure within each circulant [20]. (Note that increasing

the circulant size of the QC code increases its complexity, i.e.,

its block length. Also note that each of the three block codes has

rate slightly greater than .) As in [12], a sum–product-al-

gorithm-type sliding-window MPI decoder was used to decode

the convolutional code. Conventional LDPC block code MPI

decoders were employed to decode the QC-LDPC block codes.

All decoders were allowed a maximum of 50 iterations. The

resulting BER performance of these codes on a binary-input

AWGNC is shown in Fig. 2.

We note that, particularly in the low-to-moderate SNR re-

gion, where the complete pseudoweight spectrum plays an im-

portant role, the unwrapped LDPC convolutional code performs

between 0.5 and 1.0 dB better than the associated QC-LDPC

4Recall that, when transmitting over a binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel (AWGNC), the decision region of a codeword shares a facet with the decision region of the all-zero codeword if and only if that codeword is a minimal codeword.
= 5Pseudoweights are channel-dependent, e.g., the binary-input AWGNC pseu-
doweight for the pseudocodeword ! 6 0 is given by [5]–[7], [11]

w

(!)

k!k k!k

;

1 2 where k1k and k1k are, respectively, the -norm and -norm. Note that if ! is

( ) = ( ) a vector containing only zeros and ones, then w

! w !.

6Note that w (H)  w ( ), and the larger the gap between w (H)

( ) and w

, the greater role the minimum pseudoweight plays. In any case,

the minimum Hamming weight is still important because it quantifies the impact

of undetectable errors.

block codes. Also, as the circulant size increases, the perfor-

mance of the block codes approaches that of the convolutional

code. These performance curves suggest that the pseudocode-

words in the block code that result in decoding failures, when

unwrapped, have larger pseudoweight in the convolutional code.

In order to underline the influence of pseudocodewords under

MPI decoding, we consider the following experiment for a bi-

nary-input AWGNC. Let be a minimal pseudocodeword for

the above-mentioned

-regular LDPC convolu-

tional code. (In the simulations we took a minimal pseudocode-

word that was found by using a heuristic algorithm that searches

7The exact meaning of the technical terms in this paragraph will be discussed in Section II.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

= 2 5 (3 5) (3 5) R = ; ; Fig. 2. The sum–product-algorithm-based MPI decoding performance of a rate

-regular LDPC convolutional code and three associated -reg-

ular QC-LDPC block codes. (Maximum of 50 iterations.)

 Fig. 3. Left: Number
vergence.) Here, the

ovfaliuteersat1io:0n0s;n2e:e0d0e;d3:f0o0r ;a4:s0u0m;–5p:0ro0d;u6c:t0-0al;g7o:r0i0th;m8:-0ty0p;e9:M00PIcodrerceosdpeorndtotodeScNidRe sfoEr

=N 0 the all-zero codeword. (1000 of, respectively, 2.04

corresponds to no condB, , 0.96 dB, 2.73 dB,

(; )  > 1=2 3.97 dB, 4.94 dB, 5.74 dB, 6.41 dB, 6.99 dB, and 7.50 dB. Right: Number of iterations needed for a min-sum-algorithm-type MPI decoder to decide for the all-zero

codeword. (1000 corresponds to no convergence.) For the simulated

-pairs, we did not observe convergence to the all-zero codeword for

, either

for the sum–product-algorithm-type MPI decoder or for the min-sum-algorithm-type MPI decoder.

the fundamental polytope for minimal pseudocodewords with We then run the MPI decoder initialized with

and

low pseudoweight.8 For the given LDPC convolutional code and count how many iterations it takes until the decoder decides for

its parity-check matrix, we found a minimal pseudocodeword the all-zero codeword as a function of and . The results are

that has AWGNC pseudoweight

(which happens to be shown in Fig. 3.

smaller than the free distance). Moreover, we define the log-like- The meaning of

is the following. If

, then

lihood ratio vector

to be

corresponds to the log-likelihood ratio vector that the

receiver sees when the communication system operates at an

SNR of

and when the noise vector that is

added by the binary-input AWGNC happens to be the all-zero

8A published algorithm that performs a similar search is given in [21].

vector (see, e.g., the discussion in [7, Sec. 3]). For nonzero ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2581

the expression for

has been defined such that the LP de- The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we develop

coder has a decision boundary at

: for

the the background necessary to describe the connection between

all-zero codeword wins against the pseudocodeword whereas pseudocodewords in unwrapped convolutional codes and those

for

the all-zero codeword loses against the pseu- in the associated QC codes. In particular, after having reviewed

docodeword under LP decoding.9

the basics of QC codes in Section II-A and of convolutional

We ran the MPI decoder for various choices of and codes in Section II-B, in Section II-C we briefly discuss the

: Fig. 3 (left) shows the number of iterations needed connection between convolutional codes and their associated

using a sum–product-algorithm-type MPI decoder whereas QC codes, especially how codewords in the former can be used

Fig. 3 (right) shows the number of iterations needed using a to construct codewords in the latter. Then, in Section II-D, we

min-sum-algorithm-type MPI decoder. (Note that the decisions define the fundamental polytope/cone of a parity-check matrix

reached by the latter are independent of the choice of ,

, and show how we can describe the fundamental cone of a

the reason being that scaling the log-likelihood ratio vector polynomial parity-check matrix through polynomial inequal-

by simply scales all messages at all iterations by the same ities. We end the section by showing how pseudocodewords

factor .) In contrast to the min-sum-algorithm-type MPI in unwrapped convolutional codes yield pseudocodewords

decoder, the behavior of the sum–product-algorithm-type MPI in the associated QC codes. In Section III, we compare the

decoder depends on the value of , and so it is not surprising pseudoweights of unwrapped convolutional codes and their as-

that we observe that the closeness of the decision boundary to sociated QC block codes. In particular, Section III-A introduces

is a function of . In particular, note that for very various channel pseudoweights and Section III-B presents the

small ’s (i.e., very low SNRs), sum–product-algorithm-type main result, namely, that the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight,

MPI decoders have a weakness, since one can show (by looking the minimum binary-symmetric channel (BSC) pseudoweight,

at the message-update equations) that such decoders give back the minimum binary-erasure channel (BEC) pseudoweight, and

the correct codeword only if the hard-decision vector based the minimum max-fractional weight of a convolutional code are

on the received log-likelihood vector is the correct codeword. at least as large as the corresponding minimum pseudoweights

This results in a decision boundary that is further away from of a wrapped QC block code. Section IV discusses a method to

for very small .

analyze problematic pseudocodewords, i.e., pseudocodewords

B. Paper Goals and Structure

with small pseudoweight. The method addresses the convolutional code case. It introduces two sequences of “truncated”

In this paper, we provide a possible explanation for the per- pseudoweights and, respectively, “bounded pseudocodeword”

formance differences between the different QC codes and the pseudoweights, that play an important role in identifying the

convolutional code observed in the motivational example above. minimum pseudoweight of the convolutional code, similar

Based on the results of [6], [7] that relate code performance to to the role that column distances and row distances play in

the existence of pseudocodewords, we examine the pseudocode- identifying the free distance. We end with some conclusions in

word weight spectra of QC-LDPC block codes and their asso- Section V.

ciated convolutional codes, respectively. We will show that for

a nontrivial LDPC convolutional code derived by unwrapping a C. Notation nontrivial QC-LDPC block code,10 the minimum pseudoweight

of the convolutional code is at least as large as the minimum pseudoweight of the underlying QC code, i.e.,

We will use the following notation. We let , , , and be the Galois field of size , the field of real numbers,

the set of nonnegative real numbers, and the set of positive real

numbers, respectively.

This result, which parallels the well-known relationship between the free Hamming distance of nontrivial convolutional codes and the minimum Hamming distance of their nontrivial quasi-cyclic counterparts [14],11 is based on the fact that every pseudocodeword in the convolutional code induces a pseudocodeword in the block code with pseudoweight no larger than that of the convolutional code’s pseudocodeword. This difference in the weight spectra leads to improved BER performance at low-to-moderate SNRs for the convolutional code, a conclusion supported by the simulation results presented in Fig. 2.

We say that a polynomial

with real

coefficients is nonnegative, and we write

, if all

its coefficients satisfy

. Similarly, a polynomial

vector

is nonnega-

tive, and we write

, if all its polynomial components

satisfy

for all

. More-

over, a polynomial matrix

is nonnegative, and we write

, if all its entries are nonnegative polynomials.

If

is a polynomial and is some positive

integer, then

denotes the polynomial

of degree smaller than such that

in

.

9Note that the square root of the AWGNC pseudoweight is the (normalized) Euclidean distance to the LP decoding decision boundary in the log-likelihood ratio space.
10Nontrivial means here that the set of pseudocodewords contains nonzero pseudocodewords.
11Nontrivial means here that the set of codewords contains nonzero codewords.

Similarly, if

is a polynomial and is some

positive integer, then

denotes the poly-

nomial

of degree smaller than such that

in

. In this sense,

means that

is such that the polynomial

of degree

smaller than with

in

has only

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

nonnegative coefficients. This notation is straightforwardly ex-

tended to polynomial vectors and matrices.

Finally, to a polynomial matrix

we

associate a weight matrix [13] in

, where each entry de-

notes the number of nonzero coefficients in the corresponding

entry of

. For example,

has weight matrix

. Then a polynomial matrix will be

called monomial [12] if its weight matrix contains only ones,

it will be called of type I [13] if its weight matrix contains

only zeros and ones, and it will be called of type II [13] if its

weight matrix contains only zeros, ones, and twos. (The weight

matrix of

, where

is a matrix in

, is defined analogously.)

II. PSEUDOCODEWORDS FOR QC AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

This section presents an important link between QC block

codes and convolutional codes that was first introduced in a

paper by Tanner [14] and later extended in [15], [16]. Similar

to the connection between codewords in an unwrapped convo-

lutional code and codewords in the underlying QC code, we

will show that pseudocodewords in the convolutional code give

pseudocodewords when projected onto an underlying QC code.

Note that all codes in this paper, also if not always explicitly

stated, will be binary linear codes. Moreover, note that a parity-

check matrix

for a binary linear block code of

length and dimension must satisfy

, and

usually the parity-check matrix is chosen such that

. However, in the case of LDPC codes, it sometimes makes

sense to use a parity-check matrix where is strictly larger than

.

A. Quasi-Cyclic (QC) Block Codes

A binary linear block code whose length factorizes as

for some integers

and

and whose set of code-

words is invariant under cyclic shifts by positions is called a

quasi-cyclic (QC) code with period . It follows that such a QC

code can be described by a parity-check matrix of the form

Clearly, has the form in (2) with

,

,

,

, and

and therefore gives a QC code. A possible codeword in is, e.g.,

With a certain choice of row and column permutations of

we can obtain a parity-check matrix

of a new code,

henceforth called , that is of interest because of its particular

description. Namely, let the parity-check matrix

be ob-

tained from as follows: we start with and we take the first row in the first block of rows, the first row in the second block of rows, etc., then the second row in the first block, the second row in the second block, etc., and then we apply a similar procedure for the columns, i.e., we take the first column in the first block of columns, the first column of the second block of columns, etc., then the second column in the first block, the second column in the second block, etc. The generic variable name for a codeword in will be . It is clear that by

suitable permutation of a codeword

responding codeword

.

we obtain the cor-

Example 5: Applying this procedure to the code in Example 4 we obtain the code with parity-check matrix

...

... . . .

...

...

...

...

. . . ...

...

(2) where is an

identity matrix whose columns have been

left-cyclically shifted times. After suitable permutation of the

codeword

in Example 4 we obtain the codeword

.

with submatrices

,

, where is The Tanner graph of the code is shown in Fig. 1 (right)

some positive integer. The generic variable name for a codeword and is therefore a cubic cover of the Tanner graph of the code in

in will be .

Example 1. Note that some, but not all, finite covers of a code

Example 4: Consider the code check matrix

are QC codes. described by the parity- This will actually be a recurring theme in this paper: graph
covers are used in two different contexts. First, we will use graph

covers to analyze MPI decoding algorithms (see, e.g., the intro-

ductory comments in Section I), and second, we will use graph

covers to construct Tanner graphs that define codes that are of

interest by themselves.

In general, it can easily be seen that the matrix

is

composed of a

array of circulant matrices over .

This suggests a more compact description of . Namely,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2583

replacing a circulant submatrix like

by

the polynomial

, we obtain the matrix

, in the following called

a polynomial parity-check matrix for . Similarly, code-

words can be described by polynomial vectors. Namely, with

the codeword

in

we can

associate the polynomial codeword

where

lutional code

can be described by a semi-infinitely long

parity-check matrix of the form

...

...

... . . .

...

...

... . . .

...

(4)

...

...

...

for

. With these definitions, and the well-

known equivalence of multiplying an

circulant matrix by

a vector of length on the one hand and the multiplication of

two polynomials modulo

on the other, it follows that

where is some positive integer,

(

) for some positive integer ( ), and

is the code rate. The generic variable name for a codeword in

will be . Moreover, let the syndrome former memory

of

be the largest integer in

such that

.

if and only if

Example 7: Consider the convolutional code by the parity-check matrix

described

Example 6: For the code in Examples 4 and 5 we obtain the polynomial parity-check matrix

(3)

Moreover, with the codeword

in Example 5 we can associate the polynomial code-

word

. It is easily verified

that this polynomial vector indeed satisfies

.

An important equation relating the polynomial parity-check

matrix

to the scalar matrices

that Clearly,

,

,

, and

appear in the description of , cf. (2), is given by

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

. .

and

for

. Because

and

for

, the syndrome former memory is

.

B. Convolutional Codes

Let be some positive integer and define the right shift by

positions of the semi-infinitely long vector

to be

the semi-infinitely long vector

In the same way that a parity-check matrix

of a new

code was obtained by permuting the rows and the columns

of the parity-check matrix

of , a parity-check ma-

trix

of a new code

can be obtained by permuting

the rows and the columns of the parity-check matrix

of

. Of course,

and

are equivalent codes. The

generic variable name for a codeword in

will be . It is

clear that, by suitable permutation of a codeword

, we

Then, a semi-infinitely long binary linear code that is invariant obtain the corresponding codeword

.

under shifts by positions to the right is called a convolutional Example 8: Applying this procedure to the code

in Ex-

code with period . It can easily be seen that such a convo- ample 7 we obtain the code

with the parity-check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

shown at the bottom of the page, where is a semi-infinitely long quadratic matrix with ones in the th subdiagonal and zeros everywhere else.

In general, it can easily be seen that the matrix

is

composed of a

array of semi-infinitely long quadratic

Toeplitz matrices over . This suggests a more compact de-

scription of

. Namely, replacing a Toeplitz submatrix like

by the polynomial

, we

obtain the matrix

, in the following

called a polynomial parity-check matrix for

. Similarly,

codewords can be described by polynomial vectors. Namely,

with the codeword

in

we can associate the

polynomial codeword

We note that, instead of using semi-infinite parity-check matrices to describe convolutional codes, we could also have used infinite matrices, where we impose the condition that we only consider codewords that have zero entries for negative time indices.

C. A Link Between QC Block Codes and Convolutional Codes

Given the close resemblance of the contents of Section II-A

and Section II-B, it is not surprising that there is a natural con-

nection between QC block codes and convolutional codes (see

also [12], [14]–[16], [22]). More precisely, with any QC block

code of length , given by a

polynomial matrix

parity-check matrix

With these definitions,12 and the well-known equivalence of multiplying a semi-infinitely long Toeplitz matrix by a semi-infinitely long vector on the one hand and the multiplication of two polynomials on the other, it follows that

with polynomial operations performed modulo

,

we can associate a rate

convolutional code

given by the

polynomial parity-check matrix

with

if and only if
Example 9: For the code in Examples 7 and 8 we obtain the polynomial parity-check matrix
(5)

where the change of indeterminates indicates the lack of modulo

operations. On the other hand, in the same way as we

obtained

from , we can, upon choosing a positive

integer , obtain a QC code

from a convolutional code

.13

In the following, we will say that the parity-check matrix

in (4) is obtained by “unwrapping” the submatrices of

the parity-check matrix

in (2), and that the parity-check

matrix

is obtained by “wrapping” the submatrices of the

parity-check matrix

.

Similar to the case of QC codes, an important equation

relating the polynomial parity-check matrix

to the

scalar matrices

that appear in the descrip-

tion of

, cf. (4), is given by

Example 10: Considering again the QC code in Example 6 and the convolutional code in Example 9, we see that their polynomial parity-check matrices are connected by
.

Example 11: Consider the QC code nomial parity-check matrix

defined by the poly-

12Strictly speaking, codewords are power series rather than polynomials. However, since the paper is primarily concerned with low-Hamming-weight codewords and low pseudoweight pseudocodewords, we use the terminology polynomial codewords and polynomial pseudocodewords.

13We will say more about the choice of r in Assumption 23.

... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ... ...

... ... ... ... ...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2585

Here, the polynomial parity-check matrix

and

the binary parity-check matrix

amples 6 and 5, respectively.

• For

, the wraparound

were discussed in Ex-

Fig. 4. Left: The finite Tanner graph of the QC code in Example 11 defined by

H X r J L Jr ( ). (Here = 7, and so, because = 2 and = 3, there are =

Lr 14 check nodes and = 21 variable nodes.) Right: Part of the semi-infinite

H D Tanner graph of the convolutional code in Example 11 defined by

( ).

gives the polynomial codeword which is equivalent to the codeword

and the convolutional code parity-check matrix

defined by the polynomial

Here, the parity-check matrix equals the parity-check matrix that was discussed in Example 1.

Clearly,

and

are connected by

for

. The effect that the

“wrapping”/“unwrapping” process has on the parity-check

matrices

and

can also be observed in the Tanner

graph representation of the two parity-check matrices in Fig. 4.

One can show that the Hamming weights of the codeword

and its wrapped-around version

are

linked by the inequality

which gives the inequality [14], [15]

We turn now our attention to codewords in these codes. For any nonzero codeword with finite support in the convolutional code, its wrap-around, defined by the vector
is a codeword in the associated QC-code, since

for all

where we have assumed that all codes are nontrivial. (As we will also see in the proof of Theorem 13, when establishing this inequality one needs to take special care of codewords that map to the all-zero codeword.)
We will also make use of the following inequalities.

Theorem 13: Let be a positive integer, let

be a con-

volutional code defined by

, and for any nonnegative

integer let

be a QC code defined by

Example 12: Consider the polynomial vector

Then and

which is a codeword in the convolutional code

in Example 9.

• For

, the wrap-around

Proof: See Appendix A.

described

We conclude this section by mentioning that there are also other ways to unwrap a QC code in order to obtain a convolutional code; see, for example, the unwrapping method that was discussed in [23] based on ideas from [24].

gives the polynomial codeword

D. The Fundamental Polytope and Cone of the Parity-Check Matrices of QC and Convolutional Codes
In this subsection, we introduce our main objects of study, the fundamental polytope and cone of a parity-check matrix [6], [7], [17], [18].

and the equivalent codeword

Definition 14 (see [6], [7], [17], [18]): Let be a binary

matrix of size

, let

be the set

of column indices of , and let

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2586

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

H ConvHull( ) Fig. 5. Visualization of the codes and polytopes that

right: convex hull

of code , convex

ahpuplleCaroinnvEHxaumll(ple

)15. Top row, left to right: code of code , and fundamental

, code polytope

P(,

an)d=coCdoenv=Hull(\

)

.
\

BCootntovmHruolwl(,

)left .

to

be the set of row indices of , respectively. For each

, let On the other hand, the bottom row of Fig. 5 shows the convex

be the support of the th row hull

of , the convex hull

of ,

of . The fundamental polytope

of is then defined as and the fundamental polytope

, where

with

where is the th row of , and

is the convex

hull of , defined as the set of convex combinations of code-

words in when seen as points in .

Expressed in terms of inequalities, the fundamental polytope

can be described as follows. A vector

is in the fundamental polytope

if and only if

• for all

(6)

• for all

and for all odd-sized sets

(7)

Example 15: Consider the code from Example 1 that is described by the parity-check matrix in (1). The corresponding codes and are, respectively

We clearly see that the fundamental polytope

is strictly

larger than the convex hull

of the code .

Note that the fundamental polytope is a function of a paritycheck matrix. So different parity-check matrices for the same code can yield different fundamental polytopes. Note also that the fundamental polytope is usually an -dimensional object. However, when the parity-check matrix contains rows of weight one or two, as happens in the above example, then there is a loss in dimensionality.
For binary-input output-symmetric channels and binary linear codes, we can assume for analysis purposes that the all-zero codeword was sent, and so it is sufficient to study the fundamental polytope around the origin, which essentially amounts to studying the conic hull of the fundamental polytope.

They are depicted as point sets in the top row of Fig. 5, along Definition 16 (see [6], [7], [17], [18]): The fundamental

with the code , where

cone

of is defined to be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2587

i.e., the conic hull of the fundamental polytope

, which is

the object that is obtained by stretching the fundamental poly-

tope

to infinity, with the stretching center at the origin.

Note that if

, then also

for any real

. Moreover, for any

, there exists an

(in

fact, a whole interval of ’s) such that

.

Expressed in terms of inequalities, the fundamental cone can

be described as follows. A vector

is in

the fundamental polytope

if and only if

• for all

(8)

• for all

and for all

in all possible finite covers of equals

. Because

is dense in

and because all vertices of

are in , it is sufficient to consider

instead of the more

complicated

.

In the following, we will call any vector in the fundamental

cone a pseudocodeword, and two pseudocodewords that are

equal up to a positive scaling constant will be considered to be

equivalent. These conventions are motivated by the fact that for

any

we can always find a scaling factor

such that

. (In any case, in the following it

will be clear from the context if a pseudocodeword is meant to

be a point in the fundamental polytope

or merely a point

in the fundamental cone

.)

(9)

Example 17: Consider again the code from Example 1

that is described by the parity-check matrix in (1). The in-

equalities describing the fundamental cone

are obtained

by taking the homogeneous inequalities from the fundamental

polytope description in Example 15, i.e.,

Example 20: Consider again the code from Example 1 that

is described by the parity-check matrix in (1) and whose

Tanner graph was shown in Fig. 1 (left). As discussed in Ex-

ample 2 ,

is a codeword in the

triple cover of shown in Fig. 1 (right). Its associated scaled

pseudocodeword is

and its associated

unscaled pseudocodeword is

. It is an easy

matter to verify that

is indeed in the fundamental poly-

tope

, whose defining inequalities were displayed in Ex-

ample 15. Moreover, it is equally easy to verify that both

and

are in the fundamental cone

, whose defining

inequalities were displayed in Example 17.

From (8) and (9) it follows that for any parity-check matrix there is a matrix such that

We have already mentioned in Section I that the fundamental polytope is the central object for LP decoding. We have also mentioned that the fundamental polytope says a lot about the codewords that live in finite covers of a Tanner graph. Let us now be more precise about this latter statement.
Definition 18: Let be the Tanner graph of a length- code defined by the parity-check matrix . For some positive integer
, consider an -cover of . Let
be a codeword in , where corresponds to the th copy of the th variable node in . The (scaled) pseudocodeword associated with is the rational vector
with entries

(Clearly, the rows in corresponding to (8) form an

identity matrix and the rows in corresponding to (9) form a

submatrix containing zeros, ones, and minus ones.) In the case

of QC codes, pseudocodewords can be written as polynomial

vectors

and the fundamental cone

can be described with the help of polynomial matrices. Namely,

for any

, there is a polynomial matrix

over

such that

if and only if

(10)

Similarly, in the case of convolutional codes, pseudocodewords

can be written as polynomial vectors

and the

fundamental cone can be described with the help of polynomial

matrices. Namely, for any

there is a polynomial ma-

trix

over

such that

where the sum is taken in (not in ). The vector

if and only if

(with purely integer entries) will be called the unscaled pseu-

(11)

docodeword associated with .

For the correct interpretation of expressions like (10) and (11),

Remark 19: The main statement in [6], [7] is the following. we remind the reader of the notational conventions that were

Let be the Tanner graph of a length- code that is defined introduced in Section I-C.

by the parity-check matrix . Then the set of all (scaled) pseu- We now briefly focus on the case of monomial parity-check

docodewords that are associated with all possible codewords matrices, since the above fundamental-cone description is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2588

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

particularly simple and useful in this case.14 A vector is

a pseudocodeword in the fundamental cone of a monomial

matrix

if and only if the associated polynomial

vector

satisfies the following

inequalities.

• For all

corresponding to the scalar vector

is a pseudocodeword for the convolutional code, since

and the matrix

(shown in the first equa-

tion at the top of this page) gives

(shown

in the second equation at the top of the page), which satisfies

• For all

, for all

,

(Here,

is the entry in row and column of

, which, by assumption, is a monomial.)

Equivalently, if

is an

matrix with th row vector

Similarly, for a QC code that is described by a mono-

mial

parity-check matrix

, a vector

is a pseudocodeword in the corresponding funda-

mental cone if and only if the associated polynomial vector

satisfies

for only if

, then and

Example 21: Let

and is a pseudocodeword if and

Example 22: Let

be the

parity-check matrix

obtained from

in Example 21 for a QC block code of

length

. Then, for the polynomial vector

be a polynomial parity-check matrix of a ratecode. The following vector:

convolutional

we obtain

(shown in the third

equation at the top of this page). Since

and

,

is a pseu-

docodeword. Finally, we note that Example 25 will discuss

more cases where

is wrapped into a codeword

.

For the rest of the paper we will assume that the following conditions hold.

Assumption 23: Let

be a convolutional code

14Monomial matrices were defined in Section I-C.

defined by the polynomial parity-check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2589

When wrapping this code to obtain a QC code

defined by the polynomial parity-check matrix

, we allow only positive integers

such that the weight matrix associated with

equals

the weight matrix associated with

. A similar condi-

tion is imposed when wrapping the polynomial parity-check

matrix

of a code

to obtain the polynomial

parity-check

of the wrapped code

.

connected to the fundamental cone of

, which again by

Remark 19 is characterized by the finite covers of .

Theorem 24: Assume that the conditions in Assumption 23

hold. Let

be a pseudocodeword in the convolutional code

defined by

, i.e.,

. Then its

wraparound polynomial vector is a pseudocodeword in the

associated QC code defined by

, i.e.,

These conditions essentially guarantee that in the wrapping

process only exponents are changed, i.e., no nonzero coeffi-

cients are added. For example, the above condition is satisfied

for

and for

because

, and so the weight matrix of

weight matrix of

. However, for

condition is not satisfied because

equals the , the above

, and so the weight matrix of

does not equal the weight matrix of

.

As a consequence, these conditions guarantee that the Tanner

graphs associated with

and

look locally the

same, i.e., the variable node degrees of corresponding variable

nodes are the same and the check node degrees of corresponding

check nodes are the same. Moreover, simple cycles in the Tanner

graph of

map to (possibly non-simple) cycles in the

Tanner graph of

. (Because of the transient behavior

of the Tanner graph of the convolutional code around the zero

time index, the statement in this paragraph holds only for con-

volutional code time indices that are large enough.)

In general, the conditions in Assumption 23 are satisfied for

any

, where is the syndrome former memory of

. Moreover, there are a variety of classes of polyno-

mial parity-check matrices

such that the above condi-

tions are satisfied for any positive . One such class is the class of

monomial matrices, and another such class is the class of type-I

polynomial matrices (see Section I-C).

Note that in Theorem 13 we did not need Assumption 23. So

that theorem holds under more general conditions. However, if

we want the Tanner graphs of the wrapped codes to have the

same variable and check node degrees as the unwrapped codes,

the conditions in Assumption 23 must be imposed.

In the following, we would like to better understand how

pseudocodewords in

are connected to pseu-

docodewords in

; in particular, we would like

to see if we can make statements similar to the statements in

Theorem 13 and in the paragraphs preceding it. We will see

that such statements can indeed be made. In fact, many of

the upcoming observations can be seen as special cases of the

following observations.

• Let be some graph, let be some -cover of ; and let

be some -cover of . Then is an

-cover

of .

• If

and are the Tanner graphs of

and

, respectively, then

is an -cover of .

Therefore, the fundamental cone of

, which by Re-

mark 19 is characterized by the finite covers of

, is tightly

where
Proof: See Appendix B.
Note that for a nonzero polynomial pseudocodeword , the wrapped polynomial vector
is never the all-zero vector. This is in contrast to some nonzero polynomial codewords where the wrapped polynomial vector equals the all-zero vector. The different behavior comes from the fact that in the first case we are operating in a polynomial ring over , whereas in the second case we are operating in a polynomial ring over .
Example 25: The polynomial vector

is in the fundamental cone of the polynomial parity-check ma-

trix

from Example 21. Because

is mono-

mial, Assumption 23 holds for any

, and so, by applying

Theorem 24 we see that

for all any . The corresponding wrapped pseudocodewords are as follows.
For all

For

For

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2590

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

For
III. PSEUDOWEIGHT COMPARISON BETWEEN QC CODES AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
This section begins with an introductory subsection in which various channel pseudoweights are defined and continues with the main result that the minimum AWGNC, BSC, BEC, and max-fractional pseudoweights of a convolutional code are at least as large as the corresponding pseudoweights of a wrapped QC block code. A. Definition of Pseudoweights
Definition 26 (see [5]–[7], [11], [17], [18]): Let be a nonzero vector in . The AWGNC
pseudoweight of the vector is defined to be

A detailed discussion of the motivation and significance of

these definitions can be found in [7]. Note that, whereas the frac-

tional weight has an operational meaning only for vertices of the

fundamental polytope, the other measures have an operational

meaning for any vector in the fundamental polytope or cone.

Note also that in this paper the quantities

and

are defined for any vector in , whereas [17] defined

and

to be the quantities that we will call

and

.

Example 27: Let

be the pseudocodeword in Example 21 and let be its scalar vector description. Then

where and are the -norm and -norm, respectively,

of . In order to define the BSC pseudoweight

, we let

be the vector of length with the same components as but

in nonincreasing order. Now let

In order to compute

, we let

be the vector that lists the components of in non-increasing

order. We obtain

, since we need to

add up

ordered components of to obtain

.

Moreover

and

and, finally,

, from which it follows that

Then the BSC pseudoweight

of the vector is defined

to be

. The BEC pseudoweight of the vector

is defined to be

One measure of the effect that pseudocodewords have on the performance of a code is given by the minimum pseudoweight [6], [7], [17], [18]

where

is the set of all indices corresponding to

nonzero components of . The fractional weight of a vector

is defined to be

where

is the set of all nonzero vertices in the

fundamental polytope

and the pseudoweights are the ap-

propriate ones for each channel (AWGNC, BSC, and BEC pseu-

Finally, the max-fractional weight of a vector to be

doweights) or the fractional and max-fractional weights. is defined Computing these values can be quite challenging, since

the task of finding the set of vertices of

is in general

very complex. However, in the case of four of the above

pseudoweights (the minimum AWGNC, BSC, and BEC pseu-

doweights and the minimum max-fractional weight) there is a

where

is the infinity or maximum norm. For

we computationally simpler description, given by

define all of the above pseudoweights, fractional weights, and

max-fractional weights to be zero.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2591

for the appropriate pseudoweight. (Note that there is no such Theorem 31: We assume that the conditions in Assump-

statement for the minimum fractional weight; see, e.g., [7], tion 23 hold. If

, then

[18]).

Example 28: Let

be the length- QC code de-

fined by the polynomial parity-check matrix of Example 22. The minimum AWGNC pseudoweight is
and equals the minimum Hamming weight. (The minimum AWGNC pseudoweight was obtained using a vertex enumeration program for polytopes that lists all the minimal pseudocodewords of a code [25].)

Therefore

Proof: See Appendix D.

In the case of the fractional weight, it is easy to see that for

any

, we have

Remark 29: In [7], it was shown that for a code defined by

a parity-check matrix , the following inequalities hold:

and hence

Therefore,

and

lower bounds for

.

can serve as

,

, and

B. Minimum Pseudoweights

In what follows, we compare the minimum pseudoweights

and the minimum max-fractional weight of a QC block code

to the same quantities for its corresponding convolutional

code, which we assume to have a fundamental cone con-

taining nonzero vectors.15 In order to analyze the minimum

pseudoweights and the minimum max-fractional weight, it is

sufficient to analyze the weights of the nonzero vectors in the

fundamental cone. Throughout this subsection, without loss

of generality, all pseudocodewords

are assumed to have

finite support.16

Theorem 30: We assume that the conditions in Assump-

tion 23 hold. For the AWGNC, BSC, and BEC pseudoweights,

if

, then

When comparing the minimum fractional weight of the con-

volutional and QC codes, we encounter a computationally

harder case, since these values must be computed over the set

of nonzero pseudocodewords that are vertices of the funda-

mental polytope. This is not an easy task, because a vertex

pseudocodeword in the convolutional code might not map into

a vertex pseudocodeword in the QC code.

The following theorem, however, can be established. To help

clarify the idea, we recall that

has the following

operational meaning [17], [18]. Let

be the

set of positions where bit flips occurred when using the code

for data transmission over a BSC with crossover proba-

bility ,

. If

, then LP de-

coding succeeds. Similarly,

implies the following.

If

is the set of positions where bit flips oc-

curred when using the code

for data transmission over

a BSC, then

guarantees that LP de-

coding is correct.

Theorem 32: Assume that the conditions in Assumption 23

hold, that

is used for data transmission over a BSC with

crossover probability , where

, and that bit flips

occur at positions

. If

Therefore, if the fundamental cone of the convolutional code is not trivial (i.e., it contains nonzero vectors), we obtain

(12)

then LP decoding succeeds. (Note that, on the right-hand side of

inequality (12), we have

and not

.)

Proof: See Appendix E.

Proof: See Appendix C.

As discussed at the end of [7, Sec. 6],

and

Theorem 30 implies that low-pseudoweight vectors in the block code may correspond to higher pseudoweight vectors in the convolutional code, but the opposite is not possible. This suggests that the pseudocodewords in the block code that result in decoding failures may not cause such failures in the convolutional code.
A similar bound also holds for the max-fractional weight, as

can give, especially for long codes, quite con-

servative lower bounds on

. (For example, the

guarantees on the error correction capabilities of the LP decoder

implied by

and

are not good enough to

prove the results in [26].) However, there are polynomial-time

algorithms that compute

and

[17],

[18].

shown in the next theorem.

Remark 33: It is not difficult to adapt Theorems 30 and 31

15Obviously, this condition is a very weak technical requirement.
16With suitable modifications, this can easily be generalized to !(D) with k!(D)k < 1. Note that such polynomial vectors also fulfill k!(D)k < 1.

such that similar conclusions can be drawn with respect to a QC block code with the same structure but a larger circulant size that is a multiple of . Using similar arguments to the ones in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2592
TABLE I THE PSEUDOWEIGHTS OF THE PSEUDOCODEWORDS IN EXAMPLE 25

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009
or, equivalently, the polynomial-parity check matrix

the proofs of these theorems and Assumption 23, we obtain the following more general inequalities that hold for the AWGNC, BSC, BEC, max-fractional, and fractional pseudoweights. If
, then

for all

In addition, for the AWGNC, BSC, BEC, and max-fractional

minimum pseudoweights, the following holds for any

:

(Empirically, for

, not a multiple of , it very often holds

that

; however, this is not always

the case. A similar statement can be made about the relationship

between the minimum Hamming distances of the corresponding

codes.)

Example 34: To illustrate how the pseudoweights of the pseu-

docodewords in the convolutional code and their projections

onto the QC codes satisfy the pseudoweight inequalities in Re-

mark 33 for all the defined pseudoweights

,

,

, and

, we computed the pseudoweights of the

pseudocodewords in Example 25. Table I contains these results.

Next, we illustrate some of the bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of codes derived in this section. We take a tower of three QC codes together with their convolutional version and compute their minimum pseudoweights which, according to the bounds derived above, form an increasing sequence, upper-bounded by the minimum pseudoweight of the convolutional version. However, due to the large code parameters, we were only able to compute the minimum pseudoweight of the code of length . For the other QC codes, we used the methods of [6], [7] to give lower and upper bounds.
Example 35: Consider the -regular QC-LDPC code of length given by the scalar parity-check matrix

For

, we obtain a

code with rate

. By

increasing we obtain other QC codes. By taking to be ,

, we obtain a tower of QC codes whose graphs

form a sequence of covers of the Tanner graph of the

code. For

, all the codes have minimum distance , and

hence the free distance of the associated rate

convo-

lutional code is

, strictly larger than the minimum

distance of the

code.

For the

code we ran a vertex enumeration program

[25] for polytopes that lists all the minimal pseudocodewords

and found that the minimum pseudoweight of the

code

is

. The larger parameters of the other

three codes allowed us to only lower- and upper-bound their

minimum pseudoweights.17 For the

QC code, we ob-

tained

and for the

and

the

codes, we obtained

.18 The increase in the lower bound from , which is the

minimum weight of the

code, to and shows

that the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight of the

code

is less than that of the

and

codes. This increase in the lower bounds from to sug-

gests, but does not prove, the existence of an increasing se-

quence of minimum AWGNC pseudoweights for these codes,

according to the results of this subsection. For comparison, we

simulated the four QC codes together with the associated convo-

lutional code. The results for an AWGNC are given in Fig. 6, and

we note that they are consistent with the suggested increasing

sequence of minimum pseudoweights.

For completeness, we mention that the techniques in [17] and

[18] allow us to efficiently compute the minimum max-frac-

tional weight for the above-mentioned codes: we obtain

for the length- code,

for

the length- code,

for the length- code,

and

for the length- code. Applying the

results that were mentioned in Remark 29, we see that these

values yield weaker lower bounds on

than the

ones given in the previous paragraph.

We conclude this example by looking at

for

.

Using the vertex enumeration program in [25], we were able to

compute the minimum pseudoweights of the QC codes of length

given by the parity-check matrices

in Example 35

for

down to

. The corresponding results are pre-

sented in Table II.

IV. ANALYSIS OF PROBLEMATIC PSEUDOCODEWORDS IN CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
Studying pseudocodewords of small pseudoweight, and, in particular (since the minimum pseudoweight is upper-bounded by the minimum Hamming weight), studying pseudocodewords

17The lower bounds are obtained by applying the techniques that were presented in [27].

 18Using some more sophisticated lower bounds from [27], one can actually

show that 7:19 w

for the length-40, the length-80, and the

length-160 code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2593

= 1 4 (3 4) (3 4) R = ; ; Fig. 6. The performance of a rate

-regular LDPC convolutional code and four associated

-regular QC-LDPC block codes. (Note that the

= (1 ) E =N E =N =R E =N horizontal axis is

and not the more common

1

; this former choice yields an easier comparison between the different curves.)

TABLE II

THE MINIMUM PSEUDOWEIGHTS OF THE CODES

H (X) GIVEN BY THE PARITY-CHECK MATRICES

r = 4 r = 1 IN EXAMPLE 35, FOR

DOWN TO

observations point strongly in this direction. We now briefly

explain our technique.

Similar to associating with a convolutional code [28] an in-

creasing sequence of column distances

and a decreasing

sequence of row distances

having the property that

we define two sequences of pseudoweights that prove helpful in

identifying the overall minimum pseudoweight.

We recall that an encoder polynomial generator matrix

of pseudoweight smaller than the minimum Hamming weight,

of a rate

convolutional code with encoder

represents an important problem in the performance analysis of memory has associated with it a semi-infinite sliding gener-

LDPC codes because it allows us to identify potential failures in MPI decoding.
Upper and lower bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of a convolutional code can be obtained by exploiting the “sliding”

ator matrix

. Let

denote the

submatrix of

with rows indexed by the first block rows of

and

columns indexed by the first block columns of

, and let

structure of its semi-infinite parity-check matrix

and

some of its submatrices, which allows relatively easy computa-

tions by taking advantage of the increased sparseness compared to the corresponding parity-check matrix of an underlying QC

Then, the sequence of matrices

code. On the one hand, this technique allows us to find certain

low-weight pseudocodewords, and on the other hand, it illus-

trates the advantage of using a convolutional code structure over gives us an increasing sequence of so-called column distances

a block code structure in pseudocodeword analysis. In addition,

,

, and the sequence of matrices

similar to the expected increase in minimum distance when

going from a QC code to its unwrapped convolutional version,

we also expect an increase in the minimum pseudoweight of the

convolutional code, leading to better performance compared to gives us a decreasing sequence of so-called row distances

the original QC code. Our theoretical results and experimental

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2594

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

The column distance is a “truncated” distance, i.e., it mea-

sures the minimum of the Hamming weights of the vectors of

length that constitute the first components of some code-

word with a nonzero initial block component. The row distance

is a “bounded codeword” distance, i.e., it measures the min-

imum of the Hamming weights of the codewords with nonzero

initial block component and support contained in the first

positions. The column distances and row distances repre-

sent valuable lower and upper bounds, respectively, on the free

distance that become increasingly tight with increasing , and, in

the limit, become equal to the free distance. If similar sequences

could be defined for pseudoweights, they would prove helpful

in identifying the overall minimum pseudoweight.

With this in mind, we define corresponding sequences of

“truncated” pseudoweights and “bounded pseudocodeword”

pseudoweights.

Let

be a polynomial parity-check matrix for a con-

volutional code

with syndrome former memory , and

let

be its semi-infinite sliding parity-check matrix. Sim-

ilar to the above notation, let

be the

submatrix

of

formed by the first block rows of

and the first

block columns of

. We will consider two sequences of

such submatrices, namely

In what follows, we will mimic the theory of row distances and column distances of a convolutional code to bound the minimum pseudoweight of the convolutional code. In the case of row distances/weights, the theory carries over from the Hamming distance case to the pseudoweight case and we obtain the following upper bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of the convolutional code:
So, by computing vectors in the fundamental cones of these parity-check matrices, we obtain upper bounds on that are similar to the row Hamming distances defined from the generator matrix.
In the case of column distances/weights, the theory does in general not carry over from the Hamming distance case to the pseudoweight case. Only for BEC pseudoweights do we obtain the following lower bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of the convolutional code:

and

In the second sequence, the first matrix that has a nonzero

null space with certainty is

, since there is a

nonzero polynomial codeword of degree (associated with a

scalar codeword of length

). Since

these matrices act like parity-check matrices in computing the

where

denotes the minimum BEC pseudoweight

of all pseudocodewords in the corresponding fundamental cone

that have at least one nonzero component in the first block.

Example 36: The pseudocodeword in Example 21 was ob-

tained by attempting to compute small degree nonzero vectors in

the fundamental cone of

using the above technique.

The first nonzero “row pseudoweight” is , and the vector

row distances, with

giving the th row

distance, for all . There might be nonzero nulls spaces ear-

lier in the sequence, so we denote by

the first matrix

with a nonzero null space. Similarly,

, , will act like

parity-check matrices in computing the th column distances.

So by computing the null spaces of these parity-check matrices

we get upper and lower bounds on for the convolutional

code that are similar to the column and row distances defined

from the generator matrix.

We remark also that if we wrap the convolutional code

is in the fundamental cone of

. Its AWGNC pseudoweight

is , which is an upper bound on the minimum pseudoweight

of the convolutional code. The free distance of this code is .

The reduced pseudocodeword

, with

, then the matrix

is a submatrix of the parity-check matrix

of the QC

code that remains unchanged after the wrapping. Hence, a

codeword of minimum weight for the matrix

will,

if extended by zeros, be a codeword in the QC code. If this

codeword has weight equal to the minimum distance of the QC

code, then the free distance of the convolutional code is equal

to the weight of this codeword. The minimum distance of the

QC code could be smaller, however, and in this case the free

distance will be upper-bounded by the weight of this codeword

and lower-bounded by the minimum distance of the QC code.

modulo

, for

has the same

AWGNC pseudoweight , larger than the minimum dis-

tance of the

code, which makes this pseudocodeword

irrelevant,19 but smaller than the minimum distances of the

and

codes. The upper

19Irrelevant in the sense that it does not improve upon the upper bound on the AWGNC pseudoweight that is implied by the minimum Hamming weight.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2595

bound

in Example 35 therefore becomes based on this pseudocodeword.

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THEOREM 13

This computational method has been applied successfully to

larger codes as well. An example is the rate

LDPC

convolutional code with syndrome former memory

that was simulated in Fig. 2. The code was constructed by

unwrapping a

-regular QC-LDPC block code

with minimum Hamming distance . The convolutional code

has free distance ,20 which already suggests a possible

performance improvement compared to the QC code. Fol-

lowing the approach described above, we constructed a class

of pseudocodewords among which the minimum AWGNC

pseudoweight was . Thus, this class of pseudocodewords

contains vectors of weight less than the free distance, which

makes them relevant to the performance analysis of iterative

decoding. Consequently, an upper bound on the minimum

AWGNC pseudoweight of the convolutional code is , and,

from the way we constructed this class of pseudocodewords, we

believe it is a very tight bound. Projecting this pseudocodeword

onto the QC codes obtained by wrapping the convolutional code

gives upper bounds on the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight of

these codes as well (in some cases tighter than the ones obtained

using the methods of [6], [7]). The upper bound in [6], [7] for

the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight of the

code is

. These upper bounds, together with the simulation results

in Fig. 2, suggest that the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight

of the convolutional code is strictly greater than the minimum

AWGNC pseudoweight of the

QC code. An evaluation

of the exact values of the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight in

these cases does not seem possible, however, due to the large

complexity of such a task. Also note that if an upper bound

on the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight of the convolutional

code smaller than could be found, it would decrease the

upper bound on the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight of the

-regular QC-LDPC block code as well.

Let and let

be a polynomial parity-check matrix of

be the corresponding parity-check matrix of . Let be a

nonzero codeword in of weight equal to the minimum dis-

tance

. (Without loss of generality, we can assume

that the degree of

is smaller than .) We have

and since

, it follows that

If

, we obtain

If

, we can write

, where

(other-

wise,

). (Without loss of generality,

we can assume that the degree of

is smaller than .)

Hence

or equivalently

V. CONCLUSION

which implies that

is a nonzero codeword in . There-

For an LDPC convolutional code derived by unwrapping fore

a QC-LDPC block code, we have shown that the free pseu-

doweight of the convolutional code is at least as large as the

minimum pseudoweight of the underlying QC code. This result

suggests that the pseudoweight spectrum of the convolutional

code is “thinner” than that of the block code. This difference

in the weight spectra leads to improved BER performance at

low-to-moderate SNRs for the convolutional code, a conclu- Mimicking this argument, we also obtain

sion supported by the simulation results presented in Figs. 2 and 6. In order to analyze problematic pseudocodewords, i.e.,

, and hence the desired inequalities

pseudocodewords with small pseudoweight, we also presented

a method of analysis that introduces sequences of “truncated”

pseudoweights and “bounded pseudocodeword” pseudoweights

which lower- and upper-bound the minimum pseudoweight

of the convolutional code. This is similar to the method of From the way we construct the semi-infinite sliding matrix of

using column and row distances to bound the free distance of a the convolutional code by unwrapping the scalar parity-check

convolutional code from below and above.

matrices of the QC block codes, we can see that there exists a

20The free distance of this convolutional code was obtained by Bocharova et al. at the Department of Information Technology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, using a program called BEAST (see [29]).

QC code of circulant size large enough so that its minimum distance is equal to the free distance of the convolutional code. This assures the limit equality in the theorem statement.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2596

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

We conclude the proof with the remark that part of the deriva- Then

tion depends on the fact that the characteristic of is , and so

(in

).

APPENDIX B PROOF OF THEOREM 24

We have seen that for any tional code there is a matrix

describing a convolusuch that

from which we obtain the norm equality

if and only if

By reducing

modulo

, we obtain a matrix

with the property that a polynomial vector

satisfies

A. Binary-Input Additive White Gaussian Noise Channel (AWGNC)
Since
and

if and only if

Reducing

modulo

, we obtain we obtain

which proves the claim.

APPENDIX C PROOF OF THEOREM 30

In the following, we analyze separately the AWGNC, BSC,

and BEC pseudoweights of

and of its wraparound

. Let

be a pseudocodeword. By assumption,

has finite support,

i.e., there exists an integer such that the maximal degree of

any

,

, is smaller than . We will first

show that

which we then use several times in the proof. Let

B. Binary-Symmetric Channel (BSC)
In order to compare the BSC pseudoweight of the two vectors, we first need to arrange the components in decreasing order. Let

and

be lists of all the potentially nonzero coefficients of all the

components of

and

, respectively,

in nonincreasing order. (In order to simplify the exposition in

the following, we assume, without loss of generality, that is

such that

.) Since

we obtain that

which gives

. Hence, the two

sequences of nonnegative integers form two partitions, and

, respectively, of . In order to prove the theorem statement

for the BSC pseudoweight, it is therefore enough to show that

for all

, i.e., that

majorizes [30].

We show first that

. Suppose the contrary, i.e.,

. Since

for all

, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SMARANDACHE et al.: PSEUDOCODEWORD PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

2597

obtain that

for all

. But ,

, was obtained by adding over a cer-

tain subset of the set

. So there

should be at least one that has in its composition, and

hence

. This is a contradiction, from which we ob-

tain

.

We finish the proof by induction. Namely, we want to

show that from

for some

, it follows that

. If

, then this induction step clearly holds. So, assume

that

. Since

we can deduce that cannot contain any Hence, all possible position of for
obtain

, and in fact all with

,

with

in their composition.

,

, have occurred in the com-

, which gives

. This proves that majorizes and we

APPENDIX E PROOF OF THEOREM 32
We know that

(13)

where step follows from [17], [18] (see also [7]) and step

follows from Theorem 31.

Similar to the comments before Theorem 32, remember that

has the following meaning [17], [18]. Let

be the set of positions where the bit flips

occurred when using

for data transmission over a BSC.

If

, then LP decoding succeeds.

Now, because the theorem statement assumes that

, using (13) we have

and so, according to the meaning of

, LP decoding succeeds.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors gratefully acknowledge the constructive comments made by the reviewers.

C. Binary Erasure Channel (BEC)

REFERENCES

Since the components of the vector

are

obtained by adding in certain nonnegative components of

, it follows that

and we obtain

.

We have and

APPENDIX D PROOF OF THEOREM 31

which leads to It now follows that

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[4] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT–27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[5] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[6] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82.
[7] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 2007, accepted for publication.
[8] W. S. Massey, Algebraic Topology: An Introduction, reprint of the 1967 ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1977, vol. 56, Graduate Texts in Mathematics.
[9] H. M. Stark and A. A. Terras, “Zeta functions of finite graphs and coverings,” Adv. Math., vol. 121, no. 1, pp. 124–165, 1996.
[10] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007.
[11] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models (Minneapolis, MN, 1999), B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, IMA Math. Appl, pp. 101–112.
[12] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[13] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “On regular quasi-cyclic LDPC codes from binomials,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 274.
[14] R. M. Tanner, “Convolutional Codes From Quasi-Cyclic Codes: A Link Between the Theories of Block and Convolutional Codes,” UC Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, 1987, Tech Rep. UCSC-CRL-87-21.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

[15] Y. Levy and D. J. Costello, Jr., “An algebraic approach to constructing convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes,” in Coding and Quantization (Piscataway, NJ, 1992). Providence, RI: Amer. Math. Soc., 1993, vol. 14, DIMACS Ser. Discrete Math. Theoret. Comput. Sci, pp. 189–198.
[16] M. Esmaeili, T. A. Gulliver, N. P. Secord, and S. A. Mahmoud, “A link between quasi-cyclic codes and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 431–435, Jan. 1998.
[17] J. Feldman, “Decoding Error-Correcting Codes via Linear Programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[18] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[19] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory and its Applications (ISITA), Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 991–996.
[20] R. Smarandache, A. E. Pusane, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Pseudo-codewords in LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1364–1368.
[21] M. Chertkov and M. G. Stepanov, “An efficient pseudocodeword search algorithm for linear programming decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1514–1520, Apr. 2008.
[22] A. Sridharan and D. J. Costello, Jr., “A new construction for low density parity check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Bangalore, India, Oct. 2002, p. 212.
[23] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “On deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from QC LDPC block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1221–1225.
[24] A. Jiménez-Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[25] D. Avis, “LRS: A revised implementation of the reverse search vertex enumeration algorithm,” in Polytopes—Combinatorics and Computation, G. Kalai and G. M. Ziegler, Eds. Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser-Verlag, 2000, pp. 177–198.
[26] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[27] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Lower bounds on the minimum pseudoweight of linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 70.
[28] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[29] I. E. Bocharova, M. Handlery, R. Johannesson, and B. D. Kudryashov, “A BEAST for prowling in trees,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1295–1302, Jun. 2004.
[30] A. Marshall and I. Olkin, Inequalities: Theory of Majorization and Its Applications. San Diego, CA: Academic, 1979.

Ali E. Pusane (S’99–M’08) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electronics and communications engineering from Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 1999, and 2002, respectively. He received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering in 2004, another M.Sc. degree in applied mathematics in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 2008, all from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN.
His research interests include error control coding, coded modulation, and information theory.
Pascal O. Vontobel (S’96–M’97) received the Diploma degree in electrical engineering in 1997, the Post-Diploma degree in information techniques in 2002, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 2003, all from ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
From 1997 to 2002, he was a Research and Teaching Assistant at the Signal and Information Processing Laboratory at ETH Zurich. After being a Postdoctoral Research Associate at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, at the University of Wisconsin-Madison (Visiting Assistant Professor), and at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, he joined the Information Theory Research Group at Hewlett-Packard Laboratories in Palo Alto, CA, in the summer of 2006 as a Research Scientist. His research interests lie in information theory, communications, and signal processing.
Dr. Vontobel was awarded the ETH medal for his Ph.D. dissertation.
Daniel J. Costello, Jr. (S’62–M’69–SM’78–F’86–LF’08) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 1969.
He joined the Illinois Institute of Technology as an Assistant Professor in 1969. In 1985, he became Professor at the University of Notre Dame and later served as Department Chair. In 2000, he was named Bettex Professor of Electrical Engineering at Notre Dame. His research interests are in error control coding and coded modulation. He has more than 300 technical publications and has coauthored a textbook entitled Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, the 2nd edition of which was published in 2004.
Dr. Costello has been a member of the IEEE Information Theory Society Board of Governors since 1983, and in 1986 he served as President. He also served as Associate Editor for two IEEE TRANSACTIONS—COMMUNICATIONS and INFORMATION THEORY—and as Co-Chair of the ISIT’s in Kobe, Japan (1988), Ulm, Germany (1997), and Chicago, IL (2004). In 1999, he received the Humboldt Research Prize from Germany, and in 2000 he was selected by the IEEE Information Theory Society as a recipient of a Third-Millennium Medal. He was corecipient of the 2009 IEEE Donald G. Fink Prize Paper Award, which recognizes an outstanding survey, review, or tutorial paper in any IEEE publication issued during the previous calendar year.

Roxana Smarandache (S’96–A’01–M’04) has completed her undergraduate studies in mathematics at the University of Bucharest, Romania, in 1996, with a B.S. thesis on number theory. From 1996 to 2001, she pursued the Ph.D. degree in mathematics at the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, which she completed in July 2001. Her thesis was in coding theory, with the subject of algebraic convolutional codes.
She is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics at San Diego State University, San Diego, CA. During the academic year 1999–2000, she was for six months a Visiting Scholar at EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, in the Department of Communication Systems. During the academic year 2005–2006, she was on a leave at the University of Notre Dame, holding a Visiting Assistant Professor position in the Department of Mathematics. During 2008–2009, she was on sabbatical leave during which she visited the Mathematics Department at the University of Zurich, Switzerland, and the Mathematics and Electrical Engineering Departments at the University of Notre Dame. Her research topics are mainly related to coding theory. Her recent interests include low-density parity-check codes, iterative and linear programming decoding, and convolutional codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

