IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

251

High-Throughput QC-LDPC Decoders
Nan Jiang, Student Member, IEEE, Kewu Peng, Jian Song, Chanyong Pan, and Zhixing Yang

Abstract—High-throughput design approaches for quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders are presented in this paper. Three novel schemes for the horizontal process in min-sum algorithm and its revisions are derived to reduce design and implementation complexity. The schemes can be directly applied for variant QC codes and easily pipelined to increase the operating frequency of the decoder. Some improvements of the semi-parallel architecture are proposed to enhance throughput performance and hardware efficiency. Employing the proposed approaches, QC-LDPC decoders for Chinese Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting (DTTB) standard are implemented using field programmable gate array (FPGA). As shown in the results, the proposed approaches can substantially improve the throughput performance, as well as the throughput-and-hardware tradeoff, of decoders with semi-parallel architecture.
Index Terms—LDPC, LDPC decoder, min-sum algorithm, pipeline, QC-LDPC, soft-decision decoder, throughput.
I. INTRODUCTION
O RIGINALLY discovered by Gallager [1], LDPC codes can approach Shannon limit under belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [2], also referred to as sum-product algorithm. Due to their remarkable coding performance, LDPC codes have drawn much research attention in recent years.
Codes with random structure could provide good error-control capability, but impose tremendous complexity on encoding and decoding implementation. With regular structure, QC-LDPC codes have relatively good error control performance [3]–[5]. Besides, QC-LDPC codes can be efficiently encoded with the shift-register-adder-accumulator circuit (SRAA) [6], [7], and be delicately decoded with the semi-parallel architecture [8]–[11]. Of great interests, QC-LDPC codes have been employed in many communication and broadcasting systems, including Chinese DTTB standard [12], [13].
The simplification of the nonlinear functions in the horizontal process is crucial in the algorithmic revision of LDPC decoding, on which the converging speed, error-control performance, computational complexity largely depend [14]–[16].
Manuscript received July 31, 2008; revised November 13, 2008. First published March 27, 2009; current version published May 22, 2009. This work was supported in part by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University and863 Program of China under Grant 2007AA01Z2B6. This paper was presented in part at ICCCAS 2008, Xiamen, China, May 25–27, 2008.
The authors are with Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China (e-mail: jn06@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn; jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn; pcy@tsinghua.edu.cn; yangzhx@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2008.2012359

Uniformly most powerful (UMP) BP algorithm [16], also re-

ferred to as min-sum algorithm, used a standard approximation

to substantially reduce the decoding complexity, but introduced

an appreciable loss of error-control performance. Offset UMP

BP algorithm and normalized UMP BP algorithm [17], [18]

were proposed to compensate for the performance degradation

of UMP-BP algorithm.

In recent years, some hardware architectures have been pro-

posed for LDPC decoders towards miscellaneous applications.

Compared with the fully parallel decoder [19] and the serial

decoder [20], the semi-parallel decoding architecture [8]–[11]

offers a better balance between the throughput performance

and hardware complexity, which is suitable for LDPC codes

with array-structured parity check matrix, e.g., QC LDPC

codes. Nevertheless, the implementation of high-throughput

semi-parallel decoders remains a challenging issue. One poten-

tial drawback of the semi-parallel architecture is that there are

always one half processing units being idle while the other half

processing units are working. Therefore, scheduling approaches

[21]–[24] have been proposed to utilize the idle hardware and

improve the throughput performance. Another drawback is

that the combinational-logic processing units suffer from the

long computational delay, which severely limits the speed

the decoder. Hence, pipelining1 processing units (mentioned

in [23], [25]) are able to considerably increase the operating

frequency of the decoder.

In this paper, we focus on the methodology for state-of-the-art

design of QC-LDPC decoders. Our goal is to deduce and devise

novel decoders achieving high throughput with low hardware

cost. The main contributions of this paper are:

• Three regular layered schemes for the horizontal process of

UMP BP algorithm and its revisions are derived to simplify

design and facilitate implementation. The complexity of a

-input horizontal processing unit,

, is reduced to

and eventually to . Besides, all the three

schemes are regular, and thus can be directly applied for

different codes.

• Based on the layered schemes, operations in the processing

unit are pipelined to improve decoding throughout. Al-

though pipelining approaches have been proposed in the

earlier studies [23], [25], the existing approaches can not

be directly applied to different codes. In this paper, de-

sign details of pipelining processing units are discussed

and studied.

• The disadvantages crucial to the performance and com-

plexity are ameliorated for the semi-parallel architecture,

including scheduling inefficiency, memory redundancy,

and the imbalance of processing units.

1Throughout this paper, pipeline is used to indicate the pipeline structure within single processing unit, instead of scheduling approaches that pipeline vertical and horizontal processes.

0018-9316/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. The LDPC code definition, decoding algorithms, and semi-parallel decoding architecture are briefly reviewed in Section II. In this section, some potential deficiencies of the existing semi-parallel decoding architecture are also investigated to broach the following improvements. In Section III, three novel schemes for the horizontal process are deduced in detail to facilitate design of high-speed processing units. Some improvements of semi-parallel decoding architecture are proposed in Section IV, including recomposing the horizontal and vertical processes, pipelining operations in the processes, and balancing the delays of all parts in the decoder. In Section V, FPGA implementations results on the resource consumption as well as the throughput performance of the decoders for Chinese DTTB standard are presented and studied. Before the results are presented, QC-LDPC codes in Chinese DTTB standard are briefly introduced in this section. In Section VI, concluding remarks are drawn to summarize this paper.
II. BACKGROUND OF LDPC
A. Code Definition

TABLE I

ITERATION COMPUTATIONS OF LLR BP, UMP BP, AND NORMALIZED

N; K UMP BP ALGORITHMS FOR AN (

) REGULAR LDPC CODE

  WITH ROW WEIGHT AND COLUMN WEIGHT

ceived symbol . denotes the message sent from check

node to bit node in the th iteration, while denotes

that from bit node to check node in this iteration. de-

notes the LLR of bit in the th iteration.

is the pre-

specified maximum number of decoding iterations. The set of

bit nodes connecting to check node is denoted by

, and the set of check nodes connecting to bit node

by

. Normalized UMP BP algorithm

is described below.

An LDPC code is specified by its sparse parity check matrix Initialization: 2 [1]. Complying the parity-check rule of linear block

codes, all codewords are orthogonal to the row space of . 1) For each

, set

Assuming that is full rank, the length of message word is Set

.

bits, and the code rate is

.

An LDPC code can be represented with a Tanner Graph [26], Iteration:

which serves as a signal-flow model of BP decoding.

The parity check matrix of an

QC-LDPC is an

2) Horizontal Process: bit nodes to check nodes

array of sub-matrices with

and

; the From

to

, update for each

sub-matrix is either a circulant or a zero matrix with uniform

size . In a circulant, each row is the one-place cyclic right-

(1)

shift of the row above it, and the first row is the cyclic right-shift

of the last row. In most usual cases, the circulant is a shifted

identity matrix; namely, there is only one 1-entry either in a row or in a column. These characters of the QC matrix are desirable for hardware implementation of encoder and decoder.

3) Vertical Process: check nodes to bit nodes

From

to

, update

B. BP Decoding Algorithm

(2)

Stimulated by the resurgence of LDPC, such notable re-

visions of BP decoding algorithm as logarithm-likelihood ratio (LLR) BP [15], UMP BP [16], offset UMP BP [17], and

and update

for each

by

normalized UMP BP [18] have been proposed to exploit better

(3)

tradeoffs between error-control performance and computational

complexity. The complexities in one iteration of LLR BP, UMP BP and normalized UMP BP algorithms are compared in

Stop Criterion:

Table I. Based on codes in DVB-S2 [14], Papaharalabos et al. 4) Hard Decision:

appraised Jacobian, Min-Sum, Piecewise, and look-up-table

(LUT) approximations of the nonlinear functions

and

in the horizontal process. It can be observed that

; .

normalized UMP BP algorithm significantly yields a better

performance-and-complexity tradeoff than the others (see also terminate the decoding; otherwise,

[9], [14]).

to 2).

and go back

Before describing the decoding algorithm, we define the notations in advance. is the LLR of bit derived from the re-

In order to compensate for the degradation resulting from the min-sum approximation, the messages are normalized with a

2Once defined, each symbol will be valid throughout this paper.

factor during the horizontal process as shown in (1), which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODING ARCHITECTURE

253

Fig. 1. Semi-parallel decoding architecture.

is chosen to maximize the coding gain according to the channel estimation of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [18], [27], [28].

C. Semi-Parallel Decoding Architecture

A semi-parallel decoder consists of horizontal processing

units (HPUs), vertical processing units (VPUs), LRAMs to

store check-node message, ZRAMs to store bit-node messages,

CRAMs to store the LLRs of received symbols, and the con-

troller to synchronize all the other decoding components.

Semi-parallel decoding architecture employs a time-share

scheme of processing units to reduce hardware complexity

[8]–[10]. It can be observed that in a QC matrix the Tanner

edges corresponding to the entries in a circulant are parallel.

Utilizing this QC character, semi-parallel decoding architecture

reuses an HPU for check nodes in a circulant row and a VPU

for bit nodes in a circulant column. Namely, the parallel factor

of the architecture is

.

The overall architecture of a semi-parallel decoder is illus-

trated in Fig. 1. the number of LRAMs or ZRAMs is , the

number of nonzero circulants in parity check matrix. Each RAM

has a -symbol capacity. In the first half of one decoding itera-

tion, the horizontal process is performed in HPUs; in the second

half iteration, the vertical process is performed in VPUs. Each

processing unit operates for times by accessing symbols suc-

cessively.

The net throughput of a

semi-parallel decoder can be

estimated by

(4)

where is the number of cycles in one iteration, is the

operating frequency of the decoder, and

is the maximum

number of decoding iterations. According to the definition in

[29], the processing power of the semi-parallel decoder is

(5)

In the semi-parallel decoder, there are certain deficiencies limiting the throughput performance and hardware efficiency.
1) Memory Redundance: Since in the semi-parallel decoding schedule horizontal and vertical processes are serially carried out, it is unnecessary to simultaneously store both check-node messages and bit-node messages. Thus, LRAMs and ZRAMs can be merged as XRAMs that serially store check-node messages and bit-node messages to cut down memory consumption by 50%. However, the mergence of LRAMs and ZRAMs would augment the routing burden and impede overlapping schedules [21], [22].
2) Scheduling Inefficiency: In the decoder, one set of processing units, HPUs or VPUs, is idle, while the other is working. Motivated by this observation, scheduling approaches have been proposed to improve hardware efficiency and decoding throughput [21]–[23]. Dual-word schedule [24], [30] exploits the decoding interlude in the semi-parallel decoder to simultaneously decode two codewords, and thus improves decoding throughput to
(6)

However, if the dual-word schedule is employed, LRAMs and ZRAMs cannot be merged since bit-node and check-node messages would be accessed simultaneously, and the capacity of each RAM block needs to be doubled to store the messages of the two codewords.
3) Long Delay Paths of Processing Units: Processing units using combinational logics incur long critical paths which would limit the operating frequency severely. In Section III, layered schemes of process units are derived to facilitate pipelining design and increase decoding throughput.
4) Imbalance of Processes: It can be observed that the horizontal process, whose complexity still largely ensues from the minimization operations, is much more complex than the vertical process, as shown in (1)–(3). This imbalance can decrease hardware efficiency of the decoder.
In order to ameliorate these deficiencies, design approaches will be proposed in the following sections.

III. LAYERED PROCESSING UNITS

To facilitate the design of high-speed processing units, three

novel schemes for the horizontal process are derived in this sec-

tion. Minimizing operations in the horizontal process constitute

the major complexity of the HPU, even of the decoder. They re-

main a challenging issue for hardware implementation. While

two of these schemes in this section use cascaded comparisons

to find the minima, the third scheme employs the sort-and-in-

quire method to efficiently solve this issue. They can not only

be generalized with different but also be pipelined to boost the

decoding throughput. For simplicity, the input set of a -input

HPU is rewritten as

. The

minimizing in an HPU is to find minima of sets excluding one

input from , namely to compute

(7) the number of nonzero circulants in parity check matrix.

Namely, a semi-parallel decoder simultaneously processes from

to . Since multiplications of the signs in (1) can

messages in each clock cycles.

be easily accomplished with XOR gates in a separate data path,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

254

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

Fig. 3. Binary tree of 7-input HPU.

Fig. 2. Cyclic scheme for -input HPU.

only minimizing operations in HPUs are discussed in this section. It will be shown and proven that these schemes in this section, especially the one employing the sort-and-inquire method, can perform the horizontal process operations efficiently.

Fig. 4. Dimidiate scheme of 7-input HPU.

A. Schemes Based on Cascaded Comparisons

The minima in (7) can be calculated cascaded comparisons.

Two schemes, the cyclic scheme and the dimidiate scheme, are

derived as follows. They calculate these minima together and

thus share the computation of the minima of their intersections.

In this way, the complexity

of the horizontal process is

reduced to

.

1) Cyclic Scheme: The cyclic scheme using 2-input com-

paring components for the minimizing in a -input HPU is pre-

sented in Fig. 2. There are

(8)

layers, and each layer consists of 2-input comparing com-

ponents. A 2-input comparing component, which selects the

smaller of its two inputs, can be implemented with a selector

controlled by a comparator. In Fig. 2,

stands for the th

2-input comparator at layer

. In order to generalize the cyclic scheme, we define

.

At the first

layers

,

receives outputs of

and

, and selects

the smaller one as its output. If ,

denotes an input

entry, actually. The output of

can be expressed uniformly

as

for the horizontal process is efficiently conserved along layers. For a -input cyclic HPU, the times of comparisons are

(9)

2) Dimidiate Scheme: The dimidiate scheme is inspired by

recursion. That is, in order to calculate the minima of

,

we divide the input set into two sets, transforming the calcula-

tion of

into calculating two

. If the two

’ minima are ready, the minima of

can

be easily calculated. Recursively, we divide

to

, to

, and to HPU(2)s.

According to the dividing steps, all the sets can be organized

in a binary tree by denoting each set with a node, and by con-

necting each set with its two subsets as child nodes. The binary

tree of 7-input HPU is shown in Fig. 3. For a -input HPU, there

are

(10)

layers in the binary tree. Each binary tree node is implemented with combinational logic components—2-input comparing components. The dimidiate scheme for 7-input HPU is illustrated in Fig. 4. For a -input HPU, it can be derived and validated that the times of comparisons in the dimidiate scheme are

(11)

At the last layer and

,

receives outputs of

, and yields

B. Sort-and-Inquire Scheme

Other than cascaded comparisons, the minima in (7) can be

solved efficiently with the sort-and-inquire (SAI) method [20].

In this method, the input set is compressed as a collection of

namely,

in (7).

three values

:

The cyclic HPU increases the size of minimized sets gradu- • , the minimum;

ally to

. By cyclic comparisons, all information necessary •

, the index of ;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODING ARCHITECTURE

255

Fig. 5. Merging circuitry based on comparators and selectors.

•

, the second minimum, i.e.

.

Then, the minima

can be calculated by

inquiring

:

if

;

othewise.

(12)

By employing the binary tree structure in the dimidiate

scheme, we will deduce a novel scheme using SAI method

whose complexity is .

In order to reduce the computations of overall

to basic logic operations, the input

set is divided as the way of the dimidiate scheme, and divided

sets are organized in a binary tree. Using SAI method,

each binary tree node calculates its

and sends them to its father node. Thus, the operations

at each node are identical: merging two child nodes to

calculate its

. For a node with

two child nodes and ,

can be calculated with

and

:

Fig. 6. Sort-and-inquiry scheme of 7-input HPU.
HPU. With the quantization width of messages denoted with , the inter-layer routing width for the SAI scheme is

(18) while that for the cyclic is

(19)

and that for the dimidiate is

(20)

Since the calculation of the

in the merging circuitry

can be implemented with a 4-input selector, the one-layer delay

of the three layered schemes can be expressed as

(13)

if

;

otherwise.

(14)

if otherwise.

; (15)

In (15), denotes the size of . Accordingly, a merging circuitry is illustrated in Fig. 5. The SAI scheme for 7-input HPU is presented in Fig. 6. Employing a merging circuitry at each node and appending one layer that performs inquiring operations as (12) to the binary tree, the -input SAI HPU consists of

(21)

where

is the delay of a comparator and is the delay

of a selector.

IV. DECODING ARCHITECTURE
To address the deficiencies, scheduling inefficiency and imbalance of processing units, investigated in Section II, further improvements, including recomposing and pipelining of processing units, on the semi-parallel decoding architecture are proposed in this section.

A. Recomposing of Processing Units

(16) The operations in one decoding iteration of normalized UMP BP algorithm are illustrated in Fig. 7. As discussed in

layers. The times of comparisons in the SAI scheme are

Section II-C4, minimizations in HPUs are much more complex than other operations. As (1)–(3), the imbalance of processing

(17) units results in hardware inefficiency, due to the appreciable

discrepancy of delay lengths in HPUs and VPUs. However,

which notably reduces the complexity to .

since the shadowed operations in Fig. 7, performed on single

Compressing entries into

, the SAI messages, need not be fixed in HPUs or VPUs; operations could

scheme can considerably alleviate the routing complexity within be recomposed to balance horizontal and vertical processes.

the HPU and reduce the registers used to pipelining the layered For example, “abs” and “ ” operations can be moved to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

Fig. 7. Operations in a decoding iteration.

Fig. 9. Comparisons for cyclic, dimidiate, and sort-and-inquire HPUs.

Fig. 8. Schedules of combinational and pipelining 27-input HPU.

the vertical process, as shown in Fig. 7. For the decoder with

SAI HPUs, normalizing ’s and

’s in HPUs, instead

of all messages, can reduce

multiplications in one

iteration (see Table I) to

, where is average row

weight of the code. Thus, in the decoder using SAI HPUs,

normalizing operations are kept in HPUs; in the decoder with

other HPUs, normalizing operations can be moved to VPUs.

B. Pipelining of Processing Units

Processing units implemented with combinational logics

would severely limit the speed of LDPC decoders due to

long delays. Breaking horizontal and vertical processes into

several phases which are performed in separate hardware

units (pipeline stages), pipelining approaches could efficiently

increase the decoder’s operating frequency, and therefore ex-

pediently enhance throughput performance only at the expense

of extra registers used in pipelines. The schedules of pipelining

and combinational HPUs are compared in Fig. 8, with the delay

of combinational 27-input HPU denoted by . By employing a

5-stage pipeline, the critical path is broken up into 5 segments.

Assuming that the delay of each pipeline stage is equal, oper-

ating frequency of the HPU increases by 4 times. If submatrix

size

, the throughput of pipelining HPU

According to the binary-adder-tree structure, pipelining VPUs can be implemented by distributing vertical process operations among pipeline stages. Based on the layered schemes in Section III, pipelining HPUs could be easily derived. A certain number of layers could be implemented as a pipeline stage by registering the stage’s outputs with flip–flops. The number of layers within a stage depends on the speed requirement of the decoder. For example, in order to maximize the operating frequency, each layer can be implemented as a pipeline stage. The criterion is that the delays of all parts in the decoder should be comparable, concerning delays from the controller to synchronized elements in the decoder, and delays of all stages in HPUs and VPUs.

V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS AND COMPARISONS
In this section, implementation results for HPUs and decoders of QC-LDPC codes in Chinese DTTB standard are presented and discussed. Before implementation results, the codes in Chinese DTTB standard are briefly introduced.

A. QC-LDPC Codes in Chinese DTTB Standard

Chinese DTTB standard [12], [13] has employed three irreg-

ular QC-LDPC codes as its inner channel coding schemes. The

three codes have identical code lengths of 7493 bits and subma-

trix sizes of

, but support different rates of 0.4, 0.6, and

0.8 approximately to adapt the system to variant transmission

environments and requirements. In irregular codes, bit nodes

and check nodes can be specified with bit-node and check-node

degree distribution polynomials as

(22) where and denote the fractions of edges connected to

-degree bit nodes and -degree check nodes, respectively. The

increases by 4 times as well. In addition, not like overlapping parameters of the three codes are described in Table II, including

approaches [21]–[23], pipelining approaches need not rearrange information message length , the number of nonzero subma-

operating sequences of messages, and could be easily applied to trices , node degree distribution polynomials and ,

different QC codes.

and the SNR at the bit error rate (BER)

. This BER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODING ARCHITECTURE

257

Fig. 10. Implementation results of A, B, C, D, and E decoders for the (7493,3048) code: (a) ALUTs; (b) registers; (c) memory; (d) f ; (e) net throughput.

Fig. 11. Implementation results of A, B, D, and E decoders for the (7493,4572) code: (a) ALUTs; (b) registers; (c) memory; (d) f ; (e) net throughput.

Fig. 12. Implementation results of A, B, D, and E decoders for the (7493,6096) code: (a) ALUTs; (b) registers; (c) memory; (d) f ; (e) net throughput.

TABLE II PARAMETERS OF CODES IN CHINESE DTTB STANDARD

of logic elements compared with cyclic and dimidiate schemes,

especially for HPUs with large . When

, the ALUTs

used in the SAI HPU are only around 60% of those in the cyclic

or the dimidiate HPU.

C. Implementation Results of Decoders

Employing the proposed approaches, decoders for codes

in Chinese DTTB standard were first modeled with Verilog

hardware description language (HDL) and functionally ver-

ified using ModelSim Simulator. The behavior and results

of Verilog-coded decoders were validated by the fixed-point

C-coded model. After functional verification, the decoders

is the quasi error free (QEF) threshold of the system. The SNR is measured under normalized UMP BP algorithm with 30 iterations in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation.

were compiled and synthesized for Altera’s Stratix II FPGA

with appropriate time constraints using Quartus II compiler.

The implementation results of decoders for 0.4-rate, 0.6-rate,

and 0.8-rate codes are presented in Figs. 10–12, respectively.

In these figures,

is the maximum operating frequency

B. Comparisons for HPUs

reported by the compiler, and the throughput is estimated as

(4) and (6) with

. In the figures, hardware con-

The cyclic, dimidiate, and sort-and-inquire HPUs of

, sumptions, including amounts of ALUTs, of registers, and

8, 12, 13, 26, 27, which are the check-node degrees of codes of memory bits, are normalized with the throughput of the

in Chinese DTTB standard, were synthesized and mapped on decoder to illustrate the hardware-and-throughput tradeoff. The

Altera’s Stratix II FPGA using 90-nm process technology [31]. decoders in implementation results are classified into 5 types.

The amounts of adaptive look-up tables (ALUT), the logic el- These decoder types are described in Table III. In the table,

ements of Stratix II family, are compared in Fig. 9 to evaluate only type A uses combinational-logic processing units, and

hardware complexity of the cyclic, the dimidiate, and the SAI others use pipelining processing units. In order to adjust the

schemes. As shown in implementation results, the SAI scheme delay of pipelining processing units, pipelining stages in the

with complexity of significantly reduces the consumption decoders were implemented with 1 or 2 layers of the layered

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

258

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

TABLE III DECODER TYPES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
TABLE IV CRITICAL PATHS OF TYPE-D AND -E DECODERS

the maximum speed capacity, while two-layer stages, whose delays are shorter than the delay from the controller to RAMs in the dual-word decoders, are enough for type-E decoders.
Since the throughput performance depends largely on the code itself and the physical device, type-A decoders, employing the existing semi-parallel architecture and combinational-logic processing units, are used as the benchmark to demonstrate the advantages of the proposed decoding approaches. Nevertheless, with resource consumptions, code lengths, operating frequencies, decoding iteration numbers, and implementation devices considered, our proposed decoders archive efficient improvement of decoding throughput compared with the existing decoders [22], [23], [25], [32].

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, novel high-throughput decoders for QC-LDPC

codes were proposed. We derived three novel schemes for the

horizontal process of UMP BP algorithm and its revisions to

schemes. The “Layers/Stage” in the table indicates the number reduce design and implementation complexity. These schemes

of layers at each stage of the decoder type.

can be not only directly applied for HPUs with variant degrees

The results are analyzed and discussed in following aspects: but also easily pipelined to achieve high speed. Among these

1) Processing Units: Using combinational-logic processing schemes, the sort-and-inquire scheme can significantly reduce

units, type-A decoders incur long critical paths determined by the hardware complexity. In addition, improvements of the

the HPU with the largest . In Figs. 10(d)–12(d), it can be ob- semi-parallel decoding architecture were proposed. Employing

served that, by pipelining operations within a process (hori- the 7493-bit codes for Chinese DTTB standard as an example,

zontal or vertical), type-B, -C, -D, and -E decoders substantially we then used FPGA to implement decoders employing the

increase the operating frequency as well as the throughput at the proposed approaches. Implementation results were analyzed in

expense of extra registers used in the pipeline.

detail to assess the proposed approaches. As shown in imple-

2) HPUs: In the implementation results, the advantages of mentation results, our proposed decoding design approaches

the SAI scheme over the cyclic and the dimidiate schemes are can significantly improve the throughput performance and

evident. Type-B, -D, and -E decoders with SAI HPUs reduced hardware efficiency of semi-parallel QC-LDPC decoders.

the ALUT consumption compared with type-A decoders using

dimidiate HPUs and type-C decoders using cyclic HPUs. The ALUT reductions for 0.4-rate, 0.6-rate, and 0.8-rate decoders

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

are 27%, 15%, and 23% respectively. In addition, type-C decoder for the 0.4-rate code, with cyclic HPUs, requires 24.7% more registers than the 0.4-rate D decoder with SAI HPUs, which can be estimated with (18) and (19).

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable efforts and insightful comments, which helped to improve the quality of this paper.

3) Scheduling: As (4) and (6), the dual-word scheduling

can double the throughput compared to that of the standard

REFERENCES

scheduling, while requiring larger memory capacity. As shown in implementation results, type-E decoders (dual-word scheduling) can achieve the throughput about 40% higher than that of type-D decoders (standard scheduling), Besides, the frequency of type-E decoders is much lower than that of type-D decoders, which results in lower power consumption. However, the dualword scheduling would increase routing complexity, for more RAM blocks with larger size are connected to the controller. The critical paths of type-D and type-E decoders are both the paths from the controller to RAM blocks. But the routing delay in the dual-word decoder (type-E) is larger due to the congestion of RAM connection, as shown in Table IV.
4) Pipelining Stage Length: In order to achieve the possibly highest operating speed with most efficient hardware resources, the pipelining stage length must be adjusted, such that the delays of all parts in the decoder are comparable. As shown in the results, type-D decoders use one-layer pipeline stages to achieve

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjuvic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[4] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[5] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 12, Dec. 2004.
[6] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[7] Z. Yang, Q. Xie, K. Peng, and J. Fu, “A fast and efficient encoding structure for QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Commun., Circ., and Syst. (ICCCAS’08), Xiamen, China, May 25–27, 2008.
[8] T. Zhang, “Efficient VLSI architecture for error-correcting coding,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Univ. of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, July 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC DECODING ARCHITECTURE

259

[9] M. Karkooti and J. R. Cavallaro, “Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Technology: Coding and Comput. (ITCC’04), Las Vegas, NV, USA, Apr. 5–7, 2004.
[10] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circ. and Syst., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[11] F. Verdier and D. Declercq, “A low-cast parallel scalable FPGA architecture for regular and irregular LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, Jul. 2006.
[12] J. Song, Z. Yang, L. Yang, K. Gong, C. Pan, J. Wang, and Y. Wu, “Technical Review on Chinese digital terrestrial television broadcasting standard and measurements on some working modes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–7, Mar. 2007.
[13] W. Zhang, Y. Guan, W. Liang, D. He, F. Ju, and J. Sun, “An introduction of the Chinese DTTB Standard and analysis of the PN595 working modes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 8–13, Mar. 2007.
[14] S. Parapharalabos, M. Papaleo, P. Takis Mathiopoulos, M. Neri, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. Corazza, “DVB-S2 LDPC decoding using robust check node update approximations,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 54, no. 1, Mar. 2008.
[15] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[16] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[17] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[18] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[19] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Syst., 6–9, 2001, vol. 4, pp. 742–745.
[20] M. Cocco, J. Dielissen, M. Heijiligers, A. Hekstra, and J. Huisken, “A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 2004 Design, Automation and Test in European Conf. and Exhibition, 16–20, 2004, vol. 3, pp. 88–93.
[21] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped massage passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuit Sys. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, June 2004.
[22] Y. Dai, Z. Yan, and N. Chen, “Optimal overlapped message passing decoding of quasi cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 565–568, May 2008.
[23] L. Zhang, L. Gui, L. Xu, and W. Zhang, “Configurable multi-rate decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes based broadband broadcasting system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 54, no. 2, Jun. 2008.
[24] H. Qiao, W. Guan, M. Dong, and H. Xiang, “Design and implementation of LDPC decoder with high throughput,” Acta Scientiarum Naturalium Universitatis Pekinensis on Line, vol. 2, no. 2, Jun. 30, 2007.
[25] Y. Dai, N. Chen, and Z. Yan, “Memory efficient decoder architectures for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 9, Oct. 2008.
[26] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[27] J. Heo, “Analysis of scaling soft information on low density parity check code,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 219–221, Jan. 23, 2003.
[28] Z. Lin, Z. Yang, and C. Pan, “Low-complexity joint channel estimation and LDPC decoding for block fading channel,” in Proc. the 12th Asia-Pacific Conf. Commun (APCC’06), Bushan, Korea, Aug. 31–Sep. 2 2006.
[29] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, J. Tousch, and J.-L. Danger, “Generic description and synthesis of LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2084–2091, Nov. 2007.
[30] Z. Yang, N. Jiang, K. Peng, and J. Wang, “High-throughput LDPC decoding architecture,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Circ., and Syst. (ICCCAS’08), Xiamen, China, May 25–27, 2008.
[31] Altera Corporation, Stratix II Device Handbook [Online]. Available: http://www.altera.com/literature/hb/stx2/stratix2_handbook.pdf
[32] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.

Nan Jiang received the B.S. degree in Electronics from Peking University, China, in 2006. Currently, he is working towards the M.S. degree at the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. He has intensive interests on wireless communications and signal processing, such as MIMO, OFDM, wireless channel modeling and estimation, distributed antenna systems, and cooperative communication in wireless systems, LDPC design and applications, circuit solutions for communication systems, etc.
Kewu Peng was born in Hefei, China. He received the B.E. degree in Electronics Engineering from Hefei University of Technology in 1993, the M.E. degree in Electronics Engineering from Tsinghua University in 1996, and the Ph.D. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2003. He was a Researcher and Lecturer with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, from August 1996 to August 1999. Since Jan 2005, he joins the Digital Television Research R&D Center at Tsinghua University as a Research Staff and Assistant Researcher. His research interests include mobile/wireless communications, digital television broadcasting, and image/video transmission.
Jian Song received his B. Eng and Ph.D degrees in Electrical Engineering both from Tsinghua University, Beijing China in 1990 and 1995, respectively and worked for the same university upon his graduation. He has conducted Postdoctoral research work in both The Chinese University of Hong Kong and University of Waterloo, Canada in 1996 and 1997, respectively. He has been with Hughes Network Systems in USA for 7 years before joining the faculty team in Tsinghua in 2005 as a professor. His primary research interest is in physical layer and he has been working in quite different areas such as fiber-optic, satellite and wireless communications, as well as the powerline communications. His current research interest is in the area of digital TV broadcasting. Dr. Song has published more than 70 journal and conference papers and holds one US patent.
Changyong Pan is an associate professor at the Department of Electronics Engineering of Tsinghua University, China. He received several awards and held several patents. His research interests are in high-speed data transmission over digital television terrestrial broadcasting, wireless links, wireless communication theory and communication systems design.
Zhixing Yang is a full professor at the Department of Electronics Engineering of Tsinghua University, China. He is the executive director of the State Key Laboratory on Microwave & Digital Communications, China, and the executive director of the development group of the digital television terrestrial broadcasting national standard for China. He received several awards and held dozens of patents. His research interests are in high-speed data transmission over digital television terrestrial broadcasting, wireless links, wireless communication theory and communication systems design.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:45:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

