1776

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 44, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

Radiation Tolerance Techniques for a 1.6 Gb/s, 8 K and 4 K Low-Density Parity-Check Encoder
Sterling R. Whitaker, Senior Member, IEEE, Lowell H. Miles, Jody W. Gambles, Senior Member, IEEE, Paul Winterrowd, Ron Nelson, Chad Orbe, and Gary K. Maki, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A multiple node upset tolerant, 1.6 Gb/s (8158, 7136) and (4088, 3360) low-density parity-check encoder was implemented in a five-metal, 0.25 m CMOS process. Temporal separation coupled with single-event radiation tolerant flip-flops was used to harden the data path. A reduced sensitive cross-section combinational logic structure was used to harden the custom multiply accumulate blocks. This circuit structure is composed of a dual-rail NMOS-only pass-transistor network driving a cross coupled output buffer. By adding the output buffer section, only a small region of the buffer itself is vulnerable for propagation of a single-event transient. Single-event upset immunity with a linear energy transfer threshold of greater than 33 MeV cm2/mg and a saturation cross-section of just 0.075 m2/bit was achieved for the 4 K encoder. A linear energy transfer threshold of greater than 17 MeV cm2/mg with a saturation cross-section of just 0.3 m2/bit was achieved for the 8 K encoder. This results in a CREME96 expected mean time between failure of 1700 years for a geosynchronous orbit. Multiple node upsets as a problem increases as smaller geometry processes are used for space electronics. A mathematical basis for this reduced cross-section, multiple upset combinational logic design method is presented.
Index Terms—Encoding, LDPC, radiation hardness by design, single-event upset, single-event effects.
I. INTRODUCTION
S PACECRAFT electronics is subjected to a flux of galactic cosmic rays and ionized particles emitted from the sun which are unshielded outside of the earth’s protective atmosphere. These high energy particles deposit charge on circuit nodes within VLSI chips resulting in internal voltage transitions. In circuits with feedback, such as the internal nodes of a flip-flop, the stored logic value can transition to a faulted state. In doing so, the memory cell has experienced a single-event upset (SEU). Neutron’s have also been shown to produce SEUs in microelectronic devices at ground level [1]. When an ionizing particle induced voltage transient occurs in combinational logic where feedback is not present, it is referred to as a single-event transient (SET). In many cases, an SET will go completely undetected as the collected charge is simply removed from the per-
Manuscript received October 15, 2008; revised March 19, 2009. Current version published May 28, 2009. This work was supported in part by NASA under Grant NNG06GG29G, Grant NNX06AB15G, and Grant NNG05GA92G.
The authors are with the Center for Advanced Microelectronics and Biomolecular Research, University of Idaho, Post Falls, ID 83854 USA (e-mail: swhitaker@cambr.uidaho.edu; miles@cambr.uidaho.edu; jgambles@ excite.com; pwinter@cambr.uidaho.edu; rnelson@cambr.uidaho.edu; corbe@ cambr.uidaho.edu; gmaki@cambr.uidaho.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2009.2020459

turbed drain to the power supply through the conducting channel

of a connected transistor. If, however, as an SET propagates

through connected combinational logic gates and arrives at the

input of a flip-flop or other memory element coincident with the

storage triggering clock edge, it may be captured and become

an SEU. SET effects could be largely ignored in combinational

logic for larger geometry processes, but with the increased cir-

cuit speed and density afforded by fabrication at the 250 nm or

smaller process nodes, this is no longer the case [2]–[4].

A higher speed, second-generation low-density parity-check

(LDPC) encoder has been designed for the Goddard Space

Flight Center. Details of the architecture for the first generation

design can be found in [5]. This design is a similar architecture.

The radiation hardening by design (RHBD) circuit techniques

used will be the subject of this paper.

Linear codes are employed on data to correct bit errors occur-

ring during transmission from space. The code can be defined by

a generator matrix and an

parity check matrix ,

where

. The generator matrix is implemented in the

encoder and an -bit codeword, , may be produced according

to

where

is the -bit information

word. The corresponding parity-check matrix is required by the

decoder and, for each

in the code,

where is

the

parity-check matrix whose rows are the vectors

. The parity-check matrix performs

sepa-

rate parity checks on a received word. An LDPC code is a linear

block code for which the parity-check matrix has a low den-

sity of 1’s [6], [7].

This encoder implements two LDPC codes. The first is a

(4088, 3360) code (4 K) which is shortened from a (4095, 3367)

cyclic code [8]. The second is a (8158, 7136) code (8 K) which

is a shortened version of a (8176, 7154) subcode of a (8176,

7156) quasi-cyclic LDPC code [9], [10]. Single-event radiation

tolerant (SERT) flip-flops were used as the memory elements

[11]. Temporal separation was used to provide SET tolerance for

the standard cell portions of the encoder and will be explained in

Section II. The majority of the transistor count for the encoder

is in two custom blocks which implement the multiply-accu-

mulation (MAC) units for the 8 K parity generation sections.

A combinational logic structure exhibiting a reduced SET sen-

sitive cross-sectional area was used to harden the MAC. The

circuit details of this technique are described in Section III. A

formal analysis of the circuit action for this hardening technique

is presented in Section IV. Multiple node upsets are evaluated

for this technique in Section V. The RHBD layout techniques

utilized are explained in Section VI. Results of radiation tests

are presented in Section VII.

0018-9200/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WHITAKER et al.: RADIATION TOLERANCE TECHNIQUES FOR A 1.6 Gb/s, 8 K AND 4 K LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK ENCODER

1777

Fig. 2. Dual rail logic.

Fig. 3. Temporal redundant logic.

Fig. 4. Delay element.

Fig. 1. SERT flip-flop schematic.

In temporal redundancy, one of the memory cell inputs is con-

nected directly to the combinational logic cone final output. A

II. TEMPORAL SEPARATION

delay element is connected between the logic cone output and the other redundant input. The delay time is set to be longer than

SEU tolerant flip-flops restore their upset nodes through the duration of the SET pulse in the combinational logic. In this

redundant feedback logic internal to the cell. Several dif- way, the SET dissipates at the non-delayed input before it ar-

ferent error-correcting memory cell designs are in current use rives at the delayed input, thus insuring that the transient is not

[11]–[14]. Each of these circuits has the capability to accept presented to both redundant fault tolerant inputs simultaneously,

dual inputs. The SERT flip-flop was used in this design and a and the effect of the transient is not stored [16]–[18]. Although

SERT latch is shown in Fig. 1. The SERT latch is comprised of the SEU protection is lower than the dual rail approach, it is

four nodes. Feedback between the nodes is used to recover the sufficient for most space applications and has the advantage of

upset node. Asynchronous sequential circuit techniques were consuming less area and power.

used to design the error correcting feedback [15].

Since the LDPC encoder design was already interconnect in-

Due to the single internal fault detection and correction capa- tensive, a trade-off in SEU protection for the chip was made to

bility inherent in these redundancy based memory cell topolo- avoid further doubling the interconnect as would be required

gies, if redundant input data is also provided such that each of for a dual rail approach. The interconnect reduction aided in

the redundant data sources is coupled only to one single internal meeting speed and power goals for the design, while adequate

storage node (state variable), then the cell also has single input protection was provided against SEU.

fault tolerance [16]. If a transient arrives at one input after data Implementation of the temporal redundancy approach re-

has been set up to be written into the cell and it persists coin- quires either a knowledge of the pulse width of the transients

cident with the data capture clock edge, the transient enters the engendered by particle strikes, or as a default, one can select

storage cell such that only a single internal node is perturbed. a worst case delay (e.g.,

ns). Either way this places a

The same mechanism that detects and corrects internal memory limit on the maximum operating rate of the circuit. A designer

SEUs will correct the node perturbed by the captured transient. may, therefore, trade-off silicon area, power and ease of cell

There are two design styles for utilizing the recovery mecha- placement for maximum operating speed by choosing the dual

nism of the memory element. The redundant data inputs to the rail approach. If the desired operating speed can be achieved

memory cells could be provided through spatial redundancy as by a temporal separation architecture, however, power and area

shown in Fig. 2. In this dual rail logic, two copies of the same can be saved. This savings was possible for the data path and

logic function provide independent data to each of the storage control within the LDPC encoder by careful design of the delay

cell inputs. This method requires twice the area and power for element.

the combinational logic. In addition, a constraint exists for the Various delay elements have been studied in [19] identifying

placement of the dual logic sections. To insure that a single par- an optimal delay element as an m-cascade of series transistors.

ticle strike can not simultaneously perturb nodes in both of the Based on this conclusion, Fig. 4 shows the temporal separator

dual rail propagation paths due to the physical extent of the per- used in the encoder. The delay string starts with a small input

turbation surrounding the ionization track caused by the high inverter which minimizes the input capacitance and sharpens

energy particle, the nodes must be spatially separated. The ad- any slow input edges. The input inverter drives all three inputs

vantage to a dual rail approach is a very high SEU protection. of a three-input NAND gate. The first NAND gate drives all

For the second style, the data inputs to the memory cells are three inputs of a second three-input NAND whose output drives

provided data through temporal redundancy as shown in Fig. 3. an output inverter. The output inverter buffers the NAND gate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1778

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 44, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

Fig. 6. General SEU tolerant logic gate.

portion of this topology is identical in transistor count to a con-

ventional single rail CMOS Boolean gate implementation plus

the added unique output buffer and produces dual rail outputs.

In traditional combinational logic, an SET occurring nearly

anywhere within the circuit area can propagate to be poten-

tially captured in a storage element resulting in an SEU or false

output. The logic of the new structure is implemented by a dual-

rail NMOS-only pass-transistor network. By following with a

unique output buffer portion utilizing both and outputs from

the dual rail NMOS combinational logic network, only a small

region of the buffer itself remains vulnerable for propagation of

Fig. 5. Block diagram for the combined 4 K and 8 K encoder.

an SET. An NMOS-only pass-transistor network effectively takes ad-

vantage of the fact that radiation particle engendered electron-

delay section from the flip-flop load and sharpens the rise/fall transition going into the flip-flop input. A minimum delay of 1.1 ns was used for the design of our delay element in order to exceed the expected 1 ns duration of the upsetting event. Our Spice simulations concur with the conclusions in [19] in that using the cascade of three series transistors in the delay elements results in an area about 25% less than that required by an inverter string for the same delay. In addition, with the skew sharpening input and output inverters, a tighter delay tolerance over process, supply, and temperature variations is achieved when compared with an inverter string.

hole pairs are collected, electrons to NMOS drains and holes to PMOS well/substrate and thus produce only false 0’s at drain connected logic nodes and never false 1’s. A block diagram of a low sensitive cross-section SEU tolerant dual rail logic gate is shown in Fig. 6. The gate topology includes the following three functional elements:
1) A dual rail NMOS-only pass-transistor logic block which implements the combinational logic block (CLB) as defined by a truth table, Karnaugh map, or some other input specification.
2) A Pull-Down Circuit which is driven by the CLB outputs. 3) A State Machine Logic portion which retains the correct

state logic value during recovery of any SET occurring in

III. MAC SET ARCHITECTURE

the CLB. Primary inputs are presented to the CLB to produce output

A block diagram for the encoder is shown in Fig. 5. The 4 K and complemented output . Formal methods have been de-

encoder architecture is simply a parity register with a set of scribed to implement and optimize any Boolean function based

Exclusive-OR’s, defined by the generator matrix, between the on pass-transistor design [20], [21]. As an example, consider a

input sample and the current contents of the parity register. The four-input Exclusive-OR (XOR4) gate, commonly understood

heart of the 8 K architecture is the MAC block. Coefficients of to require a complex CMOS implementation topology. An

the first rows of the generator sub-matricies are stored in a ROM. NMOS pass-transistor circuit that realizes the XOR4 function

Input data is multiplied by the parity register contents in parallel is shown in Fig. 7. Generation of the complemented output

21-bits at a time using the MAC. Bit packing and unpacking for a given network can be accomplished utilizing a duplicate

are needed in the data flow to accommodate the structure of the circuit topology changed only by complementing all input pass

code. Architectural details can be found in [5].

variables (e.g., changing inputs to and to in this

The MAC is the limiting circuit for the speed of operation of example).

the LDPC encoder. The MACs also contain the bulk of the tran- CLB outputs and are connected to drive one NMOS tran-

sistor count for the encoder. The limitations of dual rail logic sistor gate in the Pull-Down Logic. An SET occurring in the

can be eased, through application of a dual rail circuit topology NMOS CLB can produce a false 0 but never a false 1. The only

composed of an NMOS-only pass-transistor network coupled possible SEE at the output of the CLB is that one single signal,

with a unique output structure. The combinational logic network either or temporarily changes from 1 to 0, never 0 to 1. This

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WHITAKER et al.: RADIATION TOLERANCE TECHNIQUES FOR A 1.6 Gb/s, 8 K AND 4 K LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK ENCODER

1779

Fig. 7. NMOS pass-transistor realization of a four-input Exclusive-OR.

Fig. 8. State table (Y Y ) for combinational logic cell. is true regardless of the number of internal nodes in the tightly

packed NMOS pass-transistor CLB that are perturbed by the

effects of a particle strike. The result of a 1 to 0 transient at ei-

ther or is that the one Pull-Down transistor whose gate is

connected to the upset signal temporarily switches from “on”

to “off.” No particle strike regardless of the angle can cause an

“off” to “on” condition. Therefore, under no condition are both

pull down devices “on” at the same time.

Two cross-coupled PMOS devices form the State Machine

Logic. Each PMOS device is weak relative to the NMOS PullDown Logic such that if both joined NMOS and PMOS devices Fig. 9. State table (Y Y ) for combinational logic cell for NMOS case.

are turned on, the NMOS Pull-Down transistor will overdrive

and force either or to 0. When either or is driven to

0, the weak PMOS pull-up connected to the opposite node or

is turned on. Because only one of the two Pull-Down transis-

tors is turned on at a time, the opposite pull-up can easily pull

its connected node to 1. The cross-coupled feedback turns off

the pull-up connected to the node being actively pulled down,

thus terminating any conflict. Because the outputs of the NMOS

pass-transistor networks are connected only to NMOS transistor

gates, problems normally associated with passing one levels Fig. 10. State table (Y Y ) for combinational logic cell with conflicts resolved. that are degraded by one threshold voltage drop below the Vdd

supply and thus not being able to fully turn off connected PMOS transistors are avoided.
The effect of a particle strike occurring anywhere within the CLB is that the output or whose value is 1 prior to the strike temporarily glitches to 0. The SET serves only to turn off

further have the property that no single-event particle strike will cause a transient at both outputs and allowing the single input fault tolerance of redundancy based memory cells to be fully effective.

the on transistor in the Pull-Down Logic. The connected weak pull-up in the State Machine Logic is also turned off due to

IV. CIRCUIT ACTION FORMAL ANALYSIS

the cross-coupled feedback and the corresponding node, or Considering now the NMOS pass network of Fig. 7 and its

, is tri-stated. The opposite node continues to be driven to complement driving the and inputs to the pull down logic

the correct 1 state. The nodal capacitance of the tri-stated node and the Pull-Down Logic connected to the State Machine Logic,

also maintains that node at the correct 0 state. Thus, the State the general logic gate of Fig. 6 can be analyzed as an asyn-

Machine Logic serves to save the correct output state to both chronous sequential circuit. The state table that defines the cir-

and during any and all SETs occurring internal to the CLB. cuit action is shown in Fig. 8. An entry of X denotes a conflict

The turned-off drain regions in the Pull-Down Logic and condition where the NMOS and PMOS devices of

are

State Machine Logic, including the and buffers remain both on. A Z entry denotes a high impedance state when neither

susceptible to propagating single-event transients but the sen- the NMOS nor the PMOS devices of

are actively driving

sitive cross-section area of these are only a very small fraction the node.

of the total circuit area. Further, nodes

and

are From the nature of NMOS devices, it is impossible for an SET

the only pairs sensitive to propagation of multiple SETs (i.e., event to force an NMOS network to produce a false 1. A logic

propagated to both and ) as a result of a single particle value of 1 may be upset to a 0, but not the reverse. Therefore,

perturbing multiple nodes. The cell layout and place and route it is impossible for the pass logic circuit to produce an output

challenges associated with assuring minimum spacings be-

. Don’t-care states can be entered into the state table as

tween these few dual sensitive nodes has been greatly reduced. shown in Fig. 9.

If care is taken in the physical layout of the Pull-Down and By design, the relative strengths of the PMOS and NMOS

State Machine Logic circuits such that these four pairs of dual devices in the Pull-Down Logic and the pull-up logic of

sensitive nodes are spaced sufficiently far apart then the circuit are such that every conflict X will resolve to a value of 0. Fig. 10

will have both a very small sensitive cross-section and will reflects this physical reality in the state table operation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1780

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 44, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

There are two stable states in Fig. 10: total circuit state

state entry of 10. is excited to change and when the

0110 and 1001. The state table defines all circuit

SET that forced to a false 0 dissipates, will transi-

action and demonstrates that there is immunity to all particle

tion to 1 and the circuit returns to the correct 0110. Only

strikes. For example, let the circuit reside in stable state 0110.

output has a transient.

By evaluating the various cases of transitions induced by single-event upsets, the circuit susceptibility to SET can be determined.

• The circuitry is faster than the time for the SET to dissipate. is excited and the circuit will transition to state 0001. ( is held at 0 due to the SET.) The next state

A. SET Affecting One Logic Variable

1) Signal assumes false 0. If experiences an SET and

assumes a false 0, then the next total circuit state is 0010.

For state 0010, the next state entry is 1 Z, which is stable

and the circuit will not transition further. is in the high

impedance state and therefore has no excitation energy to

change. Since the inputs to the CLB remain steady, once

the SET has cleared, will return to a value of 1 and the

circuit will transition back to the stable total circuit state

0110. Since the output is dependent on and , which

do not change, the output is unaffected by this SET and no

transient occurs on either or .

2) Signal assumes a false 1. Since the circuit that generates

f and is an NMOS logic circuit, this condition cannot

occur and it is impossible to produce a false 1.

3) State variable assumes a false 0. In this case, the circuit

transitions to state 0100 which has a next state entry of 10.

While

, next state is excited to 1. The circuit will

remain in state 0100 as long as the SET holds at 0, after

which time transitions to 1 and the circuit is stable in

0110 again. In this case, output can propagate a transient

outside of the cell, but remains steady.

4) State variable assumes a false 1. In this case the circuit

transitions to state 0111 which has a next state entry of Z0.

is excited to return to 0, hence after the SET, the circuit

will return to 0110. In this case, output can propagate a

transient outside the cell, but remains steady.

In the discussion above, no output transient is present when

a particle strikes the CLB, but there is a transient output when

a particle impacts nodes or . Normally in a combinational

logic circuit, the majority of the logic (forming transistors) re-

sides in the CLB portion. As a result, the overall sensitive cross-

section area within the circuit is reduced to only nodes and

and the and buffering inverters. A similar argument can

be made for the other stable state 1001.

entry for 0001 is Z1, which is a stable state. Eventually, the SET will dissipate and will return to a value 1 and the circuit will transition to 0101 which has a next state entry of Z0. is excited to 0 forcing the circuit to 0100 which has a next state entry of 10. is then excited to change forcing the circuit to return to the correct state 0110. Both outputs and have transients, but eventually recover to their correct values. 2) Signal assumes false 0 and state variable assumes a false 1. In this case, the circuit transitions to state 0011 which has a next state entry of ZZ. The circuit will remain in this state as long as the SET holds at 0. When resumes the correct 1 value, then the circuit will enter 0111 with a next state of Z0. will be excited to transition to 0, which will restore the logic values. Only output has a transient. 3) State variable assumes a false 0 and state variable assumes a false 1. In this case, the circuit transitions to state 0101 which has a next state entry of Z0. is excited to change and the circuit will transition to state 0100 where the next state entry is 10. is excited to change and the circuit returns to the correct 0110. Both outputs and have transients, but eventually recover to their correct values. There are only two cases where both outputs and suffer transients during the SET recovery time: (1) signal assumes false 0 while state variable assumes a false 0 and (2) state variable assumes a false 0 while state variable assumes a false 1. These two cases are considered to be dual sensitive nodes for the 0110 stable state. All other nodes are not dual sensitive for this case. A similar argument can be made for the other stable state 1001 where there are two more dual-sensitive nodes: 1) signal assumes false 0 while state variable assumes a false 0, and 2) state variable assumes a false 1 while state variable assumes a false 0. If care is taken in the physical design layout of the circuit

B. SET Affecting Multiple Nodes

such that these four pairs of dual sensitive nodes are spaced suf-

Since no SET can force an NMOS network to produce a false 1, if an SET affects more than one NMOS device in the CLB, the output can at worst assume a false 0. Therefore, more than one NMOS device in the CLB can be affected and tolerated. Looking at the cases where multiple node upsets include hits in the buffer and State Machine Logic, assume the circuit is in state

ficiently far apart so that a single particle strike can not perturb both nodes of the pairs then the circuit will have both a very small sensitive cross-section and will further have the property that no single-event particle strike will cause a transient at both outputs and . This requirement of physical separation of dual sensitive nodes does not scale with smaller process nodes.

0110. The various cases are considered. 1) Signal assumes false 0 and state variable assumes a

V. MULTIPLE NODE UPSETS

false 0. If experiences an SET and assumes a false 0 and To summarize the effect of pairwise node hits, let and

assumes a false 0, then the next total circuit state is 0000. represent NMOS and PMOS transistors respectively in the

The next state entry is 11. There are two cases to consider: buffer section. Also let and represent the transistors

• The SET dissipates before the circuitry can respond. In associated with and in the NMOS pass-transistor CLB as

this case, the circuit transitions to 0100 which has a next shown in Fig. 11. Consider all the following cases of node pairs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WHITAKER et al.: RADIATION TOLERANCE TECHNIQUES FOR A 1.6 Gb/s, 8 K AND 4 K LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK ENCODER

1781

Fig. 11. Multiple node upsets.

1) Case

. No change.

2) Case

. No change.

3) Case

. and remain unchanged

and the transient does not propagate.

4) Case

. and remain unchanged

and the transient does not propagate.

5) Case

. Since remains a 0,

producing a transient on only

which is dealt with by the flip-flop.

6) Case

. Since remains a 0,

producing a transient on only

which is dealt with by the flip-flop.

7) Case

. Since remains a 1,

producing a transient on only which is dealt

with by the flip-flop.

8) Case

. Since

remains a 1,

producing a transient on only

which is dealt with by the flip-flop.

9) Case is weak relative to

. Since

remains a 1 and pro- Fig. 12. Layout plot of one of the MAC sub-cells.

ducing transients on both which may upset the flip-flop

if caught at the clock edge.

10) Case

. Since remains a 1 and

is weak relative to

pro-

ducing transients on both which may upset the flip-flop

if caught at the clock edge.

Only two of the ten pairwise node hits lead to potential upsets.

By maximizing the distance between and as well as

and in layout, the probability of upset is still further reduced.

forming the cross-coupled pull-ups in the state machine section. This allows all conflicts to be resolved to 0’s. The source diffusion areas are extended to lower the recombination time for absorption of charge deposited by an upsetting event.
The two NMOS pass transistor sections forming the CLB are identical except for the network input connections driven by and . This section is tightly packed since multiple node upsets will not upset the output. If the normal dual rail approach

VI. RHBD LAYOUT

had been taken, the area required by two copies of the conventional combinational logic would have slightly more than twice

The layout example of one of several SET tolerant custom the area for just the NMOS pass transistor array, however the

sub-cells of the MAC is shown in Fig. 12. At the bottom are the two copies would have needed to be separated by sufficient dis-

cross-coupled PMOS transistors which form the State Machine tance to maintain the ‘single event’ assumption. In addition, the

Logic pull-up devices along with the PMOS pull-up transistors interconnect would have been doubled making the additional

in the and inverters. The continuous n+ and p+ guard bar area required by the pull down and state machine portions a rea-

above and below are inserted to prevent single-event-induced sonable trade-off.

latch-up by lowering the resistance in the parasitic bipolar sil- The only areas susceptible to SET upset are the node side

icon controller rectifier (SCR) [22]. A row of these cells would diffusion areas associated with the drains of the transistors in

be capped at the ends with vertically connecting guard bar thus the State Machine Logic section and the Pull-Down Logic sec-

ringing the PMOS devices in each row of cells.

tions. The dual sensitive nodes are on opposite sides of the cell,

Above the PMOS section, the NMOS transistors forming the which has been sized to provide sufficient space to avoid the

Pull-Down Logic plus the pull-down transistors for the inverters multiple node upset conditions that might perturb both and

of and form the next section. The NMOS pull down tran- simultaneously.

sistors are wide and minimum length compared with the min- Fig. 13 shows the layout for the delay element used in con-

imum width and longer than minimum length PMOS transistors junction with the SERT flip-flop. In addition to the guard bar,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1782

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 44, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

TABLE I CHIP SUMMARY

Fig. 15. LDPC 4 K encoder sensitivity curve.

Radiation testing of the LDPC encoder was conducted at the

Fig. 13. Layout plot of the delay element.

Texas A&M University Cyclotron Institute on September 8–9,

2008. Various beam types from neon to silver were used at an-

gles from 0 to 52 degrees. The test setup was composed of a

logic analyzer and custom test board. The logic analyzer pro-

vided the input stimulus and logged the output comparison re-

sults. The custom board contained four LDPC encoders and

comparison logic. For each sample point, an individual chip was

targeted with the particle beam and the target chip output was

compared with the output of a non-targeted chip. The 4 K and

8 K encoder modes were tested separately.

The logic analyzer was loaded with a vector set for a given

test mode consisting of a repetitive cycle of a reset followed by

several hundred to several thousand vectors. Due to limitations

associated with the portable test equipment and the remote test

board which must be exposed to the ion beam, the chips were

Fig. 14. Die photo.

clocked at 40 MHz. The probability of capturing an SET as an

SEU of a flip-flop is a linear function of the clock frequency. The

guard drains were introduced between the guard bar and delay element transistors to absorb a portion of the charge deposited from a hit [23]. These consist of the n+ diffusion connected to VDD and the p+ diffusion connected to VSS. Fig. 14 shows a photograph of the completed chip.

error data summarized in Fig. 16 demonstrates that an SEU LET of greater than 33 MeV cm /mg was achieved for the 4 K encoder. The onset LET was calculated by an order of magnitude drop from the saturation level. The saturation cross-section was just 0.075 m /bit. Fig. 15 demonstrates that an SEU LET of greater than 17 MeV cm /mg was achieved for the 8 K encoder.

VII. RADIATION TESTING

The saturation cross-section was just 0.3 m /bit. It should also be noted that control errors were logged separately from data

Prototypes were fabricated in the TSMC five-metal, 0.25 m path errors. No errors in control were recorded on any test indi-

CMOS process available through MOSIS. Functional 100 MHz cating that the control was much harder than the data path. The

testing as well as parametric testing was preformed on pack- area of control logic was very small compared to the data path.

aged die using an HP82000 integrated circuit tester. Testing and In addition, the control logic used much wider transistors and

characterization of the chip was also conducted at the Goddard drove a much larger capacitance. Both of these aided in hard-

Space Flight Center using system test boards. Table I summa- ening the control. No single-event latchup occurred under any

rizes the chip characteristics and test results.

condition.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WHITAKER et al.: RADIATION TOLERANCE TECHNIQUES FOR A 1.6 Gb/s, 8 K AND 4 K LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK ENCODER

1783

is scheduled to use the LDPC 8 K code. Other upcoming NASA missions such as GOES-R are also considering adopting the 8 K LDPC code.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Dr. Wai Fong, Dr. Pen-Shu Yeh, Dave Fischer, and Victor Sank of Goddard Space Flight Center.

REFERENCES

Fig. 16. LDPC 8 K encoder sensitivity curve.
Fig. 17. SERT flip-flop with temporal separator sensitivity curve. TABLE II
CREME96 RESULTS
A test chip from the same multiproject wafer run was tested previously on July 1, 2008. These tests were for the SERT flip-flop and SERT flip-flop with delay element. The SERT flip-flop was tested up to an LET of 117.5 MeV cm /mg and showed no errors in any test. The sensitivity curve for the SERT flip-flop with delay element is shown in Fig. 17 and demonstrates a threshold LET of greater than 55 MeV cm /mg which indicates that SET upsets are the limiting factor in the encoder.
Test results were entered into CREME961 with the following options: all elements from atomic number 1 through 92 considered, 100 mils of aluminum shielding, an overly pessimistic rectangular parallelepiped of 10 10 2 m with no funnel effects. The results are summarized in Table II. For the cosmic ray maximum, the average time between failures in 8 K mode would be approximately 1700 years. For the 4 K mode, with cosmic ray maximum, the average time between failures would be approximately 18,000 years. The TDRSS Ku-band Upgrade Program
1http://www.creme96.nrl.navy.mil

[1] E. Normand, “Single event upset at ground level,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., pp. 2742–2750, Dec. 1996.
[2] P. Liden, P. Dahlgren, R. Johansson, and J. Karlsson, “On latching probability of particle induced transients in combinational networks,” in Proc. 24th Int. Symp. Fault-Tolerant Computing, Jun. 1994, pp. 340–349.
[3] M. Baze and S. Buchner, “Attenuation of single event induced pulses in CMOS combinational logic,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., pp. 2217–2223, Dec. 1997.
[4] L. Massengill, O. Amusan, S. Dasgupta, A. Sternberg, J. Black, A. Witulski, B. Bhuva, and M. Alles, “Sub-100 nm radiation hardened IC design: Single event mechanisms impacting modeling and simulation for design,” Proc. GOMAC, pp. 309–313, Mar. 2007.
[5] L. Miles, J. Gambles, G. Maki, W. Ryan, and S. Whitaker, “An 860-Mb/s, (8158, 7136) low-density parity-check encoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 1686–1691, Aug. 2006.
[6] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-18, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[7] D. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[8] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[9] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near shannon limit quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[10] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[11] G. Maki, K. Hass, S. Quan, and J. Murguia, “Conflict free radiation tolerant storage cell,” U.S. Patent 6,573,773, Jun. 3, 2003.
[12] T. Calin, M. Nicolaidis, and R. Velazco, “Upset hardened memory design for sub-micron CMOS technology,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., pp. 2874–2878, Dec. 1996.
[13] M. Barry, “Radiation resistant SRAM memory,” U.S. Patent 5,157,625, Oct. 20, 1992.
[14] J. Dooley, “SEU-immune latch for gate array, standard cell, and other ASIC applications,” U.S. Patent 5,311,070, May 10, 1994.
[15] J. Gambles, G. Maki, and S. Whitaker, “Radiation hardening by design,” Int. J. Electron., vol. 95, no. 1, pp. 11–26, Jan. 2008.
[16] K. Hass, J. Gambles, B. Walker, and M. Zampaglione, “Mitigating single event upsets from combinational logic,” in Proc. 7th NASA Symp. VLSI Design, Oct. 1998, pp. 4.1.1–4.1.10.
[17] K. Hass and J. Gambles, “Single event transients in deep sub-micron CMOS,” in Proc. 42nd Midwest Symp. Circuits and Systems, Aug. 1999, pp. 122–125.
[18] J. Gambles, K. Hass, and K. Cameron, “Apparatus for and method of eliminating single event upsets in combinational logic,” U.S. Patent 6,326,809, Dec. 4, 2001.
[19] N. Mahapatra, A. Tareen, and S. Garimella, “Comparison and analysis of delay elements,” in Proc. 45th Midwest Symp. Circuits and Systems, Aug. 2002, vol. 2, pp. 473–476.
[20] D. Radhakrishnan, S. Whitaker, and G. Maki, “Formal design procedures for pass transistor switching circuits,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-20, pp. 531–536, Apr. 1985.
[21] S. Whitaker and G. Maki, “Pass transistor asynchronous sequential circuits,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-24, pp. 71–78, Feb. 1989.
[22] J. Canaris, S. Whitaker, and K. Cameron, “Mechanism for preventing radiation induced latchup in CMOS integrated circuits,” U.S. Patent 5,406,513, Apr. 11, 1995.
[23] B. Narasimham, J. Gambles, R. Shuler, B. Bhuva, and L. Massengill, “Quantifying the effect of guard rings and guard drains in mitigating charge collection and charge spread,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3456–3460, Dec. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1784

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 44, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

Sterling R. Whitaker (S’76–M’77–SM’97) received the B.S.E.E. degree from Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, in 1977, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees, both in electrical engineering, from the University of Idaho, Moscow, in 1982 and 1988, respectively.
He is currently a Research Professor with the Center for Advanced Microelectronics and Biomolecular Research, University of Idaho. He was previously an Associate Professor at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque. His industrial experience includes American Microsystems, Inc. (1977–1985) and AKM DesignTek (1995–1997). His current research interest is in high-performance application-specific processors for the space environment. He holds 13 U.S. patents, has published 95 papers, and has been a key contributor on 73 integrated circuit designs.
Lowell H. Miles received the B.S.C.S. and M.S.C.S. degrees from Washington State University, Pullman, WA, in 1985 and 1987, respectively.
He is currently a Research Engineer with the Center for Microelectronics and Biomolecular Research, University of Idaho, where he has developed various CAD tools, as well as leading VLSI chip designs such as a programmable high rate baseband modulator for the Goddard Space Flight Center. His current research interest is in LDPC decoding architectures. He holds five U.S. patents.
Jody W. Gambles (S’75–M’77–SM’02) received the B.Sc. (summa cum laude), M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Idaho in 1977, 1992, and 1996, respectively.
From 1977 to 1990, he worked in product design and development at Key Tronic Corporation, including involvement in several ASIC designs. He joined the Microelectronic Research Center at the University of Idaho in 1990, moved with that organization to the University of New Mexico in 1992, and returned to the University of Idaho in 2002 as a member of the Center for Advanced Microelectronics and Biomolecular Research, where he served as Research Professor and Associate Director until 2006 and remains Associate Faculty. His research interests includes digital design, ultra-low power circuits and processes, and radiation hardness by design. He holds five U.S. patents.

mentation design.

Ron Nelson received the B.S.E.E. and M.S.E.E. degrees from the University of Idaho, Moscow, in 1997 and 2000, respectively.
He has been a Research Engineer with the Center for Advanced Microelectronics and Biomolecular Research, University of Idaho, since 2003 and is working on electronic biosensor development and low-power electronics for space applications. His professional interests include power electronics, distribution, and power flow control, time domain electromagnetic simulations, and automated instru-

Chad Orbe received the B.S.E.E. degree from the University of Idaho, Moscow, in 2001.
He worked internships at both Micron and Agilent. He was a VLSI Design Engineer for Advanced Hardware Architectures before joining the staff of the Center for Advanced Microelectronics and Biomolecular Research, University of Idaho, where he led the design of an image compression chip for space applications based on the bit plane encoding algorithm. He currently leads the development of a companion bit plane decoding chip.

Gary K. Maki (S’63–M’69–SM’02) received the B.S.E.E. degree from Michigan Technological University, Houghton, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Missouri, Rolla.
He is currently Director of the Center of Advanced Microelectronics Biomolecular Research (CAMBR) and Professor in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at the University of Idaho, Moscow. He held a similar position at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque. His current research interests range from high-performance electronics to biomolecular electronic sensors. He has served on boards with the Hewlett Packard Laboratories Science Advisory Board, University Space Research Association Technology Board, the NASA Data System Working Group, and the USDA National Nanotechnology Grant Selection Board. He has authored more than 75 papers and holds seven patents.

Paul Winterrowd received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Idaho, Moscow, in 1990.
He worked as a VLSI Design Engineer for Advanced Hardware Architectures from 1992 to 1998, for Hewlett-Packard from 1998 to 2004, and most recently at the Center for Advanced Microelectronics and Biomolecular Research, University of Idaho, from 2004 to the present, leading most recently the design of a wavelet transform chip for GSFC.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

