IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

1663

Low-Floor Decoders for LDPC Codes
Yang Han, Member, IEEE, and William E. Ryan, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—One of the most significant impediments to the use of LDPC codes in many communication and storage systems is the error-rate floor phenomenon associated with their iterative decoders. The error floor has been attributed to certain subgraphs of an LDPC code’s Tanner graph induced by so-called trapping sets. We show in this paper that once we identify the trapping sets of an LDPC code of interest, a sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoder can be custom-designed to yield floors that are orders of magnitude lower than floors of the the conventional SPA decoder. We present three classes of such decoders: (1) a bi-mode decoder, (2) a bit-pinning decoder which utilizes one or more outer algebraic codes, and (3) three generalized-LDPC decoders. We demonstrate the effectiveness of these decoders for two codes, the rate-1/2 (2640,1320) Margulis code which is notorious for its floors and a rate-0.3 (640,192) quasi-cyclic code which has been devised for this study. Although the paper focuses on these two codes, the decoder design techniques presented are fully generalizable to any LDPC code.
Index Terms—LDPC code, error floor, generalized iterative decoder, low-floor decoder, bit-pinning, bi-mode decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have been intensely researched by coding theorists and practitioners over the past decade due to their near-capacity performance when decoded with low-complexity iterative decoders. Many of their properties have been well studied, yet the errorrate floor phenomenon has remained an open problem. This phenomenon can be characterized as an abrupt decrease in the slope of a code’s performance curve from the moderateSNR waterfall region to the high-SNR floor region [20]. Since many systems such as data storage devices and optical communication systems require extremely low error rates, solving the error floor problem has been a critical issue during the past decade.
Many attempts have been made to solve or mitigate the floor problem by designing LDPC codes with low floors ([2]-[13]), but only a few papers focus on decoder-based strategies for lowering floors. For example, [14] and [15] attempt to lower the floors of LDPC codes by modifying the scheduling of the decoders. Reference [17] proposes an averaged decoding algorithm which decreases the frequency of trapping set error events by averaging the messages over several iterations. In [18], the floors are reduced by utilizing linear programming-based decoding. In [16] a post-processor
Paper approved by T. M. Duman, the Editor for Coding Theory and Applications of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received July 4, 2007; revised January 22, 2008 and April 6, 2008.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 (e-mail: {yhan, ryan}@ece.arizona.edu).
This work was funded by a gift from INSIC and NASA grant NNX06AC17G.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2009.06.070325

is proposed which exploits the knowledge of the deleterious subgraphs (or trapping sets, as defined later) for a given LDPC code, and lowers the floor by inverting the bits of a known trapping set after the decoder becomes trapped in that trapping set. We discuss more on this decoder in Section III. Also, [19] investigates error floors by hardware simulation. These approaches in the literature involving decoder improvements for lower LDPC code error floors can be divided into two categories: decoder modification (DM) and post-processing (PP). In this paper, we propose decoder-based strategies which include: a bi-mode decoder, a bit-pinning decoder together with an outer algebraic code, and three generalized-LDPC (G-LDPC) decoders. The bi-mode decoder is essentially a PP technique, the bit-pinning approach is a mixture of the DM and PP categories, and the G-LDPC decoders belong to the DM category. We will present these decoding techniques in the order just given, which is in the order of increasing complexity.
It is well known that the error floors of LDPC codes under message-passing decoding are usually due to low-weight nearcodewords [21], or trapping sets [20], rather than low-weight codewords. A (w, v) trapping set is a set of w variable nodes (VNs) which induces a subgraph with v odd-degree check nodes and an arbitrary number of even-degree check nodes (CNs). When w and v are relatively small, errors in each of the w VNs create v parity check failures and tend to lead to situations from which the iterative decoder cannot escape. Throughout the paper, to simplify the language, we shall often use “trapping set” when we are referring to the induced subgraph.
Iterative decoders are susceptible to trapping set problems because they work locally in a distributed-processing fashion to (hopefully) arrive at a globally optimum decision. Of course, iterative decoders are vulnerable to cycles in the graph on which the decoder is based, for cycles often lead the iterative decoder away from the maximum-likelihood (ML) codeword. (Further, trapping sets are unions of several cycles.) In [28], Koetter and Vontobel derived a framework for the finite-length analysis of iterative decoders of LDPC codes by introducing the concept of graph-cover decoding. It was shown that the iterative decoder cannot determine whether it is acting on the Tanner graph of the code itself or on some finite cover of the graph. The decoder decodes to the “pseudo signal” that has the highest correlation with the channel output, and the set of pseudo-codewords (related to trapping sets) from all finite graph covers competes with the transmitted codeword for being the “best” solution. In other words, the ML decision space is a subspace of the iterative decoder decision space.
We shall not delve into such theory in this paper. Rather, we shall explore specific codes to determine the trapping sets which dominate the floor of their iterative decoding

0090-6778/09$25.00 c 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1664

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

performance curves. The most dominant trapping sets can

be determined from computer simulations in the floor region. Moreover, for most practical codes, because the trapping setinduced subgraphs associated with the error floor are relatively

d

d

d

d

dd

d

d

d

d

dd

small, and because their cardinalities are not too large, it is feasible to discover, enumerate, and evaluate all of the dominant trapping sets. Hence, once we obtain the trapping set information for an LDPC code by simulation and by graph-

dd

d

d

d

d

Margulis (12, 4) T.S.

dd

d dd d

d

d

Margulis (14, 4) T.S.

search techniques, we explicitly target the known trapping

sets with novel, custom-tailored iterative decoder designs.

These low-floor decoders lower the floor by orders of magni-

e

e

tude. Although the specific trapping sets depend on decoder specifics such as algorithm type and message word size, the

e

e

e

e

applicability and effectiveness of our low-floor techniques do not.

ee

ee

We consider the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and the sum-product algorithm (SPA) de-

QC (5, 5) T.S.

QC (5, 7) T.S.

coder with floating point precision as our baseline system.

We chose two LDPC codes to demonstrate the effectiveness of these decoders: (1) the rate-0.5 (2640, 1320) Margulis code which is notorious for its trapping set-induced floors [20], [21], and (2) a short quasi-cyclic rate-0.3 (640, 192) code that we

Fig. 1. Trapping sets of the Margulis and QC codes decoded by the SPA decoder. T.S. = trapping set. = VNs. = mis-satisfied CNs. = unsatisfied CNs.

have devised for this research.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section using the pair (cp, co), where cp ∈ {0, 1, · · · , M − 1} and II briefly reviews the two LDPC codes under study and co ∈ {0, 1, · · · , Q − 1}.
their dominant trapping sets. Section III describes the bi-

mode decoder that recovers trapping sets by a post-processing erasure decoding algorithm. In Section IV, we propose the bitpinning decoder which utilizes one or more outer algebraic codes. In Section V, we explore the concept of generalized LDPC Tanner graphs and their G-LDPC decoders. The idea is to decode conventional LDPC codes as if they were GLDPC codes, with the goal of eliminating trapping sets error events. The algorithm for finding the trapping sets of G-LDPC decoders is also presented in that section, after which the frame error rate (FER) performance of G-LDPC decoders can be accurately predicted using the method in [20]. Section VI discusses the complexity cost of these decoders in comparison with conventional sum-product algorithm decoder. Finally in Section VII, we draw some conclusions.

A. The Margulis Code
The Margulis construction of a regular (3, 6) Gallager code has been well studied [21][22][23]. The rate-1/2 (2640,1320) Margulis code used in this paper is generated from the special linear group SL2(11) for which Q = 11. Its parity check matrix can be expressed as a 120 × 240 array of 11 × 11 permutation matrices. The “weakness” of this algebraically constructed code is a relatively high error floor due to trapping sets, as discovered by Mackay and Postol in [21] using computer simulations. The source of the error floor is 1320 isomorphic (12,4) trapping sets and 1320 isomorphic (14,4) trapping sets, both types depicted in Fig. 1. As can be observed in the figure, a (14,4) trapping set has a structure similar to a (12,4) trapping set, and in fact each (14,4) trapping set contains

II. CODES UNDER STUDY

a unique (12,4) trapping set as a subgraph. Hence, there is a 1-1 correspondence between the (12,4) and the (14,4) trapping

Both of the LDPC codes we consider have the following sets. For both trapping set classes, half of the bits errors are structure: the parity-check matrix H can be conveniently ar- systematic errors and half are parity errors.

ranged into an M ×N array of Q×Q permutation matrices and This code is extremely difficult to deal with in terms of Q × Q zero matrices. This structure simplifies the analysis of decoder design (as we will show later) because its trapping

the code because the Tanner graph possesses an automorphism sets are highly entangled in a way that is more involved than

of order Q, and thus simplifies the search for all of the trapping what we just described. For instance, every VN of the code sets of a code. Obviously, if the Q × Q permutation matrices belongs to six different (12,4) trapping sets. It is for this reason

are circulants, the code is quasi-cyclic (QC), a characteristic that we have studied the Margulis code: to devise decoders that

that facilitates encoder and decoder implementations. We will lower the floor of codes with (and without) entangled trapping

refer to the Q variable nodes associated with a column of sets.

permutation matrices as a VN group and the Q constraint In [20], Richardson proposed a semi-analytical method to

nodes associated with a row of permutation matrices as a predict the performance of LDPC codes in the floor region and

CN group. A VN of such a code can be represented by an he verified results for the Margulis code on the binary-input

integer pair (vp, vo), where vp ∈ {0, 1, · · · , N − 1} is the AWGN channel using FPGA simulations. In his method, a index of the VN group and vo ∈ {0, 1, · · · , Q − 1} is the nearly complete list T of the dominant trapping set candidates
offset within the VN group. Similarly, a CN can be represented was formed first. Then, the decoder failure is decomposed into

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAN and RYAN: LOW-FLOOR DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES

1665

the summation of the effects from the individual trapping sets: this technique, we propose another post-processing decoder,

FER ≥ Pr{ξT },

(1)

T ∈T

where ξT denotes the set of decoder inputs that cause a failure on a trapping set T . Next, the contribution of each trapping set class to the FER is evaluated by using an importance sampling (IS) method [24][25][26]:

which avoids look-up-table decoding. In our technique, postprocessing involves simple graph-based erasure decoding, so that our overall decoder has two decoding modes.
In the error-floor region, there are three types of error events: (1) unstable error events, which dynamically change from iteration to iteration and for which w and v are typically large; (2) stable trapping sets, for which w and v are typically

small and thus are the main cause of the error floor; and

Pr{ξT }

= =

E√√B2wπ[Pσr{ξ−T∞∞|BP}r]{ξT

|B

=

b}e−

b2 w 2σ2

db,

(2)

(3) oscillating trapping sets, which periodically vary with the number of decoder iterations and which are sometimes subsets of stable trapping sets. The targets of the bi-mode decoder are the dominant stable trapping sets and some of the dominant

where w is the weight of T , σ2 is the variance of the Gaussian noise when operating at a high SNR in floor region, B is the noise biasing random variable, and EB represents the expectation over B. It was shown in [20] that the 1320 (12,4) trapping sets account for about 75% of the error floor performance, and the (14,4) trapping sets account for about 23%. (Low-weight trapping sets are always more dominant than high-weight trapping sets.) In this paper, we use a floating point software SPA decoder simulator which we have verified produces the same performance and prediction curves as those in [20]. It is known that quantization potentially affects the error floor, and various implementations of the sumproduct algorithm together with various levels of quantization could lead to different trapping sets. We contend that our algorithms will work on any decoder implementation because these algorithms lower floors by eliminating the trapping set errors of any given decoder implementation.

oscillating trapping sets. In the first mode, SPA decoding is performed with a sufficient number of iterations for the decoder to reach one of the three error event situations just listed. The second mode is the post-processing mode, which is activated only when the syndrome weight of an error event falls into the set of syndrome weights of the target trapping sets. The key role of the second mode is, using syndrome information, to produce an erasure set that contains all of the VNs of the trapping set reached by the decoder, thus resulting in a pure binary erasure channel (BEC) with only correct bits and erasures. Iterative erasure decoding based on the LDPC code’s graph can then resolve all of the erasures, including the bits that were originally part of the trapping set error event.
The look-up table post-processing decoder in [16] is based on the fact that there is usually a 1-1 correspondence between a set of unsatisfied CNs and a trapping set. It was also observed that in the error-floor region, after running extensive Monte Carlo simulations, most of the error patterns correspond to

B. The Short QC Code
The rate-0.3 (640,192) QC code is designed using a progressive edge growth-like (PEG-like) algorithm [3] and the approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) algorithm [4]. It has a circulant size Q = 64 and column weight wc = 5. The H matrix is a 7×10 array of 64×64 circulant permutation matrices. We observed in our simulations two trapping set classes with 64 isomorphic trapping sets in each class, with a representative from each class shown in Fig. 1. The (5,5) trapping set is the dominant one, as it contributes to over 90% of the error floor level.
We remark that it is very common for structured LDPC codes to have one or two dominant trapping set classes because their structured graphs lead to isomorphic classes of trapping sets. Unstructured LDPC codes are more likely to have a more diverse trapping set collection, but these codes are rarely of interest in practice. Still, the techniques in the paper can be straightforwardly extended to unstructured codes as well.

the so-called elementary trapping sets [29] whose induced subgraphs have only degree-one and degree-two CNs. That is, for an elementary trapping set, the unsatisfied CNs are usually connected to the trapping set exactly once (there is one bit error per unsatisfied CN). This is the case for the Margulis and QC codes we study. However, the applicability of the bi-mode decoding algorithm is not limited to codes with elementary trapping sets.
Assume now that the decoder converges to a trapping set and suppose an unsatisfied CN has degree dc. The goal of that CN is to find which one of the dc neighbors is in error. Our experiments have shown that the LLR magnitude of the bit in error is not necessarily the smallest among the dc VNs connected to the unsatisfied CN. Thus, we propose flagging as erasures all of the dc neighbors of the unsatisfied CN and then performing iterative erasure decoding in the neighborhood of that unsatisfied CN.
The set of erasures is generated by erasing the VNs of v trees whose roots are the v unsatisfied CNs, as in Fig. 2. The

III. BI-MODE SYNDROME-ERASURE DECODER

depth of the trees depends on the trapping set structures of the code being decoded. Consider a regular LDPC code with

In [16], the authors propose a post-processing technique row weight dc and column weight dv. For a (w, v) trapping to lower the error floor by using a look-up table of known set, the number of nodes in each level of the trees is listed

trapping sets. After conventional SPA decoding, this table in Fig. 2. For a trapping set with w ≤ v, i.e., every VN is

is used to process the residual error blocks much like a connected to at least one unsatisfied CN, trees with two levels

syndrome decoder. A drawback to this approach is, if the can cover the whole trapping set. Otherwise, when w > v,

cardinality of trapping sets is large, the implementation com- bigger trees are necessary. As the trees grow, the number of

plexity of the look-up table may be very costly. Inspired by erasures grows exponentially and the whole trapping set will

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1666
L1

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 6, JUNE 2009
CN: v

L2

g ··· g

g ··· g

g ··· g

···

VN: dcv

L3

···

···

···

···

···

···

CN: ≤ dcv(dv − 1)

L4

g... g g... g g... g g... g g... g g... g g... g g... g g... g g... g g... g g... g VN: ≤ dcv(dv − 1)(dc − 1)

Fig. 2. Syndrome-erasure flagging trees. = unsatisfied CN. = VN in trapping set. ⊗ = VN outside trapping set. = mis-satisfied CN. = CN outside trapping set.

4h (12, 4) 4h

2h

2h

4h 4h

4h (14, 4) 4h

2h

2h

4h 4h

two trapping set classes it is dealing with. The algorithm described below which resolves this issue is based on the following observation from the structure of the trees generated from the (12,4) and (14,4) trapping sets: As seen in Fig. 3 for either trapping set, there exists exactly two VNs in the second

4h 2h 4h 
h 

4h

e

2h

4h

¨4h hy© 2

additional va1, va2

e VNs :2h

e
4h ¨e 2h ©

level which share a common level-3 CN. These two VNs are what distinguish the (12,4) and (14,4) trapping sets (examine Fig. 3). Toggling the values of these VNs will switch a (12,4) trapping set to a (14,4) trapping set, and vice versa.
Algorithm 1 Auxiliary Algorithm for (12,4) and (14,4) Trap-

ping Sets

Fig. 3. Margulis code erasure flagging with 4-level trees (the numbers on the VNs are tree level numbers). Flipping the two additional VNs causes the switching between the two trapping sets.

1) Take the four unsatisfied CNs and create four trees each of four levels with these CNs as roots.
2) Erase all the VNs in the second level, and mark them

with flag “A”.

eventually be covered. However, the growth must be limited, because too many erasures may form so-called stopping sets (trapping sets on the BEC), and overwhelm the decoder. As will be explained below for the Margulis code, for some codes, additional steps are necessary to produce a smaller erasure set covering the whole trapping set. We now present the bi-mode decoding solutions for the Margulis and QC codes.

3) Erase all the VNs in the fourth level, and mark them
with flag “B”. 4) For each CN in level-3, count how many of its neigh-
boring VNs have flag “A”. Once a CN ca, with two neighboring VNs (va1 and va2 ) that are flagged with “A” is found, stop the search and go to Step 5. 5) Flip the bit values of va1 and va2 , and re-calculate the syndrome, producing a new set of four unsatisfied CNs.

6) Repeat Steps 1 to 3 with the new syndrome information

A. Margulis Code Solution

and then go to Step 7.

We observed from simulations that the Margulis code with an SPA decoder is sometimes trapped in two oscillating (6,18) trapping sets or two oscillating (7,21) trapping sets, both with

7) Including all the VNs with both A and B type erasure flags, perform iterative erasure decoding in that neighborhood until all of the erasures are resolved.

period two. The union of the (6,18) pair is a (12,4) trapping

set, and that of the (7,21) pair is a (14,4) trapping set. In Note that ca, va1 and va2 in Algorithm 1 are unique for the decoder solution for this code, the target trapping sets any (12,4) or (14,4) trapping set. The difference is: if a (14,4)

include the stable trapping sets as well as the two oscillating trapping set is reached in the first decoding mode, va1 and va2 configurations. It is obvious that the oscillating trapping sets are incorrect; otherwise when a (12,4) trapping set is reached, and some moderate-length unstable error events with w ≤ v the two VNs have correct bit values. Note also that when

can be flagged with two-level trees and recovered successfully. repeating Steps 1 to 3, the decoder adds to the erasures already

As depicted in Fig. 3, any (12,4) trapping set can be flagged flagged in the first round of Steps 1 to 3. Flipping the two

and recovered using trees with four levels; however, four-level bits of a (14,4) trapping set essentially corrects two bit errors

trees cover only 10 VNs of any (14,4) trapping set. If 6-level and turns it into a (12,4) trapping set. However, since both

trees are used, the erasure decoder is overwhelmed by too trapping set classes have the two unique VNs identified in

many erasures.

Step 4, the decoder still cannot distinguish which trapping set

To solve this problem, an auxiliary step is necessary. As it is operating on. Thus, if a (12,4) trapping set is reached, va1 discussed in Section II-A, any (14,4) trapping set contains a and va2 are flipped anyway, resulting in a (14,4) trapping set. (12,4) subset plus two additional VNs. From the syndrome For this case, repeating Steps 1 to 3 simply flags as erasures

weight itself, the decoder cannot distinguish which of these more VNs that are not in error, but does not overwhelm the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAN and RYAN: LOW-FLOOR DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES

1667

100

the bits outside of the erasure set, while erasing the erasure

Margulis−SPA−FER

Margulis−SPA−BER

bits by setting their LLRs to zeros, and then performing the

Margulis−Erasure−FER Margulis−Erasure−BER

conventional iterative decoding. Another variation of the bi-

10−2

QC−SPA−FER

mode technique is the partial-soft-erasing technique, which

QC−SPA−BER

QC−Erasure−FER

erases (by setting LLRs to zeros) the neighboring bits of one of

QC−Erasure−BER

the unsatisfied checks and then performs normal decoding; if

10−4

the decoder fails to converge, the decoder is reset with erasures

Error Rate

based on another unsatisfied check and this procedure is

repeated until the decoder converges or all unsatisfied checks

10−6

have been used. For example in [27], the authors show that

the (2048, 1723) LDPC code adopted in the IEEE 802.3an

10GBASE-T standard possesses an isormorphic class of (8,8)

10−8

trapping sets. These (8,8) trapping sets are easily resolved

using our partial-soft-erasing bi-mode decoder which requires

on average around 20 additional decoding iterations to correct

10−10

the entire trapping set.

1

2

3

4

5

Eb/N0 [dB]

6

7

We remark that the bi-mode decoder has the following

advantages relative to other floor-lowering techniques:

Fig. 4. Performance of the bi-mode decoder compared with that of the SPA decoder.

1) Beside stable trapping sets and oscillating trapping sets, this technique can also handle some unstable error

events with w ≤ v.

erasure decoder. By using this algorithm, 352 erasures will be produced for any (12, 4) or (14,4) trapping set, which can be recovered by the LDPC code successfully within 3 or 4 iterations.
The performance results for this bi-mode decoder with the Margulis code are presented in Fig. 4. For the SPA

2) No outer codes are employed, so the gain is achieved without any code rate loss.
3) The erasure decoding post-processing has very low computational complexity, which is equivalent to solving linear equations with binary unknowns, and thus involves only a collection of binary XORs.

curves in the water fall regime, 100 LDPC codeword errors

were collected; in the floor region, 50 codeword errors were collected, except for the last point at 2.7dB, which corresponds to 20 codeword errors. For the bi-mode curves, the numbers are similar, except the last three data points contain at least 10 block errors. No floor is observed down to FER ∼ 10−8 for the bi-mode decoder.

IV. CONCATENATION AND BIT-PINNING
It is well known that error floors of LDPC codes are usually a consequence of frequently occurring block errors with a small number of bit errors in each block error. A natural solution to lowering the floor in this case is to concatenate the LDPC code with a high-rate outer algebraic code to clean

B. Short QC Code Solution

up the residual systematic errors, at the expense of a coderate loss. The serial concatenation of an outer code with the

For both trapping set classes of the short QC code, every LDPC code has in fact been incorporated into the digital video

VN is associated with at least one unsatisfied CN (w ≤ v). broadcasting (DVB-S2) standard [39]. We propose a more

Hence, one level of VNs per tree is enough to include a whole effective concatenation technique which reduces the code rate

trapping set in the erasure set. Whenever the SPA decoder loss by exploiting the trapping set knowledge of the LDPC

gets trapped in an error event with syndrome weight 5 or 7, code of interest.

the decoding enters the second mode. 34 erasures are flagged The technique we propose combines outer code concatena-

for any (5,5) trapping set and 54 are flagged for any (5,7) tion with the bit-pinning technique [11]. In bit-pinning, the

trapping set, all of which can be recovered with one erasure encoder fixes (pins) to zero one or more bits of each trapping

decoding iteration. The performance of this code with bi-mode set of interest and these bits are deleted prior to transmission.

decoder is presented in Fig. 4, with 100 block errors collected, The decoder then sets the magnitude of the log likelihood

except for the last two data points for the bi-mode curves ratios (LLRs) for these pinned bits to the maximum possible

which correspond to 20 block errors. No floor is seen down value. Simulations have shown that this procedure offers a below FER ∼ 10−6, so that the floor is lowered by at least substantial improvement in the floor region [11]. However,

two orders of magnitude relative to the SPA decoder.

this solution is not as effective for some codes, such as the

With certain modifications custom-tailored to tackle differ- Margulis code, which have a large number of overlapped

ent trapping sets, this simple yet effective bi-mode technique trapping sets due to the substantial code rate loss introduced.

can apparently be applied to many LDPC code. One scenario The code rate loss can be substantially reduced for this code

that requires modification is when the erased bits contain a or any other code by the combination of concatenation and

stopping set, which usually happens if the trapping set has bit-pinning.

a large number of check violations and/or the code’s graph In one solution to this problem, one or more high-rate outer

has large check node degrees. One solution is to use the soft- codes can be concatenated with the LDPC code, where the bit

erasing method which retains the soft information (LLRs) of assignments in outer codes are arranged such that, whenever

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1668

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

100

100

Margulis−SPA

Margulis−Concatenation

10−1

Margulis−BCH/BitPinning

QC−SPA QC−BCH/BitPinning

10−2

10−2

10−3

10−4

Margulis−SPA Margulis−Concatenation Margulis−BCH/BitPinning QC−SPA QC−BCH/BitPinning

FER BER

10−4 10−5 10−6 G−LDPCIII

G−LDPCIII

10−6
10−8 G−LDPCIII

G−LDPCIII bi−mode

10−7

bi−mode

bi−mode

1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 E /N [dB]
b0

bi−mode
10−10 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 Eb/N0 [dB]

Fig. 5. FER performance of the SPA, serial concatenation and BCH/Bit- Fig. 6. BER performance of the SPA, serial concatenation and BCH/Bit-

Pinning decoders.

Pinning decoders.

a trapping set error event occurs, at least one (systematic) bit is corrected by an outer algebraic decoder. The goal is to ensure that the short, low-complexity, high-rate outer codes target the trapping sets of interest. The multiple decoders are coordinated as follows. First, a sufficient number of LDPC decoder iterations is performed to guarantee that either all errors are corrected or a stable trapping set is reached. Then the outer hard-decision decoder(s) correct some of the residual errors and feed(s) back the signs of the corrected bits to the LDPC decoder, which pins the absolute values of LLRs

4) BCH(33,28): 94,116,203
The overall code rate is 0.49 (a 0.086 dB loss). The FER and BER curves of the single-BCH-code (no pinning) and fourBCH-code (with pinning) solutions are shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, respectively. All curves have at least 20 frame error occurrences in the range of Eb/N0 ≥ 2.5 dB. We observe that both solutions lower the floor beyond the reach of our simulations, and that the code-rate loss for the four-BCH-code solution is about 0.2 dB less than that of the single-BCH-code solution, as indicated above.

corresponding to these bit to the maximum possible value.

Then the LDPC decoder continues to iterate. With probability near one, the LDPC decoder will correct both systematic and parity errors caused by a trapping set within a few additional iterations.

B. Short QC Code Solution
As discussed in Section II-B, the (640, 192) QC code has two trapping set configurations. We can concatenate that code with two t = 1 binary BCH (64, 58) codes. The bits of

one BCH code belong to 64 different (5,5) trapping sets,

A. Margulis Code Solution

and those of the other belong to 64 different (5,7) trapping

Since each of the dominant trapping set classes of the
Margulis code correspond to either 6 or 7 systematic bits, a single t-error-correcting BCH code with t = 7 is an obvious solution. In this case, no pinning is necessary. We choose the t = 7 (1320, 1243) BCH code with roots in GF(211), which is shortened from a primitive (2047, 1970) BCH code. The code rate of the overall system is reduced from 0.5 to 0.47,
corresponding to a 0.26 dB rate loss.

sets. Thus, whenever a trapping set is in error, one of its five bits is correctable by one BCH code. Once corrected, this information is fed back to the LDPC decoder which pins its LLR magnitude to the maximum possible (with the appropriate sign). The overall code rate is reduced from 0.3 to 0.2813 (0.28 dB rate loss). The simulation results presented in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show no floor down to FER ∼ 10−7. 20 LDPC codeword errors were collected in high SNR region.

We can reduce the code rate loss by considering multiple BCH codes of higher rates which exploits the fact that the

V. GENERALIZED-LDPC DECODER

trapping sets of this code are highly overlapped. We found that four BCH codes with t = 1 were sufficient when allowing feedback from the BCH decoders to the LDPC decoder. The BCH code bit assignments to the Margulis code bits are shown below. For convenience, the bit assignments are listed by VN group indices vp since all 11 bits in the VN group will be part of the BCH codeword.

In [17], an averaged decoding algorithm was proposed to reduce the number of incorrectly decoded frames in the error floor region of the Margulis code. This algorithm is a modified SPA decoding algorithm which averages messages over several iterations to “slow down” the convergence rate of certain variable values, because a sudden magnitude change in the values of certain variable messages or fast conver-

1) BCH(132,124): 24,74,88,113,81,80,87,162,34,53,137,60 gence to an unreliable estimate is a possible indicator of

2) BCH(77,70): 148,70,231,149,103,131,30

the emergence of an error trap. In this section, we propose

3) BCH(55,49): 193,239,160,208,33

novel SPA decoders which, loosely speaking, are designed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAN and RYAN: LOW-FLOOR DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES

1669

c1 c2 c3 c4

SC1

c4

A. G-LDPC Decoder I

-

1) Margulis Code Solution: At least qualitatively, it is clear

ggg ggg g

why an iterative decoder gets “trapped” by the subgraphs g g g g g g g associated with trapping sets: As seen in Fig. 1, when all of

the bits in a trapping set are incorrect, most of the associated

Fig. 7. An example of combining 3 SPC constraint processors into the GCP SC1: the redundant edges (dashed lines) on the right are deleted after grouping. Conventional iterative decoding updates messages based on the graph on the left, employing SPA constraint processors for each SPC
separately. The G-LDPC decoder updates messages based on the generalized
graph on the right, using the BCJR algorithm, for example, to calculate extrinsic information to be sent from SC1 to neighboring VNs. Note that we allow SPC constraints to coexist in the generalized graph, whose node
processors are the same as those in the original graph.

check equations are still satisfied (that is, mis-satisfied), so that a locally operating iterative decoder is incapable of resolving the discrepancies caused by these errors. However, if the unsatisfied CNs can be mutually fortified, the decoder may be able to correct the errors. The Type I G-LDPC (G-LDPC I) decoders are designed based on this idea.
Because the Margulis code trapping sets are highly over-

lapped (intersections are non-empty), we chose to require

that no two GCPs share any common SPC constraint. We

by transforming the LDPC code into a generalized LDPC (G-LDPC) code. A G-LDPC code, like an LDPC code, is a code that can be described by a sparse bipartite graph with variable nodes and constraint nodes. However, for G-LDPC codes the constraints may be more general than single paritycheck (SPC) constraints. For example, a constraint node can represent an arbitrary (n , k ) binary linear code.
To see how the G-LDPC philosophy arises, we remind the reader of the discussion in the introduction regarding locally optimum versus globally optimum decoders. Each constraint node decoder in an LDPC SPA decoder is locally optimum. It is possible in principle to group all of the SPC constraints into one combined global constraint and design a decoder for that graph. But that would be an ML decoder (for example), which has unacceptable complexity. Our strategy is to instead take one step toward that ideal and cleverly combine only a few SPC constraints at a time. Specifically, we combine check node processors corresponding to unsatisfied checks in the problematic trapping sets and call the combination a generalized-constraint processor (GCP). Observe that an advantage of doing so is that cycles and other deleterious graphical structures (from the perspective of an iterative decoder) may be removed. See Fig. 7 for an illustration of this. The notion of combining check nodes into a super node to remove cycles first appeared in [41]. The approach here more directly targets problematic trapping sets rather than cycles.
The constituent decoder for the GCP can be any softinput/soft-output decoder. We use a locally optimal decoder which employs the BCJR algorithm designed to the “BCJR trellis” [30] [31] for the linear code represented by the GCP. We allow both SPCs and GCPs to co-exist in the generalized Tanner graph, i.e., some of the SPCs are not combined to form a GCP. The G-LDPC decoder, essentially the SPA with GCP’s (denoted by SPA-GCP) passes soft information iteratively between VN processors and GCP’s in the same manner as the SPA decoder.

first grouped the four unsatisfied check nodes in the 198 non-overlapping (12,4) trapping sets into 198 GCPs. We also grouped the four unsatisfied check nodes in the remaining 22 non-overlapped (14,4) trapping sets into another 22 GCPs. In addition to these 220 GCPs (66.7% of all SPCs), each of which is a composition of four standard check nodes, the generalized Tanner graph also has 440 standard SPC nodes. At each GCP, the BCJR algorithm was applied to the BCJR trellis for the four associated check equations. The SPC constraints used standard SPA processing.
We ran Monte Carlo simulations on the generalized Tanner graph and the performance in terms of frame error rate (FER) and bit error rate (BER) are shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, respectively. We observe in the figure that the error floor is lowered by an order of magnitude compared to the standard SPA decoder. The simulator collected more than 20 frame errors for the last two simulation points of the G-LDPC I decoder, and it performed 220 iterations in order to obtain the stable trapping sets. We observed no (12,4) or (14,4) trapping sets by the G-LDPC I decoder. The new trapping sets of the G-LDPC I decoder are transformed from the original ones by deleting/adding one VN from/to the (12,4) or (14,4) trapping sets as in the (13,5) example shown in Fig. 8. Given the algebraic construction of the Margulis code, we can find 1320 subgraphs of each configuration in Fig. 8 in the original graph. However, from the G-LDPC decoder’s point of view, not all of the 1320 subgraphs are isomorphic. For example, a (13,5) subgraph in the original Tanner graph, which has the same structure as the example in Fig. 8, is a dominant trapping set for the G-LDPC I decoder if and only if its five unsatisfied CNs are not involved in any GCP and the VN with two unsatisfied CNs is attached to the rest of the subgraph through a GCP. Similarly for the other configurations listed in Fig. 8.
These observations allow us to find a complete list T of the new trapping sets that are related to the original ones by searching the generalized Tanner graph, or more

Below we present three different G-LDPC decoders (equiv- efficiently by using a two-step importance sampling method

alently, methods for grouping SPCs into GCPs) for both the which we will describe in Subsection V-A3. Fig. 8 lists the

Margulis code and the QC code. The approaches are based on dominant trapping sets and their multiplicities for the G-LDPC

the knowledge of the dominant trapping sets. The goal of the I decoder. The contribution of each trapping set class to the

SPC grouping methods is to eliminate the dominant trapping error floor performance was evaluated by Richardson’s method

sets, thus lowering the error floor. In selected cases, we predict [20]. These results demonstrate that the G-LDPC I decoder

the FER performance in the floor using the method in [20]. eliminates the (12,4) and (14,4) trapping sets as problems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1670

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

e

e

ee e

ee

e e e

e e e

G-LDPC I

Trapping Set no. FER Floor (%)

(11, 5) 22

- (13, 5)

77

17.4% 48.7%

(14, 6) 77

4.1%

(15, 5) 99

27.3%

(15, 7) 22

0.3%

(16, 6) 33

1.1%

(17, 5) 22

1.2%

G-LDPC II

Trapping Set no. FER Floor (%)

(14, 6) 13

54.3%

(14, 8)

4

1.0%

(15, 7) 11

8.4%

(16, 6) 11

26.2%

(16, 8) 18

5.4%

(17, 7) 10

1.4%

(18, 8) 11

3.2%

Fig. 8. The dominant trapping set classes of Margulis code under G-LDPC I and II decoders, their multiplicities and contributions to FER floor. A (13,5) trapping set example of G-LDPC I is shown: = a GCP consisting 5 SPCs.

Although new dominant trapping sets arise, the new trapping 100

set configurations are larger in weight and have much smaller 10−1 multiplicities, and are thus less harmful. The floor prediction curves in Fig. 9 are obtained by weighted (by the multiplicity) 10−2

sums of the error rates of each type in the table.

10−3

2) Short QC Code Solution: A similar G-LDPC I decoder

is derived for the short QC code by combining the five 10−4

FER

unsatisfied, non-overlapped SPCs into a GCP. The resulting graph contains 29 GCP and 303 standard SPCs. Through the 10−5

Margulis−SPA

two-step IS method in the next subsection, we found this 10−6 decoder has three different dominant (6,8) configurations: one

Margulis−GLDPC1 Margulis−GLDPC2 Margulis−GLDPC3

consists of a (5,5) trapping set and a additional VN who is 10−7

prediction1

attached to the (5,5) through one of its five unsatisfied CNs; the other two classes are transformed from (5,7) trapping sets 10−8

prediction2 QC−SPA QC−GLDPC1

by adding a VN through two of the seven unsatisfied CNs. The 10−9

QC−GLDPC3

(5,5) and (5,7) SPA trapping sets are eliminated and the FER

1

2

3

4

5

Eb/N0 [dB]

6

floor is reduced by around two orders of magnitude relative to

the standard SPA decoder. See Fig. 9, in which we collected Fig. 9. FER performance of G-LDPC decoders compared with that of the 100 block error events for SPA simulation and 20 block error SPA decoder.

events in the floor region for the G-LDPC I decoder.

3) Finding The Trapping Sets of G-LDPC Decoder: This section describes the two-step importance sampling method ([24][25][26]) for finding the dominant trapping sets of GLDPC decoders (“G-LDPC trapping sets”) starting with the trapping sets obtained from SPA decoder (“SPA trapping sets”). The new trapping sets can be found in two steps:
(a) Identify which of the SPA trapping sets lead to GLDPC trapping sets: As discussed in Section V-A1, the G-LDPC trapping sets are closely related to the SPA trapping sets. Without loss of generality, we can assume all-zero codewords are transmitted (all +1 words on the channel). Apply a bias of −2 to each VN of every SPA trapping set. Then observe the G-LDPC decoder failures (no noise is added, only the biases). If the decoder clears all the

random variable (RV) with mean -2 and variance corresponding to an SNR value in the floor region. We then observe the G-LDPC decoder outputs. The stable low-weight error events are the trapping sets of interest. Their multiplicities are also obtained in this way. Note that one pattern from Step (a) may lead to several stable trapping sets, thus multiple realizations of the RV need to be observed.
The advantage of applying the two-step IS instead of Step (b) alone is: When biasing with Gaussian noise, multiple GLDPC decoding instances are performed. It could be very time-consuming because every SPA trapping set has to be tested and the cardinality may be large (for example, there are 2640 SPA trapping sets to be tested for the Margulis code).

errors or an unstable error event is obtained, then we assume that the SPA trapping set leads to no B. G-LDPC Decoder II

G-LDPC trapping sets. Otherwise, record the stable In Section V-A1, we presented the G-LDPC I decoder

patterns, and accumulate their multiplicities.

which eliminates the dominant trapping sets of SPA decoder.

(b) Find all relevant trapping sets: The recorded patterns However, several new trapping sets emerged which dominated

from Step (a) are not in the exact forms of G- the new (lower) floor. On the other hand, only 66.7% of the

LDPC trapping sets on AWGN channel yet. They CNs were combined in the Margulis code G-LDPC I. Further,

are used as initial conditions in this step. Based on we can target these new trapping sets and group appropriately

these patterns, we bias each location with a Gaussian selected SPCs into more GCPs. According to Fig. 8, three

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAN and RYAN: LOW-FLOOR DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES

1671

10−1

The G-LDPC III decoder solution for the Margulis code

Margulis−SPA

10−2

Margulis−GLDPC1

contains 660 GCPs, each consisting of two SPCs. This number

Margulis−GLDPC2

came from the 1320 (12,4) trapping sets (660 pairs). Thus

10−3

Margulis−GLDPC3 QC−SPA

there are no SPC CNs in the generalized graph in this case.

10−4

QC−GLDPC1 QC−GLDPC3

Due to the overlap of trapping sets (for example, every CN is

one of the unsatisfied CNs in four different trapping sets), all

10−5

the trapping sets form a linked overlapped network. The IS

BER

10−6

method in Section V-A3 was applied to this decoder and no

trapping sets were observed. The effectiveness of this simple

10−7

G-LDPC decoder is also confirmed by simulations, which

shows no floor down to FER ∼ 10−8. We collected 50 error

10−8

events at 2.2 dB and 2.3 dB, 10 error events at 2.4 dB, and 5

10−9

error events at 2.5 dB.

10−10 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 Eb/N0 [dB]

2) Short QC Code Solution: Take any (5,5) trapping set; its five VNs belong to five VN groups with indices [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]; the five unsatisfied CNs belong to four CN groups with indices

Fig. 10. BER performance of G-LDPC decoders compared with that of the SPA decoder.

[0, 1, 2, 3]. Thus, we take any two (5,5) trapping sets and group the three unsatisfied CNs which belong to disjoint CN groups. The 64 (5,5) trapping sets can be combined to give 32 · 3 =

96 GCPs. The FER and BER performance curves with this

trapping set classes amount to over 90% of the floor of G- decoder are shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, and no trapping set LDPC I: (11,5), (13,5) and (15,5). We can thus combine the is observed down to FER ∼ 10−7. The curves were drawn

five non-overlapping unsatisfied SPCs of these trapping sets, with at least 30 block error occurrences.

arriving at a G-LDPC graph with 229 standard CNs and 258

GCPs. 82.6% of the SPCs in the original graph are combined in this decoder.

VI. COMPLEXITY DISCUSSION

The trapping sets observed for the G-LDPC II decoder As shown in this paper, the three proposed decoders effi-

are also closely related to the SPA trapping sets, and the ciently eliminate or lower LDPC error floors given knowledge

same two-step IS method can be applied to enumerate the of the trapping sets that cause the floor. Acquiring this knowl-

G-LDPC II trapping sets (results listed in Fig. 8). We can see edge is an off-line task, which can be done by using extensive

that the three dominant trapping set classes of the G-LDPC simulations, graphical search, and/or importance sampling. In

I decoder are eliminated by these 38 additional GCPs, and this section, we compare the complexities of the three decoders

the dominant trapping sets become (14,6) and (16,6) which with that of the conventional SPA decoder based on an LDPC

contribute 90% of the new floor level. A prediction curve is code Tanner graph with only single parity-check nodes.

drawn in Fig. 9, which is over two orders of magnitude lower The bi-mode decoder has the lowest complexity of the three

than the standard iterative decoder. This procedure of adding decoders due to the fact it is a post-processing decoder whose

more GCPs according to new trapping sets can continue until erasure flagging/recovering process operates only when the

no SPC CNs remain in the generalized graph or the system’s conventional SPA decoder is trapped in one of the known

floor performance requirement is achieved. Of course, the trapping sets. When the decoder enters its second decoding

improvement is at the cost of increasing complexity. This mode, bits in proximity to unsatisfied check nodes are flagged

realization led us to the G-LDPC III decoder.

according to a trivial algorithm and then iterative erasure de-

After discussing the philosophy behind the G-LDPC II coding which involves only XOR’s is performed. The erasure

decoder in the context of the Margulis code, it is clear that flags can be one of the bits in the magnitude portion of the

this same obvious approach could be applied to the QC code. channel messages since in the second decoding mode only

However, we felt no need to make this obvious (and tedious) the sign bits and the erasure locations (flags) are needed. The

step, particularly since G-LDPC III decoder in the next section XOR operators are already present from the SPA algorithm

provides the best solution.

which handles the sign computations at the check nodes in

this way. Thus, the additional hardware beyond standard SPA

C. G-LDPC Decoder III

is truly negligible and, because only a few erasure decoding iterations are necessary, the additional number of computations

1) Margulis Code Solution: It was observed through sim- is negligible as well. Note that no look-up tables are required

ulations of many LDPC codes that, in the floor region, a as in the case for the algorithm in [16].

frame error event usually contains a single trapping set. Instead The additional computational complexity required by the

of combining unsatisfied CNs within a trapping set, the G- concatenation/bit-pinning decoder is: (1) hard-decision de-

LDPC III decoder takes trapping sets in pairs and combines an coder(s) for the outer algebraic code(s) and (2) a few ad-

unsatisfied CN of one trapping set with that of the other. When ditional SPA iterations (usually less than five) to process

the decoder is trapped in one trapping set, reliable information the pinned bits fed back from the outer decoder(s). Because

from its companion trapping set will be passed along the GCP, algebraic decoders have extremely low complexity, whereas

allowing recovery from the trapping set error event.

the SPA decoder is quite complex, the percentage complexity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1672

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 6, JUNE 2009

increase can be on the order of 1%, depending on the LDPC bi-mode decoder and its variations should be considered in the

code length.

early stages of the system design because they have the lowest

As demonstrated in Section V, the G-LDPC decoders, complexity. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6

particularly G-LDPC III, offer substantially improved the error which compares the performances of the three techniques,

floor performance as well as some improvement in the moder- the G-LDPC III decoder yields the best performance. Our

ate SNR region, at the cost of higher decoding complexity. The further research involves extending the use of the generalized

complexity increase is due to the constituent decoder used to decoder and the bi-mode erasure decoding technique to partial

process the extrinsic information of the GCP’s. In our experi- response channels and designing lower-complexity GCPs to

ments, we used the BCJR algorithm to implement the optimal replace the BCJR processor with a soft-output Chase-like

GCP, though lower-complexity suboptimal algorithms, such processor. We have already successfully extended the outer-

as soft-output Chase algorithm of Pyndiah [32] or the soft- code pinning technique to partial response channels in [40].

output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) [33] can be used. The BCJR Other planned work involves evaluation of the performance

algorithm works on a trellis representing the linear block code of these techniques with fewer LDPC decoder iterations,

[30] that corresponds to the generalized constraint of interest. and research on how to determine the minimum number of

Its complexity is proportional to the number of states, S, trellis trapping set bits to pin so that the iterative decoder can correct

length, L, and the number of core operations per state, O. the residual errors.

For the three-stage structure of the BCJR algorithm (forward

recursion, backward recursion, and completion stage), O = 3 binary max* operations, where max*(x, y) log(ex + ey) (implementable as lookup table). For example, let us consider
the G-LDPC III decoder for the Margulis code. Each GCP is a combination of two degree-6 SPC nodes, i.e., S = 4 and

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Bane Vasic for suggesting an improvement to our original bit-pinning-related techniques which led to the technique in this paper.

L ≤ 12. Thus, the BCJR algorithm needs S · L · O = 12L max* operations to generate the extrinsic information from

REFERENCES

this GCP to its L neighboring VNs. This amounts to 12 max*
operations per extrinsic message. As for the SPA decoder, each SPC constraint needs dc(dc −
2) log-tanh operations [34] (often denoted by “ ”) to produce
extrinsic information to its dc neighbors. Thus, the two SPC nodes which are combined in the G-LDPC-III decoder requires 2dc(dc − 2) log-tanh operations to compute the messages to be sent to their L neighbors. That is, since dc = 6 for the Margulis code, 2dc(dc − 2)/L ≥ 4 log-tanh operations per extrinsic message are required. Further, the following
relationship holds:

L1 L2 = max*(0, L1 + L2) − max*(L1, L2)

= max(0, L1 + L2) − max(L1, L2)

+s(L1, L2),

(3)

where s(x, y) is a so-called correction term given by

s(x, y) = log(1 + e−|x+y|) − log(1 + e−|x−y|). (4)

The correction term can also be implemented using lookup table. This leads us to the conclusion that conventional SPA decoder requires ≥ 4 correction-term table-lookup operations and 2 max operations per extrinsic message, compared to 12 max* table-lookup operations for the G-LDPC-III decoder. Hence the computational complexity increase of the G-LDPCIII decoder versus the SPA decoder is no more than 200%.

VII. CONCLUSION
We have presented several decoding strategies for lowering floors in LDPC codes. All of the techniques presented succeeded in lowering the floors of the two codes we studied by orders of magnitude, and are fully generalizable to other LDPC codes. The techniques have varying levels of complexity and the chosen technique would depend on the performance/complexity requirements of the application. The

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711-2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs," in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, vol. 2, pp. 995-1001, Nov. 2001.
[4] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors," in Proc. IEEE International Conf. Commun., vol. 5, pp. 3125-3129, May 2003.
[5] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: geometry decomposition and masking," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121-134, Jan. 2007.
[6] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, “Accumulate repeat accumulate codes," in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, vol. 1, pp. 509-513, Nov. 2004.
[7] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Accumulate-repeat-accumulateaccumulate-codes," in Proc. 60th Veh. Technol. Conf., vol. 3, pp. 22922296, Sept. 2004.
[8] W.-Y. Weng, A. Ramamoorthy, and R. D. Wesel, “Lowering the error floors of irregular high-rate LDPC codes by graph condition," in Proc. 60th Veh. Technol. Conf., vol. 4, pp. 2549-2553, Sept. 2004.
[9] D. Divsalar and C. Jones, “Protograph based low error floor LDPC coded modulation," in Proc. IEEE Military Commun. Conf., vol. 1, pp. 378-385, Oct. 2005.
[10] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Structured IRA codes: performance analysis and construction," IEEE Trans. Commun., to appear.
[11] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: a case study," submitted to IEEE Trans. Commun., Feb. 2007.
[12] J. Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “Structured LDPC codes for high-density recording: large girth and low error floor," IEEE Trans. Magnetics, vol. 42, pp. 208-213, Feb. 2006.
[13] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel," IEEE International Conf. Commun., June 2006.
[14] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Graph-based message-passing schedules for decoding LDPC codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2098-2105, Dec. 2004.
[15] A. I. Vila Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes," in Proc. IEEE ICC’07, Glasgow, Scotland, June 2007.
[16] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error floor avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes," in Proc. 16th IEEE International Symp. Personal, Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., vol. 4, pp. 2386-2390, Sept. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAN and RYAN: LOW-FLOOR DECODERS FOR LDPC CODES

1673

[17] S. Lander and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes," in Proc. 2005 International Conf. Wireless Networks, Commun. Mobile Computing, vol. 1, pp. 630635, June 2005.
[18] M. Chertkov, “Reducing the error floor," 2007 Information Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sept. 2007.
[19] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation," 2006 IEEE GlobeCom Conf., Nov. 2006.
[20] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes," in Proc. 41st Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Computing, Allerton House, Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003.
[21] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of margulis and ramanujanmargulis low-density parity-check codes," Electronic Notes Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, 2003.
[22] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low-density codes," Combinatorica vol 2, no. 1, pp. 71-78, 1982.
[23] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis," in Proc. 38th Annual Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Computing, pp. 248-257, 2000.
[24] B. Xia and W. E. Ryan, “On importance sampling for linear block codes," in Proc. 2003 IEEE International Conf. Commun., vol. 4, pp. 2904-2908, May 2003.
[25] E. Cavus, C. Haymes, and B. Baneshrad, “A highly efficient importance sampling method for LDPC codes using trapping sets," submitted to IEEE Trans. Commun..
[26] C. A. Cole, S. G. Wilson, E. K. Hall, and T. R. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes," submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, June 2006.
[27] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikoli’c, “Evaluation of the low frame error rate performance of LDPC codes using importance sampling," 2007 IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop, Sept. 2-6, 2007.
[28] R. Koetter and P. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes," Turbo Conference, Brest 2003.
[29] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, pp. 39¨C55, Jan. 2007.
[30] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 20, pp. 284-287, Mar. 1974.
[31] R. McEliece, “On the BCJR trellis for linear block codes," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 1072-1092, July 1996.
[32] R. Pyndiah, “Near optimum decoding of product codes: block turbo codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 1003-1010, Aug. 1998.
[33] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications," in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, vol. 3, pp. 16801686, Nov. 1989.
[34] C. Jones, S. Dolinar, K. Andrews, D. Divsalar, Y. Zhang, and W. Ryan, “Functions and architectures for LDPC decoding," IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop’07, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sept. 2007.
[35] R. Michael Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes," in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Computing, Sept. 1999.
[36] J. Xu, L. Chen, L. Zeng, L. Lan, and S. Lin, “Construction of lowdensity parity-check codes by superposition," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 243-251, Feb. 2005.

[37] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes," to appear, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory. [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/
[38] J. Thorpe, “Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs," JPL INP, Tech. Rep., pp. 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[39] European TeleCommun. Standards Institute. “Digital video broadcasting (DVB) second generation farming structure, channel coding and modulation systems for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broadband satellite applications," DRAFT EN 302 307 DVBS274r15, 2003.
[40] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Pinning techniques for low-floor detection/decoding of LDPC-coded partial response channels," in Proc. 2008 5th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, pp. 49-54,Sept. 2008.
[41] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 498-519, Feb. 2001.
Yang Han received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China in 2002, and the M.S. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ in 2004. Since then, she has been working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Signal Processing and Coding Laboratory at the University of Arizona. Her research interests include digital communications and signal processing, with emphases on error-control coding on graphs and iterative algorithms, and its application to data storage and transmission. In 2008, she joined LSI Corporation, Milpitas, CA, where she is working on read channel architecture designs.
Professor William E. Ryan received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Virginia (Charlottesville, Virginia) in 1988 after receiving the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Case Western Reserve University (Cleveland, Ohio) and the University of Virginia, respectively, in 1981 and 1984. After receiving the Ph.D. degree, Dr. Ryan held positions in industry for five years, first at The Analytic Sciences Corporation, then at Ampex Corporation, and finally at Applied Signal Technology. From 1993 to 1998, he was an assistant professor and then associate professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM. From 1998 to present, he has been on the faculty in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, first as an associate professor and then as full professor. Prof. Ryan has over 100 publications in the leading conferences and journals in the area of communication theory and channel coding. He is co-author of the graduate textbook, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern, (Shu Lin, coauthor), to be published by Cambridge University Press in 2009. His research interests are in coding and signal processing with applications to magnetic data storage and wireless data communications. He is a Senior Member of the IEEE and he was an associate editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 1998 through 2005. He was General Chair of the 2003 Communication Theory Workshop and the 2007 Information Theory Workshop, and he as been on the technical program committees of several international conferences.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:46:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

