This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

Improving the Performance of LP Decoders for Cyclic Codes
M.R. Heidarpour1, M. Modarres-Hashemi1, M. Khosravifard1 and T.A. Gulliver2
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology, 84156-83111 Isfahan, Iran
2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Victoria, PO Box 3055, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, V8W 3P6 Canada

Abstract— Recently, a linear programming (LP) decoder has been introduced for binary linear codes. Although the performance of an LP decoder has a close relationship with the form of the parity check matrix (or equivalently with the Tanner graph) of the code, there is no clear approach to choosing a suitable form for LP decoding. In this paper, we focus on the class of cyclic codes, and show that the cyclic structure of the code can be used to expand the parity check matrix and obtain a low redundancy form which is suitable for LP decoding. Performance results are given which demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
ML certification, a solid theoretic foundation and the capability to be used for all binary linear codes are the main properties that have made linear programming (LP) decoding of great interest since its introduction by Feldman et al. [1],[2]. The complexity of Feldman’s first formulation for LP decoding increases exponentially with the degree of the check nodes in the Tanner graph of the code, so it has only been used for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes thus far. Recently, Yang et al. suggested a new LP decoder with polynomial complexity [3]. This allows the practical use of LP decoders for non-LDPC codes. Attempts have been made to eliminate the use of a general LP solver by using iterative algorithms [4],[5]. Furthermore, an adaptive approach to reducing the complexity of LP decoding has been introduced in [6]. Replacing several receiver components (e.g. demodulator, channel equalizer and decoder), by one linear programming unit has also been proposed [7]. These developments make LP decoding an important candidate for future implementation.
LP decoding has reasonable performance when used for an LDPC code (its word error rate curve lies between those of the min-sum and sum-product algorithms [1]). However, when it is used for general codes, experimental results show that its performance is not satisfactory. There are two major approaches to overcoming this problem:
• Refining the results when an error is reported
Because of the existence of fractional vertices in Feldman’s polytope, the output of an LP decoder may be a non-integer. In this situation the decoder reports an error. It is intuitive

that instead of stopping after a failure, the fractional results of the LP decoder can be refined. In [4], Multistage LP decoding was suggested to refine fractional results based on the ML certification property and adaptive branch-and-bound techniques. This decoder has the potential to surpass the performance of the sum-product algorithm at the expense of higher computational complexity.
• Using a redundant parity check matrix The performance of an LP decoder (similar to that with a message passing algorithm), is greatly dependent on the Tanner graph representation (or equivalently the parity check matrix H), of the code. As mentioned in [1],[2],[8] adding codewords of the dual code to H (expanding H), can improve LP decoder performance. Improving LP decoder performance using a redundant parity
check matrix was first introduced in [1],[2]. On the other hand, [8] is devoted to finding a sufficient number of parity check matrix rows that result in equality between “minimum pseudo distance in a binary symmetric channel (BSC)” and minimum Hamming distance. Furthermore, in [8] it is claimed that parity check matrix redundancy is well-defined, i.e., if the redundant parity check matrix includes all non-zero codewords of the dual code, then minimum pseudo distance in a BSC is equal to the minimum Hamming distance. This means that if the code is capable of correcting t errors in a BSC, then the LP decoder with a fully redundant parity check matrix is assured of correcting t errors or less (the LP decoder attains the errorcorrecting capability of the code).
As mentioned in [8],[9], inserting a few non-zero codewords of the dual code to H can have the same effect on LP decoder performance. However, there has until now been no answer to how to systematically obtain a low redundancy parity check matrix which will allow the LP decoder to attain the errorcorrecting capability of the code. In this paper, we propose an algorithm that effectively expands the parity matrix for an important class of codes, i.e., the cyclic codes.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, Feldman’s LP decoding and cyclic codes are reviewed. In Section III, the new algorithm to expand the parity matrix of cyclic codes is introduced. In Section IV, the performance of this algorithm is evaluated. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
978-1-4244-3435-0/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

II. BACKGROUND A. LP decoder
Consider a binary linear code of length n. If a codeword is transmitted through a binary-input memoryless
channel, the ML codeword given the received vector is the solution to the following optimization problem
minimize subject to
where is the vector of log-likelihood ratios defined as

communication systems for error control. Many classes of cyclic codes have been constructed over the years, including BCH codes, Reed-Solomon codes, and Fire codes.

Definition 1: A linear code is called a cyclic code if every cyclic shift of a codeword in is also a codeword in .

Obtaining the following typical form of the parity check matrix for cyclic codes is straightforward

0 00
H=

.....

0 . . . ....0

..... 0 . . . . 0

.....

0 . .0

log

Pr Pr

| |

0 1

0 . . . . .. 0

. . . .. .

As an approximation to ML decoding, Feldman et al.

proposed a relaxed version of this problem by first considering

the convex hull of the local codewords defined by each row of

the parity-check matrix, and taking their intersection to obtain

what is called the fundamental polytope by Vontobel and

Koetter [10]. This polytope has a number of integral and non-

integral vertices, but the integral vertices correspond exactly to

the codewords of . Therefore, whenever the LP gives an

integral solution, it is guaranteed to be the ML codeword. This

is called the ML certification property of the LP decoder.

In Feldman’s relaxation of the decoding problem, the following is done for each row 1,2, … , of the parity-

check matrix. Suppose that the th check node has the

neighborhood set

1,2, … , , i.e., contains the

indices of the variable nodes that are directly connected to this

check node. Then, add the following constraints to the

problem [2]

| | 1,

||

\
(1)

In addition, for any element of the optimization variable

vector, , the constraint 0

1 is added.

The number of constraints and variables in the above formulation of Feldman’s polytope increases exponentially with the degree of the check nodes, and consequently LP decoding has thus far only been used for LDPC codes. Recently, another formulation for Feldman’s polytope has been introduced [3] which uses a divide and conquer approach to convert the complexity from exponential to linear. The basic idea is to decompose a high-degree check node into several low-degree nodes.

B. Cyclic codes

Cyclic codes are an important subclass of linear block codes. They are attractive for two reasons: first, encoding and syndrome computation can be implemented easily by shift registers; and second, they have considerable inherent algebraic structure. Cyclic codes are widely used in

(2)

where

1. In fact, if the generator polynomial of the

cyclic code is

, then

must equal

1,

where

. Excellent introductions

to cyclic codes can be found in [11],[12].

III. LOW REDUNDANT PARITY CHECK MATRIX FOR CYCLIC
CODES
Although the complexity reduction in [3] opens up a new avenue for decoding of general (e.g. non-LDPC) linear block codes, the performance of the LP decoder for non-LDPC codes is not satisfactory in general and so should be improved. Using a redundant parity check matrix is one approach to achieving this goal. Since increasing the redundancy makes the LP decoder complex, for practical applications, only a small number of non-zero codewords of the dual code should be added to the parity check matrix such that the LP decoder provides adequate error correction. In this section, we propose an algorithm for adding redundancy to the parity check matrix when the code is cyclic. Our algorithm uses the cyclic structure of the code and a conjecture on the LP decoder to obtain an effective low redundancy form of the parity check matrix.
A. Using the cyclic structure
Using the cyclic structure, one can improve the performance of the LP decoder as follows. We know that integer vertices of Feldman’s polytope corresponding to an arbitrary parity check matrix are cyclic because they are codewords of a cyclic code (i.e., every cyclic shift of an integer vertex is also a vertex of the polytope). However, this is not the case for non-integer vertices. Thus once the result of LP decoding for a received vector becomes non-integer, one can shift and run the LP decoder again. This procedure can be repeated in the hope that for one of the iterations the LP decoder produces an integer output. If such an event happens, the ML codeword can be obtained by simply shifting the result as many times as has been shifted, but in the opposite direction. In this method the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

LP decoding procedure may be executed as many times as the length of . By considering the cyclic structure of the code, the proof of the above iterative approach is straightforward and thus is omitted.
Another approach for improving LP decoder performance is to add redundancy to the parity check matrix such that in the corresponding polytope all non-integer vertices are cyclic as well as the integer ones. Definition 2: A polytope is called a cyclic polytope if every cyclic shift of a vertex in is also a vertex in .

Definition 3: A parity matrix H is called a cyclic parity matrix if every cyclic shift of a row in H is also a row in H.

Theorem 1: A polytope will be cyclic if its corresponding

parity check matrix is cyclic.

Proof: there is a one to one relationship between a parity

check matrix H and the set of inequalities in the form

that describes Feldman’s polytope [2]. Matrix and vector

are obtained according to (1). We denote this one to one

relationship by

, . It is clear that if

, then

, , where and are obtained by replacing the

rows of and by their th cyclic shifts, respectively.

We want the polytope of to be cyclic. Therefore if

polytope then polytope. (where is a cyclic shift of ).

Therefore we can write polytope polytope

, ,

Thus the polytope is cyclic if and have the same

polytope. This condition is satisfied if contains all cyclic

shifts of its rows.

In particular, if H is in the form (2), it can be made cyclic just by adding k cyclic right shifts of the last row.
An important property of the LP decoder with cyclic H is given in the following theorem.

Theorem 2: If the parity check matrix is cyclic, then in a

binary symmetric channel (BSC), a cyclic shift of the error

vector does not affect the success or failure of the LP decoder.

Proof: The probability that the LP decoder fails is independent

of the codeword which is transmitted [2]. Assume that the

transmitted codeword is the all zeros vector. Suppose that the

error vector is (thus the received vector will be

). If

the cost of vertex is minimum, because of the cyclic

property of the polytope, then the cost of vertex is also

minimum for error vector . Therefore when the error vectors

have the same pattern but different positions, i.e., they are

cyclic shifts of each other, the corresponding LP decoder

outputs are also cyclic versions of each other. Hence if the

output of the LP decoder for one of these vectors is integer (or

non-integer) then the LP decoder outputs for the others are

also integer (or non-integer).

Theorem 2 shows that if a polytope is cyclic then the success of LP decoder depends only on the pattern of an error not on its location. Therefore our algorithm employs a redundant parity check matrix that is cyclic.

To illustrate the role of a cyclic parity check matrix H on improving LP decoder performance, consider the n=15, k=7, t=2 BCH code, and assume that two bits of the transmitted codeword have been flipped by the channel. In this case, the word error probability of the LP decoder with parity check matrix in the form of (2) is 0.17. Adding seven cyclic shifts of the last row of H makes it cyclic, and the LP decoder is capable of correcting all possible two bit errors. Thus by increasing the number of rows to 15, we don’t require a fully redundant parity check matrix with 2 1 rows (the number of non-zero codewords of the dual code) to correct up to the minimum distance using an LP decoder. On the other hand, if seven randomly selected codewords of the dual code are added to H in the form (2), the average word error probability was found to be 0.1. This shows that randomly adding rows provides little improvement in performance.
B. A conjecture on the LP decoder
Inserting additional parity checks cannot degrade the performance of LP decoding, while with message-passing algorithms, it may have a negative effect if short cycles are created in the Tanner graph. On the other hand, there exist similarities between the performance of LP and messagepassing algorithms [10]. Hence we conjecture that parity checks which result in short cycles in the Tanner graph are unlikely to improve LP decoder performance.
Therefore in our algorithm, low weight codewords of the dual code are selected first as they are likely to result in a Tanner graph with a small number of short cycles.
Based on these facts, we propose the following algorithm.
Step 1) Find a low weight codeword among the codewords of the dual code that are not in H.
Step 2) Add this codeword and all its cyclic shifts to H.
Step 3) Examine the performance of the LP decoder, if it achieves the required performance stop, otherwise go to step 1.
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm, consider the n=31, k=16, t=3 BCH code and assume that three bits of the transmitted codeword are flipped by the channel. In this case the word error probability of the LP decoder with parity check matrix in the form (2) is 1. However, after two iterations of the above algorithm, a parity check matrix with 47 redundant rows is obtained with which the corresponding LP decoder can correct all three bit errors. Thus only 62 rows, instead of 2 1 rows (the number of non-zero codewords of the dual code) in the fully redundant parity check matrix, are needed to decode up to the error correcting capability of the code using an LP decoder. On the other hand, we added 47 random codewords of the dual code to H numerous times, and in all cases there was no improvement in LP decoder performance compared to the case with no redundant rows in H. This shows that adding a random selection of rows to H may not improve LP decoder performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS
In this section, performance results using the GNU Linear Programming Kit (GLPK) [13] for LP decoding are presented. In order to illustrate the effect of adding redundant rows to the parity check matrix, the performance is evaluated for the following three cases: 1) H in the form of (2) (LP decoder) 2) The redundant rows are randomly chosen from the set of dual codewords (RRHLP decoder) 3) The redundant rows are selected using the proposed algorithm (Low Redundant H, LP decoder: LRHLP decoder)

Finally in Fig. 3, the word error rates with LP decoding using parity check matrices obtained with different numbers of iterations are presented. This shows that as the number of iterations increases, the LP decoder has better performance, but at the cost of increased computational complexity.
100
10-1

WER WER

The channel is assumed to be Additive White Gaussian Noise

-2

(AWGN) and the word error rates are given in Figs. 1 and 2

10

for the n=23, k=12, t=3 cyclic Golay code and the n=31, k=16,

t=3 BCH code, respectively. These results illustrate the

effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

10-3

third iteration second iteration first iteration

100

10-1

-2
10

LP

10-3

RRHLP

LRHLP

10-4

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

SNR (dB)

Fig.1: Word error rate using LP, RRHLP, and LRHLP for the cyclic Golay code. The parity check matrix for LRHLP was obtained using just one iteration of the algorithm.

100

10-4

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

SNR (dB)

Fig.3: Word error rates using an LP decoder for the n=31, k=16, t=3 BCH code with parity check matrices obtained for different numbers of iterations.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed an algorithm for improving LP decoding for an important class of linear block codes, i.e., cyclic codes, by using a redundant parity check matrix. The key idea is to use the code structure and properties of the LP decoder to expand the parity check matrix to obtain the desired performance. An algorithm was presented to obtain this matrix. Results were presented which show that LP decoder performance with a parity check matrix obtained using this algorithm is better than that with parity check matrices having redundant rows chosen randomly. Our approach is the first to use the structure of the code to improve LP decoder performance in an effective way.

10-1 WER10-2
10-3

LP RRHLP LRHLP

10-4 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 SNR(dB)
Fig. 2: Word error rate using LP, RRHLP, and LRHLP for the n=31, k=16, t=3 BCH code. The parity check matrix for LRHLP was obtained using 3 iterations of the algorithm.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, Decoding Error-correcting Codes Via Linear Programming, Ph.D. Dissertation, Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[2] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954-972, Mar. 2005.
[3] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming
approach to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1061-1072, Mar. 2008. [4] K. Yang, J. Feldman, and X. Wang, “Non-linear programming approaches to decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2006. [5] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear programming decoding,” Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Related Topics, pp. 1603–1613, Apr. 2006. [6] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive linear programming decoding,” Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, pp. 1374–1378, July 2006. [7] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Equalization on graphs: Linear programming and message passing,” Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, pp. 2551-2555, June 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings [8] C.A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “On the pseudocodeword weight and
parity-check matrix redundancy of linear codes,” Proc. IEEE Inform. Theory Worskshop, pp. 1-6, Sept. 2007. [9] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, J. B. Huber, “When does one redundant parity-check equation matter?” Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., pp. 1-6, Nov.-Dec. 2006. [10] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, available at http://www.arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078. [11] S. B. Wicker, Error Control Systems for Digital Communication and Storage, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995. [12] E. R. Berlekamp, Algebraic Coding Theory, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 1968, (Rev. ed., Aegean Park Press, Laguna Hills, CA, 1984). [13] GLPK (GNU Linear Programming Kit), available at http://www.gnu.org/software/glpk.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

