IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

239

Finite-Precision Analysis of Demappers and Decoders for LDPC-Coded M-QAM Systems
Marco Baldi, Franco Chiaraluce, Member, IEEE, and Giovanni Cancellieri

Abstract—LDPC codes are state-of-art error correcting codes, included in several standards for broadcast transmissions. Iterative soft-decision decoding algorithms for LDPC codes reach excellent error correction capability; their performance, however, is strongly affected by finite-precision issues in the representation of inner variables. Great attention has been paid, in recent literature, to the topic of quantization for LDPC decoders, but mostly focusing on binary modulations and analysing finite precision effects in a disaggregrated manner, i.e., considering separately each block of the receiver. Modern telecommunication standards, instead, often adopt high order modulation schemes, e.g. -QAM, with the aim to achieve large spectral efficiency. This puts additional quantization problems, that have been poorly debated in previous literature. This paper discusses the choice of suitable quantization characteristics for both the decoder messages and the received samples in LDPC-coded systems using -QAM schemes. The analysis involves also the demapper block, that provides initial likelihood values for the decoder, by relating its quantization strategy with that of the decoder. A new demapper version, based on approximate expressions, is also presented, that introduces a slight deviation from the ideal case but yields a low complexity hardware implementation.
Index Terms—Demodulation, digital communication, error correction codes, fixed point arithmetic, quantization.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE current scenario of error correcting codes is dominated by schemes using Soft-Input Soft-Output (SISO) decoding. Among them, an important role is played by LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, that permit to approach the theoretical Shannon limit [1], [2], while ensuring reduced complexity.
For such reason, these codes have been included in some recent telecommunication standards [3]–[5]. The second generation of Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) standards, in particular, considers LDPC codes in place of more conventional concatenated schemes formed by Reed-Solomon and convolutional codes, that were adopted in first generation DVB standards. Similarly, the second version of the satellite DVB (DVB-S2) standard includes LDPC codes in conjunction with BCH codes [3]. LDPC codes will be probably adopted also in the upcoming second generation of the terrestrial DVB (DVB-T2) standard, that will replace soon its present version [6]. Possible technologies to be included in such new standard are currently under evaluation [7].
Manuscript received May 15, 2008; revised February 09, 2009. First published April 28, 2009; current version published May 22, 2009.
The authors are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Electronics and Telecommunications, Polytechnic University of Marche, 60131 Ancona, Italy (e-mail: m.baldi@univpm.it; f.chiaraluce@univpm.it, g.cancellieri@univpm.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2009.2016498

M Fig. 1. Block diagram of the LDPC-coded -QAM system.
Based on the above considerations, a relevant issue concerns comparison between the error rate performance that is achievable by using LDPC codes and that ensured by other schemes employing SISO decoding. An example of such comparison will be given in Section II for the important case of the Digital Video Broadcasting - Return Channel Satellite (DVB-RCS) standard [8].
Moreover, modern broadcast communications are characterized by increasing throughput requirements; this is true, for example, for the DVB-T2 standard, that must support High Definition Television (HDTV) services. So, there is the need of large spectral efficiencies, that is usually satisfied by employing high order modulation schemes [9], [10]. The DVB-T standard adopts QPSK, 16-QAM and 64-QAM schemes in conjunction with OFDM, and probably the same will be for DVB-T2.
Another issue in broadcast transmissions concerns complexity of the decoder implementation, that can be somehow reduced by introducing suitable approximations [11]. In particular, in SISO decoders, complexity is strongly affected by the finite-precision representation of the inner variables.
The aim of this paper is to study finite-precision effects on an LDPC coded -QAM system of the type depicted in Fig. 1; it employs binary LDPC codes in conjunction with high order modulation schemes [12]. The meaning of the various blocks and quantities involved in Fig. 1 will be explained in detail in Sections IV and V.
This topic has been already discussed in previous literature, but most of previous works were limited to consider binary modulation. Higher order modulation schemes, like -QAM, whose adoption is justified by the need to increase the spectral efficiency, put a number of additional problems. In particular,

0018-9316/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

they require to model the effect of the demapper block (i.e., dards and applications, with a special focus on Digital Video

the symbol-to-metric calculator) and to refine the optimization Broadcasting.

procedure for saving the number of quantization bits without The DVB-S2 standard, in particular, makes use of

incurring significant performance losses. This can suggest, in semi-random LDPC codes, characterized by a parity-check

particular, the adoption of suitable non-uniform quantization matrix obtained through the concatenation of a non-structured

schemes, that are able to face efficiently the clipping effect. If block and a staircase lower triangular block (that facilitates sys-

not controlled, this effect can cause the appearance of remark- tematic encoding). LDPC codes with structured parity-check

able and unexpected error floors.

matrices can reduce both the encoding and decoding com-

After having derived, through examples, a quantitative eval- plexity; among them, an important class is represented by

uation of the quantization and clipping effects for the proposed Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes, that can be encoded

scenario, we discuss a non-uniform quantization law that repre- through very simple circuits based on barrel shift registers.

sents a good trade-off for both waterfall and error floor perfor- The DVB-RCS standard, that deals with the implementation

mance. Differently from previous proposals, this non-uniform of interactive channels for satellite applications, includes in-

quantization scheme is specifically targeted to overcome clip- stead a turbo code for error correction. Its turbo encoder uses a

ping issues arising in -QAM systems, while maintaining rea- double binary circular recursive systematic convolutional code,

sonably small the number of quantization bits. This solution is an optimized two-level interleaver and a puncturing map to deal

obtained through a simple compander-like approach, and can be with variable rates [15]. The information block lengths are also

implemented by exploiting uniform quantization hardware.

variable, ranging from 12 bytes to 216 bytes.

We discuss also the relationship that should exist between the The performance of double binary turbo codes has been com-

number of bits to use in the quantization of the received signals pared with that of structured LDPC codes in [16]. The authors

and the extrinsic messages, in such a way as to ensure compa- conclude that, for high code length and rate, LDPC codes often

rable quantization errors. This analysis is based on theoretical ar- outperform turbo codes (they observed that the two schemes

guments on the demapper functions. Finally, we propose a low achieve comparable performance for rate 3/4 and block length

complexity receiver scheme that, requiring Look-Up Tables with 1152, while, for higher rate and block length, LDPC codes can

reduced size, can be convenient in a hardware implementation. be better than turbo codes).

The organization of the paper is as follows. In Section II So, it seems interesting to investigate the applicability of

we present a comparison between the performance of LDPC structured LDPC codes in those applications where rather

codes and standard turbo codes for the DVB-RCS application. long and high-rate codes are needed. As a first example, we

In Section III we provide a short overview of previous works have considered the DVB-RCS standard turbo code mentioned

on the quantization problem, that is the main issue of the paper. above, with MPEG2 information block size (that is 188 bytes

In Section IV we describe the system model. In Section V we [17]) and code rate 4/5.

discuss the choice of the quantization law for the decoder mes- For comparison, we have simulated two LDPC codes de-

sages. In Section VI we find the relationship that should exist signed with different approaches. Both of them have dimension

between the input signals quantization and the decoder mes-

and length

, that are coincident with those of

sages quantization in order to have comparable accuracies. In the turbo code. The first LDPC code has been designed by means

Section VII we develop an approximate analysis of the receiver of the Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm [18], that aims

that permits to express directly the number of quantization bits at maximizing the girth length within the Tanner graph. The as-

and, most of all, can be used to conceive a more efficient imple- sociated parity-check matrix is non-structured; it has column

mentation. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper.

weight 3 and row weight ranging between 14 and 16.

II. EXAMPLES OF TURBO-LIKE CODES IN DVB

The second LDPC code is structured and consists of a QC-LDPC code designed through the “Random Difference

The introduction of turbo codes has substantially changed the scenario of forward error correction, and started a revision process of traditional coding schemes in practical applications.
Turbo codes are able to achieve very good correction performance, and to approach the Shannon capacity limit. This is due to the adoption of soft-decision decoding algorithms implementing the so-called “turbo principle”, which consists in an iterated exchange and update of inner messages estimating the reliability of each received bit.

Families” (RDF) approach [19]. It is characterized by a

parity-check matrix formed by a row of 5 binary circulant

blocks, i.e.,

. Each block has size 376

376, and row/column weight 5, 4, 5, 4 and 5, respectively. This

implies that matrix has average column weight

and

row weight

.

By assuming, without loss of generality, that the block is

non-singular, a very simple systematic form for the generator

matrix of the considered QC-LDPC code is as follows:

A very similar decoding approach characterizes LDPC codes,

first introduced by Gallager [13] and then, recently, rediscovered

by the scientific community. It can be shown that turbo decoding

(1)

is an instance of Pearl’s “Belief Propagation” algorithm, already

implemented in LDPC decoders [14]; so, both turbo and LDPC

codes can be included in a wider class of “turbo-like” codes.

Due to their excellent performance, turbo-like codes are being where superscripts and denote inversion and transposition,

adopted in an increasing number of telecommunication stan- respectively. Matrix is formed by a 1504 1504 identity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BALDI et al.: FINITE-PRECISION ANALYSIS OF DEMAPPERS AND DECODERS FOR LDPC-CODED M-QAM SYSTEMS

241

matrix followed by a column of 4 binary circulant blocks (since

obtained as the product of circulant blocks). So, the encoder im-

plementation is very simple, and basically consists in translating

the last column of blocks into circuits based on barrel shift reg-

isters.

With the purpose of extending the comparison to higher rate

codes, we have also considered another QC-LDPC code, still

designed through the RDF approach, with the same dimension

of the previous one, but rate

(i.e., length

). Its parity-check matrix is a row of nine circulant

blocks with size 188 188, each having row/column weight

equal to 4 or 5. The row weight of the whole matrix is

,

while its average column weight is

.

Looking at the DVB-RCS turbo code, it should be noted that

the code rate 8/9 is higher than those considered in the standard.

However, the optimized two-level interleaver can be used also

for this rate, while the puncturing rule can be easily extended,

this way giving us the opportunity to make a comparison for a

higher rate. Strictly speaking, however, it is quite evident that

this code cannot be considered a standard code; for this reason,

we call it “DVB-RCS-like” turbo code with rate 8/9.

Fig. 2 reports the simulated performance of the considered

codes over the AWGN channel, by using BPSK modulation and

in absence of quantization. In simulating turbo codes, we have

used 8 iterations for rate 3/4, and 15 iterations for rate 8/9; these

choices are adequate for achieving satisfactory convergence of

the decoding algorithm. From the figure, we observe that the

performance of turbo codes and LDPC codes is similar at both

rates. The turbo codes exhibit a slightly earlier waterfall, that

yields an initial coding gain against LDPC codes, for small

signal-to-noise ratio and high error rates. For smaller error rates,

however, the curves of the LDPC codes show a more favorable

slope, and intersect those of the turbo codes. This means that, co-

herent with the conclusions in [16], the LDPC codes can provide

a valid alternative to the turbo codes for high signal-to-noise ratios. If we focus on the FER curve for codes with rate 8/9, in particular, an error floor effect appears in the turbo code perfor-

Fig. 2. Comparison of turbo and LDPC codes for DVB-RCS: (a) bit error rate

E =N (BER) and (b) frame error rate (FER) versus the signal-to-noise ratio per bit

(

).

mance, while the LDPC code has no evident floor, at least in the

explored region of FER values.

So, well-designed high-rate LDPC codes are less exposed than turbo codes to floors for error rates of practical interest. The presence of error floor in the performance of LDPC codes is even more rare when adopting high order modulations, that are widely used in modern telecommunication standards. In such case, however, “artificial” floors may arise when implementing quantized versions of the LDPC decoder, due to approximation and clipping of intrinsic messages. This motivates our work and, in the following sections, we will study quantization effects for the considered high-rate QC-LDPC code, in conjunction with high order modulation schemes.

algorithm is applied. In [2] it is clearly stated that adaptive quantization schemes (unfeasible in many practical applications) can exploit better the channel capacity. Besides quantization of decoder messages, in [21] quantization of the received samples is considered, concluding that a 4-bit representation is a good trade-off between performance and complexity. This conclusion, however, is established only for binary (BPSK) modulation, neglecting the impact of the demapper block. On the other hand, in such paper the authors study the decoder structure and propose non-uniform quantization to implement hyperbolic functions.

A similar analysis is developed in [22], where low com-

III. OVERVIEW OF PREVIOUS WORK ON QUANTIZATION

plexity versions of the logarithmic Sum Product Algorithm (LLR-SPA) are presented. The authors show that core hyper-

The existence of finite-precision issues in LDPC decoders bolic functions of the LLR-SPA decoder can be effectively

is well consolidated: in [20] the “Parity Likelihood Ratio” implemented through a uniform quantization or a piece-wise

approach, rather than the more conventional “Log-Likelihood linear approximation, in the latter case with negligible perfor-

Ratio” (LLR) approach, is proposed to overcome some quanti- mance loss. The relevant issue of an optimal trade-off between

zation problems that appear when the Sum-Product decoding resolution and dynamic range for decoding non-binary LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

codes when used with BPSK modulation is instead addressed

in [23].

Many authors suggest the adoption of 6-bit quantization for

the decoder messages as the best trade-off between performance

and complexity in coded binary modulation [21], [24]–[26]. The

same choice can be adopted for low-complexity versions of the

Sum-Product Algorithm, like the Min-Sum variant [27]. But,

in this case, it is also proved that less quantization bits in the

implementation of a Min-Sum LDPC decoder can yield a slight

performance degradation [28].

When considering higher order modulation schemes, more

bits are necessary to represent both the received samples and

the decoder messages without incurring significant performance

loss. Only a few papers are devoted to study such more involved

situation. An example is in [29], where the authors consider

only uniform quantization schemes. Moreover, quantization is

applied to the decoder messages (with the peculiarities of -ary

systems), while that of the received samples is neglected.

Even the several proposals of non-uniform quantization schemes are generally addressed to binary systems [30]; on the Fig. 3. Gray labeling for 16-QAM.

other hand a valuable alternative to non-uniform quantization

consists in the Soft-Bit decoding approach presented in [31]. The references above evidence the need for deepening the
study in the case of -ary modulation schemes. An improved analysis should take into account the joint effects of the decoder and the demapper blocks. Actually, this is one of the targets of the present paper, and our proposed solutions will be discussed in the next sections.

are used as input for the subsequent iteration (if needed), while the latter represent the decoder output, and serve to obtain an estimated codeword that is subject to the hard decision and the parity-check test. The efficiency of this scheme, which is very simple to implement, has been tested even in comparison with more involved solutions, like those based on multilevel coding formats, showing everywhere excellent error rate performance

IV. SYSTEM MODEL
The analysis we have developed is quite general and can be applied, with some distinctions, to any value of . However, for better evidence, in the following we will mainly refer to the specific case of a 16-QAM constellation. For any equal to an even power of 2, a Gray labeling can be adopted to match every

[12]; therefore, it is often preferred in practical applications. Simulations have been carried out over the AWGN channel.
As the QAM constellation is not geometrically uniform, the simulated information patterns cannot be fixed (the all zero sequence would be the canonical choice) but are generated by a random, uncorrelated, source.

sequence of encoded bits to each symbol. An example of Gray

V. QUANTIZATION OF DECODER MESSAGES

labeling for

is shown in Fig. 3; we will refer to it in the

subsequent analysis.

A. Outline of the Decoding Algorithm

Attention will be focused on the high-rate QC-LDPC code Let and be the magnitude of the in-phase and quadrature

described in Section II. It has length

and dimension components, respectively, for each received pass-band signal.

, coincident with the size of an MPEG2 Transport The latter, denoted by

, is the sum of a symbol

Stream (TS) packet [17]. The code rate is

; so, by

of the constellation and a sample of a white

assuming

, the spectral efficiency is about 3.6 bit/s/Hz, Gaussian noise

, where and are independent

that is a large enough value for most broadcast applications. Gaussian random variables with zero mean and variance .

Let us look at Fig. 1. The LDPC encoder maps each -bit Moreover, let us denote by the -th code bit

word produced by the source into an -bit LDPC codeword. associated with the symbol, by the subset of signals whose

Each codeword is then passed to the mapper and modu- label has the value

, and by the subset of signals

lator block, that transforms groups of

code bits whose label has the value

.

into a symbol of the bi-dimensional -QAM constellation. The LLR of the coded bit , given the received signal , can

The modulated signal is then transmitted over an Additive be expressed as:

White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. At the receiver

side, the demapper block is a maximum a posteriori (MAP)

(2)

symbol-to-bit metric calculator, that is able to produce an

initial likelihood value for each received bit (such values are

denoted as intrinsic or channel messages). These messages The values (2), calculated for all bits of a codeword, are the

serve as input for the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA), that starts intrinsic messages given as input to the belief propagation algo-

iterating and, at each iteration, produces updated versions of rithm. They serve to initialize extrinsic messages, that are then

the extrinsic and the a posteriori messages [32]. The former updated through the iterated exchange of messages between

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BALDI et al.: FINITE-PRECISION ANALYSIS OF DEMAPPERS AND DECODERS FOR LDPC-CODED M-QAM SYSTEMS

243

variable and check nodes in the Tanner graph representing the code. At the end of each iteration, a posteriori messages are calculated and, based on their sign, an estimate of the transmitted codeword is derived. The procedure stops when all the paritycheck equations are satisfied or when the maximum number of iterations, fixed a priori, is reached.
The detailed description of the SPA algorithm for LDPC decoding can be found in several books and papers (see [33] and [34], for example) and is here omitted for the sake of brevity.

B. Uniform Midtread Quantization of the Decoder Messages

As stated in the Introduction, in a practical implementation,

all the decoder messages are quantized, resulting in a perfor-

mance degradation compared to the ideal behavior, that is ob-

tained by assuming real (double precision floating point) vari-

E =N Fig. 4. Max intrinsic message amplitude versus

for different bit posi-

ables for the involved quantities. In principle, we consider uni- tions.

form midtread quantization, that converts the real value into a

word of bits. The corresponding law is reported in (3), where is the saturation threshold, is the quantization step (depen-
dent on the number of bits ) and and are the exact and the uniform quantized values, respectively:

example, if the demapper output is divided by its max amplitude

(that, in a practical implementation, cannot diverge), the input

LLRs are normalized into the range

. This way, the

dynamic range of the decoder messages and their quantization

threshold become independent of the signal-to-noise ratio. In (3) particular, the choice of unitary threshold implies clipping

of the updated messages but not that of initial messages, and

In this expression, “ ” represents the floor function, that

gives the largest relative number smaller than, or equal to, its ar-

gument. When considering uniform midtread quantization, two

equivalent approaches are possible: direct fixed point represen-

tation and integer rescaling. In direct fixed point representa-

tion, bits of each word are reserved for the fractional part

(this is often denoted as

) and is quantized by con-

verting it into its nearest

value. In this case, the quan-

tization step is

and the saturation threshold is

this occurs independently of the signal-to-noise ratio. For this reason, we adopt the integer rescaling approach.
On the other hand, when using the Min-Sum approximate version of the decoder, the amount of memory required to store the extrinsic information can be reduced through other strategies ([35], [36]), due to the fact that, at each iteration, extrinsic messages associated with a check node can assume only two fixed values. This is not the case of the SPA decoder, in which extrinsic information can assume arbitrary values.

. In the integer rescaling approach, instead, the saturation threshold is fixed in advance and the dynamic range C. Effect of Quantization and Clipping

is divided into

uniform intervals, each with am- Because of the inherent complexity of the decoding process,

plitude

. In this case, the value of can be an analytical approach able to express the impact of the quanti-

denoted through the -bit interval index

zation/clipping effect would be very difficult to face. Moreover,

it is associated with, or through its fixed point value, coincident theoretical arguments permit to obtain only asymptotic results

with the product of the interval index by the amplitude (whose

[2], that could be quite distant from practical cases.

fixed point representation must be suitably chosen). The set of Thus, we resort to numerical simulations.

all the

possible values of can be stored in an -bit We consider, for the decoder messages (that is intrinsic, ex-

indexed Look-Up Table (LUT) or calculated, any time, through trinsic and a posteriori messages), the quantization character-

a suitable multiplier circuit.

istic of (3) with

and

; the value of such pa-

The integer rescaling approach requires an extra step for rameters can be optimized through a series of numerical sim-

reconstructing the quantized values and, depending on the ulations. As regards the threshold, in particular, a preemptive

threshold choice, can yield a non optimal use of the fixed analysis is possible based on the intrinsic messages. If we limit

point representation. However, these drawbacks are overcome the Gauss plane to a finite square area of side around the

when the decoder involves only linear operations. For example, signal constellation, it is possible to calculate, through (2), the

the Min-Sum approximate version of the LLR-SPA decoder max intrinsic message amplitude as a function of the average

requires additions for variable nodes update, minimum search signal-to-noise ratio per bit,

, and the bit position. This

operations for check nodes update, and sign operations for is shown in Fig. 4 for

and the constellation of Fig. 3.

estimating each bit when the decoder stops iterating. In this Fig. 4 shows that, in the considered range of signal-to-noise

case, all the quantities involved in the decoding process can be ratios, the input LLR can assume very high values. As we expect

scaled by , and the whole decoder can work on integer values, that the clipping effect has a negative impact on the performance

without the need of fixed point representation. Furthermore, of the decoder, according with this figure, the value of should

the intrinsic messages can be normalized into a fixed range; for be set very large. It is interesting to observe that the problem is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

m 0 T m 0 T 0 F Fig. 5. Performance of the considered LDPC code for uniform (Msg

E =N E =N (a) BER versus

; (b) FER versus

.

) and non-uniform (Msg

) midtread decoder messages quantization:

emphasized by the need to use rather high signal-to-noise ratios However, the values of and, most of all, , required to

because of the adoption of the -ary modulation. In the case of obtain the best performance, when employing the quantization

using BPSK, which is a more conventional choice, the problem characteristic described by (3), can become prohibitively high.

would be much less dramatic. This is because, for a given code Therefore, in the next subsection, we introduce a non-uniform

and desired error rate, the signal-to-noise ratios for BPSK are quantization characteristic, that is logarithmic in the quantiza-

much smaller, and the required value of can be reduced ac- tion interval amplitudes.

cordingly. The negative effect of clipping on the initial messages has D. Proposal of a New Non-Uniform Quantization Function

been confirmed through numerical simulations, whose results are reported in Fig. 5. In running simulations, we have adopted the LLR-SPA, with a maximum number of iterations equal to 100. The same will be for the other performance curves shown in the sequel. From Fig. 5, we see that the curves of BER and

Given the real value and a positive real number , that we

call the logarithmic “factor”, let us define

,

and

. The proposed

non-uniform quantization characteristic is as follows:

FER corresponding to

and

(i.e.,

) show

a significant error floor; even if the resolution is increased (for

example, by setting

and

, i.e.,

) the

(4)

error floor remains. This confirms that the error-floor behavior,

in these cases, is mainly due to the effect of clipping intrinsic where is the non-uniform quantized version of . This new

messages.

characteristic has more dense quantization levels for small input

On the other hand, if the clipping effect is avoided, for ex- values and more sparse quantization levels for high input values,

ample by increasing the dynamic range though maintaining uni- in line with the observation that nearly zero LLRs (that are re-

tary step (that happens when

and

are chosen), sponsible for the decoder most uncertain condition) are more

the error floor is mitigated (this is evident from the FER curve). sensitive to quantization effects than high LLRs (that represent

Better and better performance can be achieved by increasing a firm belief condition).

also the quantization resolution: the choice of

and Non-uniform quantization, according with (4), is obtained

(i.e.,

) ensures, in fact, excellent perfor- through a classic compander approach based on uniform

mance.

midtread quantization. Such a choice, however, implies a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BALDI et al.: FINITE-PRECISION ANALYSIS OF DEMAPPERS AND DECODERS FOR LDPC-CODED M-QAM SYSTEMS

245

more involved hardware realization when (even linear) oper-

ations must be performed on quantized values; so an accurate

complexity assessment must be done when considering this

solution.

For

and

, the choice of

implies

that the quantization characteristic expressed by (4) has the min-

imum interval amplitude equal to

, that coincides

with the lowest step already considered for uniform quantiza-

tion. We have applied the non-uniform quantization with this

choice of the parameters and the simulated performance is also

shown in Fig. 5. We see that, by reducing the impact of the clip-

ping effect, the logarithmic characteristic avoids the presence

of the error floor, even assuming

. More specifically, the

BER and FER curves relative to non-uniform quantization with

and

are only a small fraction of dB far from

those corresponding to uniform quantization with

and

, despite the former system adopts a smaller number

of quantization bits. In conclusion, law (4), although more in-

volved to implement, seems quite suitable in the region of low

error rates.

Fig. 6. Estimated number of quantization bits for the received signals.

quantization is adopted. If (5) is verified, the signal quantiza-

tion has no impact on the decoder messages quantization, and

the BER performance is exactly the same achievable with un-

quantized input samples.

can be approximated through

the following expression:

VI. QUANTIZATION OF THE RECEIVED SIGNALS

(6)

The effect of the quantization on the input received samples can be related, through a simple analytical approach, to the decoder messages quantization. An estimate of the number of quantization bits for the input signals can be easily found that is compatible with the resolution adopted for the messages, so avoiding introduction of further performance degradation.

Partial derivatives appearing in (6) can be easily computed starting from (2); the final result is:

A. Estimate of the Maximum Quantization Error

(7)

The sub-system processing the received samples should im-

plement (2): once having obtained and , as the results of an In this formula, and

analog-to-digital conversion, these values are used to calculate in (7) the noise variance

the

for each set of codeword bits (

, in

are implicit in ; on the other hand, is present and it influences the result.

the considered 16-QAM example). Coherent with the approach B. Optimization of the Signal Quantization Parameters followed in Section V, the output of the demapper block is then

quantized.

By computing

through (7) and inserting it in con-

Noting by the dynamic range of the input and (for dition (5), we are able to find couples of values

that,

example,

in Fig. 3) and by the number of quantiza- regardless and , ensure an error on the LLRs, as induced by

tion bits adopted, under the hypothesis of using uniform midrise the quantization of the received samples, not larger than that

quantization (that is preferable, at the input, for a number of permitted for extrinsic messages quantization. Noting by the

practical reasons [37]), the quantization step is

. distance between adjacent symbols in the 16-QAM constella-

The maximum quantization error at the input, for and , re- tion (

in Fig. 3), the following relationship holds:

spectively, is

, and it reflects on a max-

imum error

on the LLR of the -th bit. Obviously, this

SNR

(8)

propagated error depends on the value of , and a suitable de-

sign criterion should consist in choosing an that satisfies the where SNR is the ratio between the average signal power and

condition:

the noise power. Therefore, , for fixed , depends on the

average signal-to-noise ratio per bit. A plot of versus

,

(5) based on (5) (where

has been considered) and (6),

is shown in the “exact” plots of Fig. 6 for the first two bits. The

In (5), represents the constant interval amplitude in the case approximate points must not be considered in this phase; their

of uniform LLR quantization, while it can be replaced by the meaning will be described in Section VII. The analysis for the

minimum interval amplitude

when non-uniform LLR third and fourth bit provides identical results, with the position

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

m 0 T Fig. 7. Performance of the considered LDPC code for uniform midrise samples quantization (Sig

m 0 T E =N E =N (Msg

): (a) BER versus

; (b) FER versus

.

) and uniform midtread decoder messages quantization

, because of the intrinsic symmetry of the constellation, exceeded for a small fraction of time and by a limited amount;

that will be further discussed in Section VII.

secondly, the sensitivity of the decoding algorithm on the ini-

The required value of , for each bit, is a step-wise in- tial condition should be taken into account, so that it is not sure

creasing function of

. Clearly, in order to satisfy condi- that any excess translates into an additional error. Although af-

tion (5) in a given range of

values and for all the bit posi- fordable in principle (the former in analytical terms by using the

tions, it is necessary to assume the greatest (i.e., most stringent) probability density functions of the received samples, the latter

value of . As an example, for

(which implies by using empirical rules drawn by simulation) this further study

for the considered code and constellation), the is rather involved and does not permit to derive general con-

suggested value is

.

clusions. For this reason, the value of calculated by means

This estimate can be used to forecast the actual performance. of (5) only represents a “sufficient” condition to obtain the de-

For the sake of verification, we have considered uniform quan- sired good performance. On the other hand, one can object that

tization of the decoder messages (that is the most critical case, such an overestimate (in the specified sense) of the value of

having constant resolution) and repeated, in Fig. 7, the simu- obliges to operate with a number of quantization bits unaccept-

lation in Fig. 5, but now considering also the quantization of ably high. However, it should be noticed that the value of

the received samples for different numbers of quantization bits only affects the demapper, not the decoder (whose registers are

.

involved in the message passing algorithm), and a simple solu-

Coherent with the theory, the curve with

is exactly tion can be adopted to reduce the complexity of such block. This

superposed to the unquantized one. Anyway, we also see that new proposal is described in the following section.

the simulated performance degradation for a lower can be

very small, and even with

it remains below 0.2 dB.

VII. DEMAPPER BASED ON APPROXIMATE EXPRESSIONS

This result is not surprising: the value of obtained by imposing (5) is quite conservative; it aims to ensure that the error A. Second Order Approximation

on the received samples is always not greater than that on the de- When the value of SNR (and then of

) is sufficiently

coder messages. When such a condition is unsatisfied, it is not high, (7) can be greatly simplified by considering, in each sum,

realistic to think that performance becomes immediately bad: the leading term only. This dominant contribution is due to the

first of all the threshold at the right hand side of (5) could be signals

and

that, for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BALDI et al.: FINITE-PRECISION ANALYSIS OF DEMAPPERS AND DECODERS FOR LDPC-CODED M-QAM SYSTEMS

247

( ) Fig. 10. Circuit for the evaluation of L b .

= 0 dB Fig. 8. Comparison between the exact and approximate LLRs for the first two

bits, as a function of x (fixed y), at E =N

.

easy to see that and have always in common the in-phase

component (i.e.,

) or the quadrature component (i.e.,

) and that the maximum difference between the un-

equal components is . By replacing (9) in (5), together with

the highlighted maximum value, with simple algebra we find:

(10)

= 8 dB Fig. 9. Comparison between the exact and approximate LLRs for the first two

bits, as a function of x (fixed y), at E =N

.

where is the smallest integer greater than .

This result is shown in the “approximate” plot of Fig. 6, as a

function of

, and compared to the exact one (for bits 1 and

2). Both the exact and approximate curves exhibit, as obvious, a

staircase behavior. Small regions usually exist, for low/medium

signal-to-noise ratios, where the approximate formula can pro-

vide a value of one bit higher than that given by the exact for-

mula. Actually, these regions are practically indistinguishable,

in the

range considered, for the first bit, whilst they are

evident for the second bit. This is due to the fact that, when the

second bit is considered, the maximum difference between the

dominant contributions in

is smaller than . So, in prin-

ciple, an adaptive quantization can be conceived, that varies the

value of according with the bit position. Anyway, it is clear

that such a procedure would be difficult to manage in a practical

implementation.

The same simplification used in (9) can be also introduced

in the LLR expression (2). This looks like the classic max-log

approximation. Under the same hypotheses, (2) becomes:

each , are at minimum distance from the received sample .

This technique coincides with the log-sum approximation and

has been successfully applied for both product codes [38] and convolutional codes [39].
Actually, by imposing this simplification and taking into account (8), (7) becomes:
SNR (9)

(11)

The residual difference between

and

, that is due

to the approximation, is appreciable for small signal-to-noise

ratios. An example is shown in Fig. 8, for

,

where

and

are plotted as a function of , for an

arbitrary . The difference becomes smaller and smaller for in-

creasing signal-to-noise ratios and, at the values of

of

This relationship is very simple and more expressive than (7): interest (i.e., those required to have low error rates), it is usu-

first of all we notice a linear dependence on the SNR (such ally acceptable for all bits. An example is shown in Fig. 9 for

a dependence is necessarily more involved in the rigorous ex-

; in this case the exact and approximate curves

pression). Moreover, in general, it can be further simplified. For are almost overlaid. In comparison with Fig. 8, it is interesting

example, looking at the 16-QAM constellation in Fig. 3, it is to observe the very different LLR’s dynamics.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

B. Simplified Demapper

The acceptability of the approximation suggests a simple so-

lution to reduce considerably the complexity of the demapper

block. The exact expression for

, in fact, requires the im-

plementation of a processor able to calculate

, given

its inputs. An alternative solution would be to store the values

of

in a LUT indexed on , , (i.e. the quantized

versions of , , , respectively).

Looking at (11), instead, a smarter solution is possible. Due to

the linearity in the SNR, the -bit level indexes for the quantized

version of

can be stored in the LUT, in place of those of

. This

way, the dependence on the SNR is eliminated, and the

-bit output words only depend on the -bit input words,

regardless of the channel. To reconstruct the value of

from each -bit value, if needed, the circuit shown in Fig. 10

can be adopted. It multiplies each level index by the fixed

point representation of

. This circuit uses an

SNR value that is continuously estimated at the receiver side,

for example by using the signal-mean square error (S/MSE)

ratio. When multiplication is performed, it is easy to show

that, if is the number of bits used to represent (the always

positive quantity)

and the -bit index includes

one sign bit, the output value of

can be represented

through

bits, at the most. However, as stated in

Section V, when the decoder involves only linear operations,

it can be normalized in such a way as to be independent of

the signal-to-noise ratio. In this case the demapper does not

perform the multiplication step and the LUT output is the

initial extrinsic message. The proposed solution permits to

implement only one LUT that contains the quantized values

of

and has -bit addresses, being the greatest

value obtained by applying the analysis shown in the previous

section to the considered SNR range.

A B Fig. 11. Subsets

(diamond markers) and

(square markers) for

A B A B the 16-QAM constellation of Fig. 3: (a) and ; (b) and ;

A B A B (c)

and ; (d)

and .

C. Reduction of the LUTs Size The LUT size is

Fig. 12. Circuit employing the 16-QAM demapper LUT with reduced size.

Therefore, the same LUT can be used to obtain the values of

(12)

and

, such as those of

and

.

Hence, the address word length can be halved simply by adding

i.e., it consists of

bits in the 16-QAM an “input selector” block before the LUT, that is able to forward

case. This value can be further reduced taking into account the only the right component of each input signal on the basis of the

following considerations.

bit position. The corresponding circuit is plotted in Fig. 12.

Fig. 11 shows the subsets and for the 16-QAM constel- In this case, only the values of

and

are stored

lation of Fig. 3, calculated for all the bit positions

. in the LUT. As previously shown, such values only depend on

From Figs. 11(a) and 11(b), we notice that the values of

(therefore they can be calculated for an arbitrary value of ) and

and

depend only on the quadrature component, as in coincide with those of

and

for

. Hence,

their expressions we have

. Similarly, from when the switch in Fig. 12 is in position “A”, the quadrature

Figs. 11(c) and 11(d), it is evident that

and

de- component of the input signal is used as index for the LUT, and

pend only on the in-phase component, as in their expressions the values of

and

are available at its outputs.

we have

. Moreover, we notice that the On the contrary, when the switch is in position “B”, the in-phase

two subsets and coincide with and , respectively, component of the input signal is used as index, and the values

when an axial symmetry around the bisector of the first and third of

and

are available at the two outputs. Hence,

quadrant is applied. Therefore, the values of

coincide the LUT shown in Fig. 12 consists of

bits,

with those of

, for . Similarly, and coincide and it is

times smaller than that in Fig. 10.

with and under the same transformation, so the values of The same arguments hold for any Gray-labeled constellation

coincide with those of

, for

.

of

signals, with even. In all these cases, the demapper

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BALDI et al.: FINITE-PRECISION ANALYSIS OF DEMAPPERS AND DECODERS FOR LDPC-CODED M-QAM SYSTEMS

249

block can be implemented by means of a LUT with -bit ad-

REFERENCES

dresses and

-bit outputs, that is, with size

(13)

However, it should be noted that, for demapping each received sample, the circuit in Fig. 12 requires two LUT accesses, while that in Fig. 10 requires only one access. Therefore, two optimized circuits should be used in order to obtain the same latency as for the original scheme. Nevertheless, if we consider two implementations of the optimized circuit and compare their size with that of the original one, we obtain a size gain equal to

(14)

The value of depends on the number of quantization bits used for the received samples, , as expected. As shown in the previous sections, this number can be quite high (up to 10), thus yielding a considerable size gain when adopting the optimized circuit.

VIII. CONCLUSION
Modern telecommunications require more and more reliable and spectrally efficient transmissions. Reliability can be achieved by using LDPC codes, while spectral efficiency requires the adoption of high order modulation, like -QAM, schemes. Practical implementation of these solutions needs to reconsider many of the conclusions already drawn for the more classic LDPC coded binary modulations. The larger signal-to-noise ratio required, as a counterpart to the improved spectral efficiency, makes the -ary modulated scheme much more sensitive to the clipping effect, to the point that unexpected error floors can appear if the system parameters are not correctly designed. In principle, the number of quantization bits needed can become very large, thus making the system quite unfeasible. To solve the problem, attractive solutions seem to be the adoption of non-uniform quantization and in deep analysis of the demapper block functionalities. By exploiting symmetry properties and taking into account the peculiarities of the quantities involved in the decision process, efficient demapping can be achieved with minimum size LUTs. The role of the quantization of the incoming signals can be also controlled in such a way as to avoid altering the trade-off found in the quantization of the decoder messages.
We have studied these aspects for the case of DVB compatible LDPC codes, in conjunction with -QAM modulation. For the sake of clarity, the results presented in this paper have been referred to the specific case of 16-QAM, but most of the analysis and the proposed new ideas can be easily extended to higher order constellations and, in principle, to -ary systems with different modulations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Giambattista Di Donna and Sergio Bianchi, at Siemens, for their contribution and helpful discussion.

[1] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications, ETSI EN Std. 302 307 (v1.1.2), Jun. 2006, Rev. 1.1.1.
[4] IEEE P802.11 Wireless LANs WWiSE Proposal: High throughput extension to the 802.11 Standard, IEEE Std. 11-04-0886-00-000n, Aug. 2004.
[5] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks - Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems - Amendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands, IEEE Std. 802.16e-2005, Dec. 2005.
[6] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Terrestrial Television, ETSI EN Std. 300 744 (v1.5.1), Nov. 2004.
[7] “DVB-T2 call for technologies,” Digital Video Broadcasting Project, Tech. Rep. SB 1644r1, Apr. 2007.
[8] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Interaction channel for Satellite Distribution Systems, ETSI EN Std. 301 790 (v1.4.1), Sep. 2005.
[9] N. H. Tran and H. H. Nguyen, “Signal mappings of 8-ary constellations for bit interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 92–99, Mar. 2006.
[10] B. Rong, T. Jiang, X. Li, and M. R. Soleymani, “Combine LDPC codes over GF(q) with q-ary modulations for bandwidth efficient transmission,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 78–84, Mar. 2008.
[11] S. Papaharalabos, M. Papaleo, P. T. Mathiopoulos, M. Neri, A. VanelliCoralli, and G. E. Corazza, “DVB-S2 LDPC decoding using robust check node update approximations,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 120–126, Mar. 2008.
[12] Y. Li and W. Ryan, “Bit-reliability mapping in LDPC-coded modulation systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–3, Jan. 2005.
[13] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[14] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[15] C. Douillard, M. Jézéquel, C. Berrou, N. Brengarth, J. Tousch, and N. Pham, “The turbo code standard for DVB-RCS,” in Proc. Second International Symposium on Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 535–538.
[16] T. Lestable, E. Zimmerman, M.-H. Hamon, and S. Stiglmayr, “BlockLDPC codes vs duo-binary turbo-codes for European next generation wireless systems,” in Proc. IEEE VTC-2006 Fall, Montréal, Canada, Sep. 2006, pp. 1–5.
[17] Information Technology - Generic Coding of Moving Pictures and Associated Audio Information - Part 1: System, ISO/IEC Std. 13 818-1, 1996.
[18] X. Y. Hu and E. Eleftheriou, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM’01), San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 995–1001.
[19] M. Baldi and F. Chiaraluce, “Cryptanalysis of a new instance of McEliece cryptosystem based on QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT 2007, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2591–2595.
[20] L. Ping and W. Leung, “Decoding low density parity check codes with finite quantization bits,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 62–64, Feb. 2000.
[21] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low density parity check codes decoder,” in IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems ISCAS 2001, Sydney, NSW, May 2001, vol. 4, pp. 202–205.
[22] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM’01), San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1036E–1036E.
[23] H. Wymeersch, H. Steendam, and M. Moeneclaey, “Computational complexity and quantization effects of decoding algorithms for non-binary LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustic, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP 2004, Montreal, Canada, May 2004, vol. 4, pp. 669–672.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 55, NO. 2, JUNE 2009

[24] S. Kim, G. Sobelman, and J. Moon, “Parallel VLSI architectures for a class of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2002, Scottsdale, AZ, May 2002, vol. 2, pp. II-93–II-96.
[25] S. L. Howard, C. Schlegel, and V. C. Gaudet, “Degree-matched check node decoding for regular and irregular LDPCs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 1054–1058, Oct. 2006.
[26] L. Yang, H. Liu, and C.-J. Richard Shi, “Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892–904, Apr. 2006.
[27] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Performance of quantized min-sum decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2007, New Orleans, LA, May 2007, pp. 2758–2761.
[28] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Efficient message passing architecture for high throughput LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2007, New Orleans, LA, May 2007, pp. 917–920.
[29] M. Shen, H. Niu, H. Liu, and J. Ritcey, “Finite precision implementation of LDPC coded M-ary modulation over wireless channels,” in Proc. Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, Nov. 2003, vol. 1, pp. 114–118.
[30] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “A 170 Mbps (8176, 7156) quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder implementation with FPGA,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2006, Kos, Greece, May 2006, pp. 5095–5098.
[31] S. Howard, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Soft-bit decoding of regular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 646–650, Oct. 2005.
[32] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[33] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, Second ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2004.
[34] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[35] A. Hunt, “Hyper-Codes: High-Performance Low-Complexity Error-Correcting Codes,” Master’s thesis, , Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada, 1998.
[36] A. Hunt, J. Lodge, and S. Crozier, “Method of Enhanced Max-Log-a Posteriori Probability Processing,” U.S. Patent 6145114, Nov. 2000.
[37] Private Communication. Apr. 2006, Siemens, Cassina de’ Pecchi, Italy. [38] R. Pyndiah, A. Picart, and A. Glavieux, “Performance of block turbo
coded 16-QAM and 64-QAM modulations,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM’95), Singapore, Nov. 1995, vol. 2, pp. 1039–1043. [39] F. Tosato and P. Bisaglia, “Simplified soft-output demapper for binary interleaved COFDM with application to HIPERLAN/2,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2002, New York, May 2002, vol. 2, pp. 664–668.

Marco Baldi was born in Macerata, Italy, in 1979. He received the “Laurea” degree (summa cum laude) in Electronics Engineering in 2003, and the Doctoral degree in Electronics, Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering in 2006 from the Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy. At present, he is a post-doctoral researcher and contract Professor at the same university. His main research activity is in channel coding, with particular interest in linear block codes for symmetric and asymmetric channels, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and their application in cryptography.
Franco Chiaraluce (M’06) was born in Ancona, Italy, in 1960. He received the “Laurea in Ingegneria Elettronica” (summa cum laude) from the University of Ancona in 1985. Since 1987 he joined the Department of Electronics and Automatics of the same university. At present, he is an Associate Professor at the Polytechnic University of Marche. His main research interests involve various aspects of communication systems theory and design, with special emphasis on error correcting codes, sensor networks, cryptography and multiple access techniques. He is co-author of more than 180 papers and two books. He is member of IEEE and IEICE.
Giovanni Cancellieri was born in Florence, Italy, in 1952. He received the degrees in Electronic Engineering and in Physics from the University of Bologna. Since 1986 he is Full Professor of Telecommunications at the Polytechnic University of Marche. His main research activities are focused on optical fibers, radio communications and wireless systems, with special emphasis on channel coding and modulation systems. He is co-author of about one hundred fifty papers, five books of scientific contents, and two international patents. Since 2003 he is president of CReSM (Centro Radioelettrico Sperimentale G. Marconi).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:48:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

