This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

Probabilistic Data Detection for Probe-based Storage Channels in the Presence of Jitter
Haralampos Pozidis and Giovanni Cherubini IBM Research, Zurich Research Laboratory 8803 Ru¨schlikon, Switzerland

Abstract—Probe-storage devices employ large arrays of probes to write/read data in parallel in some storage medium. Because of their inherent parallelism and the independence of data retrieved from different probes, these devices lend themselves naturally to low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and associated soft/iterative decoding techniques. In this paper, a concatenated coding scheme for a particular probe-storage channel is presented that comprises an inner (d, k)-constrained code and an outer LDPC code, and the problem of probabilistic data retrieval for this channel is addressed. In particular, soft information is generated by explicitly accounting for the channel output statistics in the presence of jitter and additive noise, based on derived analytical expressions.
I. INTRODUCTION
Probe-based data-storage devices [1], [2], [3] achieving ultra-high densities of 1 Tbit/in2 or more in small form factors offer an alternative to conventional data-storage devices such as hard-disk drives (HDD) and flash memory, whose areal densities are approaching fundamental physical scaling limits. In probe storage, nanometer-sharp tips are used for modifying the topography or changing the properties of a storage medium down to the atomic scale, as customarily done in atomic force microscopy (AFM). In a probe-storage device, write and read functions are based on the mechanical scanning of a storage medium with respect to an array of cantilevers, each of which is equipped with a sharp tip at its extremity. In this paper, probe-storage devices are considered in which information symbols are represented by indentation marks and spaces in a polymer layer [3].
Indentation marks are formed on the polymer medium by thermomechanical recording, whereas sensing is based on a thermoelectrical concept. Reading and writing the indentation marks are accomplished by scanning the storage medium relative to the array of probes, along lines representing the information tracks. The amplitude of the read-back signal varies according to the topography of the storage medium as probed by the tip while it moves along the center of a written track. Besides electronics and medium noise, other impairments such as jitter, both in the positions of indentations and in the sampling instants, are present in the read-back signal of a probe-storage channel [4], [5].
Modulation codes are employed in probe storage in order to improve the effective linear density as well as the reliability of data retrieval by constraining the sequences that are written on the storage medium. The most popular modulation codes used in conventional data-storage devices are the run-length-limited

(RLL) codes, also known as (d, k)-constrained codes. RLL codes are characterized by two parameters, d and k, whereby ‘1’ symbols are constrained to be separated by at least d and at most k ‘0’ symbols.
In addition to modulation codes, error-correcting codes (ECC) are utilized in storage devices to further improve reliability. The most widely used ECC in storage devices are the Reed-Solomon (RS) codes. However, it is known that soft-decision decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes offers significant performance improvements compared with hard decoding of RS codes. Methods to combine modulation codes and soft LDPC decoding, with application to recording channels, have been proposed [6], [7]. Probe-storage devices appear as natural candidates for such concatenated coding schemes, because operations like interleaving and deinterleaving are inherent in the data allocation process of such devices, owing to their massive parallelism [8]. Application of iterative soft decoding techniques to a probe storage device, however, where multiple channels operate in parallel, entails very large complexity. At the same time, though, it provides a useful benchmark for assessing the merits of decoding schemes that are more easily realizable in practice, as well as a vehicle for determining ultimate system performance.
To generate reliable soft information for channels corrupted by colored noise and correlated jitter the channel output statistics have to be accounted for. A concatenated coding scheme for probe-based storage devices, which includes an inner (1, 7)-constrained code and an outer LDPC code, is presented in this paper. An optimum decoder for the inner code yields estimates of a posteriori probabilities, which are employed in an iterative manner by the soft decoder of the outer LDPC code. A comprehensive analytical derivation of the probability density function of the probe-storage channel output in the presence of colored additive noise and correlated jitter distortion is conducted. The analytical expressions are then used by the soft inner decoder to estimate the a posteriori probabilities in an optimal fashion, i.e., by explicitly accounting for the channel statistical description. The system performance of coded systems is investigated through simulations using experimentally identified noise and jitter spectral characteristics. In particular, the performance of a system that uses a hard decoder for an inner (1, 7) modulation code and an RS code as outer code is compared with that of a system that adopts soft decoding of a (1, 7) modulation code concatenated with an LDPC code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
978-1-4244-3435-0/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the building blocks of a probe-storage channel model, which have been determined based on extensive characterization of read-back signals obtained from actual recording experiments. Probe-based storage systems adopting concatenated codes are introduced in Section III, whereas the realization of a system with an inner code is described in Section IV. Simulation results are presented in Section V, and the paper concludes with Section VI.
II. PROBE-STORAGE CHANNEL MODEL
Probe-based recording is a new technology with characteristics that vary significantly from other established storage technologies. Prior to introducing the probe-storage channel model, the main differences between the magnetic recording channel, the most extensively-studied one, and the probe storage channel are briefly outlined.
The magnetic recording channel is characterized by the presence of a spectral null at DC and a sharp roll-off at the Nyquist frequency, leading to a partial-response signaling scheme. In the time domain, consequently, the impulse response typically extends over several symbol intervals. The signal is corrupted by additive noise, which may be characterized as the combination of stationary electronics noise and non-stationary data-dependent transition noise. Other impairments include nonlinear transition shifts (NLTS) and partial erasure, both causing nonlinear distortion. Techniques such as write pre-compensation are employed to mitigate NLTS. Residual NLTS, along with transition noise, are sources of jitter in the read-back signal of magnetic recording channels.
A scanning-probe-based recording channel, on the other hand, exhibits a wideband frequency response with a nonnegligible DC component. As a result, the impulse response extends over very few symbol intervals, typically two or three. The predominant impairments in thermomechanical probe storage are electronics/head noise, medium noise, and jitter. Electronics noise is a combination of thermal noise and flicker or 1/ f noise, both of which are typical in semiconductors. It can be well modelled as a colored Gaussian random process, as verified by recording experiments. Medium noise arises from the surface roughness of the storage medium as it is being sensed by the read head, and is thus dataindependent, unlike transition noise in magnetic recording. Extensive characterization of read-back signals from actual single-probe recordings showed that medium noise is Gaussian distributed and its power spectral density exhibits a power-law behavior [5]. At high recording densities, above 1 Tbit/in2, and/or high recording powers, nonlinear distortion due to destructive interference between closely-spaced indentations becomes significant [4].
In addition to noise, other significant distortion sources in probe-storage channels are write and read jitter. Write, or position, jitter arises from deviations in the actual positions of the write pulses with respect to their intended positions, due to variations in the scanner velocity during the write

process. As such, it is modelled as random deviations in the position of the write pulses, and thus of the pulses arising from the combined action of the write and read processes. The continuous-time read-back signal in the presence of the afore-mentioned impairments can be written as

r(t) = ∑ xih(t − iT − Jiw) + w(t),

(1)

i

where xi is the binary write-symbol at the i-th symbol interval, h(t) is the pulse shape, T is the symbol interval duration, Jiw represents the write jitter random process, and w(t) denotes electronics and medium noise lumped together.
The continuous-time read-back signal r(t) is sampled at multiples of T to obtain the sequence of read-back samples, denoted by {rk}. During the read process, random deviations of the velocity of the scanner, which moves the medium relative to the read/write probes, give rise to random perturbations of the spatial position of sampling events with respect to their nominal positions. As spatial quantities may be translated to temporal quantities through the scanning velocity, spatial deviations may be modelled as temporal deviations. As a result, scanning velocity variations while reading cause deviations of the sampling instants, that is, timing jitter in the read-back waveform. The sequence at the output of the sampler is then given by

∑ rk = r(tk) = xih(tk − iT − Jiw) + w(tk) ,

(2)

i

where tk = kT + Jkr is the k-th sampling instant in the presence of read jitter, denoted here by Jkr. Note that both write and read jitter arise mainly from the random deviations of the scanner velocity during the writing and reading processes, respectively. As a result, both jitter processes are modelled by identically distributed, albeit statistically independent, colored Gaussian random processes, a choice that is further justified by the results of the experimental characterization study of [5]. In practice, a timing recovery loop at the receiver attempts to minimize the effects of jitter on rk; thus only residual components of write/read jitter actually appear at the input of the detector.

III. PROBE-BASED STORAGE SYSTEMS ADOPTING
CONCATENATED CODES
A block diagram of the overall recording system is shown in Fig. 1. The user data to be stored on the storage device is represented by a binary vector b. The user bits are input to an encoder for an outer error-correction code, yielding a binary codeword u. The encoded binary symbols of u are then fed to a modulation encoder. A (1, 7) modulation code is considered in the rest of the paper. In general, any modulation code generated by an encoder with a finite-state machine representation may be applied as an inner code. The output of the modulation encoder, denoted by the vector x, is written on the storage medium in binary NRZ format, i.e., without precoding, unlike in magnetic or optical recording channels.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

Accordingly, a “1” gives rise to an indentation creation, whereas a “0” indicates no action.
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the recording system.
Through the data writing and sensing processes, the symbols of x are transformed into the continuous-time read-back signal r(t), which is then sampled, as discussed above. The read-back signal samples are expressed by (2).
At moderate-to-high information densities, the typical probe-storage channel response extends over approximately three symbol intervals, giving rise to constructive intersymbol interference (ISI) only. ISI is thus not a limiting factor for the performance of probe storage, at least not up to very high linear densities. On the other hand, the power spectrum of the main noise processes exhibits a dominant low-frequency component, which significantly deteriorates the performance of any detection scheme if left uncompensated. Moreover, jitter in the read-back signal also affects performance, albeit this effect is less pronounced than the effect due to the additive noise characteristics, at least for the jitter values found in practice.
Noise shaping is the most important operation of the read channel in probe storage. It can be effectively achieved by equalization, provided care is taken not to introduce any destructive ISI as a side-effect. In the particular channel, equalizers with highpass frequency characteristics tend to perform well in general, striking a balance between lowfrequency noise attenuation and impulse response confinement. Inevitably, any such equalizer also attenuates the lowfrequency part of the channel frequency response and thus of the read-back signal. However, this effect is not harmful because of the high-frequency nature of the non-precoded (1,7) code used. It has been found that, if a sequence detector is employed, a minimum mean-square-error (MMSE) partialresponse equalizer with target [−0.1, 1, −0.1] yields very good performance and is therefore adopted in the remaining part of the paper.
The sequence of samples at the equalizer output, {yk}, is fed to a metric computation and modulation decoder (MCMD) for soft-decoding of the modulation code. The MCMD performs soft-decoding of {yk} to obtain a posteriori probabilities p(un|Y), which provide the metric for decoding the outer code. The MCMD then feeds p(un|Y) to the error-correction decoder to obtain an estimate of the vector of message bits, bˆ . If the ECC decoder is a soft decoder, refined values of the a posteriori probabilities q(un) may be fed back to the MCMD. Iterative decoding may thus take place, whereby the MCMD further updates the a posteriori probabilities p(un| Y), based

on the refined a posteriori probabilities q(un).

At the heart of the MCMD is the computation of the conditional probabilities of the read-back signal samples p(yk|xk), which account for the statistics of the probe-storage channel

parameters. These probabilities have been computed based on

the channel model of (2). To compute exact expressions, it

has been assumed that the combined channel and equalizer

response heq(t) is a triangular pulse spanning the interval

[−T, T ], i.e., heq(t) =

1

−

|t| T

for |t| ≤ T , and heq(t) = 0

otherwise. Asymptotically-exact expressions may also be de-

rived for arbitrary pulse shapes. Both electronics and medium

noise are modelled as zero-mean, colored Gaussian distributed

processes. As they arise in different parts of the channel, they

are assumed to be statistically independent. To facilitate the

analysis, and as the noise processes are both additive, they

are aggregated into a single noise process which is also zero-

mean and colored Gaussian, from the independence assump-

tion. Furthermore, write and read jitter are both modelled

as zero-mean, colored Gaussian distributed processes with

equal

standard

deviations:

σ

w j

=

σ

r j

=

σJ .

The

fact

that

jitter

amplitude values are bounded in practice is expressed by

constraining | Jiw |≤ γT and | Jkr |≤ γT , with 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1. Thus

the probability density function truncated Gaussian, i.e., fJ(x) =

(PDF) cJ /√(σJ

√of2wπ )reit−e/xr2e/2aσdJ2

jitter is , where

the scaling factor cJ = 1/ erf(γT / σJ 2) ensures that fJ(x) is a

proper PDF. Finally, it is assumed that electronics and medium

noise are statistically independent with the jitter processes.

Based on the above assumptions, the conditional probabilities p(yk|xk = i) ≡ p(y|i), i = 0, 1, are given by the following expressions:

p(y|1) = 2 cJ g (y − 1, σY )

×

Q

σN(y − 1) σ σY

−Q

σN(y − σ σY

1)

+

γ σ

σY σN

, (3)

and

p(y|0)

=

1 P(0)

[P(000) p(y|000)

+ P(001)p(y|001)

+ P(100)p(y|100) + P(101)p(y|101)] , (4)

where g(r, σ ) = σ Gaussian random

√1 2π

e−r2/2

σ

2

denotes

the

PDF

of

variable with standard deviation

a zero-mean

σ,

σN

=

σJ T

,

σY = w(tk),

σ and

2 + σN2 , Q(x) =

w21 ehrefrce(xσ/√d2e)noistetshethceomstpalnedmaredntdareyvidaitsiotrnibuo-f

tion function of a zero-mean, unit-variance Gaussian random

variable. Furthermore, p(y|xk−1xkxk+1) and P(xk−1xkxk+1) are

used to denote the conditional PDF of yk on the specific three-

symbol sequence xk−1xkxk+1 and the probability of occurrence

of the triplet xk−1xkxk+1, respectively. The conditional proba-

bilities in (4) are listed below:

p(y|000) = g(y, σ ),

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

and

p(y|001)

=

1 g(y, σ ) + 2

cJ

g (y, σY

)

×Q

σN y σ σY

−

γ σY σ σN

−Q

σN y σ σY

Moreover, p(y|100) = p(y|001), and

. (6)

p(y|101) = φ (0)g(y, σ ) + ξ g (y, α)

×

w2
g(w, σ σN
w1

2 − 2ρ) erf

w +√β y 2α σN 1 + ρ

dw

w3
+ g(w, σ σN
w2

2 − 2ρ) erf

2αγ −√w − β y 2α σN 1 + ρ

dw

v2
+ ξ g (y, σY ) g(v, σ σN)

v1

× erf ρ(v + μ√y) − erf ρ(v + μy)√− γ σY dv,

σY σρ 2

σY σρ 2

(7)

The length of the binary codeword u at the output of the LDPC encoder is assumed equal to n0 = 2N, where N is a positive integer. The symbols of the codeword u thus obtained
are further encoded using an RLL encoder to generate the sequence of write symbols x. Fig. 2 shows the state-transition diagram of a 5-state rate-2/3 encoder for (1,7) sequences. In this case, N denotes the number of steps required for the (1, 7) encoder to generate a sequence of write symbols x from a codeword u of length n0 = 2N.

where α =

σ 2 +2(1 − ρ)σN2 ,

β

=

2(1−ρ )σN2 α

,

w1 = −β x, w2 = −β x + αγ, w3 = −β x + 2αγ,

μ = σN2/ σY , v1 = −μx and v2 = −μx + γ σY . Further,

φ (r)

=

ξ

r −γ T

g(x,

σJ )

Q

√−ρ x
σJ 1−ρ2

−Q

−√ρ x+γ T
σJ 1−ρ2

dx

and σρ = σN 1 − ρ2. Finally, ρ is the correlation

coefficient of Jkw−1 and Jkw+1, i.e., ρ = E{Jkw−1 Jkw+1}/ σJ2,

and

ξ = 1/

γT −γ T

γT −γ T

f (x, y)dxdy,

where

f (x, y)

denotes the

joint PDF of Jkw−1 and Jkw+1, which are assumed jointly

Gaussian distributed.

In serially concatenated coding schemes, interleaving and

de-interleaving functions are customarily introduced between

outer and inner encoders and decoders to improve system

performance. In probe-storage devices, which provide massive

parallelism, data are interleaved before the write operation,

and subsequently de-interleaved in the read-back operation.

The codewords u are fed to an interleaver, and the interleaver

output is fed to a modulation encoder for each storage field.

IV. SYSTEM REALIZATION WITH INNER (d, k) CODE AND OUTER LDPC CODE
A system realization using an LDPC code as the errorcorrecting code and a (1, 7)-constrained code as the modulation code is considered. The forward-backward algorithm is used for RLL decoding, and the sum-product algorithm is used for LDPC decoding. Both algorithms may be regarded as variants of a probability propagation algorithm, and are described in detail, e.g., in [9]. The forward-backward algorithm uses the conditional probabilities of the equalized signal samples provided by the metric computation module. The a posteriori probabilities obtained by the soft modulation decoder are input to the LDPC decoder to enable soft decoding. As discussed, the estimates of a posteriori probabilities may be refined by performing iterations between the (d, k) and the LDPC decoders.

Fig. 2. Transition diagram of 5-state rate-2/3 encoder for (1,7) sequences.

Soft decoding of the (1, 7)-constrained sequence is per-

formed on the sequence of equalized signal samples {yk}. As mentioned above, a posteriori probabilities p(un|Y) are

obtained by the forward-backward algorithm. Feedback from

the LDPC decoder to the RLL decoder is given by the refined

a posteriori probabilities of the encoded LDPC symbols that

are computed by a soft LDPC decoder. For iterative decoding

of the RLL code, no prior knowledge about the symbols of

u is available in the first iteration, therefore equally likely

codeword symbols are assumed. As state transitions in the

generation of a rate-2/3 RLL code are determined by pairs

of

symbols,

this

is

expressed

by

p(u2i = β0, u2i+1

= β1) =

1 4

,

for β0, β1 ∈ {0, 1}, where p(u2i = β0, u2i+1 = β1) denotes the

probability that the (2i)-th and (2i + 1)-th symbols of code-

word u at the i-th stage are equal to β0 and β1, respectively.

In the subsequent iterations, the probabilities of the encoded

LDPC symbols are set equal to the a posteriori probabilities

computed by the LDPC decoder as

p(u2i = β0, u2i+1 = β1) = q(u2i = β0)q(u2i+1 = β1), (8)

where β0, β1 ∈ {0, 1}. In the (d, k) decoder, N state variables are maintained for the decoding process. Each state variable ζi, i = 0, . . . , N − 1, contains a copy of the current pair of codeword symbols. Thus, each state variable can be interpreted as a five-bit binary number, whose two least significant bits (LSB) are a copy of the current pair of codeword symbols, and whose three most significant bits (MSB) represent the current (d, k)-encoder state.
The soft output of the RLL decoder represents information on the symbols of codeword u, which is input to the LDPC decoder to obtain the message estimate bˆ , using the knowledge about the parity-check matrix H. The LDPC decoder finds the most likely binary vector u such that H u = s = 0, where the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

vector s denotes the syndrome vector. If the length of the
vector b of message bits is equal to k0 and the length of the codeword vector u is equal to n0, then the number of parity check bits is given by r0 = n0 − k0, which is also equal to the length of the syndrome vector s. The elements si, i = 1, . . . , r0, of vector s are the “checks”. Then the aim of the decoder is
to compute the marginal a posteriori probabilities

qn(β ) = P[un = β |{p(ui|Y), i = 1, . . . , n0}, s = 0] (9)

for β ∈ {0, 1} and n = 1, . . . , n0. The detected codeword symbols are then given by

uˆn = arg max qn(β ), n = 1, . . . , n0,

(10)

β ∈{0,1}

from which the message estimate bˆ is obtained. The factor graph for joint decoding of an outer LDPC code and an inner (1,7) code is shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 3. Factor graph for joint decoding of an outer LDPC code and an inner (1,7) code.

V. PERFORMANCE COMPARISON

The block diagram of Fig. 1 is followed in the simulations,

assuming a single storage field in the probe-storage device.

The binary symbols bn are i.i.d. uniform-distributed, and

the state-transition diagram of Fig. 2 is used to generate

(1,7) sequences. The channel impulse response is given by h(t) = −[1 − aπ(t/tn)2] · exp−bπ (t/tn)2. This response is typ-

ical of the impulse radio systems used in ultra-wideband

communications [10], and also closely resembles the pulse

shape experimentally extracted from thermomechanical probe

recordings. The three parameters, a, b, and tn, which characterize h(t), are tailored to fit the actual probe storage

impulse response. Furthermore, to simulate different linear

recording densities, the pulse-shape is kept fixed while the

symbol interval is varied. For a typical storage density of

1.5 Tbit/in2, the symbol interval was chosen as T = 0.09,

corresponding to a normalized pulse-width (PW/T ) of 1.567.

Electronics as well as medium noise are generated as colored

Gaussian random processes, using the filters derived in [5]

with white Gaussian noise as input. The SNR is defined as

SNR = 20log10

1 2σ

, where σ is the standard deviation of the

total noise (electronics and medium) at the channel output.

An additional parameter, λ = σm2 /σ 2, is used to specify the relative contribution of medium noise in the variance of the

total noise. The standard deviations σe and σm of electronics and medium noise, respectively, can be derived based on the

SNR and the value of λ , and are used to scale the respective

noise components. A value of λ = 0.7 has been assumed

across all sets of simulations. Finally, write and read jitter are

included in the generation of read-back signal samples. They

are both generated as colored Gaussian random processes,

using the filters given in [5] with white Gaussian noise as

input. Because the jitter filters are heavily band-limited, the

normalized

standard

deviations

of

jitter

processes,

σ

w j

and

σ

r j

,

are specified at the filter output.

Samples of the continuous-time read-back signal are gener-

ated according to (2). As timing jitter in probe-storage chan-

nels is high, robust timing recovery schemes are required to

ensure reliable operation. To decouple the present performance

evaluation study from the specifics of the timing recovery

scheme used, an approach in which either no timing recovery

or ideal timing recovery is performed is followed. First, a

worst-case scenario is assumed, in which no timing recovery

is performed. Instead, the signal is sampled at the symbol

rate by an ADC operated with a free-running clock. This

clearly represents a lower bound for the system performance.

To establish an upper bound as well, the performance of an

ideal system, in which perfect timing information is provided

by a genie-aided timing recovery scheme, is considered.

Two schemes are investigated for the performance compar-

ison between probe-based storage systems with concatenated

coding. The first scheme, which represents a practical system,

comprises an outer (143,129) RS code and an inner (1,7) code

with hard decoding. The second scheme, which provides a

performance benchmark, employs an outer (495,433) LDPC

code and an inner (1,7) code with soft decoding. A maximum

of 25 iterations for LDPC decoding, and a maximum of 10

iterations between inner and outer decoders are assumed. Fig-

ure 4 shows the performance of a system with RS coding and

low to moderate jitter values. Fig. 5 illustrates the performance

achieved by LDPC coding in the presence of severe jitter,

with a soft decoding scheme that adopts a MCMD, which

either explicitly accounts for both jitter and noise statistics

or assumes additive Gaussian noise only at the equalizer

output. The two approaches exhibit approximately the same

performance up to a jitter standard deviation of about 8%

of T . For larger jitter values, the decoder that exploits the

information about jitter statistics provides better performance,

with gains that increase significantly with increasing jitter

standard deviation up to 13.2%. Furthermore, LDPC coding

and soft decoding offer an advantage with respect to RS coding and hard decoding in excess of 1.5 dB at an error rate of 10−5

in the case of moderate jitter, which increases to more than 2.5

dB in the presence of large jitter values. The performance of

an ideal system, where timing recovery is achieved by a genie-

aided scheme that is capable of instantly tracking the total jitter

arising from the write and read processes, is shown in Fig. 6

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

BIT ERROR RATE

10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4

σJ=0.012 T σ =0.060 T
J
σ =0.084 T
J
σJ=0.108 T

BIT ERROR RATE

10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4

σJ=0.084 T σ =0.108 T
J
σ =0.132 T
J

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

SNR (dB)

Fig. 4. System performance for outer (143,129) RS code and inner (1,7) code with hard decoding; sampling with free-running clock.

−3.5 −3 −2.5 −2 −1.5 −1 −0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

SNR (dB)

Fig. 6. System performance for outer (495,433) LDPC code and inner (1,7) code with soft decoding; genie-aided timing recovery.

for jitter values in the same range of 8.4% to 13.2%. The gains attained by the scheme with genie-aided timing recovery in the presence of severe jitter suggest that adoption of a robust timing recovery scheme would significantly improve system performance.

10−1 10−2 10−3

σ =0.084 T, Gauss
J
σ =0.108 T, Gauss
J
σJ=0.132 T, Gauss σJ=0.084 T, pdf σ =0.108 T, pdf
J
σ =0.132 T, pdf
J

BIT ERROR RATE

10−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

SNR (dB)

Fig. 5. System performance for outer (495,433) LDPC code and inner (1,7) code with soft decoding; sampling with free-running clock.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
Probe-storage devices offer a new framework in which a large array of write/read heads operate in parallel to store/retrieve data. The channel corresponding to one head is characterized by limited intersymbol interference, additive colored Gaussian noise, and correlated read/write jitter, which turns out to be the main impairment for the read channel at increasing storage areal densities. Application of concatenated coding strategies has been investigated with reference to a comprehensive probe-storage channel model, whose parameters have been extracted from experimental waveforms. A concatenated coding scheme comprising a (1, 7)-constrained inner code and an LDPC outer code has been considered

as benchmark for the probe storage channel performance. Soft decoding of the inner code has been tailored to the actual channel model, by making use of explicit analytical expressions for the channel output statistics in the presence of jitter. The soft decoding architecture considered offers large gains in bit-error rate, in excess of 1 dB in large jitter, with respect to conventional decoding schemes based on Gaussian approximation, and considerably larger gains with respect to hard decoding of RS codes.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank our colleagues of the Probe Storage Group at the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory. We particularly thank A. Sebastian and A. Pantazi for their work in experimental channel characterization, and E. Eleftheriou for his constant support and guidance.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Kado and T. Tohda, “Nanometer-scale recording on chalcogenide films with an atomic force microscope,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 66, no. 22, pp. 2961–2962, May 1995.
[2] T. Hidaka et al., “Formation and observation of 50 nm polarized domains in PbZr1−xTixO3 thin film using scanning probe microscope,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 68, no. 17, pp. 2358–2359, April 1996.
[3] E. Eleftheriou et al., “Millipede-a MEMS based scanning-probe data storage system,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 938–945, 2003.
[4] H. Pozidis et al., “Signal processing for probe storage,” in Proc. Intl. Conf. Acoust. Speech Sig. Proc. (ICASSP’05), pp. v-745–v-748, Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A., Mar. 2005.
[5] A. Sebastian, A. Pantazi, and H. Pozidis, “Jitter investigation and performance evaluation of a small-scale probe storage device prototype,” In Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf. (GLOBECOM’07), pp. 288–293, Washington, DC, U.S.A., 2007.
[6] J. L. Fan and J. M. Cioffi, “Constrained coding techniques for soft iterative decoders,” In Proc. IEEE Global Telecom. Conf. (GLOBECOM’99), vol. 1B, pp. 723–727, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1999.
[7] R. M. Todd and J. R. Cruz, “Enforcing maximum-transition-run code constraints and low-density parity-check decoding,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, pp. 3566–3571, Nov. 2004.
[8] M. Varsamou and T. Antonakopoulos, “A new data allocation method for parallel probe-based storage devices”, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 44, pp. 547–554, Apr. 2008.
[9] N. Benvenuto and G. Cherubini, “Algorithms for Communications Systems and their Applications,” John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, U.K., 2002.
[10] W.M. Lovelace, J.K. Townsend, “The effects of timing jitter and tracking on the performance of impulse radio,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas in Communications, vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1646–1651, Dec. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

