This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

A Low Complexity Iterative Technique for Soft Decision Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes
Farnaz Shayegh, M. Reza Soleymani Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Concordia University
Montreal, Quebec, Canada

Abstract—A new iterative soft decision decoding method for Reed-Solomon (RS) codes is proposed. This method is based on bit level belief propagation (BP) decoding. In order to make BP decoding effective for RS codes, we use an extended binary parity check matrix with a lower density and reduced number of 4-cycles compared to the original binary parity check matrix of the code. In our proposed method, we take advantage of the cyclic structure of RS codes. Based on this property, we can apply the belief propagation algorithm on any cyclically shifted version of the received symbols with the same binary parity check matrix. For each shifted version of received symbols, the geometry of the factor graph will change and deterministic errors can be avoided. Our method results in considerable performance improvement of RS codes compared to hard decision decoding. The performance is also superior to some popular soft decision decoding methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
Reed-Solomon (RS) codes are block-based error correcting codes with a wide range of applications in wireless communications and storage systems. Guruswami and Vardy [1] have shown that the maximum likelihood decoding of RS codes is NP-hard. Based on this fact, many different soft decision decoding methods have been introduced for RS codes in an effort to have moderate complexity and a performance close to optimal ML decoding.
Belief Propagation (BP) iterative decoding was first proposed for decoding low-density parity check (LDPC) codes [2]. Standard BP iterative decoding is not suitable for high density parity check codes like RS codes, because for these codes, there are a large number of short cycles in the factor graph which cause correlation between the messages and error propagation. The first successful bit-level iterative decoding method for RS codes was adaptive parity-check (ADP) algorithm [3]. In ADP, in order to make BP decoding effective for dense RS parity check matrix, Gaussian Elimination is performed on the binary parity check matrix before each iteration such that the variables of lowest reliability connect into the graph only once. It has been shown that this algorithm has very good performance compared to other soft-decision decoding algorithms for RS codes. The problem with ADP algorithm is that the required adaptation of the parity check matrix at each iteration is very complex.
This work has been supported by NSERC CRD grant CRDPJ-340658 as well as contribution from InterDigital Canada Ltd., PROMPT Quebec and FQRNT.

In this paper, we propose a new bit level iterative soft decision decoding method for RS codes based on BP decoding on the fixed binary parity check matrix. In order to make BP decoding effective for RS codes, we use an extended binary parity check matrix whose density is lower and has less number of 4-cycles compared to the original binary parity check matrix of the code. We also use the cyclic structure of RS codes. Based on this property, we can apply the BP algorithm on any cyclically shifted version of the received symbols with the same binary parity check matrix. Simulation results demonstrate that the performance of our method is superior to some popular methods including ADP method.
The organization of this paper is as follows. In section II the system model is introduced. In section III, we first briefly review the BP decoding. Then we show how to find low density binary parity check matrix for RS codes. We extend this matrix with rows and columns to reduce its 4cycles. Then we investigate the performance of BP decoding with different binary parity check matrices over binary erasure channel. Using the extended parity check matrix, the algorithm for soft decision decoding of RS codes based on BP decoding and cyclic property of RS codes is presented. We then give a geometric interpretation of the proposed algorithm. We also present a complexity analysis for the proposed algorithm. Simulation results and discussions are in section IV. Conclusions are presented in section V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL We use a systematic (N, K) RS code. A codeword c is:

c = b.G

(1)

Where b is the information sequence and G is the generator

matrix. The entries of b, c and G are elements from a Galois

Field GF (2m) where N = 2m − 1. The parity check matrix

of the code can be represented by:

⎛ 1α

α2

...

H = ⎝⎜⎜ 1

α2

α4

...

...

α(N −1)

⎞

α2(N −1)

⎟⎠⎟

1 α(N−K) α2(N−K) ... α(N−K)(N−1)

(2)

For any codeword c of the RS code HcT = 0 . Since any

element β ∈ GF (2m) has an m tuple representation, we can

show any codeword of length N in binary form:

cb = (c1,1, c1,2, ..., c1,m, c2,1, ..., c2,m, ..., cN,1, ..., cN,m) (3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
978-1-4244-3435-0/09/$25.00 ©2009 Crown

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

We assume BPSK modulation x = −2cb + 1 over AWGN wireless channel. So, the received signal is:

y = x+n

(4)

Where n is the AWGN vector with variance σ2. The reliability

of the received vector can be expressed in terms of the log likelihood ratios (LLR’s) that are given by ρch = 2y/σ2.

Here for the decoding, we consider RS codes over an

extension field of GF (2). We denote a primitive polynomial of GF (2m) over GF (2) by p(x) = a0 +a1x+...+am−1xm−1 + xm. We also suppose that α is a root of p(x) and therefore a
primitive element in GF (2m). For p(x), there is an m × m

companion matrix which is given as follows:

⎛

⎞

0 ... 0 a0

cp = ⎜⎜⎝

Im−1

a1 :

⎟⎟⎠

(5)

am−1

Where Im−1 is an (m − 1) × (m − 1) identity matrix [4]. A field isomorphism can be defined by the mapping αi → cpi , i = {0, 1, ...}. Based on this mapping, each element of the parity check matrix of the code is replaced with an m × m binary matrix resulting a binary parity check matrix Hb of size (N − K)m × N m. Such a mapping results in HbcbT = 0. This equation specifies the set of linear constraints satisfied by the
codeword bits. Every linear code can also be represented by
a bipartite graph where the set of variable nodes represents
the codeword bits and the set of check nodes represents the
set of parity-check constraints satisfied by the codeword bits.
There is also a set of edges that connect every check node
with all the variables nodes involved in its check equation.
We denote the number of the check equations that a variable node i, i = 1, 2, ..., N ∗ m is involved with by dvi and refer to it as the degree of that variable node. Also, We denote
the number of the variable nodes that are involved in a check equation i, i = 1, 2, ..., (N − K) ∗ m by dci and refer to it as the degree of that check node. The (edge) degree distributions
of the code are defined as:

dvmax

λ(x) =

λixi−1

(6)

i=1

dcmax

ρ(x) =

ρixi−1

(7)

i=1

where λi (ρi) is equal to the fraction of edges that connect to variable (check) nodes of degree i.

III. ITERATIVE DECODING OF RS CODES USING BELIEF PROPAGATION
A. Standard Belief Propagation decoding of RS Codes
In the bipartite graph of the binary image of an (N, K) RS code, there are (N − k)m check nodes and N m variable nodes. We define N ci as the set of variable nodes participating in check equation i and N vj as the set of check nodes that variable node j is involved with. The log-likelihood ratio

(LLR) of the jth variable node given the information about
all parity check nodes except node i is shown by Qi,j and the LLR that check node i is satisfied when variable node
j is fixed to 0 and 1 respectively is shown by Ri,j. Given the vector ρin of initial LLR’s, the BP algorithm outputs the extrinsic LLR’s ρx using the following algorithm [5]:

For all (i, j) such that Hb(i, j) = 1 : 1- Initialization: Qi,j = ρjin Do
2- Horizontal step (check nodes updates): Ri,j = 2tanh−1(Πk∈Nci\j tanh(Qi,k/2)) 3- Vertical step (variable nodes updates): Qi,j = ρjin + k∈Nvj \i Rk,j While stopping criterion is not met. 4- ρxj = k∈Nvj Rk,j

The stopping criterion could be when all the checks are satisfied or when we reach the maximum number of iterations. Standard BP iterative decoding is not suitable for high density parity check codes like RS codes, because for these codes, the large number of short cycles in the factor graph will cause correlation between the messages and consequently error propagation.

B. Low Density Parity Check Matrix for RS Codes
The total number of short cycles in the factor graph of RS codes increases exponentially with the parity check matrix density. The density of the binary image of the parity check matrix given in equation (2) is around 50% for different RS codes which leads to a large number of short cycles. So, one step is to find a low density binary parity check mtrix for an (N, K) RS code which is equivalent to finding the (N − K)m codewords of low hamming weight that span the binary image of the dual code of the RS code which is also an RS code. We may construct these low weight codewords by considering the subcodes of the binary image of the dual code consisting of codewords that are nonzero only on a subset of the N m coordinate positions [6]. In order to construct these subcodes, for a given parameter s < m, we define a support set R:

R = {i1, i2, ..., is} ⊂ {1, 2, ..., m}

(8)

We look for any codeword b of the dual code which is zero outsize the defined support set R:

bi,j = 0, (i, j) ∈ {1, 2, ..., N m} × R¯

(9)

Where R¯ = {1, 2, ..., m} \ R. Codewords satisfying the above constrains (if they exist) may be obtained from the appropriate linear combinations of the rows of Hb [6]. We will repeat this procedure for different support sets and among the codewords that we obtain, we choose the ones with lowest weight that span the binary image of the dual code [6].
If the low weight codewords don’t span the binary image of the dual code, we arrange the rows of the systematic Hb in an increasing order of their hamming weight. We start from the first row and select the ones that help to complete the span of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

the dual code. The density of the new parity check matrix for different RS codes is around 30% which leads to less short cycles compared to the original Hb.
C. Extended Parity Check Matrix for RS Codes
In order to reduce the number of 4-cycles in the factor graph of the RS code, we can extend the low density parity check matrix by rows and columns [6]. At first, we select the two rows (checks) with maximum variable nodes in common denoted by row i and row j. We form a new row with ones in variable overlap positions of the two checks. In order for this new row to be a check equation, we have to add a new variable (column) with single one at the new row and zero elsewhere to the parity matrix to ensure even parity of the new check. We add this new check to row i and row j and replace them with the results [6]. By doing so, all the 4-cycles among variables associated with row i, row j and this new row will be eliminated.
Then we select next two checks with maximum variable overlap and repeat the previous procedure to add a new row and a new column. After completing this process, the extended parity check matrix will have re = (N −K)m+(N −K)m/2 rows and ne = N m + (N − K)m/2 columns. The density of the new extended parity check matrix is around 15% for different RS codes which means considerably less short cycles. Since we never actually transmit these new variables, during the decoding, we consider them as erasures (zero LLRs).
D. Performance Analysis over Binary Erasure Channel
Because of its simplicity, we investigate the performance of belief propagation decoding of RS codes over binary erasure channel (BEC) with erasure probability equal to . Due to the binary form of the messages, BP decoding on the erasure channel can be done much easier as follows:
1) Set the values of all check nodes to zero. 2) If the message node is received correctly, add its value
to the values of all adjacent check nodes and remove the message node and all its edges from the graph. Repeat this for all message nodes. 3) If there is a check node with degree one, substitute its value into the value of its unique neighbor. Repeat step 2 for this message node and repeat step 3. This step is repeated until all the erased bits are recovered. If at some point there is no check node with degree one, algorithm can not proceed further causing decoding failure.
Similar to Low density parity check (LDPC) codes, for a given degree distribution pair (λ, ρ) and ∈ [0, 1], we define f ( , x) = λ(1−ρ(1−x)). Then the threshold is defined as [7]:
∗(λ, ρ) = sup{ ∈ [0, 1] : x = f ( , x) has no solution x in (0, 1]}
A critical point is a point at which f ( ∗, x) − x tangentially touches the horizontal axis. It has been proved that for unconditionally stable graphs (for which λ (0)ρ (1) < 1) with only one critical point (x∗), the block error probability curves of a

code of fixed length n can be approximated in the waterfall

region (around the asymptotic threshold) by [7]:

PB

=

√ Q( n(

∗

− βn−2/3 α

−

) )(1 + O(n−1/3))

(10)

where knowing the degree distributions λ(x) and ρ(x), we can

compute the covariance term α and the shift parameter β [7].

In defining the threshold, it is supposed that the messages

coming from the check nodes are independent as well as the

messages coming from the variable nodes. However, when

there are cycles in the factor graph, this assumption is not

always true. So, the results in this section are not exact but

they give us a good estimate to investigate the performance of

BP decoding of RS codes over BEC channels.

It should be mentioned that the performance of BP decoding

of a specific code depends largely on the parity check matrix

that is used for decoding. Here, we consider three different

parity check matrices: 1- the original binary parity check matrix with density around 50% and ∗ = 0.065, 2- low

density parity check matrix with density around 30% and ∗ = 0.0911, 3- extended parity check matrix with density around 15% and ∗ = 0.155. Performance of BP decoding of

RS(31,25) code over BEC channel using these three different

binary parity check matrices has been shown in Figure 1. It

should be mentioned that for the case of extended parity check

matrix, newly added variable nodes are considered as erasure

and therefore the erasure probability used in the formula was

more than the real erasure probability. Even doing so, the

performence of BP decoding using the extended parity check

matrix was still much better than the others. As it can be

seen from this figure, by reducing the density of the parity

check matrix and therefore the number of cycles, the erasure

probability threshold increases and the performance of BP

decoding improves largely. So, in the next section that we

propose a new method for iterative decoding of RS codes, we

use the extended binary parity check matrix for BP decoding.

100

Frame Error Rate

10−1

10−2

Original binary parity check matrix Low density binary parity check matrix

Extended binary parity check matrix

0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 Erasure Probability (ε)

Fig. 1. Performance of belief propagation decoding of RS(31,25) code using three different binary parity check matrices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

E. Proposed Iterative Decoding of RS Codes
Since RS codes are cyclic, any cyclically shifted version of a codeword c is also a valid codeword. Therefore, we can consider a cyclically shifted version of the received signal y by ϕ symbols (ϕ ∈ [0, N − 1]) as the received signal when a shifted version of c by ϕ symbols which is also a valid codeword was transmitted. Based on this fact, we can apply the BP algorithm on any cyclically shifted version of the received reliabilities with the same binary parity check matrix [8]. At the end of each iteration, the updated reliabilities are shifted back to their original positions.
Since for each cyclically shifted version of the reliabilities, the geometry of the factor graph is different, some deterministic errors can be avoided. So, the idea is to have outer rounds during the decoding. During each outer round, a different cyclically shifted version of the received reliabilities is generated and then used as the input to the BP decoding algorithm. Denoting the low density extended parity check matrix by H, the proposed algorithm is described as follows:

Step 1) Inputs: H, ρch = 2y/σ2, θ and ϕ

Step 2) Initialization step: , cit = 0, BPit = 0

Step 3) ϕ = cit

Step 4) Cyclically shifting the channel LLR’s by ϕ symbols:

ρch−shif t = ρϕch

Step 5) ρBPit

=

[00...0]1×(Nm+(N−K)m/2) and

ρBPit (1 : N m) = ρch−shift

Step 6) Belief Propagation: feed ρBPit and the parity check

matrix H into the BP decoder and generate extrinsic LLR’s for each bit: ρx.

Step 7) Update the LLR of each bit: ρBPit+1(ci) = ρBPit (ci) + θρx(ci) Where 0 < θ ≤ 1 is the damping coefficient.

Step 8) Hard Decisions, for i=1,2,...,Nm:

c˜i =

0 ρBPit+1(ci) > 0 1 ρBPit+1(ci) < 0

(11)

Step 9) If c˜ satisfies all the check equations, shift the decoded bits back to their original position: c˜ = c˜(−ϕ), save c˜,
terminate the algorithm and go to step 12. else: Berlekamp-Massey (BM) decoding [9], cB˜M = BM (c˜) and if a decoding success was signaled, cB˜M = cB˜M (−ϕ) and save cB˜M . Step 10) Inner round (BP iterations): if BPit = BPit−max, go to step 11. else BPit = BPit + 1 and go to step 6. Step 11) Outer round: if cit = cit−max, terminate the algorithm and go to step 12. else cit = cit + 1, BPit = 0 and go to step 3. Step 12) Among all the codewords that were saved during the
algorithm, choose the one with minimum Euclidean distance
from the received vector.

The maximum number of outer rounds, cit−max, can be

chosen to be equal N − 1 such that all the possible cyclically shifted versions of the received reliabilities are considered as the input of BP decoding. It should be mentioned that most of the time, our algorithm finds the response very soon (during the first or the second outer round) and is terminated. So, there is no need to complete all of the outer rounds.
In the proposed algorithm we use both BP decoding and hard decision BM decoding. At the end of each BP iteration, the hard decision version of updated reliabilities is used as the input to the BM decoding algorithm. Even in the situations that BM algorithm can recover a codeword, we do not stop the algorithm just save that codeword. In the end, if the BP decoding was not successful, we choose one of the saved codewords with minimum Euclidean distance from the received vector as the response of the proposed iterative decoding method. Therefore, the block error rate of the method can be written as:

PB = PB−BM × PB−BP

(12)

where PB−BM is the block error rate of BM decoding method and PB−BP is the block error rate of BP decoding with cyclic shifting of reliabilities.
In order to reduce the number of required BP iterations
before findi√ng the response of the algorithm, we define a radius r = N mσ2. Each time there is a decoding success at the output of BM algorithm at the end of step (9), we check the distance of that codeword from the received vector d = xB˜M − y where xB˜M = −2cB˜M + 1. If d <= r, we terminate the algorithm and go to step (12). We refer to this process as extra stopping criterion (d ≤ r). Of course by doing so, the performance of our proposed algorithm will be
slightly worse than before. So, we have a trade-off between
the performance and the complexity.

F. Analysis of Cyclic Shifting of RS Codes: Geometric Interpretation of the Proposed Algorithm

The belief propagation based algorithms were shown to be special cases of the gradient descent algorithm [10]. We define the potential function J as [3]:

n−k

n−k

n

J(Hb, T ) = − γj = −

Tp

j=1

j=1 p=1,Hjp=1

(13)

where J is a function of both the parity check matrix Hb and the received soft information T:

T = [T1, T2, ..., Tn] = [v(ρ(c1)), ..., v(ρ(cn))] (14)

Here, the operator v : [−∞, ∞] → [−1, 1] is a mapping from the LLR domain to tanh domain:

v(ρ)

=

tanh(

ρ 2

)

=

1 1

+ −

eρ/2 eρ/2

(15)

When all the checks are satisfied, we have reached a valid codeword and the potential function J is minimized. In this case, |Tj| = 1 for j = 1, ..., n and Jmin = −(n − k). In the case of RS codes, even using the extended parity check

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

Potential function (J)

−4 −6 −8 −10 −12 −14 −16 −18 −20 −22 −24
0

First outer round

Second outer round

Third outer round

20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 Number of iterations

Fig. 2. Potential function versus the number of iterations for three outer rounds during the iterative decoding of RS(15,11) code over AWGN channel with Eb/N 0 = 4dB.

matrix, the density is still high and applying the iterative decoding might lead to some local minimum points called pseudo-equilibrium points. These point are not corresponded to valid codewords and the iterative algorithm gets stuck at them. Actually, there are a few unreliable bits which do not let J to be minimum.
Because J is a function of both Hb and T (bit reliabilities), different arrangements of the reliabilities with the same Hb, result in different potential functions J. The proposed algorithm uses this fact and when a pseudo-equilibrium point is reached, we change the arrangement of bit reliabilities using cyclic shifting by ϕ symbols (ϕ = 1, ..., N − 1), such that it allows the update to proceed rather than getting stuck at the pseudo-equilibrium point. In Figure 2, we have shown the potential function J versus the number of iterations for three outer rounds during the iterative decoding of RS(15,11) code over AWGN channel with Eb/N0=4 dB. As it can be seen in this figure, during the first outer round, BP decoding gets stuck in a pseudo-equilibrium point and can not converge to a codeword. However, by cyclically shifting the reliabilities by one symbol during the second round, BP decoding converges to the correct codeword.
G. Complexity Analysis of the Proposed Algorithm
The complexity of belief propagation in each iteration is proportional to the number of nonzero elements in the parity check matrix of the code. Because the density of the extended binary parity check matrix is around 15%, the time complexity of each BP iteration is:

min(K2m2, (N − K)2m2)) binary operations for Gaussian Elimination. So, the complexity of each iteration of our method is less than ADP method. The maximum number of BP iterations in our method is cit−max ×BPit−max. However, most of the times, we find the response very soon (during the first or the second outer round) and we terminate the algorithm. So, the actual complexity will be much less than the maximum complexity. In the next section that we provide simulation results for different RS codes, we will also give a table of the average number of required BP iterations for different signal to noise ratios.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, simulation results for decoding of RS codes based on the proposed algorithm are presented. For all the simulations, we suppose BPSK transmission over wireless AWGN channel. Also, we set the maximum number of BP iterations during the inner round of our algorithm to be equal 60. So, the maximum number of iterations will be 60N .
We compare our algorithm with Berlekamp-Massey (BM) hard decision decoding method [9] and also the algebraic soft decision decoding proposed by Koetter and Vardy [11] [5] that will be mentioned by KV algorithm. We will also compare our results with ADP method [3].
1- RS(15,11) code: In Figure 3, we have shown the performance of our proposed method with and without extra stopping criterion (d ≤ r). From this figure, decoding using our algorithm will provide more than 1.5dB coding gain compared to asymptotic performance of KV algorithm and 2.7dB compared to the BM algorithm. Our method has also about 0.5dB coding gain compared to the performance of ADP-BM (5,1) [3]. In order to consider the complexity, Table I shows the average number of required BP iterations during the decoding. By comparing the complexity and the performance of our method with and without extra stopping criterion, we see that adding this extra stopping criterion causes about 0.2dB performance loss and at the same time reduces the average number of required BP iterations considerably. Therefore, for longer RS codes, we always add this extra stopping criterion.

RS (15,11,5), BPSK Modulation, AWGN Channel 100

Hard Decision−BM Algorithm

KV Algorithm, cost=1000

KV Algorithm, cost=inf

10−1

ADP−BM (5,1)

Proposed Method

Proposed method with extra
stopping criterion (d<r) 10−2

10−3

10−4

Codeword Error Rate

O(0.15 × re × ne)

(16)

10−5

where re = (N − K)m + (N − K)m/2 and ne = N m +
(N − K)m/2. In the ADP method, each iteration involves O(N 2m2)
floating point operations for sorting and BP, and O(N m ×

10−6

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)

Fig. 3. Performance of the proposed algorithm for RS(15,11)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

Codeword Error Rate Codeword Error Rate

TABLE I THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(15,11)

Eb/N0 (dB)

2 3 45

Average number of BP iterations 422 174 52 6

Average number of BP iterations 253 97 24 5

with extra stopping criterion (d ≤ r)

2- RS(31,25) code: From Figure 4, decoding using our algorithm with the extra stopping criterion (d ≤ r) will provide more than 1.5dB coding gain compared to asymptotic performance of KV algorithm and about 2.5dB compared to the BM algorithm. Also, our method has about 0.5dB coding gain compared to ADP-BM (5,1) and 0.2dB compared to ADP-BM (20,1).

100 10−1

RS(63,55,9), BPSK Modulaton, AWGN Channel
Hard−Decision−BM Algorithm ADP−BM (5,1) Proposed Method with Extra Stopping Criterion (d<=r)

10−2

10−3

10−4

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)

Fig. 5. Performance of the proposed algorithm for RS(63,55)

100 10−1 10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5 10−6
2

RS (31,25,7), BPSK Modulation, AWGN Channel
Hard−Decision−BM Algorithm KV Algorithm, cost=inf ADP−BM (5,1) ADP−BM (20,1) Proposed Method with Extra Stopping Criterion (d<=r)

3

4

5

6

7

8

Signal to Noise Ratio (dB)

Fig. 4. Performance of the proposed algorithm for RS(31,25)

TABLE II THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(31,25)

advantage of our method over ADP method [3] is that it works with the fixed parity check matrix. We used an extended binary parity check matrix with lower density and reduced number of 4-cycles compared to the original binary parity check matrix of the code. We investigated the performance of BP decoding with different binary parity check matrices over binary erasure channel and we realized that the extended binary parity check matrix provides better performance. Using the extended parity check matrix, the algorithm for soft decision decoding of RS codes based on BP decoding and cyclic property of RS codes was presented. We also presented geometric interpretation and complexity analysis of the proposed algorithm. Simulation results showed that our method has significant gain over hard decision decoding. The performance is also superior to some other popular soft decision decoding methods including KV method and ADP method.

Eb/N0 (dB)

3

4 5 5.5

Average number of BP iterations 1139 331 41 11

with extra stopping criterion (d ≤ r)

3- RS(63,55) code: From Figure 5, our method provides better performance (about 0.2dB coding gain) compared to ADP-BM (5,1) algorithm. Also our algorithm provides a coding gain of about 1.6 dB compared to the BM algorithm.

TABLE III THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED BP ITERATIONS FOR RS(63,55)

Eb/N0 (dB)

4 4.5 5 5.5

Average number of BP iterations 2012 1089 373 29

with extra stopping criterion (d ≤ r)

From Tables I, II and III, we can see that by increasing the signal to noise ratio, the number of required BP iterations and therefore the complexity of the iterative algorithm are reduced. Also, the average number of required BP iterations is much less than the maximum number of BP iterations (60N ).
V. CONCLUSION
We proposed a soft decision decoding algorithm based on bit level belief propagation decoding for RS codes. The

REFERENCES
[1] V. Guruswami and A. Vardy. Maximum-likelihood decoding of ReedSolomon codes is NP-hard. Proceedings of the sixteenth annual ACMSIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, pages 470–478, 2005.
[2] R. Gallager. Low-density parity-check codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 8(1):21–28, 1962.
[3] J. Jiang and K.R. Narayanan. Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of Reed-Solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 52(8):3746–3756, 2006.
[4] R.A. Horn and C.R. Johnson. Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1985.
[5] M. El-Khamy and R.J. McEliece. Iterative Algebraic Soft-Decision List Decoding of Reed-Solomon Codes. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication, 24(3):481–490, 2006.
[6] Jason Bellorado. Low-complexity soft decoding algorithms for ReedSolomon codes. PhD thesis, Harvard University, 2006.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke. Modern coding theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[8] J. Jiang and KR Narayanan. Iterative soft decoding of Reed-Solomon codes. IEEE Communications Letters, 8(4):244–246, 2004.
[9] S. Lin and D.J. Costello. Error control coding. Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1983.
[10] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach. On iterative soft-decision decoding of linear binary block codes and product codes. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 16(2):276–296, 1998.
[11] R. Koetter and A. Vardy. Algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 49(11):2809–2825, 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:49:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

