This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

Vertex Packing Decoding
Michael Lunglmayr∗, Jens Berkmann†, Mario Huemer∗ ∗ Klagenfurt University, Institute of Networked and Embedded Systems, Lakesidepark B02b, A-9020 Klagenfurt, {mlungl, mario.huemer}@ieee.org † Infineon Technologies AG, Am Campeon 1-12, D-81726 Munich, jens.berkmann@infineon.com

Abstract—In this work, we present a new framework for developing decoding algorithms for linear block codes. We define a new graphical model, called configuration graph and show that maximum likelihood (ML) sequence decoding can be performed by finding a maximum vertex packing on a configuration graph. We present examples of low-cost decoding algorithms developed using this graphical model and show that remarkable performance improvements can be achieved especially by combining these algorithms with belief propagation (BP) decoding for Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Graphical models are important tools for describing decoding algorithms for error correction codes. Two famous examples of such graphical models are trellises and Tanner graphs [1]. These models greatly enhance the design and understanding of efficient decoding algorithms for error correcting codes. We present a new graphical model, that we call configuration graph, for representing the maximum likelihood sequence decoding problem and describe how to construct a configuration graph for binary linear block codes. We show that the ML decoding problem can be solved by solving the maximum weighted vertex packing problem – a well-known problem in the field of graph theory – on the configuration graph. This not only allows applying certain theorems (e.g. of [2]) known for vertex packing problems to the ML decoding problem, but also allows using vertex packing algorithms for decoding of linear block codes. As an implementation example, we show simulation results with simple greedy algorithms. These results demonstrate that, even with these simple approaches, remarkable performance improvements can be achieved.
For simplicity, we will only consider binary linear codes using binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation over an AWGN channel in this work. But the discussed concepts can also be extended to non-binary codes. The receiver uses the received samples to calculate a vector of log-likelihood ratios (LLR) λ = [λi]. With these log-likelihood ratios, ML sequence decoding of a code C can be performed by finding

II. VERTEX PACKING DECODING
Let HC be a parity check matrix of a binary linear block code C. HC can be converted into an m×n matrix H = [D I] with the m×m identity matrix I and an adequate m×(n−m) matrix D. This conversion can be done with column permuta-
tions and elementary row operations leading to an equivalent code C of C. C is defined by the codewords x ∈ F2n (with the binary field F2), here represented as column vectors, satisfying

Hx = 0.

(3)

Every row i of H corresponds to a parity check. A bit j is said to contribute to parity check i, if Hi,j = 1. To satisfy (3), at every parity check, an even number of the contributing bits must be set to one.
Before defining a configuration graph, we explain its basic principles with the following example. Assume a code defined by the following parity check matrix (which is already in the desired form):

H=

1 1

0 1

1 0

1 0

0 1

.

(4)

Tab. I shows the bit assignments satisfying parity check 1 and 2 respectively. A variable assignment satisfying parity check i is called a valid configuration. Similar to linear programming decoding [3], for every valid configuration k of parity check i, an indicator qik is assigned. An indicator qik sets the bits of parity check i to the values of the valid configuration k. For the above example, q12 sets the bits 1, 3, 4 to the values 0, 1, 1, respectively. Any codeword can be
represented by an appropriate set of indicators. For example, the set {q11, q21} represents a valid codeword. But not every possible combination of indicators leads to a codeword, e.g. {q11, q23} does not define a valid codeword (the indicators would assign different values to bit 1). Generalizing the above
example, one can derive the following conditions for a set

TABLE I INDICATORS AND BIT ASSIGNMENTS FOR THE EXAMPLE CODE

xML = argmax cx(x),
x∈C
with the costs of a codeword:
cx(x) = (−2xi + 1)λi.
i

(1)

Parity check 1

Parity check 2

Indicator

bits

Indicator

bits

134

125

q11

000

q21

000

q12

011

q22

011

(2)

q13

101

q23

101

q14

110

q24

110

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
978-1-4244-3435-0/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

of indicators to represent a codeword. A set of indicators P = {qik} can be used to represent a codeword xP = [xPl ] if:
1) Exactly one indicator per parity check is included in the set.
2) All indicators are consistent, meaning that for every bit xlP , l = 1, . . . , n, all indicators qik ∈ P assign the same value to xPl .
Concerning the last condition, two indicators are consistent to each other if they assign the same values to common bits. The codeword xP can be obtained by setting the bit values according to the indicators of P .
A. Configuration Graph
A graphical model suitable for representing the described properties, is a configuration graph GC = (Q, E). Q is the set of nodes and E is the set of edges of the configuration graph. Although a configuration graph in principle can also be built from parity check matrices of other structures, in the following we assume that a parity check matrix of the structure H = [D I] is used for construction. The set Q = {qik} is given by assigning a node to every indicator of every valid configuration k of every parity check i. So a node of GC and an indicator are the same in this context. The set of edges is described by connecting those nodes that are not consistent to each other, as defined by the following rule.
Rule. Connecting nodes of a configuration graph Two nodes qik and qjl, qik = qjl of a configuration graph are connected: {qik, qjl} ∈ E, iff a bit x contributes to parity check i and to parity check j, and qik would assign a different value to bit x than qjl. At maximum one connection is allowed between two nodes of the graph.
A configuration graph for the example presented above is shown in Fig. 1. This figure also shows one of the

B. Vertex Packing on a Configuration Graph

In this subsection, we will show that the maximum likelihood decoding problem can be solved by finding a maximum weighted vertex packing on a configuration graph. The maximum weighted vertex packing problem has interesting theoretical and practical characteristics, e.g. as shown in [2] and described briefly in Sect. V.

Definition 1. Vertex Packing (VP) [2] Let G = (V, E) be a finite, undirected graph with no self loops
and no multiple edges. A vertex packing (anticlique, stable set, independent set) in G is a subset P ⊆ V for which vi, vj ∈ P implies {vi, vj} ∈/ E (no node of P is connected to any other node of P ).

Clearly, a configuration graph has the required properties
of Def. 1. If a weight wi is assigned to every node vi ∈ V , the costs of a vertex packing P are calculated as cP (P ) =
vi∈P wi. The weighted vertex packing problem (WVPP) is to find a vertex packing P ∗ with maximum costs:

P ∗ = argmax cP (P ),

(5)

P ∈PG

with PG as the set of all vertex packings on G. To show that ML decoding can be formulated as a WVPP,
we use three steps, each step accompanied by a theorem. First we show that a vertex packing on a configuration graph with m elements represents a codeword (Thm. 1). Then we show that every vertex packing on a configuration graph based on a matrix of the form H = [D I] is a subpacking of – and thus can be extended to – a vertex packing of m elements (Thm. 2). This ensures that when using an appropriate (positive) cost function, a maximum weighted vertex packing always has m elements and represents an ML codeword (Thm. 3).

Theorem 1. Let x be a codeword. Then there exists a vertex packing Px on a configuration graph GC with m elements that represents x (Thm. 1a).
Let P be a vertex packing on GC with m elements. Then P represents a codeword xP (Thm. 1b).

Fig. 1. Configuration graph for the example parity check matrix.
consequences of the above rule for drawing edges between the nodes of the graph. All nodes of one parity check are connected to each other, because every node represents a different assignment of variables contributing to a parity check.
In this example, only bit 1 contributes to both of the two parity checks of H. Because of this, additional edges are drawn between nodes of different parity checks that would assign different values to bit 1, e.g. the nodes q11 and q23.

Proof: Thm. 1a: By definition, a codeword fulfills all
parity check equations. So there must be a corresponding set of indicators Px with m elements. Furthermore, all indicators of Px must be consistent to each other, because every bit xi has the same value in all parity check equations. Thus there can be no connections between indicators of P in GC , hence Px is a vertex packing.
Thm. 1b: Assume the opposite, namely, that there exists a vertex packing with m elements which does not define a
codeword. This means that there are at least two indicators qik, qjl ∈ P that are not consistent. By construction of the configuration graph, the nodes qik and qjl are connected to each other. With Def. 1, qik and qjl together can not be included in a vertex packing, which leads to a contradiction.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

We define xP = [xPj ] as the codeword represented by the indicators of the vertex packing P (assuming that P has
m elements). To ensure that a vertex packing P has the same costs as the codeword xP it represents, we use non-
overlapping sets of bit indices – one set per parity check – to
calculate the node costs. For every parity check i we define a set of unique bit indices Iic ⊆ Ii (with Ii the bit indices participating to parity check i), such that

∀i, j ∈ {1, . . . , m}, i = j : Iic ∩ Ijc = ∅ and

i=1,...,m Iic = {1, . . . , n}.

(6)

Considering the example code, I1, I2 are given by {1, 3, 4}

and {1, 2, 5} while I1c, I2c could e.g. be defined by {1, 3, 4}

and {2, 5}, respectively. For a node qik we define its weight

wik as

wik = (−2xijk + 1)λj .

(7)

j∈Iic

Here xjik means bit j according to the configuration set by indicator qik. A vertex packing P then has the costs

cP (P ) =

wik =

(−2xjik + 1)λj. (8)

qik ∈P

qik∈P j∈Iic

Under the condition that |P | = m this equation can be formulated ( because of (6) ) as

n

cP (P ) = (−2xjP + 1)λj = cx(xP ),

(9)

j=1

which are the costs (2) of the codeword represented by P .

Theorem 2. Every vertex packing P on a configuration graph constructed from a parity check matrix H of the form H = [D I] is a subset of a vertex packing P with m elements: P ⊆P .

Proof: Assume that P is not a subset of a vertex packing with m elements. This means that there exists at least one parity check i which has no node in P and from where no node can be added to P . So there is no indicator qik consistent to the bits already defined by the indicators of P . But because of the structure of H = [D I] one can see that there is one indicator for every possible assignment of the bits a parity check i may have in common with other parity checks – all
bits participating to the parity check, except one bit uniquely used in parity check i (corresponding to the I part of H). This uniquely used bit can be seen as parity bit pi of parity check i, that is calculated out of all other bits of parity check i such
that the number of one-bits is even. So for every parity check with no node already in P , at least one node can always be added to P . As result, every vertex packing can be extended to a vertex packing with m elements.
Theorem 2 allows making the following deductions:
• With positive node weights, the maximum weighted vertex packing P ∗ on a configuration graph (built from a parity check matrix of the form H = [D I]) must have m elements (if |P | < m, the costs cP (P ) can always be increased by adding a node).

• All nodes weights can be made positive by adding a constant offset value o > |min(wik)| to all weights. This results in a constant cost offset of m · o among all vertex packings with m elements.
Combining these considerations, one can see that maximum likelihood decoding can be performed by finding a maximum weighted vertex packing on a configuration graph using positive node weights.

Theorem 3. A maximum weighted vertex packing on a configuration graph GC represents a maximum likelihood codeword, if
a) GC is constructed from a parity check matrix of the form H = [D I]
b) The costs of the nodes are defined as w˜ik = wik + o, with o big enough such that all w˜ik > 0.
Proof: A maximum weighted vertex packing P ∗ maximizes:

P ∗ = argmax cP (P )
P ∈PGC

=

argmax

w˜ik ,

P ∈{P ∈PGC | |P |=m} qik∈P

(10) (11)

because with positive node costs, the maximum vertex packing
has to have m elements. PGC is the set of all vertex packings on GC . This can further be formulated as

P∗ =

argmax

mo +

wik

P ∈{P ∈PGC | |P |=m}

qik ∈P

=

argmax

mo + cx(xP ).

P ∈{P ∈PGC | |P |=m}

(12) (13)

One can see that the vertex packing which maximizes the costs of (13) represents a codeword xP ∗ which maximizes cx(xP ). By definition, this codeword is a maximum likelihood
codeword.

III. DECODING ALGORITHMS
Solving the maximum vertex packing problem on a configuration graph is – similar to the ML decoding problem – usually too costly to be done in practice. In this section we will show that simple greedy algorithms can lead to good decoding results for LDPC [4] codes, especially when being applied in addition to a belief propagation [5] decoder.

A. Greedy Algorithms
As examples of how to efficiently search for maximum weighted vertex packings we used greedy algorithms [6] in this work. Although, there is no guarantee that a maximum weighted vertex packing is found with these algorithms, they show a good performance-complexity trade-off in practice. The basic structure of these algorithms is described in GreedyBasic. For every parity check i, the node qik that is consistent to all nodes of other parity checks already in P , and has the maximum evaluation function f (qik), is added to P .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

Algorithm GreedyBasic 1: P ⇐ ∅ 2: for each parity check i do 3: Add the node qik from parity check i to P – which is not connected
to any node already in P – with maximal f (qik). 4: end for
The decoding performance of the algorithm, as well as the runtime, greatly depends on this evaluation function f (qik). We use evaluation functions of the form

f (qik) = g(qik) + h(qik)

(14)

in this work. The function g(qik) describes the costs of a node itself – in this work it is always assumed that g(qik) = wik. The function h(qik) is a heuristic, which describes the potential of the node qik. This means h(qik) is a measure about the costs of other nodes, which can be added after adding qik to P . We first describe the simplest form of f (qik) with h(qik) = 0, so f (qik) = g(qik) = wik.

B. Simple Variants of Greedy Decoding
For practically used LDPC codes, when converting the parity check matrix HC to a matrix of the form H = [D I], one can observe that often a large number of bits contributes to a single parity check of H. Because the number of nodes per parity check in the configuration graph grows exponentially with the number of contributing bits, it is often too costly to calculate and compare the costs of all nodes of a parity check, e.g. to get the maximum node. But fortunately, because of the underlying structure of single parity checks, it is not necessary to compare the costs of all nodes. By adapting ML decoding for a single parity check code (also called Wagner decoding [7]), a maximum node of a parity check can be found. For the contributing bits of a parity check, first their hard decision – a bit is one if its LLR value is negative and zero otherwise – is calculated. If the number of one-bits is even, the maximum node is found: that which corresponds to this bit pattern. If not, the maximum node is found by flipping the bit corresponding to the LLR value with the lowest absolute value.
The described technique also works for the task of finding the maximum node of a parity check consistent to all nodes already in a vertex packing P . In this case, bits already set by indicators already in P are labeled as fixed, all other bits are labeled as free. To find the maximum (consistent) node of a parity check, the free bit of the parity check with the lowest absolute value is to be flipped, if necessary. The following decoding algorithm – GreedySimple – uses these techniques:

Algorithm GreedySimple

Input: Cost vector y

Output: Decoded codeword xˆ

1: xˆ ⇐ 0, FreeBits ⇐ {1, . . . , n}

2: for all parity checks do

3: p = Next parity check to process

4: O ⇐ 0

5: Ip ⇐ { indices of bits participating to parity check p }

6: for each j ∈ Ip do Get number of ones of parity check

7:

if j ∈ FreeBits then

8:

xˆj ⇐ hard decision of yj

9:

end if

10:

if xˆj = 1 then

11:

O ⇐ O+1

12:

end if

13: end for

14: if O is odd then Flip bit with lowest absolute value among FreeBits

15:

j ⇐ argmin |yk|

k∈Ip ∩FreeBits

16:

xˆj ⇐ ¬xˆj

17: end if

18: FreeBits ⇐ FreeBits \ Ip

19: end for

The input y of this algorithm represents the costs of single bits. This can be the vector of log-likelihood ratios of (2), or the output of an upstream soft-out decoder, as demonstrated below. One can observe that there is not even a variable for a vertex packing in this algorithm. This is because, the vertex packing is stored implicitly in the output codeword xˆ. For every parity check, the bits corresponding to the next maximum consistent node are set in xˆ. The costs of a node are also only evaluated indirectly by flipping the bit with the lowest absolute costs, without explicitly utilizing g(qik). The algorithm finds the next consistent maximum node by counting the number of one-bits participating to a parity check. If the number of ones per parity check is not even, the free bit with the lowest absolute value will be inverted. With this technique, the vector xˆ stores the bits corresponding to a vertex packing on the configuration graph. In addition, GreedySimple naturally divides the index set {1, . . . , n} into disjunct subsets by only utilizing bits out of the set Ip ∩ FreeBits for the calculation of the next consistent node. This algorithm works without an offset value for the node costs – as used in the proofs of the previous sections – because its structure ensures that only vertex packings with m elements are considered.
Many variations of this algorithm are conceivable. For example, we observed that the processing order of the parity checks has a great impact on the decoding performance. So we implemented a decoder, which calls the algorithm r times, each time using a different processing order of the parity checks. This leads to r (possibly different) result codewords. Among these codewords, the one with the highest costs (2) is chosen.
GreedySimple allows to be implemented very efficiently in hardware. The steps 6-13 of the algorithm basically represent an exclusive-or calculation over the bits participating to a parity check. With a vector of the participating bits, sorted in ascending order according to the absolute value of the corresponding elements of y, step 15 of the algorithm can also be performed very efficiently in hardware with a device called priority encoder. The priority encoder outputs the index of the first (those with the lowest absolute value) free bit of a parity check. With this dedicated hardware, GreedySimple can be performed in m steps.

C. Advanced Greedy Algorithms
The algorithm presented in the last section only considered the costs of a node itself, not including its potential. So a node with high costs will possibly be added to a vertex packing P , which blocks the way to the ML solution. To improve this behavior we use a more advanced cost function f (qik) by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

defining h(qik) according to the next algorithm:

Algorithm NodePotential Input: qik, P Output: h(qik) 1: P ⇐ P ∪ {qik}, h(qik) ⇐ 0 2: for each parity check p with no node already in P do 3: Add the next maximal consistent node qpj to P 4: h(qik) ⇐ h(qik) + g(qpj ) 5: end for
For the argument node qik the costs of a subsequent vertex packing built in a greedy manner – a lower bound on the
costs of a maximum vertex packing – are calculated. With
this heuristic we define an advanced version of the decoding
algorithm – GreedyLookAhead – as shown below:

Algorithm GreedyLookAhead

Input: Cost vector y

Output: Decoded codeword xˆ

1: xˆ ⇐ 0, FreeBits ⇐ {1, . . . , n}

2: for all parity checks do

3: p = Next parity check to process

4: O ⇐ 0

5: for each j ∈ Ip do Get number of ones of parity check

6:

if j ∈ FreeBits then

7:

xˆj ⇐ hard decision of yj

8:

end if

9:

if xˆj = 1 then

10:

O ⇐ O+1

11:

end if

12: end for

13: if O is odd then Flip bit with lowest absolute value among FreeBits

14:

j ⇐ argmin |yk|

k∈Ip ∩FreeBits

15:

xˆj ⇐ ¬xˆj

16: end if

17: Evaluate the neighbors of the maximum node of parity check p

according to f (qik) = g(qik) + h(qik) and set the bits Ip ∩ FreeBits of the neighbors with the highest value of f (qik). 18: FreeBits ⇐ FreeBits \ Ip
19: end for

This algorithm uses local search, utilizing h(qik), calculated by NodePotential, to determine which node to add to the vertex packing P . Starting from the maximum consistent node of a parity check – found similar to GreedySimple – the algorithm also evaluates neighbor nodes of the maximum node. The neighbor nodes are found by flipping bits of the maximum node (e.g.: the nodes corresponding to the valid configurations obtained by flipping up to, e.g. two bits of the configuration of the maximal node are considered as neighbors). For the maximum node, as well as for each of its neighbors, f (qik) is calculated. That node with the maximum costs f (qik) is added to P . When calling this algorithm r times, with r different processing orders, we again noticed a performance improvement of the algorithm.

D. Combining VP Decoding with BP Decoding
When evaluating the performance of the proposed decoding algorithms using several different LDPC codes, we observed a weaker performance of the greedy algorithms compared to when using belief propagation decoding. The performance of the greedy algorithms on a configuration graph built from a matrix H = [D I] was up to several dB’s worse than when performing belief propagation on a Tanner graph using the

original matrix HC. But if vertex packing decoding is used in addition to belief propagation decoding, a considerable improvement for all simulated codes was observed. Generally speaking, the concept of combining two different decoders for LDPC codes seems to have a high potential, e.g. as also shown in [9] for the combination of BP with linear programming decoding. Fig. 2 schematically shows the structure of a combined decoder. For this combined decoder, BP is performed using the original matrix HC of an LDPC code while vertex packing decoding is performed using a parity check matrix of the form H = [D I].
Fig. 2. Combination of VP decoding and BP decoding.
First an iteration of belief propagation decoding is performed. The intermediate result of the belief propagation decoder λBP is then used as an input to the vertex packing decoder. More specifically, λBP is used to determine which bits have to be flipped – i.e. to calculate the costs of the nodes of the configuration graph. The VP decoder then outputs one or more codewords (e.g. by calling GreedySimple r times with different processing orders). The selection of the maximal codeword x˜ is done by utilizing the log-likelihood vector λ calculated out of the received samples. The combination of one BP iteration and VP decoding is repeated until a maximum number of iterations is reached or BP decoding converges. The structure of this decoder is similar to the combination of BP and ordered statistics decoding as described in [8]. The use of BP decoding can be seen as an implicit calculation of a potential function h(qik) by updating the log-likelihood values of the bits itself. This explains the performance gains achievable by this method, as shown in the next section.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Fig.3 shows simulation results in terms of word error rate (WER) over Eb/N0 for the discussed algorithms using the code 96.3.963 (a (3,6) regular code of length n = 96 bits) from [10]. The numbers in the legend of the figure specifies how often VP decoding is performed during the BP iterations, each time with a different processing order. For these simulations, the processing orders have been chosen randomly. Despite the fact that this provides an easy scalability of the decoding complexity (and an inherent parallelization possibility), there is still potential to reduce the decoding effort without significantly decreasing the decoding performance by using deterministic processing order heuristics.
For GreedyLookAhead, all neighbors of the maximum node obtained by flipping up to two bits, have been examined. For comparison, the results of an ordered statistics decoder (OSD) [8] when performed after belief propagation (with order-0 reprocessing) are also shown in this figure. All simulations were done for an AWGN channel with a limit of 50 BP iterations. Compared to when using BP decoding only, a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE ICC 2009 proceedings

Fig. 3. Simulation results for the code 96.3.963.

memory to store and where a fixed processing order of the parity checks can ensure that only vertex packings with m elements are investigated. (e.g. GreedyLookAhead with parity check matrices of the form H = [D T], with a lower triangular matrix T, and processing the parity checks in successive order). • Using codes with a structure especially suitable for vertex packing decoding. An interesting application for vertex packing decoding may be Turbo codes, which are naturally describable by a parity check matrix of the form H = [D I]. • There are many heuristics for the maximum vertex packing problem (or the related maximum clique problem) for an overview see e.g. [11], [12]. These algorithms may be adapted for the special structure of a configuration graph. • The vertex packing problem offers an interesting property called partial optimality [2]. This means that there is a method to check if a vertex packing is a subset of an optimal vertex packing (a ML codeword). This property may also help for designing efficient decoding algorithms.

Fig. 4. Simulation results for the code 408.3.834.

VI. CONCLUSION
We presented a new graphical model – the configuration graph – for representing ML decoding and showed that ML decoding can be performed by finding a maximum vertex packing on a configuration graph. We discussed several efficient algorithms for decoding of binary linear block codes, particularly for LDPC codes, on the configuration graph and showed that especially when being combined with BP decoding, remarkable performance improvements can be achieved.

performance improvement up to 0.5dB can be noticed. The results of ordered statistics decoding are slightly better than the results of the best greedy algorithm. But it is to note, that ordered statistics decoding has a higher computational complexity and needs more memory to be performed than GreedySimple, even when being called 2000 times for this code. Fig. 4 shows the results for a second example code: 408.3.834 (a (3,6) regular code of length n = 408 bits) from [10]. As before, the numbers in the legend of Fig. 4 specify the number of repeated calls of the VP decoding algorithm. For this code, a performance improvement up to 0.4dB can be noticed when using the algorithm GreedySimple in addition to belief propagation, compared to when using belief propagation only.
V. OUTLOOK
In the previous sections we only investigated basic algorithms for estimating a maximum weighted vertex packing on a configuration graph. In our opinion, formulating the ML decoding problem as vertex packing problem on a configuration graph has further potential for designing efficient decoding algorithms. Among future research directions are:
• The use of parity check matrices of other forms than H = [D I]. In this case the Theorems 2 and 3 may not hold anymore. But there are matrices that need less

REFERENCES
[1] T. K. Moon, Error Correcting Coding: Mathematical Methods and Algorithms, Wiley, New York, 2005.
[2] G. Nemhauser, L. Trotter, Jr., “Vertex Packings: Structural Properties and Algorithms”, Mathematical Programming , Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 232-248, Springer, Berlin, Germany, 1975.
[3] J. Feldman, “Decoding Error Correcting Codes via Linear Programming”, Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1963.
[5] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, H. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm”, in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 51, No. 3, pp. 954-972, 2005.
[6] Z. Michalewicz, D. Fogel, How to Solve It: Modern Heuristics, Springer, 2nd Ed., 2004.
[7] M. Bossert, Channel Coding for Telecommunications, Wiley, 1999. [8] M. Fossorier, “Iterative Reliability-Based Decoding of Low-Density Par-
ity Check Codes”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 19, No. 5, pp. 908-917, 2001. [9] M. Lunglmayr, J. Berkmann, M. Huemer, “Combined linear programming/belief propagation decoder”, IET Electronics Letters, Vol. 44, No 12, pp. 751-752, 2008. [10] D. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes (hypertext archive). Online at: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html. [11] M. Pelillo, “Heuristics for maximum clique and independent set”, Encyclopedia of Optimization, C. Floudas and P. Pardalos (Eds.), pp. 411423, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA, Vol. 2, 2001. [12] I. Bomze, M. Budinich, P. Pardalos, M. Pelillo, “The maximum Clique Problem” Handbook of Combinatorial Optimization, D. Du and P. M. Pardalos (Eds.),Vol. A, pp. 1-74, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:50:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

