2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

Performance Bounds for Quantized LDPC Decoders
Based on Absorbing Sets
Homayoon Hatami∗, David G. M. Mitchell†, Daniel J. Costello, Jr∗, and Thomas Fuja∗ ∗Dept. of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA Email: {hhatami,dcostel1,tfuja}@nd.edu
† Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003 Email: dgmm@nmsu.edu

Abstract—A code-independent performance bound for a given absorbing set is derived for quantized low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders. The analysis demonstrates that each absorbing set in the Tanner graph imposes a specific lower bound on the frame error rate (FER) of any code containing that absorbing set under a given quantization scheme. This approach is applicable to any message-passing (MP) decoding algorithm and any uniform or non-uniform quantization scheme for LDPC codes. Simulation results using the sum-product algorithm (SPA) provide FERs that are consistent with the obtained bounds. In addition, the bounds demonstrate that the conventional quantized SPA is not capable of achieving very low FERs if the LDPC codes contain certain absorbing sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, invented by Gallager [1], are now included in a number of telecommunications standards owing to their near Shannon limit performance. The conventional algorithms for decoding LDPC codes rely on (various forms of) the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm and involve iterative message-passing (MP) on the code’s bipartite Tanner graph, consisting of check nodes and variable nodes.
In a hardware implementation of any MP algorithm, messages are inevitably quantized, i.e., represented with a fixed number of bits. As a result, a practical implementation may experience performance that is inferior to models in which quantization is not considered. How quantization affects the sum-product algorithm (SPA) of LDPC codes is well explored in the literature (see, e.g., [2]). Quantization generally affects LDPC codes in both the low and high signal-to-noise (SNR) regimes by worsening the waterfall performance and introducing an error floor, respectively. Particularly for the errorfloor, it has been shown that the SPA is quite sensitive to quantization [3], while other decoding algorithms, such as min-sum or box-plus, are less affected by quantization [4].
Tanner graph sub-structures called trapping sets [5] and absorbing sets [6] play a significant role in the performance of LDPC codes with MP decoding in the error floor. Notably, absorbing sets have been shown to be the most likely sources for decoding failures at high SNR [6]. There exists significant literature on estimating the error floor performance of LDPC codes with quantized decoders. For example, [7] approximates the error floor performance of certain codes for a variety of decoding algorithms and quantizers, while [8] shows that, for a
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant CCF11-61754.

specific code, each absorbing set imposes a performance bound when the log-likelihood-ratios (LLRs) are clipped. Also, [9] predicts the error floor of an array code by deriving estimations and bounds on the frame error rate (FER) of the array code based on the most harmful absorbing set.
The main contribution of this paper is the derivation of a code-independent lower bound on the FER based on a particular absorbing set, such that the bound applies to all codes containing the specified absorbing set when a finite precision (quantized) MP decoder is used. This is done by first showing that the channel noise affecting the absorbing set can cause the quantized decoder to fail even when the bits outside the absorbing set are maximally-reliable. Then we develop a method to eliminate the dependency of this argument on the part of the code outside the absorbing set. By bounding the probability of such failures, we establish a lower bound that depends only on the absorbing set and the quantizer, i.e., a bound that is applicable to any LDPC code containing the given absorbing set. We then consider presence of multiple absorbing sets of the same structure in any code; this is of significant practical interest because certain structured codes, such as array codes and quasi-cyclic (QC) codes, can have a large number of identical absorbing sets. In this case, we obtain an approximate lower bound on the FER by applying the previously-derived bound and invoking multiplicity arguments.
Finally, we evaluated the obtained bounds for certain absorbing sets using the SPA and uniform quantization. The results illustrate that the presence of certain absorbing sets causes the FER performance of SPA quantized decoders to be bounded below, independent of the block length of the code, showing that in practice the quantized SPA cannot be used to achieve very low FERs. Further we note that the results apply equally well to non-uniform quantizers and other quantized MP decoding algorithms for LDPC codes.
II. NOTATION AND TERMINOLOGY
This paper assumes uniform quantization of messages to illustrate the results, although other quantization schemes are equally applicable. Following convention, we let Qq1.q2 denote a quantizer that represents each message with q = q1 + q2 + 1 bits: q1 bits to represent the integer part of the message, q2 bits to represent the fractional part, and one bit to represent the sign. In such a scheme, there are t = 2q quantization levels, where the levels (i.e., the quantized message values) range from l1 = −2q1 to lt = 2q1 −2−q2 with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1806-2/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

2539

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

Fig. 2: For a code of length L, the variable nodes in the

graph are denoted 1 to L, the absorbing set variable nodes Fig. 1: An illustration of a (4, 2) absorbing set with girth 6. are denoted A1 to Am, and the nodes outside the absorbing step size ∆ = 2−q2 . The quantizer thresholds are equidistant set are denoted Z1 to Zp, where p + m = L

between the levels, and range from b1 to bt−1, such that each

bi =

li +li+1 2

for

i ∈ {1, 2, ..., t − 1}.

A quantized LDPC decoder is described in [2]. Each initial

LLR value from the channel is quantized and passed to the

corresponding check nodes. At the check nodes, the absolute

value of each received quantized LLR is passed to the Φ1 =

Φ(x) function, where

|O(A)| = n. By definition, an (m, n) absorbing set is a subset A of V such that each variable node of A has fewer connected check nodes in O(A) than E(A). As an illustration, Fig. 1 shows a (4, 2) absorbing set, a common structure in (3, K)regular LDPC codes that contains a cycle of length 6. The girth of an absorbing set is defined as the shortest cycle in the absorbing set, where in Fig. 1 we observe that the girth is 6.

x

Φ(x) = − log tanh

,x 0

2

(1)

We now denote the set of variable nodes that are not part of the absorbing set as Z = {Z1, Z2, ..., Zp}, where p = L − m.

and its output is also quantized. These messages are then combined and passed to the Φ2 = Φ−1(x) function. Each variable node receives quantized messages from several Φ2 functions and adds them to the initial quantized channel LLR
value. As noted in [2], the performance of a quantized SPA decoder depends on the saturation value Φ(0) chosen for the function Φ(x).
For the Tanner graph of a code of length L, we denote the set of L variable nodes constituting a codeword c = (c1, c2, ..., cL) as V = {1, 2, ..., L}, and we assume that a codeword c is BPSK modulated such that each zero is mapped to +1 and each one is mapped to −1. The modulated vector
is transmitted over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with mean 0 and standard deviation σ. The received values from the channel are multiplied by 2/σ2 to form the received LLR vector ˜r corresponding to c. As the result, the

This is illustrated in Fig. 2, where the variable nodes of subsets A and Z are indicated by light-colored and darkcolored circles, respectively. We also split r into two disjoint vectors s and o, associated with the variable nodes of A and Z, respectively. So s is the part of r associated with the absorbing set, while o is the part of r not associated with the absorbing set. Therefore, s and o can take 2q·m and 2q·p possible values, respectively. Assuming the all-zero codeword is transmitted, we define omax as the quantized vector that maximizes the likelihood of a ‘0‘ in each variable position covered by o. Put simply, omax is the p-tuple of quantized LLR values that is most consistent with all-zeroes being transmitted outside the absorbing set A, i.e., omax = (lt, lt, ..., lt). In the analysis that follows, we demonstrate that, even if the received values outside the absorbing set have maximum reliability, noise inside the absorbing set can still cause the decoder to fail.

element of ˜r corresponding to ci, denoted as r˜i, has a Gaussian distribution with mean 2/σ2 or −2/σ2 depending on ci = 0
or ci = 1, respectively. The standard deviation is 2/σ for any
ci. In this paper, we assume the transmission of the all-zero

III. FORMULATION OF THE FER BOUND This section establishes a code-independent lower bound

codeword. Therefore, for each r˜i,

on the performance of iterative MP decoding of LDPC codes

24 r˜i ∼ N σ2 , σ2 , i = 1, 2, ..., L.

with quantization. The bound is not restricted to any particular (2) MP algorithm. We begin by deriving a code-dependent bound
in Section III-A, similar to the approach of [9] for a single

The quantized version of ˜r is denoted r and is fed to the absorbing set. This is included to illustrate the approach used

variable nodes V of the Tanner graph. If a q-bit quantizer is to derive our main contribution, the code-independent bound

utilized, each ri is a random variable which can take t = 2q in Sec. III-B.

possible values ranging from l1 to lt. The probability that ri takes the value lk is equivalent to the probability that bk−1 < A. A Code-Dependent Bound

r˜i < bk, which can be obtained from (2) as follows

Let rk be any one of the 2q·L possible received quantized


 

Q bt−1

−

2 σ2

2



σ

LLR vectors and define the event EV |rk to have occurred if k = t when, after decoding rk, there is at least one incorrect bit


P (ri = lk) = Q
   

bk−1

−

2 σ2

2

σ

1−Q

− Q bk

−

2 σ2

2

σ

b1

−

2 σ2

2

σ

if 1 < k < t . among the variable nodes V . It follows that the FER of the code is given by
if k = 1
2q·L

(3) An absorbing set induces a subgraph structure in a code’s

FER = P (EV |rk) · P (rk) = P (EV ).

(4)

Tanner graph. Consider a subset A = {A1, A2, ..., Am} of V .

k=1

Let E(A) and O(A) represent the index sets of connected The events EA|rk and EZ |rk are similarly defined as occur-

check nodes with even and odd degrees, respectively, where ring when there is at least one incorrect bit in A and Z after

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2540

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

decoding rk, respectively. Therefore, EV |rk is the union of EA|rk and EZ |rk, and the union bound gives us
P (EV |rk) = P (EA|rk ∪ EZ |rk) ≥ P (EA|rk). (5)

It follows from (4) and (5) that

2q·L

FER ≥ P (EA|rk) · P (rk) = P (EA).

(6)

k=1

To obtain a lower bound on P (EA), we make the following
assumption for an iterative MP decoder. Assumption I: Let si be any one of the 2q·m possible
quantized LLR vectors associated with A and let oj be one of the 2q·p possible quantized LLR vectors associated with Z.
Then, if the decoder fails to correctly decode rk when oj has maximum reliability, i.e., oj = omax, it also fails when oj is less reliable. In other words,

EA|si, omax ⊆ EA|si, oj ,

(7)

or consequently,

P (EA|si, oj) ≥ P (EA|si, omax),

(8)

where i = 1, 2, ..., 2q·m and j = 1, 2, ..., 2q·p. A straightforward proof of (7) for a maximum likelihood
(ML) decoder can be obtained by appealing to the optimality of minimum-distance decoding, and here we make the reasonable assumption that the same relationship holds for an iterative MP decoder.
Multiplying both sides of (8) by P (si) · P (oj) and taking the summation over all i and j, we obtain

2q·m 2q·p
P (EA|si, oj) · P (si) · P (oj) ≥

i=1 j=1

2q·m 2q·p

P (EA|si, omax) · P (si) · P (oj) ,

(9)

i=1 j=1

and simplifying (9) leads to the following

P (EA) ≥ P (EA|omax).

(10)

Based on (6) and (10), a bound on the FER is given by P (EV ) ≥ P (EA|omax), and it can be calculated as

2q·m
α =∆ P (EA|omax) = P (EA|si, omax) · P (si) , (11)
i=1

where each si = (si1, si2, ..., sim) represents one possible set of quantized LLR values for the absorbing set of interest. Moreover, each P (EA|si, omax) is either zero or one because it is the probability that the decoder fails for a completely
specified set of inputs. By running the MP decoder for a
large number of iterations with the specified inputs si in the absorbing set and omax outside the absorbing set, and seeing if it decodes correctly, the value of P (EA|omax, si) for each si can be determined. Moreover, because the channel is assumed
to be i.i.d., we have

m

P (si) = P (sij),

(12)

j=1

where sij in (12) is the quantized LLR value corresponding to variable node Aj of absorbing set A and its probability, P (sij), can be obtained from (3), for j = 1, 2, ..., m.
This bound is code-dependent in the sense that determining whether P (EA|omax, si) is one or zero requires running a decoder for the entire codeword, i.e., a decoder that accepts all L channel values, where the received values outside the
absorbing set are assumed to have maximum reliability. The
next section establishes a bound for each absorbing set that
does not depend on the code.

B. A Code-Independent Bound

We now make the stronger assumption for an absorbing set with variable node set A that, during the operation of the MP decoder, at each iteration the quantized LLR values received by the check nodes in the absorbing set (O(A) ∪ E(A)) from the variable nodes outside the set (V \ A), have maximum reliability. In other words, unlike the code-dependent bound, where the variable nodes outside the absorbing set are continuously updated and their quantized LLR values can change during iterations, we now assume that these LLRs are fixed at their most reliable values throughout the decoding process. With this assumption, it is no longer necessary to include any of the nodes outside the absorbing set in the decoder, and we define the event EmAax|si to have occurred when, after decoding the received quantized LLR vector si under these conditions, there is at least one incorrect bit among the variable nodes A.
Assumption II: For any vector si of received values in the set A, if the decoder fails to correctly decode si when all the variable nodes in Z pass maximally-reliable LLRs lt to all the check nodes connected to A at every iteration, it also fails when oj is less reliable. In other words,

EmAax|si ⊆ EA|si, oj ,

(13)

or consequently,

P (EA|si, oj ) ≥ P (EmAax|si),

(14)

where i = 1, 2, ..., 2q·m and j = 1, 2, ..., 2q·p. By taking the summation over all i and j and simplifying,
as in (9) and (10), we obtain

P (EA) ≥ P (EmAax).

(15)

Based on (6) and (15), a bound on the FER is given by P (EV ) ≥ P (EmAax), which is a code-independent bound on the FER of any code containing the given absorbing set.
Similar to (11), it can be calculated as

2q·m

β =∆ P (EmAax) =

P (EmAax|si) · P (si) ,

(16)

i=1

where P (si) can be calculated using (3) and (12). P (EmAax|si) is either zero or one and can be obtained by running the MP decoder with the specified absorbing set variable node values from si and assuming that maximally-reliable messages are passed to all the check nodes in the absorbing set from the variable nodes outside the absorbing set at every iteration.
There are two advantages of this bound relative to the codedependent bound derived in Sec. III-A. First, to compute the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2541

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

bound requires only decoding a small subset of the graph, i.e., the part of the graph corresponding to the absorbing set. Second, it is applicable to any code containing a particular absorbing set. This provides a useful tool to code designers compared to error floor approximation or bounding techniques that depend on complete knowledge of a particular code.

C. An Approximate Bound for Multiple Absorbing Sets

Sec. III-A and Sec. III-B, established lower bounds on the

FER of quantized LDPC decoders based on the existence of a

single absorbing set in the code. Consider now a code in which

there are N absorbing sets of a particular type whose sets of

variable nodes are labeled Al, for l = 1, 2, 3, ..., N , and let

EAl denote the event that, after decoding rk, there is at least

one bit error in set Al. In this case, FER P

N l=1

E Al

.

Now defining EmAlax as in Sec. III-B, and extending the
approach of Assumption II and the steps leading to (15) to the union of events EmAlax, we obtain

N

P

E Al

N

P

EmAlax

l=1

l=1

N
P (EmAlax) −

P EmAkax ∩ EmAlax

l=1

1 l<k N

=∆ γ.

(17)

Since calculating each P EmAkax ∩ EmAlax is not tractable in general, we approximate this term as

P EmAkax ∩ EmAlax ≈ P EmAkax · P EmAlax .

(18)

We now use (18) to approximate the bound γ and we denote the approximation as γ . Since the events EmAkax and EmAlax are not necessary independent, P EmAkax ∩ EmAlax
P EmAkax · P EmAlax , which implies γ γ. Although γ
does not provide a true lower bound on the FER, simulation
results show that it is a good approximation (see Sec. IV).
Summarizing, we obtain the following approximate lower
bound

N
FER ≥ γ ≈ γ =∆ P (EmAlax)
l=1

−

P EmAkax · P EmAlax . (19)

1 k<l N

Certain classes of LDPC codes, particularly highly struc-

tured codes such as array codes and QC codes, contain

absorbing sets with high multiplicities in the code graph. For

example the number of (4, 2) absorbing sets in (3, K) array

codes

is

N

=

3 2

K

2(K

− 1),

where

K

is

a

prime

number

[6].

In this case, (19) simplifies to

γ = Nβ − N β2.

(20)

2

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, the code-independent bound of Sec. III-B and the approximate bound of Sec. III-C are compared with simulated FER results. In all cases, the SPA was used with BPSK-modulated signaling over the AWGN channel. To determine which received quantized LLR values cause the decoder to fail, necessary for computing the bounds, we allowed the decoder to perform up to 200 iterations; however, it was observed that the determination of decoding failure typically did not change after many fewer iterations, usually around 20. A maximum of 200 iterations were also performed for the simulated FER code results.
A. Bounds for Different Absorbing Sets
For several regular LDPC codes, the bounds for different absorbing sets are presented for the SPA with a Q3.2 quantizer and Φ(0) = 4.25 (these quantization parameters are studied in [2]). For some (m, n) absorbing sets, there may be more than one configuration. For example, a (5, 3) absorbing set can have different configurations with girth four, six, or eight [10]. In this case, the absorbing sets with the largest possible girth are chosen, since good codes are designed to have large girth. In Fig. 3, the code-independent bounds β obtained for several different absorbing sets are depicted. The simulated performance of the (3, 6)-regular code with length L = 4000 from [11], which contains only one (4, 2) absorbing set, with SPA decoding and a Q3.2 quantizer with Φ(0) = 4.25, is also depicted in Fig. 3. Note that the code-independent bound β for the (4, 2) absorbing set for (3, 6)-regular codes depicted in Fig. 1 successfully bounds the error floor performance of the (3,6)-regular code from [11], starting at Eb/N0 = 2dB, where the error floor begins.
We also calculated the bounds for specific absorbing sets in different (3, K)-regular codes and observed that by increasing K the bounds are generally better (see, e.g., the two bounds in Fig. 3 for the (4, 2) absorbing set). In this case, it was observed that the same patterns are trapped in the absorbing sets with different Ks. Since codes with higher K have higher rate, for each Eb/N0 their bound is superior.
In addition, we calculated the bounds for specific absorbing sets in (J, K)-regular codes with J > 3. The results confirm that, generally, the absorbing sets in these codes have better bounds than the (3, K)-regular code absorbing sets. As an illustration, the bound β for the (4, 8) absorbing set for (5, 47)regular codes, which was identified as the most harmful absorbing set for (5, 47) array codes using the Q3.2 quantization with Φ(0) = 4.25 in [2], is much better than any of the bounds for (3, K)-regular codes shown in Fig. 3.
B. Approximate Bound for Multiple Identical Absorbing Sets
Fig. 4 shows the bound β and the approximation γ of bound γ for a (4, 2) absorbing set in a (3, 61) array code, where a multiplicity of 334,890 was assumed for the absorbing set (see [6]). This absorbing set was chosen because it was shown to be the most harmful one for (3, K) array codes [6]. The FER of the simulated (3, 61) array code is also shown for comparison purposes. We observe that the bound β is valid and the approximate bound γ closely follows the simulated performance in the error floor region.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2542

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

10 0

10 -5

FER

10 -10

(4,0) AS in (3,6)-regular codes (5,1) AS in (3,6)-regular codes

(4,2) AS in (3,6)-regular codes

(5,3) AS in (3,6)-regular codes

(4,2) AS in (3,101)-regular codes

(6,4) AS in (3,6)-regular codes

(4,8) AS in (5,47)-regular codes

Simulation

10-15 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 3: Bound β for several regular codes containing various absorbing sets. The SPA is used and the quantization scheme is Q3.2 with Φ(0) = 4.25

10 0

10 -2

10 -4

FER

10 -6

10 -8 10 -10

Bound γ' (approximation of Bound γ) Bound β Simulation - (3,61) array code

10 -12

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 4: Bound β and approximate bound γ obtained using the multiplicity of the (4, 2) absorbing set for (3, 61) array code.

C. Effect of Different Quantization Parameters
In this section, we consider a particular absorbing set, namely the (4, 2) absorbing set shown in Fig. 1, and compute the resulting bound β obtained for (3, 6)-regular codes with the SPA and various quantization schemes. As described by Zhang et al. in [2], both the value of Φ(0) and the quantization scheme can affect the performance of the quantized SPA. In Fig. 5, some bounds are obtained for (3, 6)-regular codes with a Q3.4 8-bit quantizer for different values of Φ(0) and for quantization schemes with Φ(0) = 4.25, q1 = 3, and different numbers of fractional bits q2. Simulation results are also included for the (3, 6)-regular code with L = 4000 from [11]. The bounds together with the simulation results indicate that, when Φ(0) is larger, the error floor performance improves. But a larger Φ(0) has a negative effect on the waterfall region. Also, increasing the number of fractional bits q2 is seen to slightly improve the error floor performance. These observations are consistent with the results noted in [2], and they illustrate that quantized SPA performance is limited by relatively high error floors.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, it was shown that each absorbing set in the Tanner graph of an LDPC code is associated with an FER performance lower bound for a quantized MP decoder and that any code containing the given absorbing set cannot outperform this bound, i.e., the bound is code-independent.

10 0 10 -2 10 -4

Simulation, Q3.2, Φ(0) = 4.25 Simulation, Q3.4, Φ(0) = 4.25 Simulation, Q3.4, Φ(0) = 5 Simulation, Q3.4, Φ(0) = 6.5 Bound β , Q3.2, Φ(0) = 4.25 Bound β , Q3.4, Φ(0) = 4.25 Bound β , Q3.4, Φ(0) = 5 Bound β , Q3.4, Φ(0) = 6.5

FER

10 -6

10 -8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 5: Bound β for (3,6)-regular codes and quantized SPA decoding with different values of Φ(0) and different numbers of fractional bits q2

It was demonstrated that the bound only depends on the quantization scheme and the variable and check node degrees of the code containing the absorbing set. In particular, the bound is general in the sense that it does not depend on the code length or the detailed code structure. An approximate bound was also obtained for the case where there are multiple absorbing sets of a given type in the graph, which is typically true for highly structured codes like array codes or QC codes. Simulation results of codes containing given absorbing sets with quantized SPA decoding were included to illustrate the validity of the bounds. However, the analysis is not restricted to the SPA or to any other particular MP algorithm, and we are currently extending the results to include both the quantized min-sum and box-plus decoding algorithms. Finally, the bounds illustrate that the absorbing sets in a Tanner graph prevent a code from achieving very low FERs using a quantized SPA decoder.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, Jan. 1962.
[2] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Quantization effects in low-density parity-check decoders,” IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., pp. 6231–6237, Jun. 2007.
[3] L. Ping and W. Leung, “Decoding low density parity check codes with finite quantization bits,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 62–64, Feb. 2000.
[4] X. Zhang and P. Siegel, “Quantized iterative message passing decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2014.
[5] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” 2003 Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, p. 1426 1435, Nov. 2003.
[6] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[7] H. Xiao, A. Banihashemi, and M. Karimi, “Error rate estimation of lowdensity parity-check codes decoded by quantized soft-decision iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 474–484, Feb. 2013.
[8] S. Zhang and C. Schlegel, “Controlling the error floor in LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 3566–3575, Sept. 2013.
[9] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wainwright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. on Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, August 2009.
[10] http://www2.engr.arizona.edu/ vasiclab/project.php?id=9. [11] http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/S0.html.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2543

