2016 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI

Multi Clock Flooded LDPC Decoding Architecture with Reduced Memory and Interconnect

Oana Boncalo University Politehnica Timisoara
Timisoara, Romania Email: oana.boncalo@cs.upt.ro

Ioana Mot University Politehnica Timisoara
Timisoara, Romania Email: mot.ioana@yahoo.com

Abstract—This paper proposes a dual-clock based solution for QC-LDPC partially parallel flooded decoders. It aims at reducing memory and routing overhead, while maintaining a high degree of parallelism at processing node level. We take advantage of the high memory working frequencies with respect to the processing units, and use two clock domains: a high frequency for memory and the barrel shifter based routing network (fH ), and a slower clock (fL) for the processing components. The proposed technique allows us to emulate the high cost features required by increased parallelism at processing unit level - multiport memories and multiple barrel shifters for routing -, while utilizing reduced memory and routing resources. We present FPGA implementation results for a (3,6) regular LDPC code, with a 3:1 ratio between the fH and fL. The results indicate a 25% throughput increase, with no memory overhead.
Keywords-QC-LDPC, multi-clock, partially-parallel,FPGA
I. INTRODUCTION
Quasy Cyclic Low Density Parity Check codes (QC-LDPC) [1] are a class of structured LDPC codes that present both good error correction capabilities [2] and suitability for hardware implementations, being included in several communication standards, such WIMAX [3], and DVB [4]. Regarding the decoding algorithms, Min-Sum (MS) and its variants are the preferred choice due to its small complexity operations: additions and comparisons on few-bits messages (i.e. 3-7 bits for message quantization) [5] [6] [7] [8]. QC-LDPC codes are defined by a generator matrix B, with the typical convention: −1 is used to denote the zero matrix, and i values represent the unitary matrix shifted with the i positions to the left. i < z. z represents the size of the square unitary matrix, also referred to as the expanssion f actor. Hence, by expanding the base matrix, we obtain a sparse parity check matrix H consisting of two type of nodes: check nodes, which perform operations row-wise, and variable nodes, which perform operations column-wise. In practical applications, the number of nodes is in the order of thousands and tens of thousands. This means a straight forward implementation, also referred to as fully parallel would suffer from serious interconnect issues [6]. One way to address this problem is to reduce the number of nodes, and essentially perform a time division multiplexing on the processing side. We refer to these implementations as partial-parallel solutions. In the partialparallel architectures, cost is heavily influenced by the routing network (implemented using barrel shifters for QC-LDPC

codes) and memory. Several design choices can be made: scheduling, number of processing units, number of messages processed during one clock cycle inside the processing units, etc. These design decisions influence both the number of barrel shifters, and the size and number of ports for the memories.
In this paper, we propose a QC-LDPC architecture that uses a multi-clock (MC) domains design for a partially-parallel decoder with the following goals: (i) Balance memory and logic resources; (ii) Address the routing congestion and reduce cost (fewer wires and multiplexers on the memory access interfaces); (iii) Reduced number of memory ports. This approach is presented for flooding scheduling [9], but it can be extended for any type of scheduling, processing algorithm and architecture choice. A two clock domain LDPC decoder is proposed, as follows: (i) fH a high clock domain for memory interfaces and barrel shifter based routing network; (ii) fLl low clock domain for the processing units. fH is an integer multiple of fL in order to simplify domain crossing. This effectively reduces the number of wires and multiplexers; hence, alleviating the interconnect routing congestion. Furthermore, it relaxes the constraint on memory read/write ports, which results in significant cost savings for both ASIC and FPGA technologies.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II briefly discusses Flooding scheduling LDPC decoding using Min-Sum (MS) algorithm; Section III presents the techniques and approaches for realization of FPGA reduced complexity and high throughput architectures; Section IV covers the proposed MCQC-LDPC approach and implementation results; Conclusions are presented in Section V.
II. FLOODED MS DECODING OF LDPC CODES
QC-LDPC can be described in terms of sparse bipartite graphs, also known as Tanner graphs [10]. A variablenode and a check-node are connected by an edge if the corresponding entry of the parity-check matrix H is non-zero. The number of non-zero entries in a column is called variable node degree (dv), while the number of non-zero entries in a row gives the check node degree (dc). LDPC decoding is performed in an iterative manner, using belief-propagation algorithms [11]. Decoding relies on exchange of messages between two types of processing units variable-node units (VNU) associated to the non-zero entries of the columns

978-1-4673-9039-2/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEE

697

DOI 10.1109/ISVLSI.2016.104

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:24:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of the H matrix (H(n)), and check-node units (CNU) associated to the rows of the H matrix (non-zero entries set H(m)) over several iterations. Practical implementations of LDPC decoders may deal with different scheduling strategies, according to the order in which bit and check-node messages are updated during the message passing iterative process. In this paper we address flooding scheduling, where at each iteration, all CNUs and subsequently all VNUs pass new messages to their neighbors [9]. Hereafter we rely on the following notations: β - check-to-variable node messages; α - variable-to-check node messages; γ channel input; γ˜ - column sum of check-to-variable node messages. A MS algorithm iteration comprises of the following processing:

CN U : β˜m,n =

sign (αm,n´ ) min |αm,n´ | (1)

n´ ∈H (m)\n

n´ ∈H (m)\n

V N U : α˜m,n = γn +

βm´ ,n

(2)

m´ ∈H(n)\m

AP Pupdate : γ˜n = γn +

βm,n

(3)

m∈H (n)

The decoder output bit is sign (γ˜n) obtained at the last iteration. Decoding continues until a codeword is found or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

III. THROUGHPUT/COST TRADE-OFFS IN FLOODED LDPC DECODERS
A. Partially parallel LDPC decoders
In order to keep the QC-LDPC decoder complexity reasonable, typically time division multiplexing is applied. This means, that only a sub-set of CN or VN are processed at a time. Furthermore, messages at both VNU and CNU level may be processed in batches depending on the processing node parallelism degree p. These solutions make use of memories for storing the intermediate extrinsic messages. Furthermore, for these partially parallel solutions, the memory is dominant in overall decoder cost. Throughput is mainly influenced by the parallelization degree, number of parallel units, and operating frequency.
We employ as baseline a partially parallel decoding architecture for QC-LDPC codes Fig. 1 The main blocks of the proposed decoder are: (i) VNU processing block, composed of z VNUs, (ii) CNU processing block, composed of z CNUs (iii) VNU-to-CNU barrel shifter (iv) CNU-to-VNU barrel shifter, (v) β message memory, (vi) α message memory, and (vii) input-LLR and HD message memory. Furthermore, a control unit is used for generating the shift amounts for the two barrel shifter, read and write addresses for the memories, as well as the control signals for the processing units. The LDPC partial-parallel decoder architecture processes messages within a column/row of the B matrix in parallel, while the columns/rows in the B are processed one at a time.
For this architecture, different level of p may be employed for the processing units. For a fully parallel VNU, dv messages are processed at once; this requires reading in parallel dv β

Fig. 1. Baseline serial partially-parallel flooded architecture [12]
messages from the β memory and writing in parallel dv α message to the α memory per processing unit. Hence, dv read ports for β memory and dv write ports for α memory. Furthermore, this type of parallelism at VNU level will also require a barrel shifter which will route dvxz β messages. In a similar manner, a fully parallel CNU will require dc read ports for the α memory, dc write ports for the β memory and a barrel shifter for routing dcxz α messages. In a serial processing unit, one input/output is used for extrinsic messages. The extrinsic messages are loaded in consecutive clock cycles. Therefore, a serial VNU will require dv clock cycles in order to load the β messages. Because one message is loaded each clock cycle, only one read port is required for the β message memory. Regarding the barrel shifter, only z β messages are routed. Therefore, serialization at processing node level will have a great impact in overall cost, due to the lower number of memory ports required and of lower cost for the interconnect scheme.
B. Related work
LDPC flooding partially parallel architectures have been extensively studied in literature, due to their interesting properties, as well as application fields.The work from [5] proposes efficient MS operation re-ordering and efficient β storage suitable for high rate and/or high dv QC-LDPC decoder architectures. Furthermore, it uses compressed β messages only the signs, absolute min1, and min2 values, as well as the index for the min1 message are stored. The processing units are organized such that a number of np rows and np columns from the parity check matrix H are processed at one time . All messages corresponding to a processing unit are processed in parallel. Although, the scheduling unit design is presented, no implementation results are provided. Another important design component is interconnect. Efficient realizations such as [6] propose a QC-LDPC shift network which shortens the critical path and reduces cost. Furthermore, it proposes a flexible partially parallel architecture. Our findings have shown that the interconnect delay for modern FPGA

698 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:24:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. MC-QC-LDPC flooded architecture
families is shorter than processing delay. This motivated the MC-QC-LDPC approach. Other approaches targeted special scheduling [7] and compressed β message storage, and even code construction techniques [8].
Memory design lies at the heart of QC-LDPC architecture optimizations. Since good QC-LDPC codes start from codelengths of thousands of bits, memory and interconnect tend to be the dominant resources for both ASIC and FPGA technologies. Memory design constraints are: number of ports, width, length. For FPGA, the block RAM is configured for 1 read port and 1 write port, while in some cases, it may be configured for 2 read and 2 write ports. Other requirements are typically emulated. The closest to our solution has been used in [13], as a mean to emulate the quad-port required for the partially parallel architecture. The difference with our approach is: (i) the architecture from [13] is suitable for a sub-class of QCLDPC: array codes, while the proposed one is more generic; (ii) in contrast with the partial parallel architecture we use, the interconnect is not part of the optimization and also of reduced complexity. Another difference is in the number of required BRAM blocks. We target a very low cost solution: few BRAMS, a high degree of block usage (i.e. number of used entries from the ones available inside the memory), single port access: 1 read and 1 write simultaneously. Furthermore, our interconnect relies on barrel shifters (BS). Synthesis results for Xilinx FPGA, 7 Series, have prompted us to include the routing network in the high clock region.
IV. MULTI-CLOCK APPROACH FOR REDUCED MEMORY AND INTERCONNECT REQUIREMENTS
A. MC-QC-LDPC for Flooding Scheduling
We propose to reduce the memory and interconnect requirements, while having a high degree of parallelism at processing node level, by employing a multi-clock domain LPDC decoder. In order to emulate a multi-port or multiple bank memory, as well as multiple barrel shifters for the routing network, we use

a high frequency clock for these components. The processing units with increased parallelism degree are clocked at lower frequency. The two clock signals are synchronous, while the higher frequency is an integer multiple of the lower frequency. These two constraints between the two clock signals allow us to employ simple low-cost buffers between the two clock domains.
Fig. 2 depicts the MC LDPC architecture for a ratio of R = 3 between the high frequency clock and the low frequency clock. Fig. 2 shows the cost advantages of the MC-LDPC architecture with respect to a single clock LDPC decoder with parallelism degree 3 processing units. Regarding the extrinsic message memories, the MC LDPC requires only 1 read port and 1 write port for each memory, while the single clock solution would require memories with 3 read and 3 write ports. Furthermore, the proposed MC LDPC requires only 2 barrel shifters, compared with 6 in the single clock LDPC decoder with parallelism degree 3 processing units. Therefore, from a routing and memory perspective, the MC LDPC has the same requirements as the LDPC decoder with serial processing units.
B. Results
We have implemented MC technique for a FPGA architecture. The advantage of using this technique is that it minimizes the number of memory ports, and improves the utilization of FPGA block RAM (BRAM). BRAMs are flexible memory resources that can be configured from 8-72 bits width, having more than 512 memory words. Furthermore, they operate at very high frequency (600 MHz [14]), with respect to the processing units (150-250 MHZ).We have used a regular (3,6) QC-LDPC code of 1296 bits length, with 12 rows and 24 columns in the B matrix, and a circulant size of 54. MS algorithm has been used for decoding. We have implemented two LDPC decoders, as follows:
(1) Single clock decoder - with the architecture described in Section II Fig.1 with serial processing units [12]; a number of 54 VNUs and 54 CNUs is used; two barrel shifters composed of 6 levels of multiplexers and 54 x message quant multiplexers per level are employed; the two extrinsic message memories have a word size of 54 x message quant and a depth of 72; the two memories are dual-port memories, with one read port and one write port this type of memory implementations is suitable for FPGA devices, where memory modules are implemented using the dual port (one read port and one write port) BRAM blocks.
(2) Dual-clock decoder - with the architecture described in Section IV Fig.2; regarding the memory and the routing network, the same amount and organization is used as in the decoder described above; a fully parallel VNU is employed, with 3 inputs for β messages and 3 outputs for α messages; CNU is partially parallel, with 3 outputs for α messages and 3 inputs for β messages; reading and writing of the processed

699 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:24:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

messages at CNU level is performed in 2 batches; the ratio R = 3.
The two decoders have been implemented in Verilog HDL and have been synthesized using Xilinx ISE 14.7, for the Xilinx Virtex-7, VLX485T device, speed grade -2. Verification has been performed using SystemVerilog and a C++ model of the flooded MS decoding.
The implementation results indicate a cost of 1976 slices and 10 BRAM blocks for the single clock flooded LDPC with serial processing units, while the maximum frequency is 340 MHz, resulting in a throughput of 280 Mbps for 20 decoding iterations. The MC LDPC decoder with parallelism degree of 3 at processing units has a cost of 3763 slices and 10 BRAM blocks and 1 PLL, while the maximum frequencies are 453 MHz for the higher frequency clock and 262 MHz for the lower frequency clock. The throughput obtained for a 450 MHz high frequency clock and 150 MHz low frequency clock ratio 3:1 is 353 Mbps. The results indicate an increase in logic of around 80% for the MC approach with respect to LDPC architecture, with no increase in memory resources. Regarding the throughput, an increase of around 25% can be observed for the MC-LDPC decoder.
Table I presents the cost (in LUT-FF pairs synthesis estimates) of the serial processing units and the processing units with parallelism degree. The parallel VNU has a cost increase of around 20%, while the CNU with parallelism degree of 3 has a cost increase of around 30%. Furthermore, in Table I is presented the cost synthesis estimate of the barrel shifter. The MC approach may have a reduction of around 4*1344 LUTFF pairs with respect to the solution which requires 3 barrel shifters for the β routing and 3 barrel shifter for α routing. Furthermore, the solution with parallelism degree 3 would require 3 read ports and 3 write ports for the α and β message memories. This type of memory cannot be implemented using BRAM blocks in modern FPGA devices; thus, significant cost increase in logic is foreseen.
V. CONCLUSION
The contributions of this work are the following: (i) A multi-clock domain optimization that address the routing congestion, memory ports requirements, and at the same time it balances memory and logic resources of FPGA technology; (ii) Cost efficient high throughput QC-LDPC architecture using flooding scheduling in order to evaluate the cost/throughput for the proposed approach; We compare cost of the MC-QC-LDPC against a baseline architecture that performs serial message processing. We have implemented the proposed MC improvement on a partially-parallel architecture for FPGA. Results have shown no memory overhead with respect to the serial message processing approach for FPGA implementation, and around 25% increase in throughput, at the expense of processing unit cost increase.

TABLE I SYNTHESIS RESULTS OF LDPC DECODER BLOCKS

CNU parallel 3 VNU parallel 3 Barrel Shifter
CNU serial VNU serial

LUT-FF pairs
85 57 1314 64 48

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Franco-Romanian
(ANR-UEFISCDI) Joint Research Programme project DIA-
MOND.
REFERENCES
[1] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug 2004.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar 1997.
[3] “Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems physical and medium access control layers,” IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, 2005.
[4] U. H. Reimers, “Dvb-the family of international standards for digital video broadcasting,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 173– 182, Jan 2006.
[5] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Area-efficient parallel decoder architecture for high rate qc-ldpc codes,” in Circuits and Systems, 2006. ISCAS 2006. Proceedings. 2006 IEEE International Symposium on, May 2006, pp. 4 pp.–5110.
[6] X. Chen, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Qsn;a simple circular-shift network for reconfigurable quasi-cyclic ldpc decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 782–786, Oct 2010.
[7] T. C. Wu, Y. W. Hu, and C. M. Lee, “Optimization of memory utilization for partially parallel qc-ldpc decoder,” in Information Theory and its Applications (ISITA), 2010 International Symposium on, Oct 2010, pp. 496–500.
[8] Y. Dai, Z. Yan, and N. Chen, “Optimal overlapped message passing decoding of quasi-cyclic ldpc codes,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 565–578, May 2008.
[9] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb 1998.
[10] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep 1981.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The renaissance of gallager’s lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 126–131, Aug 2003.
[12] A. Amaricai, O. Boncalo, and I. Mot, “Memory efficient fpga implementation for flooded ldpc decoder,” in Telecommunications Forum Telfor (TELFOR), 2015 23rd, Nov 2015, pp. 500–503.
[13] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Memory system optimization for fpga-based implementation of quasi-cyclic ldpc codes decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 98–111, Jan 2011.
[14] “Virtex7 data sheet,” 2016. [Online]. Available: www.xilinx.com

700 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:24:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

