2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

Performance Evaluation of Faulty Iterative Decoders using Absorbing Markov Chains

Predrag Ivanisˇ School of Electrical Engineering,
University of Belgrade Emails: predrag.ivanis@etf.rs

Bane Vasic´ Department of ECE, University of Arizona Email: vasic@ece.arizona.edu

David Declercq ETIS lab, ENSEA Universite´ de Cergy-Pontoise/CNRS Email: declercq@ensea.fr

Abstract—We propose an iterative decoder made of a combination of faulty and perfect logic gates that is capable of correcting more channel errors than its counterpart made completely of perfect logic gates. We present an error probability analysis based on absorbing Markov chains, and explain how the randomness in the check node update function helps a decoder to escape to local minima associated with trapping sets. For the (155, 64) Tanner low-density parity check code, we provide a range of gate failure probabilities for which imperfect decoders perform better.
I. INTRODUCTION
Error-correcting codes are used extensively in digital telecommunication systems to increase reliability of transmission. In traditional models of communications systems with error correction coding, it is assumed that the operation of a decoder is deterministic and the randomness exists only in the communication channel. While appropriate in systems where the reliability of registers and logic gates used in the decoder is many orders of magnitude higher than the reliability of the channel, this assumption is invalid if digital logic in the decoder is built of faulty components.
Reliability of the decoder can be increased by using traditional von Neumann-type triple modular redundancy, but this solution is inefficient. Vasic and Chilappagari [1] established an framework for analysis and design of faulty decoders for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and density evolution analysis of the simplest massage-passing algorithm (GallagerB) implemented in faulty hardware is given in [2]. The other approach is to use randomness to improve performance of iterative decoders. The randomization of belief propagation algorithm is proposed by Leduc-Primeau in [3]. Recently, it has been shown that performance of bit-flipping decoders can be also improved if a noise or random sequence is inserted in the decoder [4], [5].
In this paper, we show that the Gallager-B decoder can operate in the unreliable gate - regime, and still be able to correct more errors than its perfect counterpart. To facilitate the frame error analysis, we consider the random sequence μ( ) of vectors composed of messages sent from all the check nodes in iteration , and show that under von Neumann failure mechanism it is a homogenous Markov chain whose state transition probabilities are governed by the decoding rule and the channel error pattern. Furthermore, the perfect gates used in the syndrome checker, make the Markov chain absorbing,

which leads to a closed form solution for the codeword probability of error. Since the number of states in the Markov chain grows exponentially with the number of edges in a Tanner graph, we define a smaller Markov chain whose states are based on the messages on a subgraph of the Tanner graph corresponding to a dominant trapping set. We show that for a fixed code such simplification preserves the accuracy of the proposed method.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II gives the formal description of faulty Gallager-B decoder. In Section III we present a Markov chain that completely determines the decoding process. Section IV describes how the Markov chain can be used for the performance analysis of the decoder in the presence of hardware failures. Numerical results are presented in Section VI and Section VII concludes the paper.

II. FAULTY DECODER

Prior to transmission over the Binary Symmetric Channel

(BSC) with probability of error α, each k-bit user information

is encoded by an (n, k) linear block code of length n and

code rate R = k/n. Due to channel errors, the codeword x

is received as y. Thus, y = (y1, y2, . . . , yn), the word at the output of the channel can be expressed as y = x + e, where

+ denotes XOR operation, and the elements of the vector e

are independent, Bernoulli random variables with parameter

α. The vector y is input to the iterative decoding algorithm

whose goal is to recover x.

Our approach is based on low-density parity check (LDPC)

codes and iterative decoding [6]. It is applicable to any LDPC

code type, but for the sake of clarity, we discuss a subclass

of the (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC code ensemble [6]. The integer

parameters

γ

and

ρ

determine

code

rate

R

≥

1−

γ ρ

,

and

the structure of the decoder, namely the number of input

arguments to Boolean functions used in the decoder.

The iterative decoding algorithm [7] operates on a graphical

representation of a code G = (V ∪ C, E). The code graph

G is a bipartite graph whose edges in the set E connect

the variable nodes in the set V with check nodes in C.

The decoding algorithm consists of sending messages between

variable nodes v ∈ V corresponding to code bits and check

nodes, c ∈ C corresponding to parity check equations in which

the variables (bits) are involved in.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1806-2/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

1566

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

The messages ν( ) from variable nodes and μ( ) from check nodes in the -th iteration are computed as

νv(→) c = Φ(yv, m( ))

μ(c→) v = Ψ(n( −1)) + e(⊕,)c→v.

(1)

where m( ) = μ(N)v\c→v denote the incoming messages to a variable node v from all its neighbors Nv except a message from the check node c. Similarly, n( ) = νN( c)\v→c denote all incoming messages to the check node c from its neighbors except the variable node v.
Our decoding algorithm is based on the modification of the Gallager-B algorithm [6]. For this algorithm, the update functions Φ and Ψ require only two types of logic gates: (γ − 1)-input majority logic (MAJ) gates and (ρ − 1)-input XOR gates [8]. We assume that XOR gates produce wrong output with probabilities α⊕. With some abuse of notation, e⊕( ) in Eq.1 denotes the errors in XOR gates affecting computation of the messages μ(c→) v, respectively (we drop the index c → v in e⊕). If the decoder was deterministic, then e⊕( ) in Eq.1 would be zero. For noisy decoders, they are independent Bernoulli random variables with parameter α⊕, respectively.
The decided bit value xˆv( ) in the -th iteration is calculated as xˆv( ) = Φˆ (l( )), where the γ-tuple l ∈ {M}γ represents all incoming messages to the variable node v, and Φˆ is the decision function. An estimate of the check node value c in the -th iteration, σˆc( ) is obtained by XOR-ing the decisions values of all neighboring variables Nc using the function Ψˆ .
The iterative procedure in Eq. 1 is halted when all parity checks are satisfied or the maximum number of iterations, L, is reached. The decoding is called successful if a codeword (either correct or wrong) is found. Otherwise, the decoding is said to have failed. The event of producing a codeword estimate which is a wrong codeword is called miss-correction.
Note that the logic gates gates used to extract the bits from any decoder must be perfect, otherwise the error rate would be bounded by the reliability of these external gates [7]. Thus, the majority-logic gates are made of perfect gates. The register inside the decoder which temporarily stores the word read from channel is also reliable.

III. MARKOV CHAIN OF A FAULTY DECODER

We now introduce a Markov model which will facilitates the analysis of our decoders. We first derive the model for the entire code graph, and then show that it can be simplified and applied to specific code subgraphs while keeping its accuracy.
Let μ( ) = (μ(c ))c∈C be the ordered set of all messages from check nodes in iteration . From Eq. 1, they can be expressed as

μ( ) = ΥC (μ( −1)) + eμ( ),

(2)

where the functions ΥC are the compositions of Φ and Ψ, and define the dynamical system of the perfect decoder. The binary vector eμ( ) of length = mρ are the realization of errors at time that affect computation of messages μ.
Their elements are deterministic functions of Bernoulli random

variables representing the errors in the XOR gates, and are
time invariant but not independent. From the discussion above, the random process {μ( )} >0 is
homogenous Markov chains with finite state space. For a given
a decoder F and error pattern e in the channel, consider the Markov chain We, with the state space S = {0, 1}|C|ρ, and the transition probability matrix P = (pε,δ)ε,δ∈S. The transition probabilities between states, pε,δ = Pr{μ( ) = δ|μ( −1) = ε}, depend on α⊕. Since Φ is the function of the channel output y, ΥC also depends on y, thus the transition probabilities depend on the the channel error vector e, and for a given decoder we
have an ensemble of Markov chains {We}e∈{0,1}n . Let δ¯ = ΥC(ε) be the state of the perfect decoder F reached
from the state ε. Then

pε,δ

=

αdδ¯,δ
⊕

(1

−

α⊕)|C|ρ−dδ¯,δ ,

(3)

where vectors

dδ¯δ¯,δanids

the Hamming distance δ, and α⊕ denotes the

between the binary failure probability in

XOR gates.

Let πβ( ) = Pr{μ( +1) = β} for some β ∈ S, and let π( ) = (πβ( ))β∈S. The initial distribution π(0) can be readily found from error statistics in the storage medium and is a function

of the memory error vector e and α⊕. For the component at the position c → v we have Pr{μ(c1→) v = 1} = α⊕.
Let the vectors xˆ( ) and σˆ( ) be the variable node decisions

and check node estimates in iteration . If they were computed

by faulty gates, the probability of convergence to a codeword

would be close to zero for any iteration . This follows from Eq. 2 and the fact that π( ) = π(0)P . This explains the

requirement for using more reliable gates to compute the

variable node estimates.

A. Classification of States

It is instructive to classify the states of We with respect to their closeness to codewords. Let C denote the set of all 2k codewords and let ∼ C denote the set of 2n − 2k n-tuples that are not codewords. For a given codeword x, let ∼ x denote the set C \ x. For a given decoder F and the error pattern e in
the memory elements, let S be the set states of Markov chain We, and let Sx denote the subset of S for which all parity checks are satisfied, and the variable node decisions form the codeword x. Similarly, S∼x denotes the set of states for which all parity checks are satisfied, and the variable node decisions form a codeword different from x. S∼C denotes the set of states for which the variable node decisions are not codewords. For any x ∈ C, the above three disjoint sets partition the set
of states

S = Sx ∪ S∼x ∪ S∼C,

(4)

When the perfect syndrome checker is turned on, and if the Markov chain is in the state β ∈ Sx ∪ S∼x, the decoding is terminated, and the Markov chain stays in β. Thus, the states in Sx and S∼x are absorbing (1(a)).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1567

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Markov chain describing the iterative decoding process. (a) The
original Markov chain We whose states are defined as ordered sets of messages from check nodes. (b) The reduced Markov chain, Wr.

B. Probability of Absorbtion
Define now the matrices P∼C,x, P∼C,∼x and P∼C,∼C with dimensions, respectively, |S∼C| × 1, |S∼C| × 1 and |S∼C| × |S∼C|, as follows:

P∼C,x =

Pr{μ( ) = ς|μ( −1) = β}

ς ∈Sx

β∈S∼C

P∼C,∼x = P∼C,∼C =

Pr{μ( ) = δ|μ( −1) = β}

δ∈S∼ x

β∈S∼C

Pr{μ( ) = ε|μ( −1) = β}

.

β∈S∼C ,ε∈S∼C

Note that the above matrices do not depend on due to

homogeneity. The matrix

⎛

⎞

1 P =⎝ 0
P∼C,x

0 1 P∼C,∼x

0 0 ⎠=
P∼C,∼C

I2 R

0 Q

(5)

defines the transition probability matrix of a new Markov chain, Wr (1(b)). In Wr, all the states in Sx are lumped into a single state. With a moderate abuse of notation, this new state
is labeled as Sx. The second absorbing state (with lumped states from S∼x) is labeled as S∼x. The matrix Q in Eq. 5 is a transition probability matrix between the transient states in S∼C, and I2 is the 2 × 2 identity matrix.
The initial distribution of Wr can be written as

π( ) = (πx( ), π∼( x) , π∼( C) ),

(6)

where π∼( C) = (πβ( ))β∈S∼C is the vector of initial probabilities of transient states, and the probabilities πx( ), π∼( x) are obtained by summing up the initial probabilities of the corresponding states: πx( ) = β∈Sx πβ , and π∼( x) = β∈S∼x πβ .
The transition diagram of the transient states is a strongly
connected graph (due to the transient failures), so Q does
not have any nonzero entries. The transition probabilities
from transient to absorbing states Sx and S∼x are given by the matrix R = (Rx, R∼x), where Rx = P∼C,x, and R∼x = P∼C,∼x.
Again, let us suppose that the syndrome checker is turned on
in every iteration. The transition probabilities between states

in iterations are given by

P=

I2 B( )

0 Q

,

(7)

where

−1

B( ) =

Qi R = (I − Q)−1(I − Q +1)R. (8)

i=0
It is interesting to explore what happens for a very large number of iterations. Then

lim B( ) = (I − Q)−1R.

(9)

→∞

The fundamental matrix of the absorbing chain, N = (I − Q)−1, determines the average times to absorption from dif-
ferent transient states. More specifically, δ∈S∼C Nβ,δ is the average time to absorbtion from the transient state β.

IV. FRAME ERROR RATE ANALYSIS
To characterize the frame error rate (F ER) performance of a given faulty decoder F, we need to compute the probability Pr{xˆ( ) = x} and find how it varies with the parameters α,
α⊕ and L. The goal is to find a region in this 3-dimensional design space in which F outperform its perfect counterpart F.
For a given error pattern e, the frame error rate, and the conditional miscorrection probability of the decoder F, (i.e. miscorrection error rate, M ER) in the iteration , Pr{xˆ( ) = x, σˆ( ) = 0} can be now found from {Wr} and expressed as

F ERe( )(F ) = Pr{μ( ) ∈ S∼0 ∪ S∼C}, M ERe( )(F ) = Pr{μ( ) ∈ S∼0}.

(10)

Theorem 1. For a faulty Gallager-B decoding algorithm D = F(L, L) on any LDPC code C, ∃L∗ and Δ, which depends on L∗, such that ∀L > L∗

|F ERe(L)(D) − M ERe(L)(D)| < Δ.

(11)

Proof. If we write the matrix B( ) in (8) as B( ) = Bx( ), B∼( x) , then it follows

πx( ) = π∼(0C) Bx( ), π∼( x) = π∼(0C) B∼( x) . From Eqs. (6) and (10) it follows
F ERe( ) = 1 − πx( ), M ERe( ) = π∼( x) . Because the sum of every row of Q is strictly less than 1, the largest eigenvalue of Q is less than 1. Therefore, when tends to infinity Q +1 → 0. Thus, π∼( C) = 0, and thus πx( ) + π∼( x) = 1, which leads to F ERe(∞) = M ERe(∞).

While the ensemble of Markov chains {Wr} completely determines the decoder’s performance on an entire code graph, its state space S is large, making the above approach numerically inefficient. However, the theory of perfect iterative decoders, gives the code graph topologies - known as trapping sets - responsible for decoding failures. Thus, instead of considering the entire graph, the decoder performance can be estimated by its ability to escape from Markov chain states corresponding to dominant trapping sets, as we explain next.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1568

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

V. ANNIHILATION OF TRAPPING SETS BY GATE FAILURES
For finite length codes, even a perfect iterative decoder fails to correct some low-weight error patterns due to its suboptimality. The decoding orbit {μ( )} ≥0 corresponding to such error pattern exhibits periodic or fixed point behavior. Subgraphs induced by variable nodes corresponding to the support of these error patterns are known as trapping sets [9]. Now we show that memory element errors inducing trapping sets can be corrected by logic gate errors.
It is known that for small α, dominant contribution to the F ER comes from small trapping sets. Trapping sets of Gallager-B decoding are completely characterized for the γ = 3 case [9]. For our discussion it suffices to define an (a, b) trapping set as a bipartite subgraph induced by a variable nodes, which contains b odd degree check nodes.
We first show that a decoder with faulty gates is capable of correcting the error patterns related with (5, 3) trapping set, that are uncorrectable by the perfect Gallager-B decoder. Markov chain state at iteration is now defined by the vector of messages from check nodes in the -th iteration as μ( ) = (μ1( ), μ(2 ), ..., μγ( |)T |), where μk( ) for k = 1, 2, ..., γ|T | is a message from a check node c to a variable node v where c ∈ CT , v ∈ T . Under the assumption that there is no errors in the rest of the graph and that the messages generated from the trapping set can not return from the rest of the graph (the same assumption is used in [10]), check nodes that connect trapping set with the rest of the graph always generates constant values. Therefore, it is not necessary to include these messages (written in brackets and boldface) in the state vector.

F PO  


F

P O  



Y

Y

 P O 



F
P O  

F


Y P O  

P O  



P O  




F

P O  



Y



P O  



P O  





P O  



F

P O  



Y

Fig. 2. The structure of (5,3) trapping set in a column-weight 3 LDPC code with girth g = 8.

In Fig. 3 performance for three-bit error pattern induced in TS(5,3) is presented. This pattern is given in Fig. 2 and the corresponding initial state is (μ(1 ), μ(2 ), ..., μ1(2)) = (1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1). In Fig. 3, statement of Theorem 1 is illustrated - after absorption, the result of decoding is a codeword (F ERe = M ERe). The high failure rates reduce the average time to absorption, but it also increases the probability of miscorrection. For the patterns that can be decoded by using reliable hardware, the gate failures have negative impact both to decoding latency as well as the residual F ERe. Therefore, for the error patterns related with TS(5,3) the best performance can be achieved for small failure rates and large value of parameter L.





í

&RQGLWLRQDOIUDPHHUURUUDWH)(5H

í í í í

0(5

XQFRUUHFWDEOHSDWWHUQα 
⊕
XQFRUUHFWDEOHSDWWHUQα 
⊕
FRUUHFWDEOHSDWWHUQα⊕  FRUUHFWDEOHSDWWHUQα⊕ 

α⊕ 

í

í

α⊕ 

í 











0D[LPXPQXPEHURILWHUDWLRQV/

Fig. 3. The conditional frame error rates of faulty Gallager-B decoder for
isolated trapping sets, analytical and simulation results for TS(5,3), correctable pattern (v1 = 1, v2 = 1, v3 = 1) and uncorrectable pattern (v2 = 1, v3 = 1, v4 = 1).

As stated before, the analysis in this section is given for isolated trapping sets and for the characteristic error patterns. If the trapping set is not isolated, logic gate failures in the rest of the graph could degrade the overall performance. On the other hand, if the analysis is performed on the whole codeword the syndrome is calculated by using massages in the whole graph, and M ERe will be much lower. However, as it will be shown in the next section, the main conclusions will remain the same.
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We consider the (3, 5)-regular (n, k) = (155, 64) LDPC code [11], which is widely used in literature. The minimum Hamming distance between codewords is dmin = 20, thus the perfect maximum likelihood (ML) decoder would be able to correct any nine-error pattern. However, the perfect Gallager-B decoder fails on some three-error patterns.
So far we considered the effects of the isolated threebit error pattern that correspond to (5,3) trapping set. This represents a worst case error pattern for (155, 64) LDPC code, and the results presented in Fig. 4 show the conditional F ER for the case when this pattern is superimposed to a codeword, when Gallager-B decoder with faulty XOR gates is applied.





í

&RQGLWLRQDO)UDPH(UURU5DWH)(5H

í

í

í

í í

/  /  / 

í 
í

í

í

α⊕

í

Fig. 4. The performance of Gallager-B decoder for Tanner (155,64) code as a function of error rates in the XOR gates. The FER curves are estimated by using Monte Carlo simulations, for the case when the channel introduces the worst case three errors-pattern which induces the (5, 3) trapping set.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1569

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory





í

)DXOW\*DOODJHUí%/  )DXOW\*DOODJHUí%/  3HUIHFW*DOODJHUí%/≥ 3HUIHFWPLQíVXP/ 

í

$YHUDJH)UDPH(UURU5DWH)(5

í

í

í 
í í í í

í

í

í

)DLOXUHUDWHLQ;25JDWHVα⊕

(a)

/ SHUIHFWGHFRGHU / α⊕  / α⊕  / α⊕  / α⊕  QLQHHUURUFRUUHFWLRQ

í 

$YHUDJH)UDPH(UURU5DWH)(5

í

í

í

í  í

í &URVVRYHUSUREDELOLW\α

(b) Fig. 5. (a) Performance of the faulty Gallager-B decoder for Tanner (155,64) code as a function of failure rates, the BSC crossover probability α = 2 × 10−3. (b) Performance of the faulty Gallager-B decoder for Tanner (155,64) code as a function of α for various decoding strategies

The presented results verify the main conclusions from the previous sections, although the results from Fig. 3 were obtained by using the Markov chains for isolated trapping sets and the results from Fig. 4 are obtained by using Monte Carlo simulations on the whole codewords. For a broad range of gate error rates, our decoder actually benefits from logic gate errors. Increasing the maximum number of iterations reduces the probability that the error pattern remains uncorrected. The impact of L is especially noticeable for high reliability gates (i.e. for low α⊕).
If the storage medium is modeled as BSC, any error pattern can occur at the decoder input with certain probability. The average F ER of the Tanner (155,64) code for the case of i.i.d. errors in memory is presented in Fig. 5(a). The faulty GallagerB decoder is more efficient than its perfect counterpart for any values of the failure rates in the logic gates less than 10−2, and the impact of parameter L is especially noticeable for high reliability gates. When L = 1000 and the gate error rates have near-optimal values, the faulty hard-decision algorithm has better performance than the much stronger and more complex soft-decision min-sum algorithm realized in perfect hardware.
The simulation results for the average F ER as a function of channel crossover probability are presented in Fig. 5(b). For all analyzed cases, the decoder F outperforms its ideal counterpart F, and for large L its performance approaches the ideal decoder capable of correcting any combination of

nine errors. Therefore, for a broad range of gate error rates, our decoder actually benefits from logic gate errors.
VII. DISCUSSION
In this paper we have developed a Markov chain that completely determines the performance of faulty Gallager-B decoder. We have shown that exact expressions for frame error rate, miscorrection probability and average time to decoding can be obtain by using the proposed method. Although the proposed approach is usually numerically inefficient when applied on the entire graph, it has been shown that the decoder performance can be estimated by its ability to escape from dominant trapping sets.
The faulty decoder proposed in this paper is a rare example of a system built from a mixture of faulty and perfect components that works better than a perfect system of the same or even higher complexity.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the Seventh Framework Program of the European Union, under Grant agreement 309129 (i-RISC project), French ANR project NAND under Grant agreement ANR-15CE25-0006-01 and in part by the NSF under Grants CCF-0963726, CCF-1314147, NSF ECCS1500170. Long version of this paper is submitted for publication to IEEE Transactions on Communications, and the concept of a decoder benefiting from failures is presented at ITA Workshop 2016.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Vasic´ and S. K. Chilappagari, “An information theoretical framework for analysis and design of nanoscale fault-tolerant memories based on low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 2438–2446, Nov. 2007.
[2] T. Yazdi, S. M. Sadegh, H. Cho, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B decoder on noisy hardware,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1660–1673, May 2013.
[3] F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. Gross, “Dithered belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2042–2047, August 2012.
[4] G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead, and E. Boutillon, “Noisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 3385–3400, Oct. 2014.
[5] O.-A. Rasheed, P. Ivanis, and B. Vasic´, “Fault-tolerant probabilistic gradient-descent bit flipping decoders,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1487 – 1490, September 2014.
[6] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[7] B. Vasic´, S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and R. Radhakrishnan, “Failures of the Gallager B decoder: analysis and applications,” in Proc. 2nd Information Theory and Applications Workshop. University of California at San Diego, Feb. 2006.
[8] M. Taylor, “Reliable information storage in memories designed from unreliable components,” Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 47, pp. 2299–2337, 1968.
[9] B. Vasic´, S. Chilappagari, D. Nguyen, and S. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 30–Oct. 2 2009, pp. 1–7.
[10] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic´, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders, Part I: Decoding beyond belief propagation on the binary symmetric channel,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4033–4045, Nov. 2013.
[11] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISTA, 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:30:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1570

