Efficient Implementation of Parallel Concatenated 
Gallager Codes with Single Encoder 
 
Aswathy G P 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering 
Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology 
Thiruvananthapuram, India 
aswathygp19@gmail.com 
Niyas K Haneefa 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering 
Mar Baselios College of Engineering and Technology 
Thiruvananthapuram, India 
niyaskhaneefa@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—Parallel Concatenated Gallager Codes (PCGCs) have 
proved to be an effective way to improve the bit error rate (BER) 
performance by increasing the redundancy at the same time 
reducing the encoding and decoding complexity when compared 
to dedicated Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) code of same 
length and code rate. Existing PCGC with single encoder has not 
been extensively successful due to its performance limitation, 
decoder complexity and decoding delay. In this paper we propose 
an efficient decoding methodology for PCGC with single encoder. 
We show that the proposed methodology outperforms existing 
PCGC with single encoder in terms of BER performance in 
AWGN channel. We also present that the proposed decoder is 
much less complex than existing one. 
Index Terms—LDPC, Parallel concatenation, PCGC, Decoding 
complexity. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are today’s most 
widely used Forward Error Correction (FEC) codes. It is a class 
of linear block codes. These codes were first introduced by 
Robert Gallager in his PhD Thesis in 1960 [1]. But these codes 
were not deployed much as they were thought to be impractical 
due to its implementation complexity at that time. After the 
discovery of Turbo codes by Berrou in 1993, LDPC codes were 
re-discovered by D. MacKay and R. Neal in 1995 [2], [3]. LDPC 
codes are well known for their capacity approaching 
performance which increases with increase in block length. 
Fully parallel LDPC decoder for longer block length, usually 
achieves very good performance. But they suffers from 
prohibitive implementation complexity due to widespread 
connectivity in the bipartite Tanner graph. Especially the routing 
overhead with a large number of global routing wires is 
extremely difficult for hardware implementation. Concatenation 
of codes is usually done to attain the error correction capability 
of longer codes, with reduced decoding complexity. Parallel 
concatenation has become one of the fieriest topics in coding 
theory after the discovery of Turbo codes [4]. Eventually H. 
Behairy and S. C. Chang introduced Parallel Concatenated 
Gallager Codes (PCGCs) in [5]. Conventional PCGC [5], [6], 
[7], [9] is a class of concatenated codes in which two component 
LDPC codes are connected in parallel using interleaver free 
Turbo code architecture. But there are some drawbacks for 
Conventional PCGC.  It fails to achieve the entire coding gain 
provided by concatenation of two component LDPC codes. 
Since serial decoding is used, decoding delay is more. 
Subsequent attempts of parallel concatenation of LDPC codes 
are presented in [10], [11], [12] and [13] which have not been 
widely successful due to their limitations. 
The remaining sections of this paper are structured as 
follows: In Section II we describe existing PCGC with single 
encoder and mention its limitations. In Section III we present the 
proposed decoding methodology for PCGC with single encoder 
and specify the advantages of proposed approach over existing 
scheme. Section IV presents the simulation results for the bit 
error rate (BER) performances of proposed PCGC with single 
encoder in Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel 
and section V concludes the paper. 
II. EXISTING PCGC WITH SINGLE ENCODER 
In PCGC with single encoder [13], [14] a single LDPC code 
with Mean Column Weight (MCW) greater than 2.5 is used as 
the component code. Fig. 1. shows the encoder and concatenated 
codeword structure for PCGC with single encoder. Here x 
represents the systematic information bits and Pb represents the 
parity bits produced by the component encoder. Here the same 
parity bits are transmitted twice. 
 
  
     
 
(i) 
                 
 
       (ii) 
Fig. 1. (i) Encoder (ii) Concatenated codeword structure for PCGC with single 
encoder [13]. 
The decoder for PCGC with single encoder consists of two 
simple LDPC decoders which are defined for the same parity 
check matrix. This is in contrast to other PCGCs explained in 
[5], [8], [10], where the component decoders were defined for 
different parity check matrices. The component decoders are 
LDPC Encoder 
x
Pb 
Pb 
Pb  
x  
x  
2016 International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks (ComNet) | 21-23 July 2016 | Trivandrum
978-1-5090-3349-2/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
39
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
connected in parallel using a set of check nodes called 
interconnecting check nodes. Each interconnecting check node 
corresponds to a parity check equation of the parity check 
matrix. Bit nodes of each component decoder are connected to 
interconnecting check nodes if they are involved in the 
corresponding parity check equations [13]. 
Decoding of PCGC with single encoder is an iterative 
process. A local iteration is referred to one complete cycle of the 
message passing algorithm, performed by the component LDPC 
decoder. Fig. 2. shows the existing decoder architecture for 
PCGC with single encoder. 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fig. 2. Existing decoder for PCGC with single encoder [13], [16]. 
A super iteration for PCGC with single encoder can be 
explained as follows [13], [16]. In the first step of super iteration, 
both 
component 
decoders 
will 
simultaneously 
and 
independently perform one local iteration of the iterative 
decoding i.e. the intrinsic information from the bit nodes are 
transferred to the check nodes of the corresponding decoder and 
bit nodes are updated based on the extrinsic messages available 
from the check nodes. In the second step, each bit node of first 
component decoder is updated (i.e. log likelihood ratio (LLR) 
value is changed) by using the updated intrinsic information of 
the bit nodes of second component decoder and similarly each 
bit node of second component decoder is updated using the 
modified intrinsic information of bit nodes of first component 
decoder through the interconnecting check nodes. This process 
of super iteration continues until one of the decoder converges 
to a valid codeword or a maximum number of super iterations 
are over. In the latter case, the output from the second 
component decoder is declared as the best estimate of the 
transmitted sequence as the super iteration process ends here. 
The main drawback of PCGC with single encoder is the 
complexity associated with its decoder due to interconnecting 
check nodes. Since PCGC decoder has got a symmetric 
structure, it is suggested in [13] to make use of this property by 
using additional registers in each bit node to reduce its 
complexity. But decoding delay is increased by a factor of 
1
3 with 
reduction in decoder complexity. Also each super iteration of 
PCGC with single encoder is a time-consuming process, which 
also accounts for decoding delay. Another demerit of PCGC 
with single encoder is that its performance is not as good as a 
single dedicated LDPC of same frame length and code rate [14]. 
III. PROPOSED DECODER FOR PCGC WITH SINGLE ENCODER 
Fig. 3. shows the proposed decoder architecture for PCGC 
with single encoder. Two simple LDPC decoders are used as 
component decoders. They are defined for the same parity check 
matrix. Both the decoders are connected in parallel without any 
set of interconnecting check nodes, hence reducing the decoder 
complexity. 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fig. 3. Proposed decoder for PCGC with single encoder. 
During a super iteration, each component decoder 
simultaneously and independently performs a local iteration to 
obtain the corresponding a posteriori LLRs. After every local 
iteration, each component decoder exchange their a posteriori 
LLRs and this is used by the other component decoder as a priori 
for the next super iteration. Similar principle is used in [8], 
where only the extrinsic information corresponding to 
systematic information bits are used as a priori by the other 
component decoders, since the parity sets were different. Also 
during each super iteration, component decoders performed a 
number of local iterations before passing any information to 
other component decoders. This increased the decoding delay. 
In PCGC with single encoder, both decoders are searching for 
the same codeword (since parity sets transmitted are same). So 
here, a posteriori LLR (a priori information + channel 
information + extrinsic information) of whole codeword 
(systematic information bits and parity bits) is exchanged by 
each component decoder and is used as a priori information by 
the other component decoder in subsequent super iteration. On 
Check node set 1 
Message bit nodes 
Parity 1 bit nodes 
Interconnecting 
check nodes 
Message bit nodes 
Parity 2 bit nodes 
Check node set 2 
DECODER 1 
DECODER 2 
Check node set 1 
Message bit nodes 
Parity 1 bit nodes 
Message bit nodes 
Parity 2 bit nodes 
Check node set 2 
DECODER 1 
DECODER 2 
A posteriori LLR exchange 
40
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the transmitting side, the same parity sets are sent twice. With 
this setting, there is no need to avoid the channel information 
from the a posteriori metrics, to be shared between the 
component decoders. This is because the parity set received by 
any one of the component decoder may be different and 
independent from the parity set received by the other component 
decoder. Exchange of a posteriori LLRs after every local 
iteration helps the component decoders to use channel 
information of both the parity sets effectively. Also inorder to 
reduce the decoding delay, only a single local iteration is 
performed by each component decoder during every super 
iteration. 
Let c = (c1 , c2 , …cL) be the transmitted concatenated 
codeword and r = (r1 , r2 , …rL) denotes the received 
concatenated codeword at the channel output. The PCGC 
decoder first de-multiplex the received sequence into two 
vectors to distribute them for component decoders. Let 𝑦𝑥
0 
denotes the received sequence corresponding to systematic 
information bits x, while 𝑦𝑝
1 and 𝑦𝑝
2 represents the received 
sequence corresponding to first and second repetition of parity 
set Pb. De-multiplexed vectors for decoder 1 and decoder 2 are 
y1 = [𝑦𝑥
0 , 𝑦𝑝
1] and y2 = [𝑦𝑥
0 , 𝑦𝑝
2] respectively. Let Y1 and Y2 
represents the LLRs of each bits corresponding to y1 and y2 
respectively. 
Let us define super iteration for proposed decoder by 
considering Minimum Sum Algorithm (MSA) as iterative 
decoding algorithm [15]. 
1. Initially the bit nodes of component decoders are 
loaded with LLR values (Y1 and Y2) as intrinsic 
information. 
2. Now decoder 1 and decoder 2 will independently and 
simultaneously perform one local iteration of MSA 
and obtain the a posteriori LLRs. Let us explain this 
step in detail [13]. 
Let 𝐿𝑚
𝑞 be the intrinsic information associated with 
the mth bit node of qth decoder. Bit node m of decoder 
q will send message (𝑀𝑚⟶𝑛
𝑞
) to check node n of 
decoder q. This is given by, 
  
                     𝑀𝑚⟶𝑛
𝑞
=  𝐿𝑚
𝑞  − 𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
 
         (1) 
 
where, 𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
 represents the extrinsic information sent 
from check node n of decoder q to bit node m of 
decoder q during previous super iteration ( 𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
= 0 
for initial super iteration). Once check nodes receive 
the messages, they will forward extrinsic information 
(𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
) towards neighbouring bit nodes of decoder q, 
which is given by, 
 
       𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
= ∏
 
𝒎′𝜖 𝐵𝑛
𝑞,𝑚′≠𝑚 sign (𝑀𝑚′⟶𝑛
𝑞
)min| 𝑀𝑚′⟶𝑛
𝑞
|  (2) 
 
where 𝐵𝑛
𝑞 represents the set of bit nodes connected to 
check node n of decoder q. Now the LLR values of bit 
nodes of both decoders are updated. 
 
                      𝐿𝑚
𝑞=  𝑌𝑚
𝑞 + ∑
 
𝑛𝜖 𝐴𝑚
𝑞  𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
                   (3) 
where 𝐴𝑚
𝑞represents the set of check nodes connected 
to bit node m of decoder q. 
3. Check for syndrome condition. If Syndrome = 0 for 
either of the component decoders, then stop decoding. 
4. If Syndrome ≠ 0, increment the super iteration count 
and exchange the a posteriori LLRs of each 
component decoder. 
5. Exchanged a posteriori LLRs are used as a priori 
information by each component decoder in subsequent 
super iteration. 
Repeat the super iteration process until a valid codeword is 
obtained by any one of the component decoders or super 
iteration count reaches its maximum value. If the component 
decoders does not converge to any valid codeword, the output 
from the second component decoder is considered as the 
transmitted codeword estimate, as the super iteration process 
ends here.  
Proposed decoding algorithm for PCGC with single 
encoder is given by, 
 
1: procedure (start) 
 Load LLR to both component decoders 
2: 
for q = 1 : 2 
3: 
for m = 1 : N 
4: 
𝐿𝑚
𝑞 = 𝑌𝑚
𝑞 
5: 
end  
6: 
end  
 Initialize Super iteration count 
7: 
SI = 0 
 Assign all 𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
 to 0 for initial super iteration 
8: 
for q = 1 : 2 
9: 
for m = 1 : N 
10: 
for n = 1 : M  
11: 
𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
= 0 
12: 
end 
13: 
end 
14: 
end 
 
repeat steps 
 Intrinsic message transfer  
15: 
for q = 1 : 2 
16: 
for m = 1 : N  
17: 
for n ϵ 𝐴𝑚
𝑞 
18: 
𝑀𝑚⟶𝑛
𝑞
=  𝐿𝑚
𝑞  − 𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
 
19: 
end 
20: 
end 
21: 
end 
 Extrinsic information transfer 
22: 
for q = 1 : 2 
23: 
for n = 1 : M 
24: 
for m ϵ  𝐵𝑛
𝑞 
41
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
25:                       𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
= ∏
 
𝒎′𝜖 𝐵𝑛
𝑞,𝑚′≠𝑚 sign (𝑀𝑚′⟶𝑛
𝑞
) min | 𝑀𝑚′⟶𝑛
𝑞
| 
26: 
end 
27: 
end 
28: 
end 
 Update decoder bit nodes 
29:                for q = 1 : 2 
30:                       for m = 1 : N 
31:                               𝐿𝑚
𝑞=  𝑌𝑚
𝑞 + ∑
 
𝑛𝜖 𝐴𝑚
𝑞  𝐸𝑛⟶𝑚
𝑞
 
32:                                𝑐̂𝑚
𝑞= {1, 𝐿𝑚
𝑞< 0
0, 𝐿𝑚
𝑞≥0 
33: 
end 
34: 
end 
 Check syndrome or maximum super iterations 
35:                   if H(c1)T = 0 (or) H(c2)T = 0 (or) SI = SImax  
36: 
             Stop iteration 
37: 
end 
       Until here, the process is similar to existing PCGC with 
single encoder [13]. After performing a local iteration, the 
intrinsic information in bit nodes of each component decoder is 
updated by adding the total a posteriori information obtained 
from the bit nodes of other component decoder. 
 
38: 
       SI = SI + 1 
 Exchange and addition of a posteriori LLRs in bit 
nodes of both decoders 
39: 
for q = 1 : 2 
40: 
             for m = 1 : N 
41:                                 𝑌𝑚
𝑞=  𝑌𝑚
𝑞  +  𝐿𝑚
𝑞′  , where q’={1,   𝑞= 2
2,   𝑞= 1 
42: 
end 
 
43: 
end 
               repeat until convergence (or) SI = SImax 
44: procedure (stop) 
In proposed PCGC with single encoder, exchange of a 
posteriori LLRs increases the reliability of each codeword bit 
after every super iteration. In this new methodology also, 
decoder 
1 
and 
decoder 
2 
performs 
local 
iteration 
simultaneously and every local iteration is followed by an 
exchange of information (a posteriori LLR) by the component 
decoders. So convergence is much quicker for proposed PCGC. 
In proposed decoder, interconnecting check nodes are 
avoided. Thus if a parity check matrix of dimension M x N is 
used, then there is a reduction of M check node units compared 
to existing PCGC decoder. Hence decoder complexity is greatly 
reduced. Since additional computations performed by these 
interconnecting check nodes are also avoided, decoding delay 
is reduced significantly. As proposed in [13], since the PCGC 
decoder is having a symmetric structure, we can make use of 
this to reduce the implementation complexity. This can be done 
by replacing the PCGC decoder with a single LDPC decoder 
(defined for same parity check matrix) with some additional 
registers in each bit node. However, decoding delay is increased 
by a factor of 
1
2 with reduction in decoder complexity. But the 
decoding delay for proposed decoder is much less compared to 
existing decoder for PCGC with single encoder. Also the 
performance of the proposed PCGC with single encoder is 
almost similar to a dedicated LDPC of same rate and frame 
length. But proposed PCGC requires more number of decoding 
iterations compared to dedicated LDPC inorder to achieve the 
same performance. 
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS 
The simulation results for the BER performance of rate  
1
3 existing PCGC with single encoder and proposed PCGC with 
single encoder for frame length 600 are presented below. 
Component code used for both are rate 
1
2 LDPC with dimension 
200 x 400 and MCW 3 as specified in [13].  
 
   
 
Fig. 4. 
BER comparison of Existing PCGC and Proposed PCGC with single 
encoder in AWGN channel 
 
For existing PCGC with single encoder, the maximum 
number of super iteration was set to 25. For proposed PCGC, the 
maximum number of super iteration was set to 25. For 
simulations, we used MSA in AWGN channel. In Fig. 4 we 
compared the BER performance of existing PCGC with single 
encoder and proposed PCGC with single encoder in AWGN 
channel. The performance of proposed PCGC with single 
encoder is much better than existing PCGC with single encoder 
in all SNR regions. 
In Fig. 5, the simulation results for the BER comparison of 
rate 
1
3 existing PCGC with single encoder, proposed PCGC with 
single encoder and dedicated LDPC of frame length 600 are 
presented. For both existing PCGC and proposed PCGC with 
single encoder, the maximum number of super iteration was set 
to 25.  For dedicated LDPC, the maximum number of decoding 
iterations (for MSA) was set to 5. We see that proposed PCGC 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
SNR(dB)
BER
BER Vs SNR in AWGN Channel
 
 
Existing PCGC with Single Encoder
Proposed PCGC with Single Encoder
42
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
almost achieves the same performance as dedicated LDPC (of 
same frame length and code rate) in all SNR regions. 
 
 
Fig. 5. BER comparison of Existing PCGC with single encoder, Proposed 
PCGC with single encoder and Dedicated LDPC in AWGN channel 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have proposed a novel decoding 
methodology for PCGC with single encoder which is effective 
than the existing methodology. We have shown that the 
proposed PCGC outperforms existing one in terms of decoder 
complexity, BER performance and decoding delay. We have 
also shown that performance of proposed PCGC with single 
encoder is almost comparable to dedicated LDPC of same rate 
and frame length. As future work, we suggest to find an efficient 
PCGC with performance better than dedicated LDPC. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IRE Transaction 
on Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, January 1962. 
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit 
performance of low density parity check codes”, Electronics 
Letters, vol.32, pp.1645-1646, 1996. 
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit 
performance of low density parity check codes”, Electronics 
Letters (reprint with printing errors corrected), vol.33, pp.457-
458, March 1997. 
[4] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon 
limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes”, 
Proceedings 
of 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communication, pp.1064-1070, May 1993. 
[5] H. Behairy and S. C. Chang, “Parallel Concatenated Gallager 
codes”, Electronics Letters, vol. 36, no. 24, pp. 2025-2026, 
November 2000. 
[6] H. Behairy and S. C. Chang, “Parallel Concatenated Gallager 
Codes for CDMA Applications”, Proceedings of IEEE 
GLOBECOM’01, San Antonio, TX, pp. 1002-6, 2001. 
[7] H. Behairy and S. C. Chang, “Analysis and design of parallel 
concatenated Gallager codes”, Electronics Letters, vol. 38, no. 18, 
pp. 1039- 1040, Aug 2000. 
[8] Hatim M. Behairy and Mohammed Benaissa, “Multiple Parallel 
Concatenated Gallager Codes: Code Design and Decoding 
Techniques”, IETE Journal of Research, vol: 59, issue: 6, page no: 
659-664, Nov-Dec 2013. 
[9] H. M. Behairy, “Dual Mode PCGCs for Advanced Wireless 
Communications Networks”, Proceedings of IEEE International 
Design and Test Workshop, IDT 2007, Cairo, Egypt, Dec.2007. 
[10] P. C. Catherine and K. M. S. Soyjaudah, “Parallel Concatenation 
of LDPC codes with Two Sets of Source Bits”, IEEE Proceedings 
of International Conference on Emerging Trends in Engineering 
& Technology, page no: 112-115, 2011. 
[11] J. C. Serrato and T. O’Farrell, “Parallel Concatenated Gallager 
Codes using Euclidean and Projective Geometry LDPC Codes”, 
Proceedings of London Communications Symposium (LCS 2004), 
University College London, UK, September 2004. 
[12] J. C. Serrato and T. O’Farrell, “Structured Parallel Concatenated 
LDPC codes”, Proceedings of London Communications 
Symposium (LCS 2006), University College London, UK, 
September 2006. 
[13] R. Pravin Kumar and Rakhesh Singh Kshetrimayum, “An 
Efficient Methodology for Parallel Concatenation of LDPC codes 
with reduced complexity and decoding delay”, IEEE Proceedings 
of the National Conference on Communications (NCC), page no: 
1-5, February 2013. 
[14] R. Pravin Kumar, “Parallel Concatenation of LDPC codes and its 
applications”, M. Tech. thesis, Department of Electronics and 
Electrical Engineering, IIT Guwahati, India, April 2013. 
[15] Sarah J. Johnson, Iterative Error Correction, Cambridge 
University Press, 2010. 
[16] Aswathy G. P and Niyas K. Haneefa, “A Survey on Methods of 
Parallel Concatenation of LDPC Codes”, International Journal of 
Engineering and Advanced Technology, vol. 5, issue: 4, page no: 
124 -129, April 2016. 
 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
10
-6
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
SNR(dB)
BER
BER Comparison
 
 
Existing PCGC with Single Encoder
Proposed PCGC with Single Encoder
Dedicated LDPC
43
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
