2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

Generalized Belief Propagation Based TDMR
Detector and Decoder
Chaitanya Kumar Matcha∗, Mohsen Bahrami†, Shounak Roy∗, Shayan Garani Srinivasa∗, and Bane Vasic´† ∗Department of Electronic Systems Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, 560012 India. {mchaitanyakumar, shounak, shayan.gs}@dese.iisc.ernet.in †Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA. {bahrami, vasic}@ece.arizona.edu

Abstract—Two dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) achieves high areal densities by reducing the size of a bit comparable to the size of the magnetic grains resulting in two dimensional (2D) inter symbol interference (ISI) and very high media noise. Therefore, it is critical to handle the media noise along with the 2D ISI detection. In this paper, we tune the generalized belief propagation (GBP) algorithm to handle the media noise seen in TDMR. We also provide an intuition into the nature of hard decisions provided by the GBP algorithm. The performance of the GBP algorithm is evaluated over a Voronoi based TDMR channel model where the soft outputs from the GBP algorithm are used by a belief propagation (BP) algorithm to decode low-density parity check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Two dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) is a promising technology to increase the areal densities beyond 800 Gb/in2 using sophisticated signal processing algorithms on the currently available magnetic medium by reducing the track width. The signal processing algorithms in TDMR have to handle the 2D ISI and very high media noise arising due to irregularities in the medium.
The correlation and data dependent nature of the media noise can be used to reduce the effect of media noise on the signal processing algorithms in TDMR. Khatami and Vasic´ [1] have used constrained codes along with GBP detector to avoid harmful patterns that contribute to high media noise. Matcha and Srinivasa [2] have used pattern dependent noise prediction filters along with a 2D soft-output Viterbi algorithm (2D SOVA) to handle the media noise.
We use generalized belief propagation (GBP) algorithm for signal detection. The GBP algorithm is a graph based iterative algorithm where the messages are passed across regions instead of between nodes as seen in the belief propagation (BP) algorithm [3]. The performance of the GBP algorithm in relation to the MAP/ML criteria and the optimal choice of regions is not well understood.
In this paper, we model the media noise from a Voronoi based media model as a pattern dependent noise. We formulate the GBP algorithm to handle the media noise and obtain soft-outputs useful to decode a LDPC code. We also provide
The work at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore is funded by the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY), India (grant no. MITO0101). The work at University of Arizona, Tuscon, USA was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-1314147 and ECCS-1500170 and in part by IDEMA-ASTC.

intuition into the nature of hard decisions given by GBP by looking at the GBP as a convex optimization problem.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we describe the Voronoi based TDMR channel model. In Section III, we provide insights into the nature of hard decisions from GBP algorithm and formulate the algorithm to handle media noise. In Section IV, we use GBP algorithm to bound the TDMR channel capacity for designing the LDPC code of appropriate rate. We also discuss the numerical results where LDPC codes are decoded using soft outputs from the GBP algorithm.
II. TDMR CHANNEL MODEL
A TDMR channel model is characterized by a magnetic media model, a write process and a read-back procedure. For the study in this paper, we use a Voronoi based channel model proposed in [1]. This section provides the essential details of the channel model.
A. Voronoi Based Magnetic Medium
The non-ideal features of the magnetic medium are modeled as Voronoi tiling of magnetic grains. The distribution of grain centers is modeled as the Poisson disk process with boundary sampling as explained in [1]. The distribution is characterized by the center-to-center (CTC) distance parameter which defines the minimum distance between any two grains.
For the storage of information, the magnetic medium is viewed as a rectangular grid. Each rectangular cell has a size of bit period (BP) × track width (TW) and stores a channel bit. The write head magnetizes all grains whose centers are within a bit area with a polarization corresponding to the channel bit.
B. Read Procedure and Media Noise
The read-head output samples are obtained by convolving the magnetization of recorded medium with the read-head response and then sampling at the centers of bit cells. We consider the read-head impulse response to be a Gaussian pulse truncated to 3 × 3 bit area [1]. We denote P W5C0T (P W5D0T ) as the width of Gaussian pulse at half-amplitude in the down-track (cross-track) direction.
The media noise arises due to the grains near the boundaries of the bit region and is correlated in both down-track and cross-track directions. If two neighboring bits have the same polarization, there is no media noise caused from that border. For the 3 × 3 span of read-head impulse response, the media

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1806-2/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

210

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

noise is dependent on the local 3 × 3 data patterns written on
the medium. We can approximate the pattern dependent media
noise distribution as a Gaussian distribution [4]. For our discussion, let xi,j ∈ {0, 1} , (i, j) ∈ Z2 represent
bits written onto the medium. Let yi,j ∈ R, (i, j) ∈ Z2 represent the read-back samples obtained from the channel model. Let x = [xi,j] ∈ {0, 1}n×m represent a n × m page of bits and y = [xi,j] ∈ Rn×m represent the corresponding page of read-back samples obtained from the channel model. Let
xi,j represent the set of bits that contribute to the read-back sample yi,j. For a channel with 3 × 3 ISI span, xi,j contains 9 bits {xi+k,j+l | k, l ∈ {−1, 0, 1}}.

III. GBP BASED 2D-ISI DETECTION
Generalized belief propagation (GBP) algorithm is a graph based decoding/detection algorithm that can be formulated as a convex optimization problem that minimizes the Gibbs free energy [3]. The algorithm provides a method to approximate marginal distributions which makes it suitable for MAP detection with soft outputs.
The GBP algorithm is known to give exact marginals if and only if the region based graph has no loops [5]. Even though the region based graphs always contain loops when used for 2D ISI signal detection, the GBP algorithm provides a method to approximate the marginals that are empirically observed to be close to the actual marginals.
In this section, we provide insights into the nature of hard decisions from the GBP algorithm and evaluate the performance of the GBP algorithm over a chosen 2D ISI channel for different choices of region. We next formulate the GBP algorithm for the noise characteristics seen in the Voronoi based TDMR channel model in Section II.

A. Gibbs free energy and Kikuchi approximation

Assuming uniform distribution of the input bits and white noise samples in the channel model, the a-posteriori probability of x given read-back samples y is given by

p (x | y) = p (y | x) p (x) p (y)−1 ∝ p (y | x)

p (y | x) =

fi,j (xi,j )

(1)

i,j

where fi,j (xi,j) = p (yi,j | xi,j) is the distribution function of noise sample at location (i, j). Therefore, we have

p (x

|

y)

=

1 Z

fi,j (xi,j ) ,

(2)

i,j

for some Z(y). Let b(x) represent the belief of the a-posterior probability (APP). From the properties of KL-divergence, the belief b (x) = p (x | y) can be achieved by minimizing the free energy given by

F = E − H = D (b (x) p (x | y)) − ln Z(y), (3)

average energy E = −

b(xi,j ) ln fi,j (xi,j ), (4)

i,j xi,j

entropy H = b (x) ln b(x).

(5)

x

f(1,1) (1, 1) (1, 2)

f(1,3) (1, 2) (1, 3)

f(3,1) (2, 1) (2, 2)

f(3,3) (2, 2) (2, 3)

f(1,1)

f(1,3)

(2, 1) (2, 2) (2, 2) (2, 3) (3, 1) (3, 2) (3, 2) (3, 3)

x(1,1) x(1,2) x(1,3) x(2,1) x(2,2) x(2,3) x(3,1) x(3,2) x(3,3)

(1, 1)

(1, 2) (2, 2)

(2, 1) (2, 2) (1, 3)

(2, 2) (3, 1)
(3, 2)

(2, 2) (2, 3)

(3, 3)

f(3,1)

f(3,3)

(a) Factor graph

(1, 2) (2, 1)

(2, 2) (2, 3) (3, 2)

(b) Region graph

Figure 1. Factors fi,j (·) of a 3 × 3 page are shown. The corresponding region graph with all regions and sub-regions is also shown. The arrows in the region graph show the flow of messages in the GBP algorithm.

Let a region R ⊂ R2 be defined as a set of positions within a page. Let R represent a collection of such regions such that each of xi,j is included in atleast one region. For each R ∈ R, let xR be the vector of bits in the region R and b (xR) and p (xR) be the corresponding marginal beliefs and probabilities. The regions are partially ordered based on the containment of
one region inside another [3]. A region graph is formed using
this partial ordering as shown in Figure 1.
The free energy is approximated using the entropy of
individual regions as

Fˆ = −

b (xi,j ) ln fi,j (xi,j )

i,j xi,j

+ cR b (xR) ln b (xR) ,

(6)

R∈R xR

where cR are overcounting numbers defined as cR = p∈PR 1 − cp and PR are parents of region R in the region
graph. This approximation is called Kikuchi approximation or
region based approximation (RBA). The marginals b (xR) are
estimated by minimizing (6) under the constraints

b (xp) = b (xR) ∀p ∈ PR, ∀R ∈ R. (7)
u∈xp\R
These constraints ensure that the beliefs of sub-regions are obtained by marginalizing the beliefs of their parents [5]. The message update rules of GBP algorithm are obtained from the constrained optimization of Fˆ using Lagrange multipliers.
The regions and cR are chosen to 1) ensure unique solution to the for GBP algorithm, 2) closely approximate the marginals 3) reduce computational complexity.

B. Hard Decisions from GBP
The analysis on GBP in the literature is focused on closely approximating the marginals (soft decisions). However, the nature of hard decisions is also of interest while analyzing GBP as a signal detection/decoding algorithm. In this subsection, we use the ideas of linear programming and convex optimization to provide an insight into the behavior of GBP algorithm for hard decisions decoding/detection.
Hard decision decoding is a signal classification problem where the received signal is classified based on the decision regions with in a signal space. We define the spaces of interest and the corresponding decision regions as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
211

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

Let {0, 1}N = {m0, m1, · · · , m2N −1} represent the set of states taken by x, where N = mn is the number of bits in a
page, mk (i, j) is the value of xi,j when x = mk. Let mi (R) be the vector of bits in mi restricted to the region R ∈ R.
The RBA reduces the optimization problem in b (x) space
to the optimization in a lower dimensional space of marginals
{b (xR)}R∈R. Let b be the vector of beliefs b (x) , x = m0 · · · m2N −1, and let bR represent the vector of marginals b (xR) , xR = m0 (R) · · · m2N −1 (R) , R ∈ R. We define the space of probabilities and marginals as follows.

Definition 1. Probability space: We define ∆ as the space of probabilities/beliefs b (x) with the constraints

2N −1

0 ≤ b (x = mi) ≤ 1 and

b (x = mi) = 1.

i=0

Let {v0, v1, · · · , v2N −1} represent the vertices of the space where vi represents b (x = mi) = 1, i = 0, · · · , 2N − 1. Let u be the uniform distribution.
Marginal space: Let ∆M be the space of marginals bR (x) for the regions in R with the constraints 0 ≤ b (xR) ≤ 1 and b (xR) = 1∀R ∈ R. We further enforce following
xR
constraints such that the marginals of two overlapping regions
are consistent:

b (xRi ) =

b xRj

xRi \Rj

xRj \Ri

∀Ri, Rj ∈ R. (8)

Remark: We can define a linear map L : ∆ → ∆M using the marginalization operations b (xR) = xRc b (x) , R ∈ R.
Let vˆi = L (vi) , i = 0, · · · , 2N − 1 and uˆ = L (u).

Definition 2. Pseudo-marginal space: Let ∆P be a space of pseudo-marginals bR (x) for regions in R with the constraints
0 ≤ b (xR) ≤ 1 and b (xR) = 1∀R ∈ R. These are pseudo
xR
marginals as we ignored the constraints in (8). Therefore,
∆M ⊂ ∆P .

Definition 3. Optimal hard decisions: The word mF ER is said to be frame error rate (FER) optimal hard decision if

p (x = mF ER) > p (x = mj) , ∀mj = mF ER. (9)

The word mBER is bit error rate (BER) optimal decision if

p (xi,j = mBER(i, j)) > 0.5, ∀xi,j.

(10)

Let vF ER, vBER ( and vˆF ER, vˆBER) be the vertices in ∆( and ∆M ) corresponding to b(mF ER) = 1 and b(mBER) = 1. Since the inner product vi, b = b (x = mi), the FER
decision region can be written using (9) as

D(F ER) = ∆ ∩

{ vF ER − vj, b ≥ 0} (11)

j:mj =mF ER

It is easy to see that all FER decision regions corresponding
to each word mi intersect at u. Proposition 1 identifies the FER decision region in ∆P corresponding to (11).

Proposition 1. The optimal FER decision region in the pseudo

marginal space ∆P is

Dˆ F ER = ∆P ∩

{ vˆF ER − vˆj, bR ≥ 0} . (12)

j:vˆj =vˆF ER

Proof: Let D˜F ER = L (DF ER) be the linear map of DF ER from ∆ to ∆M . Note that D˜F ER also has linear decision boundaries and hence the decision boundaries in ∆P are also linear. Notice that DF ER and DˆF ER are Voronoi
regions in their own spaces. Each vertex of DF ER is obtained as follows: Choose any
subset set of points V ⊆ {vi | i = 1, · · · , 2N−1}. Centroid of points V ∪ {vF ER} is a vertex of DF ER.
Similarly, the vertices of DˆF ER in (12) are the centroids of a subset of points from {vˆi = vˆF ER} and vˆF ER. Since the map from vi to vˆi is linear, the same linear map maps the centriods in ∆ to centriods in ∆P . Therefore, the vertices of DˆF ER in (12) are a map of vertices of DF ER. Therefore, DˆF ER in (12) is the optimal FER decision region in ∆P .
The following proposition proves a property of the average
energy in ∆P that helps us in understanding the nature of
signal classification by GBP.

Proposition 2. In the pseudo marginal space ∆P , the average

energy term in the Kikuchi approximation of free energy has

a

constant

gradient

g=

∂E ∂bR

satisfying

vˆF ER − vˆi, bR ≤ 0∀vˆi = vˆF ER, i = 0, · · · , 2N −1. (13)

Proof: The gradient of E has the terms − log fi,j (xi,j) and hence is constant. Since E = 0 when bR = 0, we can write E (bR) = bR, g . From (4), E is linear in ∆ and the minima of E occurs on the boundaries of ∆. We can easily verify that E is minimized in ∆ when b (x = mF ER) = 1 i.e., at the point b = vF ER. Consider the polytope in ∆P formed by the points vˆi, i = 0, · · · , 2N − 1. Using the exactness of the average energy in RBA [3], we can claim that the average energy is minimum at bR = vˆF ER inside this polytope i.e., E (vˆF ER) ≤ E (vˆi) =⇒ vˆF ER − vˆi, bR ∀vˆi = vˆF ER.
Nature of signal classification by GBP: The approximated entropy Hˆ has maximum value at uniform distribution uˆ. Proposition 2 shows that the gradient of −E has the largest component along the direction of vˆF ER than in the direction of any other vˆi. Therefore, in the optimization problem to maximize −E + H, the component −E shifts the maxima of Hˆ closer to vˆF ER i.e., within the region DˆF ER. This shows that the inherent nature of signal classification achieved by
GBP is towards optimizing FER. Due to this nature of signal
classification, the GBP algorithm is suitable for hard decision
decoding of error correcting codes (ECC) where FER has to
be minimized. A good approximation of entropy will provide
a closer approximation of the marginals resulting in optimal
BER. Therefore, a good approximation of entropy is the key
for the problems where BER has to be minimized.

C. Choice of regions
In this subsection, we focus on choosing regions suitable for 3 × 3 ISI span. The optimal choice of regions is not trivial.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
212

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

100

10−1

10−2

BER

10−3

Without 1x2, 2x1 sub regions

10−4

Without 1x3, 3x1 sub regions

Without 2x2 sub regions

10−5

Without 3x2, 2x3 sub regions

Only 3x3 and 1x1 regions (BP)

All regions

10−6 9

9.5

10

10.5

11

11.5

12

12.5

13

SNR

Figure 2. BER performance of the GBP algorithm for different choices of regions. The best performance is seen when all sub-regions of sizes 2 × 3, 3 × 2, 1 × 3, 3 × 1, 2 × 1, 1 × 2, 2 × 2, 1 × 1 are chosen. Omitting any of the regions would not ensure that the beliefs marginalize to the same values in the intersection of regions. Severe degradation in performance is seen if there are large number of descendants for the omitted regions.

Welling [6] has proposed a region pursuit algorithm based on his observations on splitting and merging of regions. However, the choice of regions larger than 3 × 3 is computationally prohibitive for signal detection in TDMR.
Therefore, we restrict our search to regions of size 3 × 3 or smaller. Let Rp×q denote the set of regions of size p × q within a frame. The valid sizes of sub-regions are 2 × 3, 3 × 2, 1 × 3, 3 × 1, 2 × 1, 1 × 2, 2 × 2, 1 × 1. Let R denote the collection of all 3 × 3 regions and sub-regions within a frame.
The choice R = R is shown in [5] to ensure several desirable properties for the convex optimization problem:
1) The constraints in (7) ensure that the beliefs of regions are marginals of a distribution if and only if R = R .
2) The choice achieves totally balanced condition that helps in removing bias in the approximation of entropy.
3) The choice ensures unique solution.
Figure 2 shows the performance of the GBP algorithm for different choices of regions over a 2D-ISI AWGN channel given in [7]. The BER is estimated by detecting pages of size 32 × 32 at a time. We notice that the best performance is obtained when the R = R . The performance is about 0.2 dB better than JTED [7] for the same 2D ISI channel operating on 64 × 64 pages. We also notice severe degradation in performance if the omitted set of regions has a large number of descendants.

Table I RSCT (RSDT ) DENOTES THE READER RESPONSE SPAN IN CROSS-TRACK (DOWN-TRACK) DIMENSION. ALL THE PARAMETERS IN THE TABLE ARE
SPECIFIED IN NANOMETERS. INDICATES THAT THE PARAMETER IS VARIED IN THE SIMULATIONS. CTC= 7nm.
TW BP RSCT RSDT P W5C0T P W5D0T

TDMR

10 28

28

14

14

The MAP detection minimizes the BER by maximizing the APP, p(xi,j|y), for each xi,j in x.
In order to utilize the GBP algorithm for finding the LLRs, the first step is to identify the local constraint functions fi,j (xi,j) given in (2). Since the 2D ISI in our model is limited to a 3×3 span, the read-back sample yi,j and the corresponding media noise sample depends only on xi,j, the 3 × 3 bit region centered at (i, j). Therefore, the local constraint functions can be defined using the pattern dependent noise distribution as fi,j (xi,j ) = p(yi,j |xi,j ).
We can incorporate the GBP algorithm to the probabilistic graphical model of this problem that we introduced in [1] in order to obtain the APPs. In order to obtain optimal performance, as seen in Section III-C, we choose the regions to include all 3 × 3 regions and all possible intersections of these regions.
IV. USING SOFT-INFORMATION FROM GBP FOR ITERATIVE DECODING OF CODED TDMR CHANNELS
In our simulations, LDPC coded bits are written on and read from the Voronoi based magnetic medium, resulting in read-back samples. The GBP algorithm is used for signal detection and the LLRs from the GBP algorithm are used for iterative LDPC decoding using the belief propagation (BP) algorithm. We design the LDPC code rate by bounding the channel capacity of our TDMR channel model using the GBP based TDMR SIR estimation algorithm described in our recent work [8]. The TDMR channel model parameters used in the simulations are given in Table I. The GBP algorithm detects a 32 × 32 page of data at a time. The read-head response is truncated to restrict the ISI span to 3 × 3 bit area.
In order to demonstrate the feasibility of implementation of our proposed GBP based TDMR detector, we conducted experiments to recover the user bits from the distorted coded TDMR channel.

D. Soft Information from GBP

As discussed in Section III-C, the GBP algorithm can be used to compute the a-posteriori probabilities of the bits. In the following, we formulate the problem of extracting soft information from the Voronoi based TDMR channel as an instance of 2D ISI channels.
The APP ratios in the log domain, also called the log likelihood ratio for each bit xi,j is approximated using the beliefs from GBP algorithm as

LLR (xi,j) = log

p (xi,j = 1 | y) p (xi,j = 0 | y)

≈ log

b (xi,j = 1) b (xi,j = 0)

.

A. Lower and Upper Bounds on the SIR of Voronoi Channel

The SIR between the input and output random processes

X and Y of a Voronoi channel is defined as the mutual

information per symbol between X and Y when the input

distribution is uniform. For a n × m Voronoi channel, we

have SIR

=

1 nm

I

(X

;

Y

)

when

the

input

distribution

is

uniform where I(X; Y ) = H(Y ) − H(Y |X). The term,

H(Y |X), is the conditional entropy of the media noise that

can be computed analytically using the channel model. As

discussed in Subsection II-B, we estimate the media noise

distribution p(Y |xR) by an AWGN with the noise variance σx2R dependent on each 3 × 3 span of input data. Therefore,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
213

2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

0.85

100

Upper Bound

BCH (1023, 675)

Lower Bound

CW−4 QC−LDPC (756, 504)

0.8

10−1

0.75

10−2 0.7

SIR FER

0.65

0.6

0.55

0.5

12

12.5

13

13.5

14

14.5

15

TW (nm)

Figure 3. Lower and upper bounds on the SIR of Voronoi channel of TDMR system with the parameters given in Table I

H(Y |X

=

xR)

=

1 2

log(2πeσx2R ).

H(Y )

is

obtained

using

the GBP based TDMR SIR estimation algorithm [8].

The GBP-based capacity estimation algorithm provides a

lower bound on the 2D partition function of a factor graph,

and accordingly the SIR which is obtained using the algorithm

is only an estimate. In [9], GBP was used to estimate the

capacity of 2D RLL codes and it was shown that GBP capacity estimate for local constraints are accurate (up to 3rd decimal

place). Moreover, in [10], it was shown that SIR, computed

for the 2D Gaussian channels using the GBP-based algorithm

coincides with the lower and upper bounds of the SIR given

by Chen and Siegel [11]. In our recent work [8], we have

shown that the lower and upper bounds merge to the SIR

of the Voronoi channel by increasing the dimensions of the

medium. The upper and lower bounds on SIR are obtained as:

Lower Bound: No information about outside of boundaries

of the 32 × 32 page is available for the GBP based TDMR

SIR estimator. In this case, we compute the beliefs assuming

that all states of the boundary regions are equi-probable. This

gives us a lower bound on the SIR of the TDMR channel.

Upper Bound: The boundary information of the magnetic

medium is assumed to be known to the SIR estimator. In this

case, the bit values outside the page boundary are known and

treated as deterministic giving us an upper bound on the SIR.

Figure 3 shows the SIR lower and upper bounds for the

chosen TDMR channel model. We use SIR as a lower bound

on the capacity of the system. Based on the observed lower

and upper bounds of the SIR we choose LDPC code rate to be

R = 0.66. The LDPC code of length N = 756, rate R = 0.66,

and a circulant size of L = 126 is constructed by methods

described in [12], and is free of small trapping sets.

B. Frame Error Rate Results
Figure 4 shows the frame error rate (FER) results with respect to T W for the Voronoi channel with the parameters given in Table I. At T W = 16.2 nm, the LDPC code gives more than two orders of magnitude gain in the FER when compared with the BCH code of length 1023 bits, rate 0.66.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a method to handle the media noise seen in the TDMR channels using the GBP based

10−3

10−4

10−5

14

14.5

15

15.5

16

16.5

TW (nm)

Figure 4. The FER result of quasi-cyclic column weight four LDPC code with N = 756, R = 0.66 with respect to the parameter T W for the Voronoi channel. Also, the FER of BCH code (1023, 675) is plotted for reference.

detector. We have used the GBP algorithm for signal detection
in conjunction with a BP algorithm for LDPC decoding. We
have given an insight into the nature of signal classification
(hard decisions) by GBP to be motivated towards minimizing
FER. We have also evaluated the performance of the GBP
algorithm for different choices of regions suitable for TDMR.
The GBP algorithm can be formulated to handle correlation
in the media noise and exchange information in a turbo
fashion with the BP algorithm for further gains in the TDMR
performance.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Khatami and B. Vasic´, “Constrained coding and detection for TDMR using generalized belief propagation,” in ICC, Jun. 2014, pp. 3889–3895.
[2] C. Matcha and S. G. Srinivasa, “Generalized partial response equalization and data-dependent noise predictive signal detection over media models for TDMR,” IEEE Trans. Magn, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1–15, Oct 2015.
[3] J. Yedidia, W. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282 – 2312, Jul. 2005.
[4] M. Khatami, M. Bahrami, and B. Vasic´, “Information rates of constrained TDMR channels using generalized belief propagation,” in GLOBECOM, San Diego, CA, Dec. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[5] P. Pakzad and V. Anantharam, “Estimation and marginalization using Kikuchi approximation methods,” Neural Computation, vol. 17, pp. 1836–1873, 2003.
[6] M. Welling, “On the choice of regions for generalized belief propagation,” in UAI ’04. Arlington, Virginia, United States: AUAI Press, 2004, pp. 585–592.
[7] Y. Chen and S. G. Srinivasa, “Joint self-iterating equalization and detection for two-dimensional intersymbol-interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Comm, vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3219–3230, Aug. 2013.
[8] M. Khatami, , M. Bahrami, and B. Vasic´, “Symmetric information rate estimation and bit aspect ratio optimization for TDMR using generalized belief propagation,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2015.
[9] G. Sabato and M. Molkaraie, “Generalized belief propagation for the noiseless capacity and information rates of run-length limited constraints,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 669–675, Mar. 2012.
[10] O. Shental, N. Shental, S. Shamai, I. Kanter, A. Weiss, and Y. Weiss, “Discrete-input two-dimensional Gaussian channels with memory: Estimation and information rates via graphical models and statistical mechanics,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1500–1513, Apr. 2008.
[11] J. Chen and P. Siegel, “On the symmetric information rate of twodimensional finite-state ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 227–236, Jan 2006.
[12] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, B. Vasic´, and M. W. Marcellin, “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
214

