Weighted Bit-Flipping Decoding

for Product LDPC Codes

S.Khittiwitchayakul1, W.Phakphisut2, P.Supnithi3 1,3Faculty of Engineering, King Mongkut's Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok 10520, Thailand
2Faculty of Science and Technology, Bangkok Suvarnabhumi University, Bangkok 10520, Thailand Email: 57601155@kmitl.ac.th, phwatid@gmail.com, pornchai.su@kmitl.ac.th

Abstract— In this work, we propose a weighted bit-flipping (WBF) decoding for product LDPC codes of which decoding complexity is lower than the belief-propagation (BP) decoding. Two distinct types based on page computations and row/column computations are proposed. In addition, we address an issue of hard decision algorithm for product LDPC codes suffering a performance degradation at high iteration numbers. We introduce a threshold of flipped bits to adjust the performance at high iterations. Although the performances of both proposed decoding are worse than that of the BP algorithm, it greatly reduces the decoding complexity.
Keywords— low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, weighted bit-flipping (WBF), product LDPC codes
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been shown to achieve performance approaching the Shannon’s limit in an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [1-2]. It is well known that the performance of LDPC codes can be improved by increasing the length of codeword. However, as the codeword length increases, it leads to high complexity of encoder and decoder. Therefore, in [6], product LDPC codes have been proposed. Herein, the long information bits are divided into multiple shorter information bits, which can be viewed as two dimensional (2-D) information bits. Then, 2-D information bits are encoded and decoded on row and column direction separately. The simulation results show that the product LDPC codes give lower complexity of decoder than long-length LDPC codes, but the performance of product LDPC codes is worse than long-length LDPC codes at high signal to noise ratios (SNR).
In general, LDPC decoding algorithm can be decoded by either soft-decision or hard-decision algorithm. The soft decision algorithm [3-4] provides the better performance than the hard decision algorithm, but it requires very high complexity. The standard weighted bit-flipping (S-WBF) algorithm [7] is one of the hard decision algorithms. This algorithm employs the magnitude of receive signals to determine the worst unreliable bit at each iteration. The modified weighted bit-flipping (M-WBF) algorithm [8] has been proposed to improve the performance of the S-WBF algorithm. However, the performance of the M-WBF decoding algorithm depends on the weight factor α , which must be investigated at each SNR.
In recent works, the reliability-ratio weighted bit-flipping (RR-WBF) algorithm [10-11] has been proposed to avoid the

search for optimal α values and its performance is shown to be comparable to that of the M-WBF algorithm.
Unfortunately, the research works of hard decision algorithm only focus on the one dimensional (1-D) information bits of 1-D LDPC codes. In this research, we modify the hard decision algorithm to decode product LDPC codes and call it page-based weighted bit-flipping (P-WBF) decoding algorithm. Furthermore, we will reduce the decoding complexity of the P-WBF algorithm by splitting the decoder to row and column decoder, it called row-column weighted bitflipping (RC-WBF) decoding algorithm. Although the decoding complexity of the RC-WBF algorithm is less than that of the P-WBF algorithm, its performance is not as good at high number of iterations. Therefore, we will introduce the thresholds of flipped bits to adjust the performance at high number of iterations.
The rest of paper is organized as follow. In Section II and III, we describe the background of decoding algorithms used in this research. Then, we describe the proposed hard decision algorithms for product LDPC codes, i.e., the P-WBF decoding algorithm and the RC-WBF decoding algorithm in Section IV. The problem of the RC-WBF decoding algorithm and the simulation results are described in Section V and VI, respectively. Finally, section VII delivers the conclusions.
II. PRODUCT LDPC CODES
Given that the information bits m = [m1, m2 , m3...., mK ] are
encoded by an LDPC encoder to obtain the codeword
bits c = [c1, c2 , c3 ,...., cN ] , where K and N are the length of
information bits and codeword bits, respectively. The LDPC code has a parity-check matrix H that represents the relationship among the code bits. The codeword c must
satisfy the condition cHT = 0 . A binary phase shift keying (BPSK) is used to modulate the codeword bits, where the transmitted bits are x = 2c −1 . At the receiver, the received
signal y = [ y1, y2 , y3 ,...., yN ] can be expressed as

y = x + n,

(1)

where n denotes the sequence of additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) samples with zero mean and variance N0 / 2 .
A product LDPC code [6] as shown in Fig. 1 is a twodimensional (2-D) LDPC code, whereby the information bits are encoded and decoded on row and column directions

978-1-4673-9749-0/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

separately. Therefore, the product LDPC code consists of the

information bits, the parity-check of error correction on each

column, the parity-check of error correction on each row and

the parity-check of error correction of parity bits. We define

Nrow and Ncol as the length of codeword in each row and

each column of the product LDPC code, respectively. Thus,

the length of codeword of the product LDPC codes can be

computed from N 2D = Nrow × Ncol , the length of information

bits can be computed from K 2D = Krow × Kcol and the code rate

is R2D , where, R2D = Rrow ×Rcol = K2D / N2D = (Krow ×Kcol ) / (Nrow ×Ncol ) .

Kcol

Ncol − Kcol

Krow

Information bits

Paritycheck bits

Nrow − Krow

Parity-check bits

Paritycheck bits

Fig. 1. Structure of a product LDPC code [6].

III. WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING (WBF) DECODING ALGORITHM
The standard weighted bit-flipping (S-WBF) algorithm [7] is one of the hard decision algorithms proposed to reduce the complexity of decoder. Let Ν(m) denote a set of non-zero
positions in the m-th row and Μ(n) denote a set of non-zero positions in the n-th column of the parity-check matrix H . The received signal y is hard decisioned to the sequence z ,
where zn = 1 if yn ≥ 0 and zn = 0 otherwise. The steps of the S-WBF algorithm are shown in Table I.

TABLE I. STEPS OF THE S-WBF DECODING ALGORITHM [7]

Initialization: Compute y min−m for m = 1, 2,3..., N − K , from

y min −m



min
n∈N ( m )

yn

.

(2)

Step 1: Compute syndrome sm for m = 1, 2,3..., N − K , from

N

 sm = zn Hmn.

(3)

n =1

where Hmn is an element on the m-th row and n-th column in the parity-check matrix H .

Step 2: Compute En for n = 1, 2,3..., N , from

 ( ) En =

(2sm −1) y min−m .

(4)

m∈Μ (n)

Step 3: zn is flipped if n = arg max1≤n≤N En . Then the steps 1-3
are repeated until all of sm equal 0 or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

In recent works [10-11], the reliability-ratio weighted bitflipping (RR-WBF) algorithm has been proposed to improve the performance of the S-WBF algorithm. The steps of the RR-WBF algorithm are similar to those of the S-WBF algorithm, but (4) is modified to

  En

=

|

1 yn

| m∈Μ(n) (2sm

−1)

 

|

 n∈Ν(m)

yn

|  

.

(5)

Note that the received bits yn can be replaced with a loglikelihood ratio (LLR) of yn that is computed from
L ( yn ) = 2 yn / σ 2 for AWGN channels.
IV. WEIGHTED-BIT FLIPPING (WBF) FOR PRODUCT LDPC CODES In [6], product LDPC codes are decoded using the belief
propagation (BP) algorithm or soft decision algorithm on row and column directions separately. Although the soft decision algorithm gives a more powerful error correcting capability than the hard decision algorithm, it has a very high complexity. Therefore, in this research, we employ the weighted bitflipping (WBF) algorithm to decode product LDPC codes instead of the BP algorithm. Herein, we propose the pagebased weighted bit-flipping (P-WBF) algorithm and the rowcolumn weighted bit-flipping (RC-WBF) algorithm.

A. Page-based weighted bit-fliping (P-WBF) algorithm

For the page-based weighted bit-flipping (P-WBF) algorithm, the 2-D codeword of product LDPC codes is decoded based on the 2-D WBF algorithm. Let i and j be the row and column index of 2-D codeword. Thus, at any (i, j) position, the parameter Ei,j is computed from

  Ei, j

=

|

1 yi, j



|

  m∈Μ row

(

j

)

(2sm

−

1)

 

|
j∈Νrow (m)

yi, j

|

 

+

(6)

  (2sm
m∈Μcol (i)

− 1)

 

i∈Νcol

|
(m)

yi,

j

|

 

.

The identical parameters in the square bracket consist of

the parameters that are computed from row i and column j of

the received signals, separately. The P-WBF decoding

algorithm will flip only one bit with the highest Ei,j value at each iteration and always compute the Ei,j values from row and column direction. Therefore, when the codeword length

increases, the complexity of decoder will be increased as a

quadratic function.

B. Row-Column weighted bit-flipping (RC-WBF) algorithm
Since the complexity of the P-WBF algorithm has a quadratic nature, we will propose the row-column weighted bit-flipping (RC-WBF) algorithm to reduce the decoding complexity. The 2-D codeword of product LDPC codes is decoded using the WBF algorithm on row and column directions, separately. Since the number of codeword that is decoded at each iteration equals Nrow or Ncol , the complexity of
the RC-WBF algorithm will be linear. In addition, the number of updated check nodes per iteration of the RC-WBF algorithm equals one-half of those of the P-WBF algorithm. The steps of the RC-WBF algorithm are shown in Table II.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE III. DECODING COMPLEXITY PER ITERATION

Algorithm Product LDPC code with
BP [6]
P-WBF [proposed 1]
RC-WBF [proposed 2]

Multiplication
( ) 11N t row c − 6 2Nrow − Krow
-

Division
Nrow (tc +1)
-

Addition
Nrow (3tc +1)
Nrow Ncol −1 + tctr Nrow −1 + tctr

TABLE II. STEPS OF THE RC-WBF DECODING ALGORITHM
for iter = 1 to the maximum number of global iteration or every codeword in row and column direction satisfy the condition c.HT = 0 .
for i = 1 to Ncol
The codeword in row i is decoded by the WBF algorithm until all of sm
equal 0 or the maximum number of inner iterations is reached.
end for j = 1 to Nrow
The codeword in column j is decoded by the WBF algorithm until all of sm equal 0 or the maximum number of inner iterations is reached.
end end
The decoding iteration of the RC-WBF algorithm consists of the number of global iterations (Ig ) and the number of inner iterations (Ii ) (the number of row and column decoding iterations). Therefore, the number of flipped bits of the RCWBF algorithm can be computed from

algorithm because Nrow Ncol is always greater than Nrow . In
addition, the number of updated check nodes tc per iteration of the P-WBF algorithm is always twice that of the RC-WBF algorithm.
V. V-SHAPE PROPERTY FOR RC-WBF ALGORITHM
The performances of LDPC decoding can be improved by increasing the number of iterations. However, the performances of the RC-WBF algorithm will differ from the general LDPC decoding. In Fig. 2, we evaluate the bit errorrate (BER) performances of the RC-WBF algorithm when the number of global iterations equals 3 and the code rate equals 0.5. The BER of the RC-WBF algorithm decreases until the number of inner iterations is around 18 iterations, then, the BER is increased. This problem will specifically occur at the large number of inner iterations and we call it the V-shape property of the RC-WBF decoding algorithm.

( ) N flip = Ii .N row + Ii .Ncol I g .

(7)

C. Decoding complexity
In general, the decoding complexity of LDPC codes is evaluated from the number of operations in hardware circuits such as multiplication, division and addition operations. Herein, we compare the decoding complexity of the product LDPC codes using the belief-propagation (BP) decoding [6] or soft decision algorithm, the P-WBF algorithm and the RCWBF algorithm. The complexity of BP algorithm and WBF algorithm of LDPC codes have been shown in [9]. Since the P-WBF algorithm of product LDPC codes will compute the information in the row and column direction at the same time, the number of operations of P-WBF decoding algorithm is always twice those of the WBF algorithm. On the other hand, the RC-WBF algorithm will decode the product LDPC codes in the row and column direction, separately. Thus, the number of operations will equal those of the WBF algorithm. Herein, the decoding complexity of product LDPC codes mentioned in this research can be computed and listed in TableIII. Let tr and tc denote the time unit per iteration and the number of updated check nodes per iteration, respectively. The product LDPC codes with BP decoding algorithm [6] has higher complexity than both of the proposed hard decision algorithms because they do not require multiplication and division operation. Moreover, Table III shows that the P-WBF decoding algorithm has higher complexity than the RC-WBF decoding

Fig. 2. The BER performance of the RC-WBF algorithm.
Herein, we investigate the En variation with Eb/N0 equals 4 dB. Figure 3(a) shows the En distribution of RC-WBF algorithm before the codeword bits are flipped at the first iteration. The highest En indicates the high probability that bits may be in error while En around 0 or less than 0 indicate the low probability. The RC-WBF decoding algorithm will flip the bit that has the highest En at each iteration. Therefore, in Fig. 3(b), when the number of inner iterations equals 18 (after 18 bits are flipped, an inflection point of the V-shape curve), the highest En will approach 0. In Fig. 3(c), we evaluate the En
distribution when the number of inner iterations equals 50

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(after 50 bits are flipped). This graph shows that the bits having En around 0 and less than 0 (low probability bits) are flipped. Thus, the correct bits become incorrect causing the Vshape situation.
(a)

rates. Obviously, the threhold is specifically used when the number of global iteration equals 1 and 2. After that, the thresholds are set to be a large negative value, meaning that the threshold of En does not affect the stopping condition of the RC-WBF algorithm. Thus, the bits are still flipped until all of sm equal 0 or the maximum number of inner iteration is reached. The 3rd step of WBF algorithm for the RC-WBF algorithm can be revised to
Step 3: zn is flipped if n = argmax1≤n≤N En . Then the steps 1-3 are repeated until all of sm equal 0 or Threshold(R2D ) ≥ argmax1≤n≤N En , Iglobal ≤ 2 or the maximum number
of inner iteration is reached.
The V-shape property does not occur on the P-WBF algorithm because the Ei,j parameters are accurately computed from row and column directions. On the other hand, the En parameters of the RC-WBF algorithm are computed from each row and each column separately.

Optimal threshold (Minimum BER)

(b)
Fig. 4. The optimal thresholds of the RC-WBF algorithm.

(c)
Fig. 3. The En distribution at the number of inner iterations of (a) 0, (b) 18
and (c) 50.
Since an increase of the number of inner iterations causes the V-shape property, we propose to use the threshold of En values as a stopping condition of the RC-WBF algorithm. We find the optimal thresholds of the RC-WBF algorithm from simulation as shown in Fig. 4. The thresholds of the En values will depend on the number of global iterations and the code

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS In this section, we divide the simulation results into two parts. Firstly, we evaluate the V-shape property fixed by the threshold. Secondly, the BER performance of the product LDPC codes that use BP decoding algorithm [6] or soft decision, the P-WBF decoding algorithm and the RC-WBF decoding algorithm are compared. In the simulations, the parity-check matrix H is generated by the regular progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [5] with column weight (dv) of 3. We use the 2-D codeword size of 500 × 500 bits. The BER performances of every decoding algorithm are evaluated on an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with zero
mean and variance σ 2 = N0 / 2 .
A. Performances of RC-WBF using the thresholds
The V-shape property of the RC-WBF algorithm is fixed by using the optimal thresholds in Fig. 4. We use the number of inner iterations from 1 to 50 and the global iterations equal 3. The performance of RC-WBF algorithm using the threshold is shown in Fig. 5. With the threshold, the performance of RCWBF algorithm after 15 iterations is improved. The V-shape

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

property will change to the L-shape (stable after inflection point). For example, at the number of inner iterations of 20, the BER performance of the RC-WBF algorithm with the threshold will be around three times that of the RC-WBF algorithm without the threshold at the Eb/N0 of 3.7 dB.

iterations and inner iterations of the RC-WBF algorithm to be 3 and 20, respectively.
Figure 6 compares the BER performances of the product LDPC codes that use BP algorithm [6] or soft decision algorithm with both proposed hard decision algorithms at the code rate of 0.5. The BER performance of the P-WBF algorithm after 60,000 iterations is better than the RC-WBF algorithm after 3 global iterations. The coding gain is 0.75 dB at the BER of 10-5. When the numbers of decoding iterations are increased, the P-WBF algorithm is still better than the RCWBF algorithm. The coding gain is 0.6 dB. However, the PWBF and RC-WBF algorithms have 1 dB and 1.6 dB coding gains worse than the product LDPC code using the BP algorithm, respectively.

BER

BER

Fig. 5. The BER performances of the RC-WBF algorithm before and after using the thresholds.

BER

B. Performance comparison of the proposed algorithms The BER performances of the product LDPC codes with
BP algorithm [6], P-WBF algorithm and RC-WBF algorithm using the thresholds are compared in this part.

Fig. 7. The BER performances of BP, P-WBF and RC-WBF at the code rate of 0.7 (high code rate).
The performances of product LDPC codes at a high code rate have been shown in Fig. 7. The tendencies of BER performance are similar to those of a medium code rate. The product LDPC codes that use BP algorithm are better than the P-WBF and the RC-WBF algorithms. The coding gains are 0.85 dB and 1.5 dB, respectively at the BER of 10-5. Furthermore, the P-WBF algorithms after 60,000 iterations can achieve 1.05 dB coding gain over the RC-WBF algorithm after 3 global iterations. At the same time, the P-WBF algorithm after 100,000 iterations also achieves 0.7 dB coding gain over the RC-WBF algorithm after 5 global iterations.

Fig. 6. The BER performances of BP, P-WBF and RC-WBF at the code rate of 0.5 (medium code rate).
We use same the number of flipped bits of the P-WBF decoding algorithm as that of the RC-WBF decoding algorithm. Hence, knowing the number of decoding iteration of the P-WBF algorithm, we can compute the number of decoding iterations of the RC-WBF algorithm by (7). For example, if the number of decoding iterations of the P-WBF algorithm is 60,000, we can compute the number of global

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS In this research, the decoding complexity of the product LDPC codes that use soft decision algorithm [6] is greatly reduced by two proposed hard decision algorithms. However, the hard decision algorithm may suffer the performance degradation at high decoding iterations. We proposed the threshold of flipped bits to adjust the performance at high iterations. The simulation results show that the BER performance of the P-WBF algorithm is better than the RCWBF algorithm while the decoding complexity of the RCWBF algorithm is lower.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Future works include the study of the relationship between the codeword length and the threshold of En values. In addition, we will compare the performnace of the three algorithms for various codeword lengths.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from research and researchers for industries (RRI) under grant no.MSD57I0153, the Thailand Research Fund (TRF) and western digital (Thailand) Co. Ltd. It is partially funded by Thailand Research Fund under grant no. RSA5680055.
REFFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallagher, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, and I. N. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electronics letters, vol. 32, pp. 1645-1646, 1996.
[3] J. Erfania, S. Pasupathy, P.G. Gulak, “Reduced complexity symbol detectors with parallel structures for ISI channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 42, pp. 1661-1671, 1994.
[4] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, vol. 19, pp. 468, 1995.

[5] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, pp. 386-398, 2005.
[6] Z. Qi, Ng. Chun Sum, “LDPC product codes,” The Ninth International Conference on Communication Systems (ICCS), pp. 481-483, 2004.
[7] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density paritycheck codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711-2736, 2001.
[8] J. Zhang, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bitflipping decoding of low-density Parity-check codes,” IEEE Communication Letters, vol. 8, pp. 165-167, Mar. 2004. pp. 441-445, Jun. 1999.
[9] Z. Liu, and D. A. Pados, “Low Complexity Decoding of Finite Geometry LDPC Codes,” IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), vol. 53, pp.415-421, Mar. 2005.
[10] F. Guo, and L. Hanzo, “Reliability ratio based weighted bitflipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes,” Electronics letters, vol. 40, pp. 1356-1358, 2004.
[11] C.-H. Lee, and W. Wolf, “Implementation-efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for LDPC codes,” Electronics letters, vol. 41, pp. 755-757, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

