Loop Calculus Helps to Improve Belief Propagation and Linear Programming Decodings of Low-Density-Parity-Check Codes
Michael Chertkov and Vladimir Y. Chernyak

arXiv:cs/0609154v1 [cs.IT] 28 Sep 2006

Abstract— We illustrate the utility of the recently developed loop calculus [1], [2] for improving the Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm. If the algorithm that minimizes the Bethe free energy fails we modify the free energy by accounting for a critical loop in a graphical representation of the code. The log-likelihood specific critical loop is found by means of the loop calculus. The general method is tested using an example of the Linear Programming (LP) decoding, that can be viewed as a special limit of the BP decoding. Considering the (155, 64, 20) code that performs over Additive-White-Gaussian channel we show that the loop calculus improves the LP decoding and corrects all previously found dangerous configurations of log-likelihoods related to pseudo-codewords with low effective distance, thus reducing the code’s error-floor.
Belief Propagation (BP) constitutes an efficient approximation, as well as an algorithm, that applies to many inference problems in statistical physics [3], [4], [5], information theory [6], [7], [8], [9], and computer science [10]. All these problems can be stated in terms of computation of marginal probabilities on a factor graph. If the underlying graph structure contains no loops, i.e. it is a tree, the BP is exact, being only an approximation in the case of a general graph. The BP approximation can be restated in terms of a variational principle [11], [12], [13], where the BP equations describe a minimum of the so-called Bethe free energy, and the standard BP algorithm [6], [7] means solving the BP equations iteratively.
In coding theory BP plays a special role as the decoding of choice for Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes introduced by R. Gallager [6]. These codes, described in terms of sparse (Tanner) graphs, are among the best performing codes known to date. Actually, these codes perform so well exactly due to the high-quality performance of the computationally efficient BP decoding scheme [6], [8], [9]. In the water-fall domain, i.e. at low and moderate Signalto-Noise Ratios (SNR), the Frame-Error-Rate (FER) or BitError-Rate (BER) of an LDPC code decoded using BP comes close to the optimal yet inefficient Maximum-Likelihood and Maximum-a-Posteriori decodings. However, in the low noise regime BP decoding clearly fails to approximate ML in practical (finite size) LDPC codes, thus causing the error-
Invited talk at 44-th annual Allerton Conference on Communications, Control and Computing, Sep 27-Sep 29, 2006.
We are thankful to M. Stepanov for many great remarks and discussions. This work was carried out under the auspices of the National Nuclear Security Administration of the U.S. Department of Energy at Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC52-06NA25396. VYC also acknowledges the support of WSU
M. Chertkov is with Theoretical Division and Center for Nonlinear Studies, LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA; chertkov@lanl.gov
V.Y. Chernyak is with Department of Chemistry Wayne State University 5101 Cass Ave Detroit, MI 48202; chernyak@chem.wayne.edu

floor [14], [15], [16]. It is now well understood that the BP decoding failure in the error-floor domain is due to existence of pseudo-codewords [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22] and related instantons [23], [24], defined as dangerous noise configurations causing the failures. Removing the obstacles and thus improving the BP decoding while keeping a reasonable computational complexity is on a great demand for highperformance applications, e.g. optical communications and data storage, where error-floor is a serious handicap.
Some general purpose BP-improvement strategies were already discussed in the literature [13], [25], [26]. Survey Propagation (SP) has been suggested in the context of combinatorial optimization [25]. SP, based on the so-called replica approach that originates from spin glass theory [27], applies successfully to highly degenerate problems where the standard BP would be trapped in a local unrepresentative minimum. Generalized Belief Propagation (GBP) of [13] constitutes another generalization of BP. It extends the cluster variational approximation of statistical physics [11], [12] to problems in information and computer sciences. GBP has been shown to perform well for the problems with many short loops, like Inter-Symbol Interference on a regular twodimensional lattice [28], where transition to a coarse-grained cluster offers an improvement over the standard BP. The only yet serious drawback of the method is the expense of an overhead that scales exponentially with the cluster size. An efficient alternative to GBP, that is claimed successful in describing some random graph and random spin models on lattices, has been recently discussed in [26]. The method is based on closing the system of cavity equations and suggests a way to account for correlations (many loops) on all scales.
In spite of their potential in dealing with highly degenerate problems where the bare BP approach fails, the set of the aforementioned methods/algorithms (maybe except for a possible extension of [26]) do not seem appropriate in dealing with the error-floor problem. Indeed, one expects that any actual code (as opposed to ensemble of codes) has a discrete set of well-defined and relatively simple troublemakers (pseudo-codewords) localized on a subgraph. Therefore, for each (rare) failure of the standard BP one needs to identify and correct for a relatively long correlated configuration that is localized however on a small portion of the total number of bits.
This paper suggests an efficient approach that generalizes the BP algorithm and which is capable of reducing the undesirable error floor effect. Our method is based on the recently developed analytical tool, called loop calculus [1], [2], that represents the partition function (and, therefore,

the marginal probabilities) in terms of a finite series where each term is associated with a generalized loop on the graph and the zero order contribution corresponds to the bare BP approximation. We conjecture that for an instanton noise configuration that causes a BP failure there is always a relatively simple loop correction to the bare BP (in the terminology of the loop calculus) that provides an equal or comparable contribution to the partition function. We further suggest an improved decoding scheme based on finding this critical loop correction (in the case of the bare BP failure) followed by correcting the error. This is achieved by a proper modification of the Bethe free energy and the BP equations. These ideas are verified using an example of the Tanner (155, 64, 20) code [29] performing over the AdditiveWhite-Gaussian-Noise (AWGN) channel and decoded with the Linear Programming (LP) decoding [30]. We build this test on analysis of the set of pseudo-codewords recently found for this code by the LP-based pseudo-codeword search algorithm [31]. We introduce the LP-erasure decoding which is equivalent to the standard LP decoding with full or partial erasure of information at the bits along the critical loop. We demonstrate that the LP-erasure algorithm corrects errors associated with all previously found pseudo-codewords of the Tanner code (∼ 200 of them) completely closing the errorfloor gap between the lowest LP-instanton, with the effective distance ≈ 16.4037, and the Hamming distance 20 of the code.
The manuscript is organized as follows. An extended introductory Section I consists of four Subsections. Subsection I-A introduces the notations and briefly overviews decoding of a binary linear code. Subsection I-B describes the loop calculus of [1], [2] also complementing it by some new variational interpretation that was not discussed in the original papers. Subsection I-C describes the calculation of a-posteriori log-likelihoods (magnetizations) within the loop calculus. Subsection I-D establishes a connection of the Bethe free energy approach to the loop calculus and LP decoding. Section II unveils an underlying loop structure, e.g. emergence of certain critical loops, for the family of instantons that appear in the (155, 64, 20) code performing over the AWGN channel and decoded by LP [31]. The effective free energy approach, suggesting modification of the BP gauges to account for the critical loop, is introduced in Section III. An improved LP decoding, called LP-erasure, is presented in Section IV. Numerical test of the LP-erasure algorithm using an example of the (155, 64, 20) code is discussed in Subsection IV-A where we also demonstrate that all previously found bare LP instantons (most damaging noise configurations) are actually corrected by the LP-erasure procedure thus completely reducing the error-floor observed for the standard LP decoding. The final Section V contains conclusions and discussions.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Decoding in terms of Statistical Inference
A message word that consists of K bits is encoded to an N -bit long codeword, N > K. In the binary linear case

the code can be conveniently represented by M ≥ N − K constraints, usually referred to as parity checks or simply checks. Formally, π = (π1, . . . , πN ) with πi = ±1, is one of the 2K codewords if and only if i∈α πi = 1 for all checks α = 1, . . . , M , where i ∈ α if the bit i contributes the check α. The relation between bits and checks (we use i ∈ α and α ∋ i interchangeably) is often described in terms of an M × N parity-check matrix Hˆ that consists of ones and zeros: Hαi = 1 if i ∈ α and Hαi = 0 otherwise. A bipartite graph representation of Hˆ , with bits marked as circles, checks marked as squares and edges corresponding to the corresponding nonzero elements of Hˆ , is usually called the Tanner graph associated with the code. For an LDPC code Hˆ is sparse, i.e. most of the entries are zeros. Transmitted through a noisy channel, a codeword gets corrupted due
to the channel noise, so that the channel output at the receiver is x = π. Even though an information about the original codeword is lost at the receiver, one still possesses
the full probabilistic information about the channel, i.e. the conditional probability P (x|σ) for a codeword σ to be a pre-image for the output word x is known. In the case of
independent noise samples the full conditional probability can be decomposed into a product, P (x|σ) = i p(xi|σi). The channel output at a bit can be conveniently characterized by the so-called log-likelihood hi = log(p(xi| + 1)/p(xi| − 1))/2s2 measured in the units of the Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (SNR), normally defined as 2s2. For a common model of the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel , p(x|σ) = exp(−s2(x − σ)2/2)/ 2π/s2, hi = xi. The decoding goal is to infer the original message from the received output x.
ML decoding (that generally requires an exponentially large number 2K of steps) corresponds to finding σ maximizing the following weight (probability distribution) function

W (σ) = Z−1 δ

σi, +1 exp

σihi , (1)

α

i∈α

i

where the normalization factor Z that enforces the σ W (σ) = 1 condition is called the partition function
in the statistical physics literature. Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP) decoding boils down to finding a-posteriori loglikelihood (magnetization) at a bit defined according to

m = σW (σ),

(2)

σ

followed by taking an absolute value of the result bit-wise.
Even though bits and checks play an essentially different role in the LDPC decode, it actually turns out to be formally convenient to consider them on equal footing thus putting the relevant inference problem in a more general context of graphical models [32], [33], [34] where binary variables are shifted from bits/vertexes to edges of the corresponding Tanner graph.
A general vertex model, also called normal factor graph model [33], is determined by the weight (probability distribution) function W, which along with the partition function

Z can be represented in the following general form

W (σ) = Z−1 fa(σa), Z =

fa(σa), (3)

a∈X

σ a∈X

where X defines a graph consisting of vertexes and edges; a denotes a node (vertex) in the model; an elementary spin
resides at the edge connecting two neighboring vertexes, σab = ±1, for b ∈ a and a ∈ b; σa stands for the vector built of all σab with b ∈ a; σ is a particular configuration of spins on all the edges. With this notation one assumes that σab = σba.
The problem of LDPC decoding (1) represents a particular
case of the general vertex model with bits and checks combined in one family of vertexes {a} = {i} ∪ {α}, the Tanner graph X and the factor functions defined according to

fi(σi) =

exp(hiσi), σiα = σiβ = σi ∀α, β ∋ i

0,

otherwise;

(4)

fα(σα) =

1, 0,

i∈α σi = 1 i∈α σi = −1

.

(5)

Our strategy will be to keep the general vertex model notations whenever possible. The transition in the general formulas to our focus case of the LDPC decoding will always be simple and straightforward according to Eqs. (4,5).

B. Loop Calculus [1], [2]

Consider a general vertex model (3) and relax the con-

dition σab = σba, thus treating σab and σba as independent binary variables. We represent the partition function in the

form:

Z=
σ

a

fa(σa)

bc

1

+

σbc 2

σcb

.

(6)

Note that for this representations the vectors σa become independent variables. Also in the product over edges, (bc), we assume that each edge contributes only once. We further introduce a parameter vector η with the set of independent components ηab. Making use of the algebraic relation

(cosh

η

cosh(η + χ)(1 + πσ) + σ sinh η)(cosh χ + π

sinh χ)

=

1

+

(7)

(tanh(η + χ) − σ) (tanh(η + χ) − π) cosh2(η + χ).

we arrive at the following representation for the partition function that is ready for a subsequent loop decomposition

−1

Z=

2 cosh (ηbc + ηcb)

bc

Pa Vbc, (8)

σa

bc

Pa(σa) = fa(σa) (cosh ηab + σab sinh ηab) ; (9)

b∈a

Vbc (σbc, σcb) = 1 + (tanh(ηbc + ηcb) − σbc)

∗ (tanh(ηbc + ηcb) − σcb) cosh2(ηbc + ηcb).

(10)

Eqs. (8,9,10) are generally valid for any choice of the η fields (gauge choice). However, in the rest of this paragraph
we will be discussing a particular choice of the gauge fields, η(bp), special because of its relation to Belief Propagation.

The desired decomposition is obtained by expanding the V -terms followed by a local computation. The parameters (gauges) η are chosen using the criterion that subgraphs with at lest one loose end do not contribute to the decomposition. This can be achieved if the parameters satisfy the following system of equations:

tanh(ηa(bbp) + ηb(bap)) − σab Pa(σa) = 0.

(11)

σa

It is also straightforward to check that the gauge-fixing condition Eq.(11) corresponds to an extremum of Z0,

δZ0 δηab

η(bp)

= 0,

(12)

where

−1

Z0 =

2 cosh (ηbc + ηcb)

bc

Pa(σa) , (13)

σa

η(bp)

is the bare part of the partition function Z derived from Eq. (8) with the product of the vertex V -terms replaced by unity.
Eqs. (11) constitute the BP system of equations, represented in terms of parameters η(bp). Calculated within BP the probability of finding the whole family of edges connected to a node a in the state σa is

b(abp)(σa) =

Pa(σa)

.

σa Pa(σa) η(bp)

(14)

A typical sum, entering a diagram contribution for a generalized loop C , is expressed in terms of the corresponding irreducible correlation functions of the spin variables computed within BP:

µ(abp) =

ba(bp) (σa )

σab − m(abbp) ,

σa

b∈a,C

(15)

where m(abbp) is the magnetization (a-posteriori loglikelihood) at the edge (ab) calculated within BP

m(abbp) =

b(abp ) (σa )σab .

σa

(16)

Making use of Eqs. (8,15,16) one derives the following final expression for the partition function

Z = Z0 1 + r(C ) ,

C

µ(abp)

r(C ) =

a∈C
(1 −

(m(abbp)

)2

)

,

(ab)∈C

(17)

where Z0 is taken at η(bp) and the summation in Eq. (17) runs over all allowed C (marked) paths in the graph associated with the model; (ab) marks the edge on the graph that connects nodes a and b. A marked path is allowed to branch at any node/vertex, however it cannot terminate at a node.

We refer to such a structure as a loop (it is actually some kind of a generalized loop since branching is allowed; we use the shorter name for convenience). An example is given in Fig. (1)
In the LDPC case (4,5) the loop series expressions (17) assumes the following form

ZLDPC = Z0 1 + r(C ) ,

(18)

C

r(C ) =

µα(bp) µi(bp) ,

i,α∈C

α∋i
qi = 1,
α∈C

µi(bp)

=

(1

−

mi(bp))qi−1 + (−1)qi (1 + mi(bp))qi 2(1 − (mi(bp))2)qi−1

−1

,

i∈α

µα(bp) = bα(bp)(σα) (σi −mi(bp)), mi(bp) = bi(bp)(σi)σi,

σα

i∈C

σi

where bi(bp)(σi) and bα(bp)(σα) are the beliefs defined on bits and checks respectively according to

bi(bp)(σi) ∝ exp

σi qi − 1

ηi(αbp) − hi
α∋i

, (19)

bα(bp)(σα) ∝ δ

σi, +1 exp

ηiασi ,(20)

i∈α

i∈α

β=α

 j=i



ηi(αbp) = hi +

tanh−1  tanh ηj(bβp) . (21)

β∋i

j∈β

Eq. (21) represents a traditional form of the BP equations for LDPC codes [6], [7].
See [2] for more details of the derivations sketched in this Subsection.

1

8

2 4
3

5

7

6

Fig. 1. Example of a general vertex model. Fourteen possible marked paths (generalized loops) for the example are shown in bold at the bottom.

C. Calculating a-posteriori log-likelihoods
Formally a-posteriori log-likelihood (magnetization) is defined by

mab ≡ σabW (σ).

(22)

σ

Full magnetization at an edge of a general graphical model

can be recalculated using Eqs. (17,22) with the gauge fields

fixed according to the BP rules (11). There are two comple-

mentary ways to perform these calculations. One can incorporate infinitesimal test-field, hab, into the factor functions by fa → fa exp(σabhab), and use the generalized partition function to generate the corresponding magnetizations by simply differentiating ln Z (with Z taken in the loop-series

representation) with respect to the test-field followed by taking the hab → 0 limit. Alternatively and straightforwardly, one can calculate the magnetization according to the defini-

tion (22) with the probability measure taken according to

Eq. (8) in the following BP-gauge form

W (bp)(σ) =

a

Pa

bc

Vbc 2 cosh (ηbc +ηcb)

.
η(bp)

(23)

Applying the same ”marked path” rule to calculate the

magnetization as we used in the previous Subsection to

derive the loop-series expression for the partition function,

we arrive at

ma(bbp) mab =

a∈/C
1 + r(C ) +

δm(ab→p)b;Ca→b

C

Ca→b

, (24)

1 + r(C )

C

µ(ab→p)b;C c=a µ(cbp)

δm(ab→p)b;C =

(1

c∈C
− (m(abbp))2)

,

(ab)∈C

(25)

b(abp)(σa)σab

(σac − m(abcp))

µ(ab→p)b;C = σa

c∈a,C
1 − (m(abbp))2

,

(26)

where Ca→b consists of an extended family of loops with

the connectivity degree at node a being one or higher while

the connectivity degree at node b, as well as at any other

node that belongs to Ca→b and different from a, being two

or higher.

Note that for any generalized loop C there may be many

extended loops Cab propagating correlations imposed by the

local loop contribution all over the graph.

Replacing the hole families of the generalized loops C and

the extended generalized loops Ca→b in Eq. (25) by some relevant subfamilies constitutes an approximation which pro-

vides an improvement over the bare BP approximation.

D. Bethe-Free energy and Linear Programming Decoding

The variational approximation for a general vertex model reads as follows [13]. The Bethe free energy

F=

ba ln

a σa

ba fa

−

bab ln bab,

(ab) σab

(27)

is a functional of the beliefs ba(σa), bac(σac), defined on the vertices and edges of the graph respectively. BP equations can be introduced as equations for a conditional extremum of the Bethe-free energy. The realizability conditions (constraints) are

∀ a, c; c ∈ a : ∀ a, c; c ∈ a :

0 ≤ ba(σa), bac(σac) ≤ 1,

(28)

ba(σa) = bac(σac) = 1, (29)

σa

σa,c

bac(σac)= ba(σa) = bc(σc),

σa \σac

σc \σac

(30)

where we assume σac = σca. The second term on the rhs of Eq. (27) is the entropy term that corrects for “double counting” of the link contribution: any link appears twice in the entropy part of the first term on the rhs of Eq. (27).
Optimal configurations of beliefs minimize the Bethe free energy (27) subject to the constraints (28,29,30). Introducing the constraints as Lagrange multipliers in the effective Lagrangian and looking for the extremum with respect to all possible beliefs leads to

ba(bp)(σa) ∝ fa(σa) exp(ηa(bbp)σab), (31)

b∈a

ba(bbp)(σab) ∝ exp((ηa(bbp) + ηb(abp))σab),

(32)

where ∝ indicates that one should use the normalization conditions (29) to guarantee that the beliefs sum up to one. It is straightforward to check that the system of Eqs. (31,32) supplemented with the normalization and consistency conditions for the beliefs Eqs. (29,30) is fully equivalent to the BP equations (11) discussed above.
If the aforementioned optimization procedure is performed with the compatibility conditions (30) excluded, yet all other constraints accounted for, one still obtains Eqs. (31,32) for the beliefs with η(bp) replaced by yet unconditioned η. Expressing the beliefs in terms of the η-fields according to the relaxed version of Eqs.(31,32) we arrive at the following expression for the Bethe free energy in terms of the η variables:

F = F0+

ηabma(∗→) b +ηbam(b∗→) a −(ηab + ηba)m(a∗b) ,

(ab)

σabfa(σa) exp(ηacσac)

ma(∗→) b ≡ σa

fa(σa)

c∈a
exp(ηacσac)

,

σa

c∈a

(33)

ma(∗b) ≡ tanh (ηab + ηba) ,

(34)

where F0(η) ≡ − ln Z0(η) and ma(∗→) b and m(a∗b) are two expressions for a-posteriori log-likelihoods (magnetizations)
at the edge (ab) which are equal to each other if the compati-

bility conditions are accounted for. For an arbitrary choice of
η the magnetizations are different. However, for the special choice of η that corresponds to η(bp) the two generally

different magnetizations become equal. More formally: the

Belief Propagation equations can be expressed as

ma(∗→) b|(∗)→(bp) = m(b∗→) a|(∗)→(bp) = m(a∗b)|(∗)→(bp), (35)

satisfied ∀ab, where η and b(∗) turn into η(bp) and b(bp), respectively.
There is also a relation between the Bethe free energy minimization approach and the LP decoding [30], [21], [35], [36]. Consider the Bethe free energy Eq. (27) in the f → ∞ limit of zero noise or, equivalently, large SNR. In this limit the self-energy contribution to the free energy dominates the entropy terms and the latter can be safely neglected. However, both the self energy and the constrains (28,29,30) are linear in beliefs. Therefore this asymptotic optimization problem can be solved efficiently by means of the standard linear programming approach.

II. LOOP CALCULUS ANALYSIS OF THE LP-INSTANTONS FOR THE (155, 64, 20) CODE

We consider a family of (∼ 200) instantons, i.e. noise configurations (log-likelihoods) corresponding to the pseudocodewords with the effective distance smaller then the Hamming distance of the code. This set of instantons and related pseudo-codewords was found in [31] for the Tanner (155, 64, 20) code performing over the Additive-WhiteGaussian-Noise (AWGN) channel and decoded using LP decoding.
In short the method/algorithm of [31], called pseudocodeword search algorithm, proposes an efficient way of describing LP decoding polytope and the pseudo-codeword spectra of the code. It approximates a pseudo-codeword and the corresponding noise configuration on the error-surface surrounding the zero codeword correspondent to the shortest effective distance of the code. The algorithm starts from choosing a random initial noise configuration. The configuration is modified through a discrete number of steps. Each step consists of two sub-steps. First, one applies LP decoder to the initial noise-configuration deriving a pseudo-codeword. Second, one finds the noise configuration equidistant from both the pseudo codeword and the zero codeword. The resulting noise configuration is used as an entry for the next step. The algorithm, tested on the Tanner (155, 64, 20) code and Margulis p = 7 and p = 11 codes (672 and 2640 bits long respectively) shows very fast convergence.
Discussing the instantons, found for the (155, 64, 20) code with the pseudo-codeword-search algorithm, one after another we aim to associate for each instanton the corresponding critical loop, Γ that generates a contribution to the loop series (18), comparable to the bare BP contribution.
We restrict our search for the critical loop contribution to the class of single-connected loops, i.e. loops that consist of checks and bits with each check connected to only two bits of the loop. According to Eqs. (18) such contribution to the loop series is the product of all the triads, µ˜(bp), along the loop,

r(Γ) = µ˜α(bp),

(36)

α∈Γ

µ˜α(bp) =

µα(bp)

,

(1 − (mi(bp) )2 )(1 − (mj(bp) )2 )

(37)

where for any check α that belongs to Γ, i, j is the only pair of α bit neighbors that also belongs to Γ. By construction, |µ˜α(b;pij)| ≤ 1. We immediately find that for the critical loop contribution to be exactly equal to unity (where unity corresponds to the bare BP term), the critical loop should consist of triads with all µ˜(bp) equal to unity by absolute value. Even if degeneracy is not exact one still anticipates the contributions from all the triads along the critical loop to be reasonably large, as an emergence of a single triad with small µ˜(bp) will make the entire product negligible in comparison with the bare BP term. This consideration suggests that an efficient way to find a single connected critical loop, Γ, with large |r(Γ)| consists of, first, ignoring all the triads with |µ˜(bp)| below a certain O(1) threshold, say 0.999, and second checking if one can construct a single connected loop out of the remaining triads. If no critical loop is found we lower the threshold till a leading critical loop emerges.
Applied to the set of instantons of the Tanner (155, 64, 20) code with the lowest effective distances this triad-based scheme generates r(Γ) that is exactly unity by the absolute value. This is the special degenerate case when the critical loop contribution and the BP/LP contribution are equal to each other by absolute value. Thus only the sixth of the first dozen of instantons has r(Γ) ≈ 0.82 while all others yield r(Γ) = 1. To extend the triad-based search scheme to the instantons with larger effective distance one needs to decrease the threshold. This always results in emergence of at least one single connected loop with r(Γ) ∼ 1. Note, that it may be advantageous, even thought not necessary, to include in this triad-based search for the critical loop some additional criteria. In particular, we found it useful to also require that the absolute values of the a-posteriori loglikelihoods of the bits involved in the critical loop be larger than certain threshold.
Fig. 2 shows a representative set of instantons analyzed using the described loop calculus tool. Critical loops are shown in the corresponding subplots. The resulting critical loops are typically 4 − 5 bits long (with the girth of the code that counts both bits and checks being 8). However some configurations, like instanton #192 shown in the right lower corner of Fig. (2), corresponds to a highly degenerate situation. The instanton #192 shows three distinct single connected loops giving all r(Γ) = 1 contribution to the loop series (18).
Obviously, when an instanton produces a critical loop Γ with r(Γ) = 1 one can guarantee that this is the largest non-bare (non-BP) contribution to the loop series. However in all other cases when r(Γ) < 1, no guarantee can be given and we may not exclude a possibility that some other general loop of a more complex structure can provide a contribution to the loop series with higher r(Γ). However, we will show in Section IV that knowledge of the r(Γ) = O(1) critical contribution found along the way explained above is sufficient for successful decoding of these dangerous configurations.
One final remark of this Section concerns the value of magnetization calculated for degenerate critical loops, i.e.

loops with r(Γ) = 1. Calculating a-posteriori log-likelihood (magnetization) at a bit which belongs to the critical loop, one finds that the first term in the numerator of Eq. (24) is completely compensated by the only relevant of the other terms, correspondent to Γa→b replaced just by the critical loop Γ. Therefore, if only these two contributions are accounted for the magnetization at the bit is exactly zero. This suggests that one of the effects related to a critical loop is an effective shift of log-likelihoods at the bits of the critical loop in the direction opposite to the magnetization measured at the bit by bare BP. We have also found that the bare BP a-posteriori-log-likelihoods along the critical loop are always aligned bit-wise with the corresponding loglikelihoods. This set of observations will actually be explored in Section IV to construct a simple modification of the LP decoding algorithm.

III. EFFECTIVE FREE ENERGY APPROACH

Accounting for a single loop effect, when it is comparable to a bare (BP) contribution, can be improved through an effective free energy approach explained in this Section. This approach is akin to degenerate Hartree-Fock variational approach used in quantum mechanics (quantum chemistry) [37] in the case of a phase space degeneracy.
It was shown in the previous Section that finding the BP gauge is equivalent to optimizing (finding an extremum of) the functional F0(η) = − ln Z0, where Z0 is given by Eq. (13). Therefore, the η-gauge is fixed according to the first term in the series Eq. (8). Further terms in Z, coming from other higher-order vertex “corrections”, were calculated above with the BP gauge fixed. This resulted in Eqs. (17,18).
As we see from an example presented in the previous Section, some number (or just one) of these corrections may be either comparable (by absolute value) or just equal to the bare Z0 contribution. Any of this special O(Z0) contributions is associated with some critical generalized loop. This situation, when one or more of these critical loops emerge, is a potentially dangerous one, possibly leading (as we observed) to the bare BP failure.
In this troublesome situation a plausible solution would be to modify the BP gauge conditions Eq. (12) by

δ exp (−F) = 0,

δηab

ηeff

F ≡ − ln Z0 + ZΓ
Γ

,

(38)

where ZΓ is the component of the full expression for Z that corresponds to a critical loop, Γ. In general Eq. (38) will be different from the standard BP equation, and we can anticipates that the corrections due to the critical loops may cure the bare BP failure in decoding.
From Eqs. (38) we derive the following set of modified

BP equations

m(a∗→) b −ma(∗b) =
Γ

d∈Γ µd;Γ (a′b′)∈Γ(1 − (ma(∗′b)′ )2)

δma→b;Γ,(39)

1−(ma(∗b) )2

 

µb;Γ



c=a (σbc − mb(∗c)) b,
c∈b;Γ

(ab) ∈ Γ;

δmaΓ→b= 1−(ma(∗b))2

  

µa;Γ

c∈a;Γ

(σac −ma(∗c))
&c=b

a,

a ∈ Γ, b ∈/ Γ; (40)





mab − ma→b,

a ∈/ Γ;

gPa(σa)

g(σa)

a ≡ σa

Pa(σa)

,

µa;Γ ≡

(σab −m(a∗b))
b∈Γ;a

a,

(41)

σa

where Eqs.(33,34) defined ma(∗b)(η) and m(a∗→) b(η) and Eqs. (39) should all be taken at η → ηeff as the system of equations actually defines ηeff . Recast in terms of the beliefs Eqs. (39) forms a system of polynomial equations for beliefs, that become linear only if the right hand sides of Eqs. (39) turn to zero.
To find a-posteriori log-likelihoods within the degenerate approach one calculates

m =m + 1 + , (42) ab;eff

(∗) a→b

σab

c∈a,Γ(σac−ma(∗c)) a

d=a d∈Γ

µd;Γ

Γ

(a′ b′)∈Γ (1−(ma(∗′)b′ )2)

d∈Γ µd;Γ (a′ b′ )∈Γ (1−(ma(∗′)b′ )2)

where η is substituted by ηeff solving Eqs. (39). Note a couple of special cases. First of all, if the graph

consists of a set of disconnected single loops, the modified

BP equations (39) are simply reduced to the standard BP,

with the rhs of Eq. (39) replaced by zero. One consequence

of this degeneracy is that if one chooses F based on all the

single-connected loops contained in the degenerate model,

the variational result would just be exact. Second, if one

considers contributions to F based on some number of

single-connected critical loops, Γ, the only terms on the rhs

of Eqs. (39) that will not result in exact zero for the bare BP

solution will be associated with a → b where a ∈ Γ while

b ∈/ Γ.

The modified free energy approach, described by equations

(39) for renormalized gauges ηeff , promises decoding benefit

in the degenerate or close to the degenerate cases when com-

pared with the corresponding direct truncation of the loop

series given by Eqs. (17) or Eqs. (18). The approximation is

also convenient as it keeps the same level of complexity as

the BP equations. This is in contrary to the direct approach

which requires summation according to Eq. (25) over many

extended diagrams for getting renormalized values of log-

likelihoods at the bits that do not belong to the critical loops.

Note that pretty much like in the case of bare BP, to define

an algorithm associated with Eqs. (39) one needs to introduce

an iterative algorithm based on it, and there is obviously

some freedom associated with the choice of discretization.

(See [38] for discussion of different discretization/iteration

schemes in the context of the bare BP equation.)

We expect that accounting for just one critical loop Γ that

corresponds to the largest value of rΓ (calculated within

the bare BP) will be already sufficient for a substantial improvement of BP in the special cases when the bare BP fails. Summarizing, we arrive at the following Loop-corrected BP algorithm
• 1. Run bare BP algorithm. Terminate if BP succeeds (i.e. a valid code word is found in terms of marginal probabilities).
• 2. If BP fails find the most relevant loop Γ that corresponds to the maximal (by absolute value) amplitude rΓ in Eq. (17). A simple method for the critical loop search introduced in the previous Section may be tried first.
• 3. Solve the modified-BP equations (39) for the given Γ. Terminate if the improved-BP succeeds.
• 4. Return to Step 2 with an improved Γ-loop selection. An additional loop found through an improved critical loop procedure can simply be added to the sum on the rhs of Eqs. (39).
In this manuscript we do not report any results of numerical simulations where the Loop-corrected BP algorithm would be tested directly using a sample code. We postpone this important exercise for future analysis. Instead, we use the result described in this Section as a motivation for an even simpler heuristic approach detailed in the next Section.
IV. LP-ERASURE DECODING
As it was already discussed in the literature [35], [31] and commented on in Section I-D, LP decoding can be viewed as a certain (large SNR) limit of BP decoding. It is not obvious, however, that the BP-improved procedure outlined in the previous Section can be rigorously transformed into a correction to LP keeping a linear structure.
Our approach to this question will be heuristic, i.e. we simply conjecture a plausible modification of the LP scheme based on the algorithm formulated above for improved BP and then test this idea using an example of the (155, 64, 20) code.
On our way to proposing an improved LP decoding we first note that the effective free energy approach keeps the same number of degrees of freedom as the original bare BP. Therefore, if we conjecture that a modification of LP decoding should keep its linear structure and thus the number of constraints, the only actual degree of freedom left is in the log-likelihoods, i.e. in their possible modifications deduced from loop calculus. We further observe that the modifications of the BP equations discussed in the previous Section are actually well localized. Specifically, the rhs of (39) is non-zero for the η variables associated with the vertices that belong to the critical loop Γ or are immediately adjusted to it. Given that LP decoding is a special limit of BP decoding one deduces from these observations that the log-likelihoods should be renormalized just at the bits lying on the critical loop. Furthermore, taking into account the observation reported in the last paragraph of Section II, we argue that renormalization of log-likelihoods on the bits of the critical loop should be directed against the bare loglikelihoods.

All this suggests the following LP-version of the loopenhanced algorithm: LP-erasure algorithm
• 1. Run LP algorithm. Terminate if LP succeeds (i.e. a valid code word is found).
• 2. If LP fails, find the most relevant loop Γ that corresponds to the maximal amplitude r(Γ) in the LPversion of Eq. (17).
• 3. Modify the log-likelihoods (factor-functions) along the loop Γ introducing a shift towards zero, i.e. introduce a complete or partial erasure of the log-likelihoods at the bits. Run LP with modified log-likelihoods. Terminate if the modified LP succeeds.
• 4. Return to Step 2 with an improved selection principle for the critical loop.
Let us also mention that our loop-calculus based conjecture that the full or partial erasure of certain log-likelihoods is beneficial for LP decoding is akin to the statement made in [39] in regard to the positive effect of thresholding in LP decoding.
A. (155, 64, 20) test of the LP-erasure algorithm
Here we describe our numerical test of the LP-erasure algorithm. The test is based on the analysis (described in Section II) of instantons, i.e. most probable out of a variety of dangerous noise configurations that lead to LPdecoding failure. The ∼ 200 instantons found in [31] for the 155, 64, 20) code have the effective weight lower then the Hamming distance of the code, thus leading to the undesirable error-floor. We apply the triad method of Section II to analyze all the low effective weight instantons of the (155, 64, 20) code. In spite of the fact that the method did not guarantee that the critical loop was actually the one with the largest (for given configuration of the noise) r(Γ) we still choose to try it for the next, third, step of the LPerasure procedure: for the special marked bits we lowered the original log-likelihood uniformly multiplying all the loglikelihoods at the marked bits of the critical loop by a positive number ǫ that is smaller than one.
The results of the test are remarkable. We found out that all instantons are actually corrected already with the roughest, i.e. ǫ = 0, modification corresponding to the full erasure of the information (log-likelihoods) along the critical loop. We verified that the noise configurations that are re-scaled instantons (of the same structure but with effective distance larger then one of the original instanton but smaller then the Hamming distance of the code) are also corrected by the LP-erasure algorithm successfully.
Note that the instantons shown in Fig. (2) are counted using the all ”+1” configuration as the original codeword primarily for the purpose of the demonstration transparency. We did verify that the LP-erasure algorithm is invariant with respect to a change in the original codeword, i.e. that the LPerasure algorithm corrects instantons of the bare LP and their derived configurations if counted using any other codeword as a reference point. In all our tests (with the ∼ 200

instantons) whenever LP-erasure decoded to a codeword, the codeword was actually the right one.
The LP-erasure algorithm also shows an impressive robustness. The algorithm often forgives an inaccurate definition of the critical loop. For example, if one uses a very low threshold in identifying the bits that can possibly enter the critical loop, the resulting loop can actually be large and contain up to 20 bits. By lowering or completely erasing loglikelihoods at all these bits we often get the correct result with subsequent LP-decoding. However, in the rare cases when this loose way to define a critical loop leads to a failure one just needs to tighten the threshold and possibly use some additional thresholding (e.g. in the value of the a-posterioriloglikelihood that belong to the loop and also in the erasure coefficient ǫ) till a codeword emerges.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this manuscript we presented a proof-of-concept test demonstrating the utility of the loop calculus approach of [1], [2] to improve inference algorithms of the BP class in general, and of BP decoding of LDPC codes in particular. The key observation, that enabled the reported improvement in the decoding scheme, was emergence of a well-defined and relatively simple loop correction for each BP-dangerous configuration of log-likelihoods. Identification of the critical loop and further log-likelihood specific modification of the BP/LP algorithm has been suggested as a cure for bare BP/LP failure. LP-erasure that is the simplest algorithm based on the critical loop identification, was successfully tested using the (155, 64, 20) code operated on the AWGN channel. LPerasure was able to correct all bare-LP-dangerous noise configurations related to the previously found pseudo-codewords with the effective distance lower than the Hamming distance of the code.
This demonstration is clearly the first step in the highlighted direction where the next steps are thought of as follows. We plan to improve and continue testing the simple LP-erasure algorithm. The major improvement required is an automatization of the critical loop identification scheme. Further tests imply (a) direct comparison of LP-erasure with bare LP algorithms with the help of Monte Carlo simulations of BER/FER, (b) working with other (longer) codes, (c) working with other (e.g. correlated) channels. We will also be implementing all of the above using a more sophisticated and also better justified Loop-corrected BP scheme outlined in Section III.
These studies will certainly benefit from using some other recent developments in the field of BP/LP decoding, such as [40], [41] on reducing complexity of LP-decoding, [38] on accelerating the bare BP convergence , and [42] which suggests an alternative method of LP-decoding improvement.

Instanton #1, deff=16.4037 1

Instanton #33, deff=16.7531 1

A−posteriori log−likelihood

A−posteriori log−likelihoods

0

0

−1

−1

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

bit label, i=1,...,155

bit label, i=1,...,155

Instanton #50, deff=17.0171 1

Instanton #100, deff=17.7366 1

A−posteriori log−likelihood

A−posteriori log−likelihood

0

0

−1

−1

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

bit label, i=1,...,155

bit label, i=1,...,155

Instanton #140, deff=18.8339 1

Instanton #192, deff=19.9997 1

A−posteriori log−likelihood

A−posteriori log−likelihood

0

0

−1

−1

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

bit label, i=1,...,155

bit label, i=1,...,155

Fig. 2. The panels represent the results of LP decoding and critical loop identification for 6 representative instantons found for the Tanner (155, 64, 20) code performing over AWGN channel. All instantons has an effective distance smaller than the Hamming distance, 20, of the code and the exact (ML) decoding would correctly decode them to the correct codeword (all +1 for the test shown in the Figure). The main Figures show dependence of the a-posteriori log-likelihood on the bit label/position. Bits lying on the critical loops are marked with red (filled circles). The critical loops are also shown
schematically in the subplots. Values shown in the subplots next to the checks (squares) that connect pairs of bits on the critical loop are related to the of the corresponding triad contributions µ˜ defined by Eq. (37). Loop-erasure decoding, with erasures applied along the critical loop, corrects all the dangerous (instanton) errors.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Chertkov, V.Y. Chernyak, Loop Calculus in Statistical Physics and Information Science, Phys. Rev. E 73, 065102(R) (2006); cond-mat/0601487.
[2] M. Chertkov, V.Y. Chernyak, Loop series for discrete statistical models on graphs, J. Stat. Mech. (2006) P06009, cond-mat/0603189.
[3] H.A. Bethe, Proc.Roy.Soc.London A, 150, 552 (1935). [4] R. Peierls, Proc.Camb.Phil.Soc.32, 477 (1936). [5] R. J. Baxter, Exactly solvable models in Statistical Mechanics (Aca-
demic Press, 1982). [6] R.G. Gallager, Low density parity check codes (MIT PressCambridhe,
MA, 1963). [7] R.G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication (Wi-
ley, New York, 1968). [8] D.J.C. MacKay, Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse
matrices, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 45 (2) 399-431 (1999). [9] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke, The renaissance of Gallager’s low-density
parity-check codes, IEEE Communications Magazine 41, 126–131 (2003). [10] J. Pearl, Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: network of plausible inference (Kaufmann, San Francisco, 1988). [11] R. Kikuchi, ‘A theory of cooperative phenomena”, Phys.Rev. 81, 9881003 (1951). [12] T. Morita, “Cluster variation method for non-uniform Ising and Heisenberg models and spin-pair correlation functions”, Prog.Theor.Phys. 85, 243-255 (1991). [13] J.S. Yedidia, W.T. Freeman, Y. Weiss, Constructing Free Energy Approximations and Generalized Belief Propagation Algorithms, IEEE IT51, 2282 (2005). [14] Y. Mao, A.H. Banihashemi, Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comm. 1, 41 (2001). [15] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, R.D. Wesel Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comm. 5, 3125 (2003). [16] T. Richardson, Error floors of LDPC codes, 2003 Allerton conference Proccedings. [17] N. Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs, Link’´oping Studies in Science and Technology, Ph.D thesis No. 440, Link´’ooping, Sweden. [18] S. Aji, G. Horn, R. McEliece, and M. Xu, Iterative Min-Sum Decoding of Tail-biting Codes, Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 1998. [19] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles, in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models (Minneapolis, MN, 1999) (B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, eds.), vol. 123 of IMA Vol. Math. Appl., pp. 101112, Springer Verlag, New York, Inc., 2001 [20] B. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT47, pp. 766781, Feb 2001. [21] R. Koetter, P. Vontobel, Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes, Turbo conference, Brest 2003. [22] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. Vontobel, and J.L. Walker, Characterization of pseudo-codewords of LDPC codes, cs.IT/0508049. [23] M.G. Stepanov, V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, B. Vasic, Diagnosis of weakness in error correction: a physics approach to error floor analysis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 228701 (2005) [See also http://www.arxiv.org/cond-mat/0506037 for extended version with Supplements.] [24] M. Stepanov, M. Chertkov, Instanton analysis of Low-Density-ParityCheck codes in the error-floor regime, arXiv:cs.IT/0601070, Proceeding of ISIT 2006, July 2006 Seattle. [25] M. Mezard, G. Parisi, R. Zecchina, Analytic and Algorithmic Solution of Random Satisfiability Problems, Science 297, 812 (2002). [26] A. Montanari, T. Rizzo, How to compute loop correction to Bethe Approximation, cond-mat/0506769, J. Stat. Mech. (2005) P10011. [27] M. Mezard, G. Parisi, M.A. Virasoro, Spin Glass theory and beyond, World Scientific, 1987. [28] O. Shental, A.J. Weiss, N. Shental, Y. Weiss, Generalized Belief Propagation Receiver for Near-Optimal Detection of Two-Dimensional Channels with Memory, IEEE Information Theory Workshop, 24-29 Oct. 2004, San Antonio, TX, USA; p.225-9. [29] R.M. Tanner, D. Srkdhara, T. Fuja, Proc. of ICSTA 2001, Ambleside, England. [30] J. Feldman, M. Wainwright, D.R. Karger, Using Linear Programming to Decode binary Linear Codes, 2003 Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, The John Hopkins University, March 12-14, 2003; IEEE IT 51, 954 (2005).

[31] M. Chertkov, M. Stepanov, Pseudo-Codeword-Search Algorithm for Linear Programming Decoding of LDPC Codes, arXiv:cs.IT/0601113, submitted to IEEE Transactions on Information Theory.
[32] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, Factor gaphs and the sum-product algorithm, IEEE IT 47, 498-519 (2001).
[33] G. D. Forney, Codes on Graphs: Normal Realizations, IEEE IT 47, 520-548 (2001).
[34] H.-A. Loeliger, An Introduction to Factor Graphs, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, Jan 2001, p. 28-41.
[35] P.O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, On the Relationship between Linear Programming Decoding and Min-Sum Algorithm Decoding, ISITA 2004, Parma Italy.
[36] P.O. Vontobel, R. Koetter, Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes, arXiv:cs.IT/0512078 .
[37] W. Domcke, D.R. Yarkony, H. Koppel, (Editors) Conical Intersections: Electronic Structure, Dynamics & Spectroscopy (Advanced Series in Physical Chemistry), World Scientific Publishing Company (October 2004).
[38] M. Stepanov, M. Chertkov, Improving convergence of belief propagation decoding, arXiv:cs.IT/0607112.
[39] J. Feldman, R. Koetter, P. Vontobel, The Benefit of Thresholding in LP decoding of LDPC codes, arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0508014.
[40] M. Taghavi and P.H. Siegel, Adaptive Linear Programming Decoding, Proceedings of IEEE ISIT, Seattle, WA. July 2006, arxiv:cs.IT/0601099.
[41] P.O. Vontobel and R.Koetter, Towards Low-Complexity LinearProgramming Decoding, Proc. 4th Int. Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, April 3-7, 2006, arxiv:cs/0602088 .
[42] A.G. Dimakis, Martin J. Wainwright, Guessing Facets: Polytope Structure and Improved LP Decoder, Proceedings of IEEE ISIT, Seattle, WA. July 2006, arxiv:cs/0608029.

