Finite-Length Scaling and Finite-Length Shift for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

Abdelaziz Amraoui
EPFL (Lausanne), CH-1015 abdelaziz.amraoui@epfl.ch

Andrea Montanari
LPTENS (UMR 8549, CNRS et ENS) 24, rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris CEDEX 05, France montanar@lpt.ens.fr

Tom Richardson
Flarion Technologies Bedminster, NJ, USA-07921 richardson@flarion.com

Ru¨diger Urbanke
EPFL (Lausanne), CH-1015 rudiger.urbanke@epfl.ch

arXiv:cs/0410019v1 [cs.IT] 10 Oct 2004

Abstract
Consider communication over the binary erasure channel BEC(ǫ) using random low-density parity-check codes with finite-blocklength n from ‘standard’ ensembles. We show that large error events is conveniently described within a scaling theory, and explain how to estimate heuristically their effect. Among other quantities, we consider the finite length threshold ǫ∗(n), defined by requiring a block error probability PB = 1/2. For ensembles with minimum variable degree larger than two, the following expression is argued to hold
ǫ∗(n) = ǫ∗ − ǫ∗1 n−2/3 + Θ(n−1) ,
with a calculable shift parameter ǫ∗1 > 0.
1 Introduction
Assessing the performances of finite-blocklength iterative coding systems is an important open issue in modern coding theory. A particular case of such a task consists in the study of low-density parity-check code (LDPC) ensembles, when used for communicating over the binary erasure channel BEC(ǫ). A consistent effort has been devoted to this case, with the hope of a positive feedback on the general problem [4, 10, 11, 12, 14]. Some lessons can be drawn from the results obtained so far:
Approximate! While density evolution (DE) provides exact thresholds in the large blocklength limit, there is little hope to compute exact performances (bit or block error rates Pb and PB) at finite blocklength n. For the BEC(ǫ), Pb and PB are determined by a set of recursions [4] whose evaluation has complexity Θ(nκ). However the exponent κ grows with the irregularity of the ensemble (more precisely, with the number of probabilistically inequivalent types of node in the Tanner graph). Given the large degree of irregularity necessary for approaching capacity, an exact calculation becomes prohibitive

already for moderate blocklengths. The situation can unlikely be simpler for more general channel models.
It is therefore crucial to develop approximate estimates of finite-length performances.
Small error events. Consider, for the sake of simplicity, communication over BEC(ǫ) using an LDPC ensemble. Below the threshold ǫ∗ for iterative decoding, the typical size of error events (the number of erased bits after decoding) is of order 1. Above threshold, the same size is of order n (the bit error probability is finite). One can regard the failure of iterative decoding at ǫ∗ as due to the divergence (on the Θ(1) scale) of the size of typical error events.
The probability of small error events is readily evaluated through the union bound. For a code with minimum variable degree lmin, the expected number of error events involving E bits is Θ(nE−⌈Elmin/2⌉ǫE), as long as E is kept finite in the n → ∞ limit. If lmin > 2, this quantity decreases by a factor n (or more) each time E increases by one. This suggests that only very small error events have a non-negligible probability: their contribution can be computed exactly [10] and compares favorably with recursive calculations or numerical simulations. Moreover, in the vast majority of elements from the ensemble, such error events are strictly absent.
If lmin = 2, the dominating error events involve uniquely degree 2 variable nodes, and have the topology of cycles in the Tanner graph. The number of such structures is Θ(n2E): one can chose both the variables and the check nodes involved. Their probability is Θ(ΛE2 ǫEn−2E), where we denoted by Λl the fraction of variable nodes having degree l. In fact: the variables must be erased (which explains the factor ǫE); they must have degree 2 (factor ΛE2 ); and they must be connected to the previously chosen check nodes (factor n−2E). Unlike in the case lmin > 2, the resulting typical size depends upon ǫ. Detailed calculations can be carried on for cycle ensembles: one finds Etyp ∼ |ǫ∗ − ǫ|−1 as ǫ ↑ ǫ∗. The divergence of error events size ‘drives’ the failure of iterative decoding above ǫ∗.
Large error events. Computing the probability of small (i.e. finite in the n → ∞ limit) error events is a conceptually straightforward task. While in the case lmin > 2 one has do the computation for just a few small structures, if degree-two nodes are present, an infinite number of contributions must be summed over. In both cases, this approach yields a simple and accurate description of the error probability in the noise regime for which Pb = Θ(n1−⌈lmin/2⌉). This is the so-called error-floor region.
What about the waterfall region? The description in terms of finite-size error events cannot account for this regime. Take for instance the case lmin > 2. As long as the error size E is finite, its probability decreases rapidly with E. The breakdown of iterative decoding at ǫ∗ can therefore be ascribed uniquely to error events whose size diverges with n. Analogously, for cycle ensembles the typical size of finite error events diverges at ǫ∗. This conclusion can be extended to general irregular ensembles: in order to describe the waterfall region, large error events have to be taken into account.
This remark implies several theoretical problems. First of all, no enumeration of all the configurations (by this we mean stopping sets in the BEC(ǫ) case, and any suitable generalization for other channels) responsible for errors is possible in the waterfall regime. In fact, it is likely that the number of relevant ‘topologies’ diverges with the blocklength. Second, we cannot think of the set of wrongly decoded bits as the union of several small ‘error events’, which are probabilistically independent. In more practical terms: the

union bound is not a reliable tool in this regime. Yet, as optimized ensembles approach capacity, controlling the waterfall region is of
utmost interest. We developed an approach to this problem for the BEC(ǫ) case, which yields extremely satisfactory results. The methods are complementary to the stoppingsets analysis and build upon the description of iterative decoding by Luby et al. [8, 7]. Although the extension to general channel models is likely to require a considerable effort, one can learn a general lesson about which kind of characterization can be hoped for in the waterfall regime.
Consider, for the sake of simplicity the case of lmin > 2. We find that there exists a non-negative constant ν and some non-negative function f (z) so that

lim
n→∞

PB(n,

ǫn)

=

f

(z)

,

(1)

where

the

n

→

∞

limit

is

taken

by

keeping

n

1 ν

(ǫ∗

− ǫn)

=

z

fixed.

In

other

words,

if

one

plots

PB(n, ǫ)

as

a

function

of

z

=

n

1 ν

(ǫ∗

−

ǫ)

then,

for

increasing

n

these

finite-length

curves are expected to converge to some function f (z). The function f (z) decreases

smoothly from 1 to 0 as its argument changes from −∞ to +∞. This means that all

finite-length curves are, to first order, scaled versions of some mother curve f (z). It might

be helpful to think of the threshold ǫ∗ as the zero order term in a Taylor series. Then

the above scaling, if correct, represents the first order term. In fact, one can even refine

the analysis to include higher order terms and write

PB(n, ǫ) = f (z) + n−ωg(z) + o(n−ω),

(2)

where ω is some positive real number and g(z) is the second order correction term.

For ensembles with lmin = 2 (and in particular, for ensembles whose threshold is fixed

by the local stability condition) Eq. (1) must be properly generalized. We refer to Ref. [3]

for an example.

It is worth making a couple of remarks. First of all, the form (1), wherever it can

be argued to hold, allows a precise definition of what is meant by “waterfall” region.

This

is

going

to

be

the

interval

of

channel

parameters

ǫ∗

−

C−n−

1 ν

≤

ǫ

≤

ǫ∗

+

C+n−

1 ν

for some positive constants C− and C+. Second, even in cases in which the function

f (z) cannot be determined analytically, the statement (1) is highly informative, since it

reduces a two-variable function to a single-variable one. Moreover, in several cases, f (z)

can be efficiently given in terms of a few parameters. This opens the way to empirical

applications of Eq. (1). An example is provided in Fig. (1).

Finite-length optimization of code ensembles is an issue of great practical relevance. We think that the scaling description (1)-(2) may be an important step towards a mathematically well-founded solution of this task.
A first numerical investigation of finite-size scaling for LDPC codes was presented in Ref. [9]. Earlier accounts of the present work appeared in [1, 2], and a complete version in [3]. Related ideas were put forward by Lee and Blahut [6] and Zemor and Cohen [13].

2 Heuristic arguments
In this paper we consider standard LDPC(n, λ, ρ) ensembles. Here n is the blocklength, and λ and ρ denote the degree distribution of (respectively) variable and check nodes from an edge perspective. For the sake of simplicity, we shall often refer to regular

PB
10-1

10-2

10-3 10-4

10-5

(E /N ) 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6

b 0 dB

Figure 1: Scaling of PB(n, σ) for transmission over BAWGNC(σ) and a quantized version of belief propagation decoding implemented in hardware. The threshold for this combination is (Eb/N0)∗dB ≈ 1.19658. The blocklengths n are n = 1000, 2000, 4000, 8000, 16000 and 32000, respectively. The solid curves represent the simulated ensemble averages. The dashed curves are computed according to the refined scaling law (10) with scaling parameters α = 0.8694 and β = 5.884. These parameters were fitted to the empirical data.
ensembles with left degree l, and right degree k. The corresponding degree distributions read λ(x) = xl and ρ(x) = xk.
In order to analyze the iterative decoder, we adopt the point of view introduced by Luby et al. in [8, 7]. According to this description, the algorithm proceeds as follows (we assume the all-zeros codeword to be transmitted and describe the action of the algorithm on the Tanner graph). Given the received message, the decoder deletes all received variable nodes and their incident edges. In this way one arrives at a residual graph. The decoder proceeds now in an iterative fashion. If the residual graph contains no degree-one check nodes the decoding process stops. Otherwise, the decoder randomly chooses one such degree-one check node and deletes it together with the corresponding variable node and all its incident edges. In this way a new residual graph results and a new iteration starts. Decoding is successful if all the graph gets deleted by this procedure. In the opposite case, the decoder gets stucked in a stopping set.
The state of the algorithm after a fixed number of iterations can be entirely described by a finite set of integers, providing the number of variable and check nodes of a given degree. Let us denote this vector of integers by x. For regular ensembles the situation is even simpler: it is enough to specify the total number of variable nodes v, the number of degree-one check nodes s, and the number of check nodes of higher degree t. Therefore, in this case x = (v, s, t). Notice that, when decoding starts, these variables are of order Θ(n). Each iteration of the decoding procedure described above, amounts to a finite increment (or decrement) in these variables. In particular, for the regular case: v decreases by one; s decreases by one (the check node chosen at that iteration) and increases by the number of degree-two check nodes which are neighbors of the newly deleted variable; t decreases by this last quantity. It is easy to realize that the probability distribution of these increments (decrements) depends upon v, s, t only on the scale n. More precisely

the probability of a variation (∆v, ∆s, ∆t) is (up to 1/n corrections) a smooth function of v/n, s/n, and t/n.

0.1

0.15 s
0

0.2 0.15

v 0.1

0.05

0.8

0

0 0.2 0.4
0.6 t

Figure 2: A pictorial representation of density and covariance evolution for the LDPC(n, x2, x5) ensemble. Notice that the ellipsoids c√orresponding to (s, t) covariances should be regarded as living on a smaller (by a factor n) scale than the typical trajectory.

Call x(ℓ) the state after ℓ iterations, and consider the change in state δx = x(ℓ + δℓ) − x(ℓ) in a time δℓ. If δℓ is much smaller than Θ(n), then also |δx| ≪ n. Therefore each step in the interval [ℓ, ℓ + δℓ] is independent and identically distributed. If δℓ is nevertheless much larger than 1, we can apply the central limit theorem to deduce that δx is, with good approximation, a m√ulti-dimensional gaussian√variable with mean of order δℓ and standard deviation of order δℓ. Since, for δℓ ≫ 1, δℓ ≪ δℓ, one can, to a first approximation neglect fluctuations. This was the essential step taken in [8, 7]. These authors showed that x(ℓ) concentrates around its average value xav(ℓ) ≈ nz(ℓ/n), with z(τ ) solution of the a set of ordinary differential equations:

dzi dτ

=

fi(z, τ ) .

(3)

These are nothing but the density evolution equations. They are integrated with an initial condition depending upon the erasure probability.
A typical decoding trajectory is reported in Fig. 2. For ǫ < ǫ∗, it reaches the (v = 0, s = 0, t = 0) point before touching the s = 0 plane: decoding is successful. For ǫ > ǫ∗, it touches the s = 0 plane before the (v = 0, s = 0, t = 0) point: a stopping set has been reached.
Once the typical trajectory is found, one can compute distribution of x(ℓ) − xav(ℓ). The procedure is conceptually simple. Consider ℓ ≈ nτ for some fixed τ and decompose the interval [0, ℓ] into sub-intervals of size δℓ, with 1 ≪ δℓ ≪ n. Within each sub-interval we can apply the √argument outlined above to show that δx is gaussian with standard deviation of order δℓ. Gluing together n/δℓ s√uch intervals we deduce that x(ℓ) − xav(ℓ) is gaussian with standard deviation of order n. This has immediate implications for tdohfisethaditnetccienogdoifntohgredppeerlraf√norenm. aaVbnoicvceees-.tvheIernssaf,a=cift0,tphalesansaoev,oenrflaugacestuttahrtaeijoeancvsteorwrayiglleppatrrsoasdejseucc√teonaryfibepnlaiotswesepstrhowebiatshbi=inlity0a

plane, decoding can nevertheless be successful with finite probability. Recall that the

erasure probability sets the initial condition. It is easy to realize that a change δǫ in the

channel parameter implies a change of order n δǫ in the average trajectory xav(ℓ). At

threshold (ǫ = ǫ∗), x(ℓ) is just tangent to the s = 0 plane. probability is strictly between 0 and 1 as long as n|ǫ − ǫ∗|

Th√isn.imTphliiesssuthgagtestthtehfaatiluthree

scaling form (1) holds with ν = 2.

The above argument can be made both quantitative and rigorous: the procedure for

computing gaussian fluctuations around the typical trajectory has been named covariance

evolution [3] and it is not much harder than usual density evolution. We refer to the next

section for a more precise account of the results. Unhappily, when compared with detailed

simulations, or with exact computations obtained from recursion relations, the results are

not very accurate. The reason lies in some subtle effect that produces sizeable corrections

of the form (2). It turns out that ω = 1/6: this implies large corrections even for quite

large blocklengths (n in the range 103 ÷ 105). Since it turns out that g(z) ∝ f ′(z), the

same corrections can be attributed to a finite-length shift of the iterative threshold:

ǫ∗(n) = ǫ∗ − ǫ1∗ n−2/3 + Θ(n−1) ,

(4)

with a positive (ensemble-dependent) constant ǫ∗1.

x

ℓ∗

ℓg

O(n1/3) O(n2/3)

ℓ

Figure 3: A pictorial view of decoding trajectories near the critical point. The type of trajectory depicted here is responsible for the finite-length shift of the iterative threshold (4).

It when

pisasnsoint gh√arnd

to understand the origin of the shift (4) heuristically. In a nutshell: above the s = 0 plane, the decoding trajectory has many occasions to

fail. At any time, a fluctuation may imply it touching the plane. On the other hand, for

decoding to be successful, all fluctuations must be lucky enough to keep the trajectory

away from the plane. This asymmetry leads to a finite-size lowering of the threshold.

In order to understand the −2/3 exponent in Eq. (4), it may be convenient to consider

a toy example, cf. Fig. 3. Here the state is describe by a single integer x, playing the role

of s in the decoding problem, evolving over discrete time ℓ. Both x and ℓ are typically of

order n, and the increment probabilities of x depends smoothly on x/n and ℓ/n. Finally,

the average trajectory xav(ℓ) has a minimum at ℓ∗, with xav(ℓ∗) = 0, and

xav(ℓ)

=

1 2n

(ℓ

−

ℓ∗)2

+

Θ((ℓ −

ℓ∗)3/n2) ,

(5)

near the minimum. In other words the minimum is ‘non-degenerate’. This is the situation for iterative decoding at ǫ = ǫ∗ under mild conditions on the code ensemble. We want to
compute the ‘failure’ probability, P(n) i.e. the probability for the trajectory to touch the
x = 0 plane, which corresponds to the block error probability in the decoding problem.
Within a first approximation x√(ℓ) is at any time a gaussian variable with mean xav(ℓ) and standard deviation of order n. The failure probability can be estimated as the
probability for x(ℓ = ℓ∗) ≤ 0. Since xav(ℓ = ℓ∗) = 0, we get P(n) = 1/2. The crucial point is now that, even if x(ℓ∗) > 0, the trajectory has some probability for touching the x = 0 plane either for ℓ < ℓ∗ or for ℓ > ℓ∗. What matters is clearly the location of the minimum ℓg. The trajectory does not touch the x = 0 plane if and only if x(ℓg) > 0.
Let us now try to estimate the position of the minimum ℓg. This is the outcome of a balance between two competing forces. On the one hand, the average trajectory is bent
upward and forces ℓg to be close to ℓ∗. This yields a contribution to x(ℓ) − x(ℓ∗) which is of order (ℓ−ℓ∗)2/2n. On the other hand, by moving away from ℓ∗ one can take ad√vantage of fluctuations, [x(ℓ) − x(ℓ∗)] − [xav(ℓ) − xav(ℓ∗)] which are typically of order √ℓ − ℓ∗. The location of ℓg is estimated by balancing these two effects: (ℓ − ℓ∗)2/2n ∼ ℓ − ℓ∗. We get therefore

|ℓg − ℓ∗| = O(n2/3) , |x(ℓg) − x(ℓ∗)| = O(n1/3) .

(6)

The above argument implies that the failure probability is slightly larger than 1/2.
One can in fact fail either if x(ℓ∗) < 0 (and this happens with probability 1/2), or if x(ℓ∗) = O(n1/3) because, in this case, x(ℓg) can be O(n1/3) below x(ℓ∗). What is the probability of x(ℓ∗) = O(n1/3)? We know that x(ℓ∗) i√s, with good approximation a gaussian variable with mean 0 and standard deviation Θ( n). Therefore the probability is of order n−1/2 · n1/3 = n−1/6. We find therefore the estimate

P(n)

=

1 2

+

P1

n−1/6

+

...

.

(7)

Remarkably, the constant P1 can be calculated exactly [3] and depends uniquely upon the transition probabilities near x(ℓ∗). Once the axes x and ℓ have been properly scaled P1 is given by an integral expression in terms of Airy functions.
When adapted to the coding problem, the above argument yields ω = 1/6 in Eq. (2). If we define the finite-size threshold ǫ∗(n) by PB(n, ǫ∗(n)) = 1/2, we get Eq. (4).

3 Results

The heuristic arguments presented in the previous Section can be put on precise quantitative bases. For some of them we were able to provide a rigorous foundation, leading to the following:

Lemma 1 [Scaling of Unconditionally Stable Ensembles] Consider transmission over the

BEC(ǫ) using random elements from an ensemble LDPC(n, λ, ρ) which has a single critical

point and is unconditionally stable. Let ǫ∗ = ǫ∗(λ, ρ) denote the threshold and let ν∗

denote the threshold.

Ffriaxcztiotnoabl esizze:=of√thne(ǫr∗e−sidǫu).alLgertaPphb (ant,

the critical point λ, ρ, ǫ) denote the

corresponding to the expected bit erasure

probability and let PB,γ(n, λ, ρ, ǫ) denote the expected block erasure probability due to

lk

ǫ∗

α

β/Ω

3 4 0.6473 0.260115 0.593632 3 5 0.5176 0.263814 0.616196 3 6 0.4294 0.249869 0.616949

4 5 0.6001 0.241125 0.571617

4 6 0.5061 0.246776 0.574356 5 6 0.5510 0.228362 0.559688 6 7 0.5079 0.280781 0.547797

6 12 0.3075 0.170218 0.506326

Table 1: Thresholds and scaling parameters for some regular standard ensembles λ(x) = xl, ρ(x) = xk. The shift parameter is given as β/Ω where Ω is the universal constant defined in Ref. [3] in terms of Airy functions, and whose numerical value is very close to 1.

errors of size at least γν∗, where γ ∈ (0, 1). Then as n tends to infinity,

PB,γ(n, λ, ρ, ǫ)

=

Q

z α

(1 + on(1)),

(8)

Pb(n, λ, ρ, ǫ)

=

ν∗Q

z α

(1 + on(1)),

(9)

where α = α(λ, ρ) is a constant which depends on the ensemble.

Unhappily, we were not able to derive powerful enough estimate for making the ‘shift’ argument rigorous. However, the difficulty is more technical than conceptual. We formulate therefore the following:

Conjecture 1 [Refined Scaling of Unconditionally Stable Ensembles] Consider trans-

mission over the BEC(ǫ) using random elements from an ensemble LDPC(n, λ, ρ) which has a single critical point and is unconditionally stable. Let ǫ∗ = ǫ∗(λ, ρ) denote the threshold and let ν∗ denote the fractional size of the residual graph at the threshold. Let

Pb(n, λ, ρ, ǫ) denote the expected bit erasure probability and let PB,γ(n, λ, ρ, ǫ) denote

the Fix

expected z to be z

b:=loc√k ne(rǫa∗su−reβpnr−o23ba−bǫil)i.tyTdhueen

to errors of as n tends

size at least to infinity,

γν∗,

where

γ

∈

(0,

1).

PB,γ(n, λ, ρ, ǫ)

=

Q

z α

1 + O(n−1/3) ,

(10)

Pb(n, λ, ρ, ǫ)

=

ν∗Q

z α

1 + O(n−1/3) ,

(11)

where α = α(λ, ρ) and β = β(λ, ρ) are constants which depend on the ensemble.

In Table 3 we report the values of the scaling parameters for a few regular ensembles. These parameters are obtained by integrating a set of ordinary differential (covariance evolution) equations and are easily pushed to great precision. Finally, in Fig. 4 we compare the refined scaling form provided by Conjecture 1, with the exact error probability computed by recursion. The agreement is excellent.

Acknowledgments
The work of AM was partially supported by European Community under the project EVERGROW.

PB
10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
ǫ 0.35 0.36 0.37 0.38 0.39 0.4 0.41 0.42 0.43 0.44
Figure 4: Scaling of PB(n, ǫ) for transmission over BEC(ǫ) and belief propagation decoding. The threshold for this combination is ǫ∗ ≈ 0.42944, see Table 3. The blocklengths/expurgation parameters are n/s = 1024/24, 2048/43, 4096/82 and 8192/147, respectively. (More precisely, we assume that the ensembles have been expurgated so that graphs in this ensemble do not contain stopping sets of size s or smaller.) The solid curves represent the exact ensemble averages. The dashed curves are computed according to the refined scaling law stated in Conjecture 1 with scaling parameters α = 0.2498692 + ǫ∗(1 − ǫ∗) and β = 0.616045, see Table 3.
References
[1] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, Finite-length scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles, in Proc. 41th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2003.
[2] , Finite-length scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles, in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Chicago, Illinois, June-July 2004, 2004.
[3] , Finite-length scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles, submitted to IEEE Transactions on Information Theory.
[4] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 48 (2002), pp. 1570–1579.
[5] M. E. Fisher, in Critical Phenomena, International School of Physics Enrico Fermi, Course LI, edited by M. S. Green, (Academic, New York, 1971).
[6] J. Lee and R. Blahut, Bit error rate estimate of finite length turbo codes, in Proceedings of ICC’03, Anchorage Alaska, USA, May 11–15 2003, p. 2728.
[7] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, Efficient erasure correcting codes, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 47 (2001), pp. 569–584.

[8] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, Practical loss-resilient codes, in Proceedings of the 29th annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[9] A. Montanari, Finite-size scaling of good codes, in Proc. 39th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2001.
[10] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, Error-floor analysis of various low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel. To be presented at ISIT’02 in Lausanne, 2002.
[11] , Finite-length analysis of various low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel, in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5 2002, p. 1.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Finite-length density evolution and the distribution of the number of iterations for the binary erasure channel. in preparation, 2003.
[13] G. Zemor and G. Cohen, The threshold probability of a code, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 41 (1995), pp. 469–477.
[14] J. Zhang and A. Orlitsky, Finite-length analysis of LDPC codes with large left degrees, in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5 2002, p. 3.

