2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)
1
An Iterative Soft-decision Decoding Algorithm for Reed-Solomon Codes
Huang-Chang Lee†‡, Jyun-Han Wu∗, Chung-Hsuan Wang§, and Yeong-Luh Ueng∗¶, Senior Member, IEEE ∗Dept. of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. †Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan City, Taiwan, R.O.C.
‡Dept. of Neurological Surgery of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, 33302, Taiwan. §Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.
¶Institute of Communications Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Abstract—This paper proposes an iterative soft-decision decoding algorithm for Reed-Solomon (RS) codes. The proposed decoding algorithm combines the concepts of adapting the parity-check matrix and informed dynamic scheduling decoding. The parity-check matrix is re-arranged before each iteration, where the systematic part is mapped to the least reliable bits, consequently reducing their influence on the other bits. Using dynamic scheduling, the more important decoding messages are updated to these least reliable bits, meaning that the majority of the error bits with low reliability can be corrected. When the proposed integrated decoding is applied to (255, 239) RS code, the difference between its frame error rate performance (FER) and the maximum-likelihood (ML) bound can be reduced to 0.8 dB, and a gain of about 0.1 dB is achieved compared to all the previously recorded soft-decision decoding for RS codes.
Index Terms—error-control codes, Reed-Solomon codes, softdecision decoding, belief propagation, informed-dynamic scheduling.
I. INTRODUCTION
Among linear block codes with the same code length and code rate, Reed-Solomon (RS) codes are able to achieve the largest possible minimum distance, and have become one of the most popular error-correcting codes used for many applications [1]-[3]. Although the algebraic hard-decision decoding (HDD) algorithm can provide practical performance, the potential of the error-correcting capabilities of RS codes without the need to introduce soft information has not yet been thoroughly explored, and several researches focus to the soft decision decoding algorithms of RS codes [7]-[10].
Iterative belief propagation (BP) is one of the most popular soft decision decoding schemes for low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, but cannot be directly applied to RS codes because of the high-density parity-check matrices. The correlation between the decoding messages increases rapidly after a few iterations and restrict the convergence abilities. In order to mitigate the correlation, adaptive belief-propagation (ABP) decoder [8] combines iterative BP with the adaptive parity check matrix (ADP) algorithm. The non-binary paritycheck matrix of RS code is first transferred to the binary image
This work is supported in part by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the R.O.C. under grants MOST 103-2221-E-007-025-MY3, MOST 1032221-E-009-046-MY3 and MOST 105-2218-E-182-002

matrix. In order to limit the accumulation of decoding message correlations, the magnitude of the decoding message is scaled down using a damping coefficient, and the ADP algorithm is adopted to modify the parity-check matrices using row operations before the next iteration.
Using the ADP algorithm, the received code bits are sorted according to their reliability, and the least reliable bits are mapped to the systematic part of the binary image matrix. This means that in the corresponding bipartite graph, the variable nodes representing these least reliable bits are connected to only one check node, and the influence of the unreliable messages from these least reliable variable nodes (LRVNs) can be minimized. The decoding messages to be used by the ABP algorithm are propagated by following a flooding schedule, meaning that the number of messages updated to each variable node is equal to the number of neighboring check nodes, and the degree-1 LRVNs are only updated once in a single iteration. It can be expected that if these LRVNs are updated more often, the received vectors can be correctly decoded with a higher probability.
In order to update the degree-1 LRVNs more than once in each iteration, a double-polling residual BP (DP-RBP) decoder is proposed in this paper, where the selection of updated decoding messages is based on the idea of informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) [4]. A variety of IDS decoders have been applied to LDPC codes [4]-[6], and a significant improvement in error-rate performance has been achieved. Since the DP-RBP is applied to the high-density binary image matrices rather than the sparse parity check matrices for LDPC codes, the ADP algorithm is still adopted in order to sort the reliability of the variable nodes. By using the DP-RBP decoder, the opportunity for each decoding message to be updated is different, and the important messages can be propagated more often. The importance can be measured according to a metric known as the “residual”[4], and the number of decoding messages that are updated to the LRVNs is no longer limited by the degree.
Besides the introduction of the dynamic scheduling, DPRBP also removes the damping coefficient from the ABP. The decoding messages processed in a single iteration no longer need to be scaled down, and the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values accumulated on the variable nodes are reset to their channel values before the next iteration. In other words,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:14:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-4096-4/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

2775

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)
2

the accumulated LLR values are only used by the ADP for sorting only, and will not be maintained for the next iteration. The effect of the correlations between the decoding messages is limited in a single iteration. Simulation results show that, with the more fair assignment of decoding resources and the reset operation, a significant improvement in the error-rate performance is achieved using the DP-RBP decoder. When the proposed DP-RBP decoder is applied to (255, 239) RS code, the difference between the maximum-likelihood (ML) bound and the frame error rate (FER) can be narrowed to about 0.8dB. Compared to the best soft-decision decoding for RS codes proposed in previous work, an improvement of about 0.1 dB can be achieved.

 




 




‫ݒ‬ଵ௟ ‫ݒ‬ଶ௟

‫ݒ‬௡௟ ି௞ ‫ݒ‬௡௟ ି௞ାଵ ‫ݒ‬௡௟ ି௞ାଶ ‫ݒ‬௡௟ ିଵ ‫ݒ‬௡௟

ܿଵ ܿଶ

ܿ௡ି௞

II. PRELIMINARY

A. RS Codes and their Binary Image

Let a primitive element in a GF(2m) be denoted as β, for

an (N, K) RS code over GF(2m). Its parity-check matrix can

be expressed as:

⎛1 β . . .

βN−1 ⎞

Hs = ⎜⎜⎜⎝1...

β2 ...

... ...

β2(N −1) ...

⎟⎟⎟⎠ ,

(1)

1 βδ−1 . . . β(δ−1)(N−1)

and the minimum distance for this (N, K) RS code is δ =

N − K + 1. If a symbol for an RS code over a GF(2m) is

made up of m bits, then the parity-check matrix Hs for the

(N, K) RS code can be transferred to the binary image [8].

The size of Hb is (n − k)-by-n, where n = N × m and

k = K × m. The binary image parity-check matrix Hb can be

expressed using a bipartite graph that has n − k check nodes

and n variable nodes.

A codeword of an (N, K) RS code contains n = N × m

bits and can be represented as v = [v1, v2, . . . , vn], where

j = 1, 2, . . . n and vj ∈ {0, 1}. Assume that the codeword bits

are transmitted using BPSK modulation through the AWGN

channel, then the received vector can be represented as y =

(−2v+1)+w, where w = [w1, w2, . . . , wn] is the noise vector,

and wj is a Gaussian random variable with a zero mean and a variance σ2, yj denotes the j-th component of the received

vector y. In the initial state, the LLR of the j-th variable node

is

evaluated

as

L0(vj )

=

log

P P

(vj (vj

=0|yj =1|yj

) )

,

and

is

also

called

the

channel value of the j-th variable node.

B. The ABP algorithm
The binary image matrix Hb contains high density non-zero elements, its corresponding bipartite graph contains a large number of short cycles, and the correlation between messages increases rapidly after a small number of iterations. The ADP algorithm is embedded in the ABP decoder [8] used to modify the binary image matrix, as well as the corresponding bipartite graph, meaning that the correlation between decoding messages can be mitigated after each iteration. The variable nodes are first sorted based on their reliability according to the magnitude of the LLR values. Using elementary row operation, the first (n − k) columns of the modified parity check matrix

Fig. 1. The bipartite graph corresponding to the parity check matrix modified using the ADP algorithm.

form an identity matrix, i.e., the systematic part of the binary
image matrix, the corresponding LRVNs are then connected
to only one check node. Fig. 1 shows an example of the Hbl matrix after the l-th
iteration, and the corresponding vl is a reordered version of v. The components vjl in vl for j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n} are sorted according to their reliability. In Fig. 1, |Ll(v1l )| ≤ |Ll(v2l )| ≤ · · · ≤ |Ll(vnl )|, where Ll(vjl ), is the LLR value of the j-th variable node after the l-th iteration, and j ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}.
The first (n − k) variable nodes are mapped to the systematic part of Hbl . The sum-product algorithm (SPA) is used to generate the decoding messages from:

Lvj →ci =

mca→vj + Lvj ,

(2)

ca∈N (vj )

mci→vj = 2tanh−1(

tanh( Lvb→ci )), 2

(3)

vb∈N (ci)\vj

where vb ∈ N (ci) \ vj denotes all the variable nodes neighboring to ci, except for vj. The variable-to-check node (V2C) messages and check-to-variable (C2V) messages are
respectively generated according to (2) and (3). The initial values of the V2C messages from the j-th variable node is equal to the LLR value, i.e., Lvj→ci = L0(vj0).
After l iterations, the LLR value of the i-th variable node is denoted as Ll(vil) = Lvj + α ca∈N (vj) mca→vj , where 0 < α < 1 is a damping coefficient [8]. After the maximum
number of iterations is reached, the binary decoding results can
be derived by applying a hard decision to the LLR values.
If the hard-decision result is unable to satisfy all the check
nodes in the binary image matrix, then conventional non-
binary algebraic decoding can be used to obtain the final
decoding results for the RS codes.

III. PROPOSED DOUBLE-POLLING RBP SELECTION
When the received vector is decoded using the iterative BP algorithm, it is more likely to be correctly decoded if sufficient decoding messages that have a high reliability are collected by all variable nodes. Based on this concept, any

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:14:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2776

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)
3

variable nodes that have a low reliability should be updated

more often. In contrast, any decoding messages from these

low-reliability variable nodes should be considered suspicious,

and their propagation should be limited, or the convergence of

the decoding process may be inhibited.

The ABP decoder successfully constrains the propagation of

unreliable decoding messages by mapping the LRVNs to the

systematic part of the binary image matrix, where only one

check node can be used to generate the decoding message

for each LRVN. However, since the decoding messages from

the ABP are propagated by following a flooding schedule,

each LRVN can be received using only a single C2V message

in each iteration. In other words, when the influence of the

LRVNs on the other MRVNs is minimized, the possibility that

their reliability can be increased is also reduced.

In order to enable the LRVNs to receive more updates

while simultaneously limiting their unreliable influence, the

schedule of the decoding message update can be completed

using an IDS decoder, where the update sequence are arranged

according to a predetermined metric, and only the important

messages are selected to be updated. Since the reliability of the

variable nodes is related to the C2V messages, the C2V resid-

ual can be considered as a suitable metric for decoding the RS

codes. The C2V residual was first included in the RBP decoder

described in [4], which is defined as the absolute value of the

difference between the current C2V value and the C2V value

about where

to be updated, mcpir→e vj is the

i.e., rC2V (i, j) pre-computation

= of

|mpcir→e vj the next

− mci→vj |, update. The

pre-computation can be generated by using (3).

In this work, the comparison of the C2V residual will take

place between the C2V messages generated on a single check

node only. Since according to (3), the messages generated on

the same check node use the same set of variable nodes,

the comparison between them can be fairer. In addition,

the C2V messages generated on different check nodes may

be correlated since the high-density binary image matrix is

derived from the parity-check matrix for the RS codes. This

comparison can be misleading when considering a scheduling

arrangement.

The arrangement of the schedule must be focused on those

variable nodes that directly affect the final decoding results.

In a single iteration, the variable nodes are selected following

the sort order that was generated using several cycles of the

ADP algorithm. In the p-th cycle, when the j-th variable

node is identified, the comparison of the C2V residual with

its p-th neighboring check node take place. After the C2V

message with the maximum residual from the p-th check node

neighboring to the j-th variable node is updated, the decoding

operation switches to the p-th check node neighboring to the

j + 1-th variable node. Only a single message is updated from

each check node in each C2V residual comparison operation.

This process can be regarded as a form of polling between

the check nodes that is inserted in a polling operation that is

performed between the variable nodes, which, consequently,

inspires the name “double-polling” RBP (DP-RBP). A more

detailed description of the DP-RBP decoder is presented in

Algorithm 1, , where the “double-polling” operation can be

observed in Step 4.

Suppose that when using the ADP algorithm, the binary image matrix Hlb illustrated in Fig. 1 is obtained prior to the (l + 1)-th iteration. The selection of the variable nodes begins from the node with the lowest reliability. Since the LRVNs are mapped to the systematic part, then all check nodes update a single C2V message once the LRVNs have been selected during each cycle. In contrast, those check nodes neighboring the MRVNs update the C2V message alternately. Each updated message is selected as the messages with the maximum C2V residual among the connected check nodes, and the high-degree check nodes, i.e., those with a large number of neighboring variable nodes, have more opportunity to propagate their C2V messages.
Suppose that the j-th variable node received the updated C2V message, the V2C messages for the i-th check node can then be generated as:

Lvj →ci =

mca→vj + Lvj .

(4)

ca∈N (vj )\ci

It is worth noting that equations (2) and (4) are different in that C2V message from the i-th check node is excluded when the V2C message is generated in the DP-RBP decoder using (4).
A posteriori probability (APP) values are evaluated by DP-RBP decoder as Ll(vil) = Lvj + ca∈N (vj) mca→vj . where the C2V messages are directly updated to the variable node without the need for scaling down using the damping coefficient. Once the number of updated C2V messages is equal to the number of edges in the bipartite graph, the (l +1)th iteration is complete, the ADP algorithm resorts the order of the variable nodes based on their APP values, and a new binary image matrix Hlb+1 is constructed for the next iteration. The reliability for all variable nodes is reset to the initial LLR values before the next iteration begins. In other words, the APP values accumulated in the previous iterations are used to modify the binary image matrix, and the correlation between the decoding messages is limited within a single iteration.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The FER performance when the DP-RBP decoder is applied to (31, 25) and (63, 55) RS code is shown in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. The ADP algorithm is processed by the ABP (20,3) 20 times in order to modify the binary image matrix modification, and 3 iterations are completed before the matrix is changed again. This means that total of 60 iterations are performed by the ABP (20,3) decoder. When using the same number of iterations for both codes, the DP-RBP decoder can provide a gain of about 0.2 dB at an FER of 10−4 compared to the ABP (20,3) decoder, the DP-RBP decoder. Moreover, a near ML performance can be achieved when using the proposed DP-RBP decoding based on 60 and 480 iterations for (31, 25) and (63, 55) RS codes, respectively.
Fig. 4 shows that, when the DP-RBP decoder is applied to (255, 239) RS code, the ML bound cannot be approached using the DP-RBP decoder alone, even if 4000 iterations are available, and the gain is marginal compared to the ABP (80,50) decoder, which performs the same number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:14:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2777

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Algorithm 1 Iterative Decoding Algorithm by DP-RBP

Step 1 : Initialization: Set the size of the binary image Hb

to be (n − k) × n, set the iteration index l = 0 and the LLR

values

from

the

channel

observation:

L0

=

2 σ2

y

Step 2 : Adapt the parity check matrix by using the ADP

algorithm, and obtain Hlb for the next iteration. Step 3 : Set the cycle index p = 1, and set the variable

node index j = 1, j = 1, 2, . . . n.

Step 4 : Begin the polling of the DP-RBP decoding:

a) For the i-th check node, compute all rC2V (i, j) values, and record the index of the node with the maximum value. i = |N (vj)| mod p.
b) Update the C2V value for the node with the maximum

value and then update the related V2C values. c) j = (j + 1). if j > n, p = p + 1 and j = 1, begins

the next cycle.

Step 5 : Repeat Step 4 until the total number of updated C2V messages is equal to the number of 1s in Hbl . Step 6 : Perform a hard decision and apply conventional

non-binary algebraic hard decision decoding. Step 7 :If all check nodes are satisfied, output the results. Else if l = lmax, declare a decoding failure. Else set l = l + 1 and return to Step 2 to begin another

iteration.

Fig. 3. The FER performance for (63,55) RS code.
100 10-1

10-2

4
Algebraic HDD KV(100) [9] ABP(60,1) [8] BMA [7] ABP,(80,50) [8] DP-RBP,iter=4000 ML lower bound

FER

10-3

10-4
4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5 Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 4. The FER performance for (255,239) RS code.

Fig. 2. The FER performance for (31,25) RS code.
iterations. This implies that improvement in the error-rate performance is negligible when using additional iterations.
Fig. 5 is used to illustrate the performance of DP-RBP decoder when it is applied to (127, 121) and (127, 107) RS codes. A total of 42 and 120 check nodes are respectively contained in the binary image matrices of the same length (127, 121) and (127, 107) RS codes at different rates.
V. CONCLUSION In this work, a DP-RBP decoder has been devised. The dynamic scheduling DP-RBP decoder is able to efficiently correct any erroneous bits that have a low reliability. When the DP-RBP decoder decoder is applied to RS codes, a gain

100 10-1 10-2

(127,107)ABP (80,50) (127,107)DP-RBP,iter=60 (127,107)DP-RBP,iter=4000 (127,121)ABP (80,50) (127,121)DP-RBP,iter=60 (127,121)DP-RBP,iter=4000

FER

10-3

10-4

10-5

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 5. The FER performance for (127,121) and (127,107) RS codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:14:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2778

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)
5
in FER performance of more than 0.1 dB can be provided compared to the best results achieved by the RS decoders reported in the prior literature. For the popular (255, 239) RS code, an FER performance that approaches to only 0.8 dB away from the ML bound has been achieved.
REFERENCES
[1] E. R. Berlekamp, R. E. peile, and S. P. Pope, “The application of error control to communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol.25, pp. 44-57, 1987.
[2] E. R. Berlekamp, J. Shifman, and W. Toms, “An application of ReedSolomon codes to a satellite TDMA system,” MILCOM’86, Monterey, CA.
[3] B. C. Mortimer, M. J. Moore, and M. Sablatash, “The design of a highperformance error-correcting coding scheme for the Canadian broadcast telidon system based on Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-35, pp. 1113-1138, 1987.
[4] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470-3479, Dec. 2010.
[5] H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, S.-M. Yeh, and W.-Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886-896, Mar. 2013.
[6] H.-C. Lee and Y.-L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104-3113, Sept. 2014.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier and A. Valembois, “Reliability-based decoding of Reed-Solomon codes using their binary image,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, pp. 452454, Jul. 2004.
[8] J. Jiang, K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft-input soft-output decoding of Reed-Solomon codes by adapting the parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trasn. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, 2006.
[9] W. J. Gross, F. R. Kschischang R. Koetter, and P. G. Gulak, “Applications of algebraic soft-decision decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Trans. Communi., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1224-1234, Jul. 2006.
[10] H. Tang, Y. Liu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and S. Lin, “Combining Chase-2 and GMD decoding algorithms for nonbinary block codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 209-211, May 2000.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:14:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2779

