IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 6, JUNE 2017

725

Retention-Aware Belief-Propagation Decoding for NAND Flash Memory
Chaudhry Adnan Aslam, Student Member, IEEE, Yong Liang Guan, Member, IEEE, and Kui Cai, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—To recover decoding errors caused by data retention noise in NAND Flash memory, a novel retention-aware belief-propagation (RA-BP) decoding scheme is proposed. The RA-BP scheme is based on two rounds of BP decoding in which the memory cell’s charge-loss effect is systematically compensated. The most prominent feature of the proposed RA-BP scheme is that it recovers the retention-failure decoded data without performing additional memory sensing operations. Instead, the likely retention-failure memory cells are identified by using the available readback voltage signal and the decoded codeword bits. For all such likely retention-failure memory cells, the corresponding log-likelihood ratio information is modified in such a way as to reverse the effect of retention noise, and a second round of BP decoding is performed afresh. Through numerical simulations, it is shown that the proposed RA-BP decoding scheme can improve the error rate performance by more than three orders of magnitude and increase the retention time limit by up to 60% compared with a single round of BP decoding.
Index Terms—Belief-propagation (BP) decoding, data retention noise, error rate performance, NAND Flash memory, retentionfailure recovery.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE NAND Flash memory is a nonvolatile storage technology that is being widely used in portable digital electronic consumer products. More recently, Flash memory has started penetrating the domain of high-performance enterprise data storage applications. However, its further proliferation is hampered by the emergence of various circuit-level noise and interference components, which significantly distort the memory cell’s threshold voltage signal and consequently degrade the flash data reliability. Among all, the data retention noise, which is caused by the charge leakage at the cell’s floating gate, is well recognized as a dominant source of errors in today’s Flash memory chips [1]–[4].
Due to the nonstationary data retention noise, the initial voltage distribution parameters (mean and variance) and the default read threshold voltage levels of the flash channel tend
Manuscript received June 9, 2016; accepted August 4, 2016. Date of publication August 24, 2016; date of current version May 26, 2017. This work was supported in part by the NTU Research Scholarship and in part by the SUTD-ZJU Research Collaboration under Grant ZJURP1500102. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor F. C. M. Lau.
C. A. Aslam and Y. L. Guan are with the School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: ad0001ry@e.ntu.edu.sg; EYLGuan@ntu.edu.sg).
K. Cai is with the Department of Science, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 487372 (e-mail: cai_kui@sutd.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this brief are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2016.2602359

to become outdated and suboptimal with time and thus need to be continuously refreshed/updated. To this end, a flash correct-and-refresh (FCR) technique is reported in [2], where the stored flash data are periodically read, decoded, and reprogrammed before they accumulate large retention noise errors. However, the FCR scheme is only applicable when the flash controller is powered on. Furthermore, the cell reprogramming operation itself may induce more cell-to-cell interference (CCI). Apart from FCR, a decision-directed estimation (DDE) strategy is presented in [3], in which the decoded bit error patterns are used to formulate an optimization problem for the estimation/adjustment of voltage distribution parameters. For the implementation of both the FCR and DDE schemes, the availability of correctly decoded data is a prerequisite, which demands the usage of strong error-correction code (ECC).
When the number of retention errors is large and exceed the error-correction capability of the ECC decoder, the FCR and the DDE no longer work. In this case, the flash channel parameters need to be updated by invoking different estimation algorithms [4], [5]. However, these algorithms incur additional memory sensing operations, which significantly increase the read latency and power consumption. Similarly, some other recent data recovery techniques attending to retention failures, such as the error prediction error recovery [6] and the flash defibrillator [7], where the charge-reduced cells are recharged by applying recovery pulses, and the retention optimized reading [8], the adaptive read thresholds [9], and the read channel optimization [10], where the failed host data are recovered by adaptively applying read threshold levels, also require extra memory sensing operations, which could compromise the advantages brought by the NAND flash technology.
In this brief, we present a novel retention-aware beliefpropagation (RA-BP) decoding scheme for improving the error rate performance of the flash channel, specifically when the memory cells are severely influenced by the retention noise. In the proposed scheme, using a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, we execute the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm to decode the stored flash data. In case of decoding failure, we intelligently modify the input log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information, based on the decoded codeword bits and the sensed readback voltage signal, and rerun a second round of BP decoding using the modified LLR values. The proposed RA-BP scheme improves the flash channel tolerance against the data retention errors and enables the BP algorithm to successfully decode the flash data for a longer period of retention time, thereby averting the usage of time- and power-consuming estimation/sensing algorithms [4], [5]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the firstever technique that recovers the retention-failure data without performing new memory sensing operations.

1549-7747 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized liceSneseedhtutpse://lwimwitwed.ietoe:eY.oorngs/peui bUlniciva.tiDoonws_nslotaanddeadrdosn/pJuubnleic2a4ti,o2n0s2/6riagth1ts4/i:1n5d:e2x3.hUtmTCl fforormmIoErEeEinXfoprlomreat.ioRne. strictions apply.

726

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 6, JUNE 2017

III. RA-BP DECODING

Fig. 1. Voltage distribution functions for 2-bit-per-cell Flash memory before and after the data retention noise effect: voltage levels tend to drop gradually with data retention time.

To ensure on-chip flash data reliability, the soft-input LDPC codes have been widely employed [17]–[20]. The BP decoding of an LDPC code requires the LLR information of the entire codeword stored over a single memory page. To read a memory page, the read threshold levels can be chosen to maximize the mutual information between the flash channel’s input and output voltage signals, as this can minimize the LDPC error rate performance [18]. In this regard, it has been found that six levels of memory sensing precision are able to approach the performance of full-precision soft-input BP decoding, whereas further increase in memory sensing levels starts to produce diminishing returns [18], [21]. With six-level quantization, the LLR values corresponding to the least significant bit (LSB), i.e., Llsb, and most significant bit (MSB), i.e., Lmsb, can be computed such that, when Rn−1 < v Rn for n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, where R0 = −∞ and R7 = +∞, we have

II. FLASH MEMORY CHANNEL MODEL
In this brief, we present the proposed RA-BP scheme over a model-based 2-bit-per-cell NAND Flash memory. However, the RA-BP principle can be easily extended for 3-bit-per-cell or 4-bit-per-cell technology. According to [11] and [12], the flash channel can be modeled by incorporating the programming noise, the random telegraph noise (RTN), the data retention noise, and the CCI components. In the initial state, the cell’s threshold voltage tends to follow a Gaussian distribution. For the erased-state voltage distribution, corresponding to symbol “11,” we set the mean and standard deviation parameters to −2.0 and 0.4 V, respectively [3]. The programmed-state voltage distribution functions, corresponding to symbol “10,” symbol “00,” and symbol “01,” are configured according to the incremental step pulse programming (ISPP) [13] technique with target verify levels of 0.4, 1.9, and 3.5 V, respectively [3]. We set the ISPP step size to 0.3 V and the programming noise standard deviation to 0.15 V.
Inadvertently, the initial threshold voltage distribution functions are affected by the nonstationary wear-out noise (RTN), which widens the voltage distribution functions with extending exponential tails around the mean threshold voltage [14]. We model the RTN by using a Gaussian distribution function with zero-mean and nonstationary standard deviation, which varies with the number of program and erase (PE) cycles in a power law fashion [11], [12]. Furthermore, the CCI component, which is induced due to the presence of circuit-level parasitic coupling capacitive between the adjacent memory cells, linearly adds to the threshold voltage signal, which can be estimated and subsequently neutralized either during cell programming [15] or after memory sensing [16]. The extent of data retention noise depends upon the initial voltage level, the data retention time, and the number of PE cycles [11], [12]. This nonstationary noise can be approximated as a Gaussian random variable. The unremitting charge leaking effect over increasing data retention time reduces the cell’s threshold voltage level and eventually shifts the memory cell down, into an adjacent (lower) cell state, leading to an incorrect detection of stored data symbol, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The overall threshold voltage distribution for the erased state, i.e., ps11 (v), and programmed state, i.e., ps10 (v), ps00 (v), and ps01 (v), cells can be well approximated using a Gaussian mixture model [3]–[5].

Rn

[ps00 (v) + ps01 (v)] dv

Llsb(n)

=

log

Rn−1 Rn

(1)

[ps10 (v) + ps11 (v)] dv

Rn−1

Rn

[ps00 (v) + ps10 (v)] dv

Lmsb(n)

=

log

Rn−1 Rn

(2)

[ps01 (v) + ps11 (v)] dv

Rn−1

where v represents the cell’s readback voltage signal. These input LLRs are then used to initialize the variable nodes in the LDPC code graph for BP decoding. If decoding is successful, the time-varying voltage distribution parameters for the nonstationary flash channel can be accurately updated using the DDE [3] algorithm, without requiring additional memory sensing operations.
However, if the BP decoding fails, due to a large number of retention errors accumulated over a long retention period, the DDE algorithm cannot be invoked. In this situation, more memory sensing operations are performed in order to estimate the new voltage distribution parameters and to subsequently compute the updated set of read threshold levels [4], [5]. This is followed by the retrial of error-correction decoding using these updated parameters to recover the incorrectly decoded codeword. This whole process, however, significantly affects the read response time of the flash channel as it requires additional read operations (memory sensing) not only for the channel estimation but also for the second round of error correction decoding.
To preclude the excessive rereads necessitated when BP decoding fails, as well as to counter the escalating effect of data retention errors, we propose the RA-BP decoding, which consists of two rounds of BP decoding. The first round provides a hard-decision estimate of the codeword bits, i.e., {cˆmsb cˆlsb}, corresponding to the MSB and LSB positions. In case of decoding failure, we will generate new/updated LLR information, which is denoted by Lˆlsb and Lˆmsb, by reversely exploiting the charge leakage effect, and execute a new (second) round of BP decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:15:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: RETENTION-AWARE BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY

727

Fig. 2. Illustration of a six-level quantization scheme for 2-bit-per-cell Flash memory: voltage range is split into four data regions (D1, D2, D3, D4) and three erasure regions (E1, E2, E3).

In Fig. 2, we illustrate a six-level quantization scheme where

the threshold voltage range is split into four data regions,
which are denoted by D1, D2, D3, and D4, and three erasure regions, which are denoted by E1, E2, and E3. The quantities NDDji and NEDki , which we will refer to as the retention error and retention erasure counts, respectively, for i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} and k ∈ {1, 2, 3}, represent the number of memory cells that were originally programmed to data region Di but appeared into data region Dj and erasure region Ek, respectively, due to downshifting of the cell’ls voltage as a result of data retention

Fig. 3. Retention erasure probability, p(NEDki ), and retention error probability, p(NDDji ), versus data retention time at PE = 5 K.
belonging to data regions D2, D3, and D4 may shift past the lower erasure region and into the lower data regions D1, D2, and D3, respectively. To see this effect, we plot the retention error probability versus the retention time in Fig. 3, which is

effect. Consequently, with increasing retention time, the voltage given by

distribution functions corresponding to symbol “10,” symbol
“00,” and symbol “01” will tend to drift into the erasure regions E1, E2, and E3, respectively. Meanwhile, the voltage distribution functions corresponding to symbol “11,” symbol “10,” and symbol “00” will drift away from the erasure regions E1, E2, and E3, respectively. Equivalently, as the retention time increases, the values of NED12 , NED23 , and NED34 will tend to increase, whereas the values of NED11 , NED22 , and NED33 will tend to decrease. This observation is illustrated in Fig. 3, where we plot the retention
erasure probability as a function of retention time, which is
given by

p

N Di
Ei−1

=

psp (v) dv

(3)

v∈Ei−1

where i ∈ {2, 3, 4}, sp ∈ {s10, s00, s01}, and

p

N Di
Ei+1

=

psp (v) dv

(4)

v∈Ei+1

where i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, and sp ∈ {s11, s10, s00}. In order to recover from the aforementioned effects, we com-
pute new LLR information for all the erasure-bound memory cells, where v ∈ {E1, E2, E3} such that, when Rn−1 < v Rn, for n = 2, 4, and 6, their new LLR values become

p

N Di
Di−1

=

psp (v) dv

(7)

v∈Di−1

where i ∈ {2, 3, 4}, and sp ∈ {s10, s00, s01}. We can notice

that

the

retention

error

count

N Di
Di−1

,

tends

to

increase

with

retention time. Thus, we also need to identify these charge-

depleted retention-error memory cells in order to modify their

LLR information for the second round of BP decoding. How-

ever, in this situation, contrary to the retention-erasure correc-

tion, it is not possible to change the LLR information merely

on the basis of readback voltage signal v. To this end, we

leverage on the decoded codeword bits for the detection of

such charge-loss memory cells. Specifically, if the cells have

readback voltages within D1, D2, or D3, but they are decoded into the next higher programmed state (i.e., D2, D3, or D4,

respectively), we mark them as the likely affected memory

cells. For instance, when a memory cell is observed in data

region D1 and the corresponding pair of bits is decoded to {cˆlsb cˆmsb} = {1 0}, it will be marked as a likely charge-

loss memory cell. Thus, for all such likely charge-loss memory

cells, we modify their LLRs such that, when Rn−1 < v Rn for n = 1, 3, and 5, the new LLR values become

Lˆlsb(n) ⇒ Llsb(n + 2)

(8)

Lˆlsb(n) ⇒ Llsb(n + 1)

(5)

Lˆmsb(n) ⇒ Lmsb(n + 2).

(9)

Lˆmsb(n) ⇒ Lmsb(n + 1).

(6) This step is referred to as the retention-error correction,

This process is referred to as the retention-erasure correc- as depicted in Fig. 2. Using the modified LLR information, tion, as shown in Fig. 2. Furthermore, after a long retention i.e., Lˆlsb and Lˆmsb, we execute a fresh second round of BP
time, it is also possible that the threshold voltage distributions decoding, as explained in Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:15:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 6, JUNE 2017

Fig. 4. Fraction of retention-error corrected (uncorrected) cells, Z{C|UC)}, versus data retention time at PE = 5 K with six-level quantization.

A. Random Memory Read Request

The proposed RA-BP decoding scheme can be easily cus-

tomized for random memory read request (instead of sequential

read), in which, instead of reading both the LSB and MSB memory pages, only an LSB or MSB memory page is read. For instance, the LSB page read requires two memory sensing operations at R3 and R4, as shown in Fig. 2. With such twolevel quantization, the proposed RA-BP decoding scheme will

perform the retention-erasure correction for the LSB positions
when R3 < v R4 and the retention-error correction when v R3 and {cˆlsb} = {0}. Similarly, for MSB page read, four memory sensing operations are performed at R1, R2, R5, and R6, as shown in Fig. 2. In this case, retention-erasure correction is performed when R1 < v R2 or R5 < v R6, whereas retention-error correction is performed when v R1 and {cˆmsb} = {0} or when R2 < v R5 and {cˆmsb} = {1}. Thus, in the proposed RA-BP decoding, only two or four,

Fig. 5. FER versus data retention time at PE = 5 K: comparison between the proposed RA-BP decoding and the conventional (Conv.) single round of BP decoding with 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-level quantization schemes.

instead of six, quantization levels are required for LSB or MSB

page read operations, respectively.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
To analyze the error rate improvement under the proposed RA-BP decoding scheme, we simulate a binary column weight 4 regular LDPC code, which is constructed using the progressive edge growth algorithm [22]. This code has input (K) and output (N ) block lengths of 6800 and 8000 bits, respectively, and a code rate of 0.85. This LDPC code is decoded using the shuffled BP algorithm [23], where the maximum iteration count is set to 25 per BP decoding round.
We first observe the performance of the proposed decisiondirected decoding strategy. Specifically, we plot the fraction of retention-error corrected (uncorrected) cells as a function of retention time in Fig. 4, which is given by

Z {C|UC)}

=

Retention-error

corrected

(uncorrected)

cells .

Total (corrected + uncorrected) cells

(10)

cells. It is important to analyze this measure as the proposed RA-BP decoding leverages on the partially corrected codeword, which contains residual errors. In Fig. 4, we can notice that the number of corrected retention errors is much higher than the number of uncorrected retention errors; hence, a second round of decoding will be able to correct the residual errors with adjusted LLR values.
In Fig. 5, we plot the frame error rate (FER) performance versus the data retention time for 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-level quantization with conventional BP decoding and compare with the proposed RA-BP decoding scheme. We can observe that the flash channel tolerance against the retention-noise-induced errors is significantly improved. For instance, considering an FER of 10−2, which is equivalent to 99% success rate that the DDE [3] will be invoked, the Flash memory can endure up to 2500 h using six-level quantization without performing flash channel estimation. In contrast, for the same FER performance, the endurance limit can be extended by up to 4000 h (60% improvement) under the proposed six-level RA-BP decoding. Similarly, we can notice that the six-level RA-BP decoding

This ratio is computed through Monte Carlo simulations via improves the FER performance by more than three orders of

steps 8–10 in Algorithm 1 by counting the number of retention- magnitude at a retention time of 3000 h. Beyond six-level error corrected and uncorrected (⇒ wrongly corrected) memory quantization, nine-level RA-BP decoding leads to an even

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:15:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: RETENTION-AWARE BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY

729

REFERENCES

Fig. 6. FER versus data retention time at PE = 5 K for random read request: comparison between the proposed RA-BP decoding and the conventional (Conv.) single round of BP decoding with two-level (LSB read) and four-level (MSB read) quantization schemes.
larger performance gain, as shown in Fig. 5. This is because higher quantization leads to wider erasure regions that, in turn, enable more retention-erasure correction. A further increase in quantization levels (e.g., 12-level quantization) starts to produce diminishing gains. In addition, increasing quantization levels also incur larger memory sensing latency. Hence, six or nine levels of quantization are recommended for the Flash memory.
To observe the error rate performance with random (MSB or LSB) memory read request, we plot the corresponding FER curves under the conventional BP and RA-BP decoding schemes in Fig. 6. We also plot the FER curves for the retentionerror and retention-erasure correction methods. Again, we observe a noticeable improvement in the retention time and error rate by RA-BP decoding. Specifically, we obtain up to 45% and 50% improvement for MSB and LSB page reads, respectively. In summary, the proposed RA-BP decoding scheme can be effectively used for both sequential and random read requests without any read performance degradation.
V. CONCLUSION
An innovative RA-BP decoding strategy has been proposed to mitigate data loss associated with retention noise in NAND Flash memory without the need for memory resensing. The proposed scheme exploits the knowledge that the memory cell threshold voltage levels tend to drop gradually with data retention time. Under this effect, the probable charge-loss memory cells may be detected by jointly analyzing their readback voltage signal and the corresponding decoded codeword bits. In the case of decoding failure, a new set of LLR information that enables retention-erasure correction or retention-error correction is computed for all such memory cells. Then, a fresh round of BP decoding is performed using the new LLR values. By simulating a regular LDPC code over a 2-bit-percell NAND flash channel, a substantial improvement in the error rate performance is observed for both sequential and random read methods.

[1] Y. Cai, E. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Error patterns in MLC NAND Flash memory: Measurement, characterization, and analysis,” in Proc. Conf. Exhib. Des., Autom. Test Eur., Mar. 2012, pp. 521–526.
[2] Y. Cai, “Flash correct-and-refresh: Retention-aware error management for increased Flash memory lifetime,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Comput. Des., Sep. 2012, pp. 94–101.
[3] D.-H. Lee and W. Sung, “Decision directed estimation of threshold voltage distribution in NAND Flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 919–927, Feb. 2014.
[4] D.-H. Lee and W. Sung, “Estimation of NAND Flash memory threshold voltage distribution for optimum soft-decision error correction,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 440–449, Jan. 2013.
[5] Y. Cai, E. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND Flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. Conf. Des., Autom. Test Eur., Mar. 2013, pp. 1285–1290.
[6] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Error-prediction LDPC and error-recovery schemes for highly reliable solid-state drives (SSDs),” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 2920–2933, Nov. 2013.
[7] J. Jeong, Y. Song, and J. Kim, “Flash defibrillator: A data recovery technique for retention failures in NAND Flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Non-Volatile Memory Syst., Appl., Aug. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[8] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, E. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Data retention in MLC NAND Flash memory: Characterization, optimization, and recovery,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit., Feb. 2015, pp. 551–563.
[9] B. Peleato, R. Agarwal, J. Cioffi, M. Qin, and P. Siegel, “Adaptive read thresholds for NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 3069–3081, Sep. 2015.
[10] N. Papandreou et al., “Enhancing the reliability of MLC NAND Flash memory systems by read channel optimization,” ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1–24, Sep. 2015.
[11] G. Dong, Y. Pan, N. Xie, C. Varanasi, and T. Zhang, “Estimating information-theoretical NAND Flash memory storage capacity and its implication to memory system design space exploration,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1705–1714, Sep. 2012.
[12] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND Flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.
[13] S. Kang-Deog et al., “A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND Flash memory with incremental step pulse programming scheme,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1149–1156, Nov. 1995.
[14] C. M. Compagnoni, M. Ghidotti, A. L. Lacaita, A. S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Random telegraph noise effect on the programmed threshold-voltage distribution of Flash memories,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 984–986, Sep. 2009.
[15] G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND Flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010.
[16] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Detector for MLC NAND Flash memory using neighbor-a-priori information,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 2827–2836, Sep. 2016.
[17] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Non-binary LDPC code with multiple memory reads for Multilevel-Cell (MLC) flash,” in Proc. Int. Conf. APSIPA, Dec. 2014, pp. 1–9.
[18] W. Jiadong et al., “Enhanced precision through multiple reads for LDPC decoding in Flash memories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, May 2014.
[19] Y. Hu, S. Song, S. Xiao, Q. Xu, N. Xiao, and Z. Qin, “A dominating error region strategy for improving the bitflipping LDPC decoder of SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Express Briefs, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 578–582, Jun. 2015.
[20] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Low-complexity QuantizationAware Belief-Propagation (QA-BP) decoding for MLC NAND Flash memory,” in Proc. ICICS, Dec. 2015, pp. 1–5.
[21] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for Multi-Level-Cell (MLC) NAND Flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[22] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[23] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Improving the belief-propagation convergence of irregular LDPC codes using column-weight based scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1283–1286, Aug. 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:15:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

