2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Characterization and Efficient Exhaustive Search Algorithm for Elementary Trapping Sets of Irregular LDPC Codes

Yoones Hashemi, and Amir H. Banihashemi Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a characterization of elementary trapping sets (ETSs) for irregular low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes. These sets are known to be the main culprits in the error floor region of such codes. The proposed characterization is based on a hierarchical graphical representation of ETSs, starting from simple cycles of the graph, or from single variable nodes, and involves three simple expansion techniques: depth-one tree (dot), path and lollipop, thus, the terminology dpl characterization. The proposed dpl characterization corresponds to an efficient search algorithm, that, for a given irregular LDPC code, can find all the instances of (a, b) ETSs with size a and with the number of unsatisfied check nodes b, within any range of interest a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, exhaustively. Simulation results are presented to show the versatility of the search algorithm, and to demonstrate that, compared to the literature, significant improvement in search speed can be obtained.
I. INTRODUCTION
It is well-known that error-floor performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is related to the presence of certain problematic graphical structures in the Tanner graph of the code, commonly referred to as trapping sets (TS). Among TSs, the most harmful ones are known to be the elementary trapping sets (ETSs), whose induced subgraphs contain only degree-1 and degree-2 check nodes. In particular, the leafless ETSs (LETSs), in which each variable node is connected to at least two even-degree (satisfied) check nodes, are recognized as the main culprit for variable-regular LDPC codes [2]. For a given LDPC code, the knowledge of trapping sets can be used, for example, to estimate the error floor, or to design codes/decoding algorithms with low error floor. While there are numerous works on the characterization and search algorithms for trapping sets, very few works are dedicated to the trapping sets of irregular LDPC codes [5], [6], [1]. To the best of our knowledge, the algorithms proposed in [6] and [1] are the only exhaustive search algorithms of error-prone structures in irregular LDPC codes. Using the branch-&-bound principle, Kyung and Wang [6] proposed an exhaustive search algorithm to enumerate the fully absorbing sets (FASs) of short irregular LDPC codes. The proposed algorithm, however, becomes quickly infeasible to use as the block length, n, and the size of the FASs, a, are increased. Very recently, Falsafain and Mousavi [1] proposed another branch-&-bound algorithm to find the ETSs of irregular LDPC codes. Their exhaustive search algorithm, also, is only applicable to short-to-moderate length LDPC codes.

In an earlier work [2], we proposed a hierarchical graphbased expansion approach to characterize/search LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. The proposed characterization/search is based on three basic expansion techniques: depth-one tree (dot), path and lollipop, thus the name dpl characterization/search. In this paper, we generalize the dpl characterization/search of [2] to LETSs of irregular LDPC codes. We also extend the results to ETSs that are not leafless. We thus provide an efficient exhaustive search algorithm for all ETSs (leafless or otherwise) of irregular LDPC codes. We demonstrate that compared to the search methods of [6] and [1], the dpl search is more efficient and has a much wider reach for finding problematic structures of larger size a within codes of larger block length n. The main reason for this superiority is that, unlike the branch-&-bound algorithms of [6] and [1], the proposed scheme uses carefully devised embedded sequences of structures, each starting from a simple cycle or a single variable node, and then expanding step by step to larger structures based on one of the three simple expansion techniques.
A more detailed presentation of this work, including some proofs that are missing here due to the limitation of space, can be found in [3].
II. PRELIMINARIES
Any parity check matrix H of a binary LDPC code can be represented by its bipartite Tanner graph G = (V ∪ C, E), where V is the set of variable nodes, C is the set of check nodes, and E is the set of edges corresponding to the nonzero elements of H. A Tanner graph is called variable-regular with variable degree dv if dvi = dv, ∀ vi ∈ V . A Tanner graph is called irregular if it has multiple variable or check node degrees. For irregular codes, notations λ(x) and ρ(x) are used to denote the edge-based variable and check node degree distributions, respectively. The girth g of a Tanner graph is the length of its shortest cycle(s). We study the Tanner graphs that are free of 4-cycles (g > 4). For a subset S of V , the subset Γ(S) of C denotes the set of neighbors of S in G. The induced subgraph of S in G, denoted by G(S), is the graph with the set of nodes S ∪ Γ(S), and all the edges in between. The set of check nodes with odd and even degrees in G(S) are denoted by Γo(S) and Γe(S), and are referred to as unsatisfied check nodes and satisfied check nodes, respectively. The size of an induced subgraph G(S) is defined to be the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-4096-4/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

1192

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

G(S )

G(S )

G(S )

G(S )

m-2 d edges

m − 1 edges

m − 1 edges

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 1. Tanner and quasi-normal graph representations of LETSs in (a) (4, 2), (b) (4, 3), (c) (4, 4), (d) (4, 6) classes and (e) their normal graph.

c − 2 edges

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2. Expansion of the LETS structure S with (a) dotm, (b) lom c , (c) pam.

its variable nodes. All the induced subgraphs with the same size a, and the same number of unsatisfied check nodes b, are considered to belong to the same (a, b) class. Given a Tanner graph G, a set S ⊂ V is called an (a,b) trapping set (TS) if |S| = a and |Γo(S)| = b. An elementary trapping set (ETS) is a trapping set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2.
To simplify the representation of ETSs, similar to [2], we use an alternate graph representation of ETSs, called normal graph. The normal graph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by removing all the check nodes of degree one and their incident edges, and by replacing all the degree-2 check nodes and their two incident edges by a single edge. We call a set S ⊂ V an (a,b) leafless ETS (LETS) if S is an (a, b) ETS and if the normal graph of S is leafless (has a minimum node degree of at least 2). It is easy to see that there is a oneto-one correspondence between the Tanner graph G(S) and the normal graph of S for variable-regular LDPC codes. This is, however, not the case for irregular graphs, in which the extra information about the degrees of variable nodes involved in the ETS is also required. For this, we introduce a new graphical representation of an ETS, which we call quasinormal representation. The quasi-normal graph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by replacing all the check nodes (degree-one or two) and their incident edges by a single edge. In this representation, the edges that are connected to only one node (singly-connected edges) are responsible for preserving the degree of variable nodes. We also continue to use the same definition of LETS for irregular graphs, i.e., an ETS S is LETS if the normal graph of S is leafless. Fig. 1 shows the induced subgraphs of four LETS structures, along with their quasinormal graphs, in an irregular Tanner graph with variable node
degrees 3 and 4. (Symbols ◦, and are used for variable
nodes, satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes, respectively.) It can be seen that all four non-isomorphic LETS structures have the same normal graph.
III. DPL CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH OF LETSS
In [2], we developed a dpl characterization/search algorithm for LETS structures of variable-regular LDPC codes in the space of normal graphs. In the dpl characterization, each LETS is identified with an embedded sequence of LETSs that starts from a simple cycle and expands, at each step, to a larger LETS using one of the three expansions, dot, path or lollipop, until it reaches the LETS structure of interest. Also,

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3. Seven non-isomorphic LETS structures in the (a) (5, 2), (b) (5, 3) and (c) (5, 4) classes, all with the same normal graph, in an irregular graph with variable degrees 3 and 4.

in [2], given amax and bmax, a characterization algorithm was proposed to determine the expansion techniques needed to be
applied to all the LETSs within each LETS class to generate all the LETSs in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, in a guaranteed fashion. Using the dpl characterization, an efficient exhaustive search algorithm for LETSs was also proposed
in [2] that required only short-length simple cycles of the graph
as the input. It was, in fact, proved in [2] that the maximum length of the input cycles for the dpl search is minimal. In the following, we briefly explain the three expansions.
Consider an (a, b) LETS structure S of a variable-regular Tanner graph with g > 4 and variable degree dv. Figs. 2(a)(c) show the three expansions applied to the induced subgraph
of S. In these figures, the symbol ◦ is used to represent the
common node(s) between S and the expansion graph, and the
symbol • is used to represent the other nodes of the expansion
graph. In Fig. 2(a), the expansion using a depth-one tree (dot) is shown. The notation dotm is used for a dot expansion with m edges, 2 ≤ m ≤ dv. In Fig. 2(b), the expansion of a LETS structure S using a lollipop walk is shown. The notation lom c is used for a lollipop walk of length m+1, which consists of a cycle of length c (c ≥ g/2) and a path of length d (d ≥ 1). The path expansion of S, shown in Fig. 2(c), is a LETS structure S of size a + m, that is constructed by appending a path of length m + 1 to S. The first and the last nodes of the path are common with S, and can be identical. The notation pam is used for a path of length m + 1.
In irregular Tanner graphs, for a given class of LETSs, the
variety of non-isomorphic LETSs would increase significantly
compared to that of variable-regular Tanner graphs. This is
due to the variety of the degrees of variable nodes involved in
LETSs. An important observation, however, is that despite the
large number of non-isomorphic quasi-normal graphs in each
class, they are all projected to only a few normal graphs. Fig.
3 shows seven LETSs in different classes, all projected to the
same normal graph. In the following, we demonstrate, through a sequence of intermediate results, that the dpl characterization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1193

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

of LETSs of variable-regular Tanner graphs can be used to exhaustively cover all the normal graphs of all the nonisomorphic (a, b) LETSs of irregular Tanner graphs within any interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. Suppose that Ldav is the set of all non-isomorphic LETSs of size a in the Tanner graph of a variable-regular graph with variable degree dv.
Proposition 1. In the space of normal graphs, if dv < a − 1, then, Ladv ⊂ Laa−1, and if dv ≥ a − 1, then, Ldav = Laa−1.
Proposition 2. Any (quasi-normal graph of a) LETS structure S in the (a, b) class of an irregular Tanner graph with variable degree distribution λ(x) is mapped (via a surjective mapping) to a (normal graph of a) LETS structure in the (a, b ) class of variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv = f , where f is the largest variable degree in λ(x) strictly less
a
than a and b = a × f + b − dvi , with vi, i = 1, . . . , a,
i=1
being the variable nodes of S.

Theorem 1. The dpl characterization of non-isomorphic
LETSs for variable-regular graphs with dv = t in (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax + amax(t − dvmin ) is sufficient to generate the normal graphs of all the non-
isomorphic (a, b) LETSs with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax of irregular Tanner graphs with variable degree distribution λ(x) = dvmax λixi−1, where t is the largest variable degree
i=dvmin
in λ(x) strictly less than amax.

Proof. Based on Proposition 2, to cover the projections of all

the LETSs with a ≤ amax of irregular graphs, the variable

node degree of the variable-regular graph needs to be dv =

t, where t is the largest variable degree in λ(x) strictly less

than amax. Moreover, to cover all the LETS classes of the irregular graphs in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, the maximum value of b is bmax +amax(t−dvmin ). This is obtained by noting that b is maximized by setting a and

b

to

their

maximum
amax

values

amax

and

bmax,

respectively,

and

by minimizing dvi through assuming that all the variable

i=1

nodes in the LETS have the minimum degree dvmin .

In [2], for variable-regular graphs, the dpl characterization of LETSs was used as a road-map for the dpl search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in any interest range of a and b values, in a guaranteed fashion. The search algorithm of [2] starts by the enumeration of simple cycles that are identified in the characterization. Then, these instances are expanded recursively to find instances of other LETSs up to size amax. In each step, after finding a new LETS, the indices of its variable nodes should be saved for subsequent expansions in the next step. The expansion techniques, identified by the characterization, should be applied to all the instances of LETSs in the corresponding classes. Unlike the case for variable-regular graphs, in irregular graphs, a normal graph can be the projection of multiple LETSs in different classes. Therefore, for each LETS, in addition to the index of its variable nodes, we need to also keep track of the class of

its normal graph in variable-regular graphs with dv = t. Otherwise, the search follows the exact similar steps as in

the dpl search of [2].

The search algorithm for LETSs of irregular graphs de-

scribed above can face problems when amax or t, the largest variable degree strictly less than amax, are large, or when variable nodes with small degrees (for example, degree-2) are

present. Under such circumstances, the range of a and b values

covered in the characterization of variable-regular graphs with

dv = t plus the number of non-isomorphic LETSs will quickly increase. To overcome these problems, we use a different

approach to characterize/search LETSs of irregular codes.

Rather than relying on the normal graph representation through

the characterization table of a variable-regular graph, in the

new approach, we focus on the class of LETS structures. For

each class of LETSs, we identify all the possible expansions

from the set of dot, path and lollipop expansions that can be

applied to LETSs in that class and eventually result in an (a, b) LETS structure with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The application of this approach recursively and starting from all the simple

cycles with size from g/2 up to amax provides us with an exhaustive list of all LETSs of an irregular code within any desired range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. We identify the expansions for each class through a backward recursion. We start from LETSs of size amax with b ≤ bmax, and then find out how these structures can be possibly constructed in a recursive

fashion starting from simple cycles using the three expansions.

The first step is to find out all the possible candidates that can

lead to the target LETS structures through a single expansion

step, and then backtrack this recursively until one reaches

simple cycles. In the backward recursion, for any given value

of a in the range g/2 ≤ a ≤ amax, we derive an upper bound bamax, on the b values of (a, b) LETS classes that need to
be included for exhaustiveness. The upper bound is derived

recursively by finding bma ax as a function of bam+a1x with the

initial

condition

that

bamax
max

is

equal

to

bmax.

The

details

are

provided in the following.

Lemma 1. Any variable node v involved in an (a, b) LETS structure of an irregular graph in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, has a degree deg(v) < amax + bmax.

Lemma 2. In an irregular Tanner graph with variable node
degree distribution λ(x), among the LETS structures with the same size a, the simple cycle, consisting of variable nodes all with degree dvmax , has the largest b value, equal to a(dvmax − 2). Moreover, for such an irregular graph, among (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, the simple cycle of size a in the (a, a(η − 2)) class has the largest b value, where η is the largest variable degree in λ(x) strictly smaller than amax + bmax.

The following proposition shows how the class of a LETS
structure of an irregular graph changes as it is expanded by one of the three expansion techniques. The notation dotkm is used for a dot expansion with m edges and a root node with
degree k.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1194

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Proposition 3. Consider an (a, b) LETS structure S in an

irregular Tanner graph. The application of dotkm (2 ≤ m ≤ k), pam (m ≥ 2), and lom c (m ≥ g/2, g/2 ≤ c ≤ m) to S

will result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + 1, b + k − 2m),

m

m

(a + m, b − 2 + (dvi − 2)), and (a + m, b − 2 + (dvi − 2))

i=1

i=1

classes, respectively, where dvi , i = 1, . . . , m, are the degrees

of the variable nodes in the expansion.

Proposition 4. In an irregular graph with variable node degree distribution λ(x), the application of dotm k (2 ≤ m ≤ k), pam (m ≥ 2), and lom c (m ≥ g/2, g/2 ≤ c ≤ m) to an (a, b) LETS results in an (a , b ) LETS structure with minimum possible value of b equal to (b+min{z−2a, −y})+, (b − 2 + m(dvmin − 2))+, and (b − 2 + (m − 1)(dvmin − 2) + d − 2)+, respectively, where (f )+ = max{f, 0}, y is the largest variable degree in λ(x) less than or equal to a, z is the smallest variable degree in λ(x) strictly larger than a, and d is equal to dvmin , if dvmin > 2, and is equal to the smallest variable degree strictly larger than 2, if dvmin = 2.
Proof. For the dotm k expansion, using Proposition 3, we have b = b + k − 2m, and we note that m ≤ min{a, k}. We consider two cases: (i) a < k and (ii) a ≥ k. For Case (i), we have m ≤ a, and the minimum value of b is obtained when m has its maximum value in this interval, i.e., m = a, and k has its smallest value in the interval k > a, i.e., k = z. This results in b = b + z − 2a. For Case (ii), we have m ≤ k, and the minimum value of b is obtained when m has its maximum value in this interval, i.e., m = k. This results in b = b − k, which in turn is minimized if k takes its largest value in the interval k ≤ a, which is y. This results in b = b − y. Combining the results of Cases (i) and (ii), we obtain b = (b + min{z − 2a, −y})+, where (·)+ simply indicates that the b value cannot be negative. For the pam expansion, the minimum is attained when all the m nodes in the expansion have degree dvmin . For the lom c , the minimum is resulted when all the nodes in the expansion have degree
dvmin , with the exception being when dvmin = 2, in which case, one node needs to have a degree equal to the smallest
variable degree strictly larger than 2.

Theorem 2. Suppose that we are interested in generating all
the (a, b) LETSs of an irregular graph with variable node degree distribution λ(x) and girth g within the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. For this, consider an approach that starts from simple cycles sk, k = g/2, . . . , amax, and recursively applies all the possible dot, path and lollipop expansions
to any generated LETS. Such an approach will exhaustively
generate all the LETSs in the range of interest, if for any size
a in the range g/2 ≤ a ≤ amax, the approach is constrained to only find (a, b) LETSs with b values satisfying b ≤ bma ax, where bamax values are obtained through the recursion bma ax = min{bam+a1x + max{y, 2a − z} , a(η − 2)}, in which y is the largest variable degree in λ(x) less than or equal to a, z is
the smallest variable degree in λ(x) strictly larger than a and
strictly smaller than amax +bmax, and η is the largest variable

degree in λ(x) strictly smaller than amax + bmax. The initial

condition

for

recursion

is

bamax
max

=

bmax.

Proof. Based on Proposition 4, it is clear that the largest

decrease in the value of b by increasing a through the three

expansions is caused by the dot expansion. In fact, it is easy to

see that the recursion bma ax = bm a+a1x + 1, along with the initial

condition

bamax
max

=

bmax,

cover

the

range

of

b

values

required

for exhaustive search based on path and lollipop expansions.

Focusing on dot then, based on Proposition 4, it is clear that

the largest decrease in the b value by the application of dot

is − min{z − 2a, −y}, or equivalently, max{2a − z, y}. The

proof is then completed by combining this with Lemmas 1

and 2.

Given

the

upper

bounds

bgm/a2x

,

.

.

.

,

bamax
max

,

one

can

easily

find

the list of expansion techniques that are required to be applied

to all the non-isomorphic structures in each (a, b) LETS class.

The expansion dot is applied to all the (a, b) classes with

a ≤ amax − 1. Also, pam and lom c are applied to all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax − m. The only constraint for using an
expansion technique is that the b value(s) of the new LETS

structure(s) need to remain in the range identified by the upper

bounds

bgm/a2x,

.

.

.

,

bamax
max

.

The

results

of

Proposition

3

are

used

to impose this constraint. The search algorithm is similar to

the search algorithm of [2]. The main difference is that, due

to the presence of variable nodes with different degrees, after

applying an expansion technique, the algorithm needs to check

whether the resultant LETS instances are in the interest range

or not.

IV. DPL-BASED CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH OF ETSLS
For irregular LDPC codes, in addition to LETSs, there are other ETSs that are problematic but are not leafless, i.e., they have variable nodes that are connected to only one satisfied check node [5], [6], [1]. We use the notation “ETSL” (ETS with Leaf) for such trapping sets, and remind the reader that it is the normal graph representation of ETSL structures that has at least one leaf. Unlike the LETS case, where dotm k expansion with m ≥ 2 was used, in the ETSL case, we are interested in the dotm k expansion with m = 1. In general, the ETSLs can be partitioned into two categories. The ETSLs that contain at least one LETS sub-structure, denoted by ETSL1, and those that do not contain any LETS sub-structure, ETSL2. We characterize ETSL1s through the following proposition.
Proposition 5. Any (a, b) ETSL1 structure S of irregular graphs, with minimum variable node degree dvmin ≥ 2, in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, can be obtained by successive application of dotk1 to the largest (a , b ) LETS substructure of S, where a < amax and b ≤ bmax.
To generate all the (a, b) ETSL1 instances of an irregular graph with dvmin ≥ 2, in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, for each value of i in the range dvmin − 2 ≤ i ≤ bmax − 1, the expansion dot1k with k ≤ i + 2 should be applied to any LETS and ETSL1s with a ≤ amax − 1 and b = bmax − i.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1195

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

It is easy to see that ETSL2 structures (in the space of normal graphs) contain no cycles, and are thus trees. The following proposition is then simple to prove.
Proposition 6. Any (a, b) ETSL2 structure of irregular graphs with dvmin ≥ 2, in the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, can be obtained by successive application of dot1k expansions to single variable nodes with degree less than or equal to bmax.
Based on the results of this section, Algorithm 1 provides a pseudo code for finding all the instances of all the (a, b) ETSL structures of an irregular Tanner graph in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, exhaustively.

Algorithm 1 (ETSL Exhaustive Search) Finds all the in-

stances of (a, b) ETSL structures of an irregular graph with

girth g and dvmin ≥ 2, for a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The input is all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures, in the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, I, with Ia,b being the set of all the instances in the (a, b) class. The output is the set IET SL,
which contains all the instances of ETSL1s and ETSL2s in the
interest range.

1: Inputs: G, amax, I, g. 2: Initializations: Itae,mb ← ∅, IEa,Tb SL ← ∅, ∀ a ≤ amax, ∀ b ≤
bmax.

3: for b = 2, . . . , bmax do 4: It1e,m b = the set of variable nodes of degree b in G. 5: end for

6: for a = 1, . . . , amax − 1 do

7: for b = 1, . . . , bmax do

8:

Itae,mb = Itae,mb ∪ Ia,b.

9:

for any structure S ∈ Itae,mb do

10:

Consider V to be the set of variable nodes in V \ S

with degrees less than or equal to bmax + 2 − b, which

have only one connection to the check nodes in Γo(S)

and have no connection to the check nodes in Γe(S),

11:

for each variable node v ∈ V do

12:

IEa+T1S,Lb = IEa+T1S,Lb ∪{S ∪v}, Itae+m1,b = Itae+m1,b ∪

{S ∪ v}, where b = b + deg(v) − 2.

13:

end for

14:

end for

15: end for

16: end for 17: Output: IET SL = {IEa,Tb SL, ∀ a ≤ amax, ∀ b ≤ bmax}.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We have applied the proposed search algorithms to find the ETSs of a large number of irregular LDPC codes with a wide range of variable node degrees, rates and block lengths, exhaustively. In this paper, the results of only three LDPC codes with rate 0.5, denoted by C1, C2 and C3 are reported. These codes have also been used in [1]. For all the runtimes reported in this paper, a desktop computer with 2.4GHz CPU and 8-GB RAM is used. Codes C1 and C2 are the LDPC codes with girth 6 and block lengths 576 and 1056, respectively, used in the IEEE 802.16e standard. Code C3 is a code constructed by the PEG algorithm [4], with girth 8, block length 504, and variable degrees 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 14 and 15. Table I list the multiplicity of instances of ETSs and LETSs

TABLE I
MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) ETSS AND LETSS OF CODES C1 , C2 AND C3 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 10 AND b ≤ 2

C1

C2

C3

(a, b) Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total

class ETS LETS ETS [1] ETS LETS ETS [1] ETS LETS ETS [1]

(2,2) 240 0 240 440 0 440 230 0 230

(3,2) 216 0 216 396 0 396 219 0 219

(4,2) 192 0 192 352 0 352 208 0 208

(5,2) 168 0 168 308 0 308 198 0 198

(6,2) 216 72 216 352 88 352 207 19 207

(7,1) 0 0

0

00

0

22

2

(7,2) 408 24 408 572 0 572 276 24 276

(8,1) 0 0

0

00

0

84

8

(8,2) 624 24 624 792 0 792 466 61 458

(9,1) 0 0

0

00

0 16 4 16

(9,2) 912 120 912 968 44 968 870 75 870

(10,1) 0 0

0

44 44 44 22 3

22

(10,2) 1560 168 1560 1276 88 1276 1640 168 1640

38 min.

18 min.

20 min.

in different non-empty (a, b) classes, a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax, for these codes. The difference between the total number of ETSs and LETSs gives the total number of ETSLs. We have compared our results for Codes C1, C2, and C3, with those obtained in [1], in Table I. As can be seen, the multiplicities of ETSs for different classes match perfectly for all three codes with those reported in [1]. In terms of run-time, however, the proposed algorithm here is expectedly faster, particularly for C2 and C3. The run-times reported in [1] for the three codes are about 41, 189 and 273 minutes, respectively.1 Notable here is that, while for our algorithm, the run-time for C2 is less than that of C1, the trend for the algorithm of [1] is the opposite. In fact, unlike the branch-&-bound algorithms of [1] and [6], where the complexity, in general, increases rapidly with the block length, the complexity of our algorithm, in general, decreases with the increase in the block length, for a fixed degree distribution. More numerical results for additional fifteen LDPC codes can be found in [3].
REFERENCES
[1] H. Falsafain and S. R. Mousavi, “Exhaustive enumeration of elementary trapping sets of an arbitrary Tanner graph,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 1713–1716, Sept. 2016.
[2] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[3] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for elementary trapping sets of irregular LDPC codes,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Oct. 2016, available online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.10014
[4] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[5] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[6] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, June 2012.
1The algorithm of [1] was executed on a laptop with 2.2-GHz CPU and 4-GB RAM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1196

