2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Time-invariant LDPC convolutional codes
Dimitris Achlioptas∗, Hamed Hassani†, Wei Liu‡, and Rüdiger Urbanke‡ ∗Department of Computer Science, UC Santa Cruz, USA Email: achlioptas@cs.ucsc.edu
†Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland Email: hamed@inf.ethz.ch
‡School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland Emails: {wei.liu,ruediger.urbanke}@epfl.ch

Abstract—Spatially coupled codes have been shown to achieve the capacity for a large class of channels universally. Many variants of such codes have been introduced to date. We discuss a further such variant that is particularly simple and is determined by a very small number of parameters. More precisely, we consider and ensemble of time-invariant low-density parity-check convolutional codes with very large constraint lengths.
We show via simulations that, despite their extreme simplicity, such codes still show the threshold saturation behavior known from the spatially coupled codes discussed in the literature. Further, we show how the size of the typical minimum stopping set is related to basic parameters of the code. Due to their simplicity and good performance, these codes might be attractive from an implementation perspective.
I. INTRODUCTION
Spatially coupled codes have been shown to universally achieve the capacity for a large class of channels, [1]–[4]. Many variants of such codes have been introduced to date. For the purpose of analysis it is convenient to consider highly random ensembles. For implementation purposes it is convenient to eliminate as much randomness as possible, e.g., by considering constructions based on protographs.
We ask how much “randomness” is required in order for such codes to perform well. A natural setting is to look at the origins of spatially coupled codes and to consider lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) convolutional codes with large constraint lengths. But rather than considering time-variant LDPC convolutional codes, we consider time-invariant such codes (and hence the number of parameters that describe such codes is very small). As we will see, even these extremely simple codes exhibit in simulations the threshold saturation phenomenon that is well-known from the standard spatially coupled codes discussed in the literature.
Let us recall that LDPC block codes are linear codes defined by parity-check matrices where the number of nonzero elements per parity-check is small and independent of the blocklength. Due to the small degrees of the checks such codes can be decoded “well” by a message-passing decoder. To be more precise: for well-designed ensembles, the threshold under belief propagation decoding is close to the Shannon limit, [5], [6]. Nevertheless this threshold is typically strictly smaller than the threshold that would be achievable if we were able to implement maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding, which is the optimal decoding strategy.

LDPC convolutional codes can be seen as convolutional codes (with very large constraint lengths) defined by paritycheck equations with only a small number of non-zero taps (and the number of taps is independent of the constraint length). Standard convolutional codes are typically decoded by means of the Viterbi algorithm, whose complexity is exponential in the constraint length. For the codes that we consider the constraint length is hundreds or even thousands. Decoding via the Viterbi algorithm is therefore not feasible. But, just as for LDPC block codes, these codes can be decoded “well” via a message-passing algorithm due to the low-density nature of the parity-checks. There is one big difference to block codes, however. Whereas for block codes the iterative decoding threshold is generically strictly smaller than the MAP threshold, for convolutional codes with a proper “seeding” at the boundary, the two thresholds coincide. This phenomenon has been dubbed threshold saturation in the literature [3], and has been observed (and in some cases proved) for various spatially coupled ensembles.
For most variants of LDPC convolutional codes discussed in the literature, it is assumed that the filter coefficients are timevariant. But the time-invariant case has already been discussed in the literature. Perhaps most prominently, the codes in [7] are time-invariant and have an underlying quasi-cyclic structure.
In this paper, we consider perhaps the simplest ensemble of time-invariant LDPC convolutional codes. Each code in the ensemble is defined by only Θ(n(n − k) log2(W )) bits, where W is a “window” design parameter that determines the constraint length or the “effective” blocklength of the code. The parameter n is equal to the number of streams of the code, and k/n is the rate of the code. We show via simulations that, despite their extreme simplicity, such codes show the threshold saturation behavior known from standard spatially coupled codes discussed in the literature. More precisely, up to the numerical precision of the simulations the threshold for the examples we consider only depends on the local connectivity and is the same as for spatially-coupled ensembles that contain a much higher randomness.
Further, we show how the typical minimum stopping set size is related to the basic parameters of the code. Due to their simplicity and good performance, these codes might be attractive from an implementation perspective.
This paper has two objectives. First, we want to investigate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:12:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-4096-4/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

366

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

how little randomness is needed in order to construct good spatially coupled codes. Second, we want to point out the strong analogy that exists between block and convolutional codes. In both cases, there are no polynomial-time algorithms known that accomplish decoding close to capacity when we consider the dense case. But when we restrict ourselves to codes defined by sparse parity-check constraints then the message-passing algorithm works well. The major difference is that for block codes the iterative decoding threshold is generically strictly worse than the MAP threshold whereas for convolutional codes they generically coincide.
In order to bring out this analogy even clearer, we start from scratch and quickly review some basics of coding theory. This is done in Section II. In Section III we describe the exact ensemble that we consider. It is particularly simple and suitable for analysis. In Section IV we show that the size of the minimum stopping sets in such a code grows exponentially in the degree of the check nodes. Finally, in Section V we present some basic simulations. We limit ourselves to the binary erasure channel (BEC) for ease of exposition but the general phenomenon is not limited to this channel.

II. BINARY LINAR CODES A. Block Codes Definition 1 ((n, k) Block Code – Parity View). An (n, k) linear binary block code B can be defined by
B = {y ∈ {0, 1}n : Hy = 0 },

where

⎛ h1,1
H = ⎝⎜ ...

⎞

h1,2 · · · h1,n

...

...

... ⎟⎠

hn−k,1 hn−k,2 · · · hn−k,n

is a binary matrix of dimensions (n − k) × n. It is called the parity-check matrix.

There are very good codes in such an ensemble. In fact, if we allow MAP decoding then such codes achieve capacity for a large class of channels (e.g., the class of binary-input memoryless output-symmetric channels).
Unless such codes have further structure, no algorithms are known that can accomplish decoding close to the threshold in polynomial time.

B. Convolutional Codes
Let F(D) be the set of formal power sums the indeterminate D with binary coefficients.

i≥0 aiDi in

Definition 2 ((n, k) Convolutional Code – Parity View). An (n, k) convolutional code C can be defined by
C = {y(D) ∈ F(D)n : H(D)y(D) = 0 },

where ⎛ H(D) = ⎝⎜

h1,1(D) ...

⎞

h1,2(D) · · · h1,n(D)

...

...

...

⎟⎠

hn−k,1(D) hn−k,2(D) · · · hn−k,n(D)

is a matrix of dimensions (n − k) × n with entries hi,j(D) that are polynomials in D. It is called the parity-check matrix.

The memory M of the code is defined as

M

=

max
1≤i≤n−k;1≤j≤n

deg[hi,j

(D)],

and the constraint length Lc is defined as

n−k

Lc =

max
1≤j≤n

deg[hi,j

(D)].

i=1

Optimal decoding of such codes is typically accomplished by running the so-called Viterbi algorithm. Its complexity is exponential in the constraint length. Similar to block codes, convolutional codes are capacity-achieving for a wide range of channels under optimal decoding, see [8].

C. Low-Density Parity-Check Block Codes
Much of the advance in modern coding theory and practice has come about by looking at sparse versions of block codes, [9]–[11]. More precisely, we consider codes defined via paritycheck matrices where the parity-check matrix is sparse / has a low-density of non-zero entries. Many versions of such LDPC block codes have been discussed in the literature. In the simplest case we can assume that every row of H has r non-zero entries and every column has l non-zero entries. This is called an (l, r)-regular LDPC code.
For LDPC block codes, decoding is typically done via a message-passing algorithm. As we discussed in Section I, such codes, if well-designed, have thresholds very close to the Shannon capacity. But typically the threshold under iterative decoding is strictly smaller than the threshold under MAP decoding, [12].

D. Low-Density Parity-Check Convolutional Codes
As for block codes, we can consider convolutional codes defined by low-density parity-check matrices. More precisely, we let the memory tend to infinity but we keep the number of non-zero tap coefficients per row constant, independent of the memory.
We then use a standard message-passing algorithm on the Tanner graph of the code, rather than a Viterbi algorithm. Since the check degrees are constant, the complexity of the messagepassing algorithm is linear in the overall length of the code.
We note that the codes in [7], [13] fall into this category. We consider an even simpler ensemble which can be seen as the equivalent of the standard random ensemble for block codes.

III. CONSTRUCTION
In the previous section, we have discussed the generic class of LDPC convolutional codes. The following construction is particularly convenient from the point of view of analysis. But we caution the reader than many other variants are possible and might in fact be preferable.
Definition 3 ((n, k, W ) Ensemble). The (n, k, W ) ensemble is an ensemble of codes of rate k/n. Each code is defined on

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:12:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
367

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

n streams and has n − k shift-invariant parity-checks. Each of these n − k parity-checks has degree n and it has exactly one tap for each of the n streams. Each such tap is picked independently of all other choices uniformly at random from the set {0, · · · , W − 1}.
Let us go back to our previous definition of convolutional codes. The parameter W is typically close to but always slightly larger than the memory M of the code. Further, we see that each code in this ensemble is defined by a parity-check matrix H(D) whose entries hi,j(D) are monomials where the degree of the monomial is a random variable uniformly distributed in {0, · · · , W − 1}. Figure 1 below shows the standard filter diagram where the number of input streams n = 4, the number of shift-invariant parity-checks n − k = 2, and W = 6. Note that for the ensembles we consider W should be hundreds or thousands. The n and k are typically small and are only constrained by two facts. First, the rate is equal to k/n. Second, as we will discuss in the next section, the size of the minimum stopping set grows (exponentially) in n − k and so n − k should not be too small.

⊕

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

D

⊕
Figure 1: Filter diagram: n = 4, k = 2, and W = 6.

The reader might wonder why we are making this choice and only allow monomials, whereas our previous generic definition allowed polynomials as long as only a small number of taps is non-zero. This choice is mainly motivated by the fact that this ensemble is particularly easy to analyze when we are looking at the size of the minimum stopping set. In practice better performance can likely be achieved by allowing several non-zero taps and we leave the question of how to find “optimal” filter choices as an interesting open problem.
As we mentioned before, the main characteristics of these codes is that they are time-invariant. They are therefore defined by only a handful of integer numbers. More precisely, each code in the (n, k, W ) ensemble is determined by n(n − k) integer numbers in {0, · · · , W − 1}. Hence, n(n − k) log2 W bits are sufficient to describe such a code. Thus, an exhaustive search for for the “best” code in this ensemble needs to go over at most W n(n−k) codes. If we think of W as the “effective” blocklength then the construction complexity of such codes is

polynomial in the blocklength, namely, of order W n(n−k). There is also a downside to this definition. Some thought
shows that even when the parameter W tends to infinity, the computation graph of a bit does not tend to a tree but is only approximately tree-like. It is therefore a considerably theoretical challenge how to compute the thresholds of such codes. This is why we resorted to simulations. We leave the analytic determination of the asymptotic thresholds as an interesting open question.
Encoding elements of the (n, k, W ) ensemble is particularly simple if the code has in addition the so-called “staircase” property (defined below). Recall that we have n − k shiftinvariant parity-checks, each having n taps, one on each stream. We can use the last k streams to contain information bits, and the bits on the first n − k streams can be evaluated deterministically using the bits on the last k streams. Assume now that we can order (label) the shift-invariant parity-checks from 1 to n−k in a way that the associated tap of the i-th check on the i-th stream is placed before the tap of the (i + 1)-th check on the (i + 1)-th stream (we name this configuration “staircase”). The encoding can then be done in the order determined by the “staircase”.

IV. STOPPING SETS

Recall that every code in the (n, k, W ) ensemble is defined by only n(n − k) log2(W ) bits which determine the n − k “filters”. The parity-checks are then defined by all shifts of these filters. This means that there is a lot of “dependence” among the various parity-checks. Does such a code have a large error floor?
We will investigate this question for the BEC by giving a bound on the size of minimum stopping set for a typical realization, where “typical” refers to the randomness in picking the non-zero taps.

Lemma 1 (Minimum Stopping Set Size). With probability 1−

O(1/W ), every stopping set contained in a randomly chosen

c(o3dne−gke−ner1a)t/e(d2√fronm−thke)

(n, k, .

W)

ensemble

has

size

at

least

Note: The term O(1/W ) contains constants that depend on n. In general, as will be clear from the proof, the larger n the larger we will have to choose W . The constant in our estimate of the stopping set can be improved by a more careful analysis but this leads to more involved expression.

Proof. We begin by describing some basic properties of the
positions of the taps when W is large enough. We will use Figure 2 as our running example. Recall that a code in the (n, k, W ) ensemble is specified by n streams as well as n − k shift-invariant parity-checks. We denote the i-th shiftinvariant parity-check by ci. From now on we will use the two phrases “check type ci” and “shift-invariant parity-check ci” interchangeably. A check type ci is determined by n taps, one for each stream. Let us denote by vi,j the tap on stream j that is associated to check ci. We assume that the i-th stream is placed on the horizontal line y = i in the two-dimensional plane.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:12:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
368

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

The taps on each stream are placed at integer positions such that any two consecutive taps differ by a unit. Consider two distinct taps vi,j and vi,j that are connected to check ci. We denote by vi,j→j the vector whose starting point is vi,j and whose endpoint is vi,j (see Figure 2). It is a two-dimensional vector with integer components. The first component contains the difference of the stream indices. The second component contains the difference of the time indices.
ci

vi,1→2 vi,2

vi,3

vi,1→3

Figure 2

vi,1 stream 1
stream 2
stream 3

It is not hard to show that, with probability 1−O(1/W ), all the vectors vi,j→j are distinct. Consider now a stopping set and assume without loss of generality (w.l.o.g.) that it contains a variable node on the first stream. Let us denote this variable by z. Recall now that each check has exactly one connection to each stream. Hence, for each i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , c = n − k}, there is a check node of type i (appropriately shifted) that is connected to z. But whenever this happens, the corresponding check must have at least one more non-zero variable that it is connected to at this time, since otherwise we do not have a stopping set. Equivalently, we can say that for each i, there exists a vector vi,1→j such that if we start at z, and move along vi,1→j, then we end up at a variable node which is also part of the stopping set. This itself already leads to a lower bound on the size of a stopping set (namely the bound 1 + c = 1 + n − k) since, as we mentioned above, the various vectors are with high probability distinct.
But we can get better bounds by continuing to “grow out” the stopping set (think of a tree rooted at z). So assume that we start at the variable z. This variable has c children that are distinct with high probability. Now let us look at the children of these children and so on, up to depth , ≤ c.
More precisely, given any sequence of distinct check types (i1, i2, · · · , i ), we can associate a sequence of vectors (vi1,1→j1 , vi2,j1→j2 , · · · , vi ,j →j ) +1 such that if we start at node z and move along the path created by these vectors then all the nodes that we visit along this path belong to the stopping set. If all these nodes were all distinct (for all such paths of distinct types) we would get a very simple lower bound on the stopping set. As we will see now, it can happen that some of the nodes are in fact the same. But we will be able to lower bound the number of distinct such nodes.

Define the set T as

T = (i1, i2, · · · , i ) | ∈ [c], i1, · · · , i are distinct .

Note that we allow the empty (null) sequence to be included

in T . We now construct a rooted tree (rooted in whose

vertices are members of T . This tree has the empty string

as its root node, and every (i1, i2, · · · , i ) ∈ T is adjacent to (i1, i2, · · · , i −1) as its parent node. In this way the depth of a node (i1, i2, · · · , i ) ∈ T is equal to . Consider any path P in the tree that starts at the root node and ends at a sequence (i1, i2, · · · , i ) ∈ T . Define ¯ij (i1, i2, · · · , ij) for each j ∈ [ ]. We also denote the root node by ¯i0. Therefore, the path P can be represented as P = ¯i0 − ¯i1 − · · · − ¯i .
Recall from above that we can assume w.l.o.g. that the

stopping set has a node on the first stream which we denote

by z. From what we have discussed up to now, given any stopping set we can assign to each sequence ¯i ∈ T a number

n¯i ∈ [n] such that the following property holds. For any path P = ¯i0 − ¯i1 − · · · − ¯i , consider the following trajectory: we

start at node z and move along the vectors vij,n¯ij−1 →n¯ij for each j ∈ [ ], one after the other, then all the variable nodes

that we visit along the way should belong to the stopping set.

We need to count the number of repetitions among the

variables v¯i for ¯i ∈ T (and this leads to a lower bound

on the size of the stopping set). Consider two sequences

¯i (i1, i2, · · · , i ) ∈ T and h¯ (h1, h2, · · · , h ) ∈ T .

With probability 1 − O(1/W ), we have v¯i = vh¯ only if

= and the two sets of vectors {v } ij,n¯ij−1 →n¯ij j∈[ ] and

{vhj this

} ,nh¯j−1 →nh¯j j∈[ condition, for a

] are the same (up to a permutation). With sequence ¯i, the number of repetitions of

v¯i can be upper bounded as follows. For t ∈ [n], let

xt = {j ∈ [ ] : n¯ij = t} .

Note that t∈[n] xt = . The number of repetitions of v¯i is upper bounded by t∈[n] xt!. We can thus upper bound the
number of repetitions by

B max

xt! | (x1, x2, · · · , xn) : xt = .

t∈[n]

t∈[n]

By using the inequality a!b! ≤ (a + b)!, we can further write

B ≤ max{a!b! | a + b = }, and thus

⎧ ⎨

2! 2

if is even,

B ≤⎩ √

−1 2

!

+1 2

!

if is odd.

√

Using !! ≤ 2 − 1( − 1)!! for even gives B ≤ 2 !/2

for any ∈ [c]. Finally, the number of sequences ¯i ∈ T with

length is precisely c!/(c − )!. Putting all these together, we

get the following lower bound on the size of any stopping set,

1 B
∈[c]

c! (c −

)! ≥

2√ ∈[c] 2

c

≥ 2√1 c

2c

∈[c]

=

3c√− 1 2c

,

which holds with probability 1 − O(1/W ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:12:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
369

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

100

We now get to our numerical experiments. More precisely,

we consider the “terminated” case: on each stream the number of variable nodes is 106, and on both sides of each stream

W additional variable nodes are fixed to be 0 (seeding). We

assume that the all-zero codeword was transmitted over the

BEC with parameter and we use the peeling decoder.

Figure 3 shows the bit erasure probability versus the channel

parameter for n = 6 and W ∈ {40, 200, 1000, 5000}.

The empirical average is over 100 random samples from the

ensemble (where the randomness is over the choice of code

and the channel realization). As we can see, the curves become

steeper and steeper in the waterfall region and move rightward

as W becomes larger and larger. This is consistent with the

fact that W is proportional to the constraint length.

In addition we see in this figure the error floor due to small

stopping sets. We can compare this error floor to our analytic

predictions. Note that the “slope” of the error floor curve tells

us the size of the stopping set that causes this error floor. I.e., if the curve has the form α d then d is the size of the

stopping set. For W = 40 we get an estimate of d ≈ 12 and

for W = 1000 we have the estimate d ≈ 15. These results are

consistent since (33

with our√lower bound − 1)/(2 3) = 8.

of

Lemma

1

in

Section

IV,

10−1

10−2

10−3 10−4
0

n = 8, W = 1000 n = 8, W = 5000 n = 10, W = 1000 n = 10, W = 5000

0.5

1

Figure 4: n ∈ {8, 10} and W ∈ {1000, 5000}.

which grows exponentially in the number of shift-invariant parity-checks.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work of W. Liu and R. Urbanke is supported by grant No. 200021_166106 of the Swiss National Science Foundation. The work of H. Hassani is partially supported by a fellowship from Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley.

100

10−1

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5 10−6 10−7
0

W = 40 W = 200 W = 1000 W = 5000

0.5

1

Figure 3: n = 6 and W ∈ {40, 200, 1000, 5000}.

The cases n ∈ {8, 10} and W ∈ {1000, 5000} are shown in

Figure 4. Note that in order to see the error floor in this case

one would have to simulate the curves to considerably lower

p(r3ob4 a−bil1it)i/e(s2√sin4c)e

for n = 20.

= 8 and k = 4 we have already We see that compared to the case

n = 6 the threshold is even closer to the Shannon capacity,

consistent with the threshold saturation phenomenon.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
We discussed a particularly simple form of time-invariant LDPC convolutional codes. These codes are defined by a very small number of bits. We have seen that despite their simplicity these codes perform very well. We have given some simple lower bound on the minimum stopping set size of such codes

REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2190, Sept. 1999.
[2] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zigangirov, and J. D. J. Costello, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803– 834, Feb. 2011.
[4] A. Yedla, Y. Y. Jian, P. S. Nguyen, and H. D. Pfister, “A simple proof of Maxwell saturation for coupled scalar recursions,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 6943–6965, Nov 2014.
[5] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[6] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[7] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec 2004.
[8] A. J. Viterbi and J. K. Omura, Principles of Digital Communication and Coding. McGraw-Hill, 1979.
[9] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[10] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Geneve, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[12] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Maxwell construction: the hidden bridge between iterative and maximum a posteriori decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5277–5307, Dec. 2008.
[13] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 835–857, Feb 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:12:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
370

