Superposition decoding scheme based on raptor-like LDPC code for signaling protection in broadcasting system
Genning Zhang, Yin Xu, Dazhi He, Wenjun Zhang, Fellow, IEEE Cooperati ve Media Network Innovation Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Abstract - This paper proposes a superposition decoding scheme based on raptor-like LDPC code for signaling protecti on in broadcasting system. The proposed scheme takes use of the fixed signaling bits to improve decoding performance significantly and lower the decoding threshold with a few frames sacrificed. Meanwhile, this paper also proposes a selection algorithm to select prope r LDPC bits positions for fixed signaling which is better than random selection.
Keywords ---- LDPC, Signaling, raptor-like, superposition decoding

I. INTRODUCTION Signaling is the most important part of the transmitted frame in the broadcasting communication, because the receiver needs the signaling to recover the rest of the frame. Thus, to make sure that the signaling could be transmitted correctly during the broadcasting communication is of great importance. Many current broadcasting communication standards apply the low rate error correction code with very strong error correction ability to protect the signaling. LDPC code[1] are widely applied to protect signaling in current broadcasting standards because of its close-toShannon-limit waterfall performance[2]. In recent years, raptor-like structure was verified that it can provide an ideal framework[3][4] with good performance for low rate LDPC code. Therefore, low rate raptor-like LDPC code is a good choice to protect signaling in broadcasting systemand it will also be applied in the upcoming ATSC3.0 standard. For broadcasting system, the signaling has the characteristic that some bits of the signaling wouldn’t change frequently. Especially when the broadcasting communication is stable, most bits of the signaling (hardware version info. bits,

This paper is supported in part by National Natural

Science Foundation of China (61420106008,

61671297, 61601286), National High Technology

Research

and

Develop ment

Program

(2015AA015802), National Science and Technology

M ajor Project (2017ZX03001027).

The authors: Genning Zhang, Yin Xu, Dazhi He and

Wenjun Zhang are from Shanghai Jiao Tong

University. The corresponding author is Yin Xu (e-

mail: xuyin@sjtu.edu.cn).

physical layer parameter related info. bits, etc) would not change in a relatively long time. Only a few bits which indicate time information, start position information and CRC check would change in every frame. In this paper, we use changeable signaling bits to denote these bits which change in every frame, and those bits which not change in a relatively long time are called fixed signaling bits.
However, none of the current broadcasting systemuse the characters of changeable signaling bits and fixed signaling bits to protect signaling. In this paper, we propose a superposition decoding scheme based on raptor-like LDPC code which can take use of the above fixed signaling bits to improve the performance of signaling code. In the good channel condition, once the encoded signaling of the first frame is decoded correctly, the proposed scheme can take use of the fixed signaling bits of the first frame as known bits to decode the encoded signaling bits of the next frames and improve the overall performance. In very bad channel conditions where the encoded signaling can’t be decoded correctly in first frame by normal LDPC decoding scheme which means several frames will be sacrificed until it is successfully decoded, the proposed scheme can still improve the waterfall performance by overlapping the fixed signaling bits of the first few frames.
Based on the proposed scheme above, we can randomly select the LDPC bits position as fixed signaling bits, however the performance is also random and not guaranteed optimal. To this end, we further propose a selection algorithm which can select the most appropriate position to be fixed signaling bits based on raptor-like LDPC code, to optimize the performance.
From the simulation results, it can be seen that the proposed superposition decoding scheme is better than normal LDPC decoding scheme, especially when the signaling can’t be recovered in bad channel condition, it can help to lower down the threshold to finally make the signaling to be recovered. Moreover, based on the proposed superposition decoding scheme the proposed selection algorithm can provide better performance than the random selection algorith m under a fair enough condition that the number of the sacrificed frames are the same.

978-1-5090-4937-0 Copyri ght © by IEEE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, the Superposition decoding scheme is proposed. In Section III, we will introduce how to select LDPC bits positions for the fixed signaling bits based on raptor-like structure. In Section IV, some computer simulation results are provided. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V.

II. SUPERPOSITION DECODING

A signaling LDPC code consists of information

bits and parity bits, the former one stands for the

signaling bits. Therefore, the fixed signaling bits

can also be denoted as fixed information bits,

similarly, the changeable signaling bits can also

be called as changeable information bits. The

parity check bits are some redundancy bits which

are relevant to the information bits to make sure

that the information bits can be received correctly.

Some of the parity bits are only relevant to the

fixed information bits, so if the fixed informatio n

bits are not changed, these parity bits will not be

changed. We call these bits as fixed parity bits ,

and the rest of the parity bits are called

changeable parity bits.

In short, it is easily understood that both fixed

information bits and fixed parity bits are fixed for

a relative long time, so they are both called fixed

bits. And both changeable information bits and

changeable parity bits are changeable frame by

frame, they are both called changeable bits . Let = , indicates the codeword of

the th frame, where denotes the changeable bits and denotes the fixed bits in the th

frame. The proposed superposition decoding

scheme can be described in Scheme 1.

In good channel condition, we can decode the codeword = , correctly in the first

frame (which means =1), thus no overlapping is

needed. But compared with the normal decoding

scheme, our proposed scheme can still take use of

the correct fixed bits

to decode the

changeable bits ( > 1) of the frames following the first frame. By this way, can improve the waterfall performance. In very bad channel condition, if the codeword = ,
couldn’t be decoded correctly by using the first frame, the proposed superposition decoding scheme will overlap the fixed bits ( = 1,2, ⋯ , ) of several successive frames to finally
obtain a correct codeword while normal decoding scheme can’t work in this situation. Same as before, once the fixed bits is decoded correctly, we can take use of them to decode the changeable bits of next frames.

III. THE FIXED BITS SELECTION ALGORITHM
Since the selection algorithm is based on
raptor-like LDPC code, we will briefly introduce raptor-like LDPC code. Raptor-like LDPC[4] is one kind of QC-LDPC[5] whose sparse parity check matrix (PCM) consists of small square blocks. These blocks are either zero matrix or circulant permutation matrix. We can obtain these circulant permutation matrix by cyclically shifting the identity matrix. For instance, let be the ∗ identity matrix, then the circulant permutation matrix (0 ≤ < ) is obtained by shifting rightwards cyclically by times. An example of (0 ≤ < ) is demonstrated in Fig.1 where = 3.

1 00

0 10

001

=0 1 0, =0 0 1, =1 0 0

0 01

1 00

010

Fig.1. T he examples of ( = 3)

The PCM of a raptor-like LDPC code with codelength and information length is depicted in Fig.2. A and B are both composed of many zero matrixes and circulant permutation matrixes whose size is ∗ . D is an identity
matrix and C is a blockwise dual diagonal mat rix whose structure is given by Fig.3, note that ∗

Scheme 1

1. Decode the codeword = , , and decide whether is decoded correctly? If it’s correct,

output and jump to step 3, else run step 2. 2. Accumulatively overlap the fixed bits from the 1st frame to the th frame (i.e. , , ⋯ , ) to

the fixed bits

of the next frame and return to step 1.

3. Begin to decode the next frames, during which we take use of the known fixed bits and decode

the changeable bits.

4. Stitch the changeable bits and the known fixed bits to get the whole codeword, and output the

codeword.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

is ∗ identity matrix.

K

G

N-K-G

G

A

C

0

N-K

N-K-G

B

D

N
Fig.2. T he PCM structure of a raptor-like LDPC code

⎡∗

∗

⎢

=

⎢ ⎢

∗
0 ⋮

0
∗ ∗
⋮

0⋯ 0 0⋯ 0 ∗⋯ 0 ⋮⋱⋮

0 0 0 ⋮

⎤ ⎥ ⎥ ⎥

⎢0 0 0 ⋯ ∗ 0 ⎥

⎣0 0 0 ⋯ ∗

∗⎦

Fig.3. T he structure of a blockwise dual diagonal matrix

In this Section, we propose a selection algorithm to select the optimal LDPC bits positions for the fixed information bits based on raptor-like LDPC code. Only fixed bits can be overlapped during the superposition decoding scheme, so if there are more fixed bits in LDPC codeword, the performance of signaling will be better which means the superposition decoding scheme requires less frames to finally successfully decode the codeword in very bad channel condition. For a given system, since the fixed singling bits are determined, the number of fixed information bits is constant, however if the LDPC bits positions for the fixed information bits are changed, the number of fixed parity bits will be changed. So, basic idea of the algorith m proposed is that we try to find the LDPC bits positions for the fixed information bits in a way that the fixed parity bits can be as many as

possible, in which case the number of fixed bits (equal to number of fixed information bits plus number of fixed parity bits) will be the largest.
Assuming the number of fixed information bits is , because the number of information bits is ,

there are

kinds of fixed information position

schemes. We use , = 1,2, ⋯

to

indicate these schemes, where is a length

binary sequence which cons ists of 1 and 0. The number of 1 is and the number of 0 is ( − ).

The positions with 1 are the positions for the fixed information bits. Let = [ , , ] indicates a

LDPC codeword, where

denotes the

information part, and denote the parity

check parts corresponding to C and D (seen in

Fig.2), respectively. Obviously, the length of

is , and the length of is . The check equation H = 0 can be split into two

equations as follows: A +C =0
B( , ) + D = 0

漏1漐 漏2漐

Area C is a blockwise dual diagonal matrix, so all

of parity check bits in are relevant to each

other. Meanwhile, every information column has

1 in area A, so all of the information bits are

relevant to every bit in , which means all of the

fixed parity bits belong to . Area D is an

identity matrix, can be easily calculated by

= B( , ) . If we denote

as =

, , , , , ,⋯, ,

, where

,

denotes th bit of , and we denote B as B=

(b ,b , b , ⋯ ,b

) , where b denotes th

row of B, then , can be calculated as , = b ( , ) . b is a binary sequence with length

+ . If every 1 in b is in the column

corresponding to LDPC bit position which

belongs to the fixed information bit positions

algorithm1:

for = 1: 1: Given position scheme , = 0 for = 1: 1: − − Verify whether , is a fixed parity bit, i.e. verify whether equation (3) is true. if , is a fixed parity bit = +1 endif endfor
endfor
Select the position scheme which has the biggest value .澳

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

scheme, , is a fixed parity bit. In other word, given a position scheme , if the equation (3) is

true, the corresponding , is a fixed parity bit. Let denotes the number of fixed parity bits

when the position scheme is , then the

proposed algorithm is given by algorithm1.

, 0,0, ⋯ ,0 &b = b

漏3漐

Where the number of 0 is .

Usually, if the length of LDPC code is too long,

computation complexity of proposed algorith m

will be too large. However, a raptor-like QC-

LDPC code is designed based on matrix block

which is zero matrix or circulant permutation

matrix. So, the proposed algorithm can be

calculated based on the mother matrix or base

matrix of the PCM, in which case the computation

complexity will be reduced to an acceptable

region.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS In order to demonstrate the performance of the proposed decoding scheme and the proposed selection algorithm, we performed some simulations based on the raptor-like LDPC code adopted by ATSC3.0 with rate 1/5 and length 16200. In ATSC3.0, the signaling consists of basic signaling and detail signaling. For the basic signaling, the proportion of fixed signaling bits is from 75% to 83%, the difference of proportion is a result of the flexible system configuration. For the detail signaling, the proportion can’t be calculated accurately, because the length of detail signaling is variable and system configuration is very flexible. But we can estimate the proportion of fixed signaling bits from 75% to 90% . Therefore, we assume that about 80% signaling bits are fixed signaling bits and the followin g simulation results are all based on this assumption. As shown in Fig.3, in good channel condition, once the fixed bits are decoded correctly in the first frame, the proposed decoding scheme can provide about 2.3dB gain for the next frames to improve the ability against the potential channel degradation. In very bad channel condition, assuming the SNR is lower than the work threshold of normal decoding scheme, then the normal decoding scheme can’t work in this situation. By applying the proposed superposition decoding, we can lower down the work threshold to make it still work. For example, when the SNR of channel is -7.7dB as seen in Fig.3, normal decoding scheme can’t work. However, the proposed superposition decoding scheme can overlap the fixed bits of the first frame and the second frame to decode the signaling correctly. In other words, the lowest work threshold of norma l decoding scheme is -6.7dB SNR, the proposed

decoding scheme can lower the work threshold 1dB at the cost of sacrificing the first frame. Similarly, the work threshold will be 1.6dB lower with the first and second frame sacrificed.
Fig.3. Performance of proposed decoding scheme
Fig.4 shows the performance comparison of the proposed selection algorithm and random selection algorithm. As shown in Fig.4, in good channel condition, the performance of proposed decoding scheme is almost unaffected, no matter which selection algorithm we use. But, in very bad channel condition, the proposed selection algorithm can provide the lower work threshold than random selection algorithm. In particular, with the first frame sacrificed, the proposed algorithm can make the work threshold lower about 0.4dB than random selection algorithm. With the first and second frames sacrificed, the work threshold is lower about 0.5dB.
Fig.4. Performance of proposed selection algorithm
V. CONCLUSION In this paper, we proposed a superposition decoding scheme based on raptor-like LDPC code for signaling protection in broadcasting system. The proposed algorithm takes use of the signaling characteristic which is that most bits of the signaling wouldn’t change frequently. Therefore, based on the raptor-like LDPC code applied by ATSC3.0 with rate 1/5 and length 16200, the proposed superposition decoding scheme can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

provide almost 2.3dB performance gain once the fixed bits are decoded correctly. Meanwhile, it also can lower the work threshold 1dB(1.6d B) than normal decoding scheme with the first frame (first and second frames) sacrificed, which means, in the very bad channel condition where the normal decoding scheme can’t work correctly, the proposed decoding scheme can still work by overlapping the fixed bits of the first few frames .
Furthermore, we also proposed a selection algorithm to select the optimal bits position for fixed signaling bits in a raptor-like LDPC code for the proposed decoding scheme. This proposed selection algorithm is much better than random selection for lowering the work threshold when the number of the sacrificed frames is the same.

REFERENCES
[1] Gallager R. Low-density parity-check codes[J]. IRE T ransactions on information theory, 1962, 8(1): 21-28.
[2] MacKay D J C. Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices[J]. IEEE transactions on Information Theory, 1999, 45(2): 399-431.
[3] Richardson T, Urbanke R. Multi-edge type LDPC codes[C]//Workshop honoring Prof. Bob McEliece on his 60th birthday, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California. 2002: 24-25.
[4] Park S I, Wu Y, Kim H M, et al. Raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes and their puncturing performance for the cloud transmission system[J]. IEEE T ransactions on Broadcasting, 2014, 60(2): 239-
245. [5] Fossorier M P C. Quasicyclic low-density parity-check
codes from circulant permutation matrices[J]. IEEE T ransactions on Information T heory, 2004, 50(8):
1788-1793.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

