2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Design of Improved Quasi-Cyclic Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes for Short Block-Lengths
Sudarsan V. S. Ranganathan∗, Dariush Divsalar†, and Richard D. Wesel∗ ∗Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095
†Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91109 Email: sudarsanvsr@ucla.edu, Dariush.Divsalar@jpl.nasa.gov, wesel@ucla.edu

Abstract—Protograph-based Raptor-like low-density paritycheck codes (PBRL codes) are a recently proposed family of easily encodable and decodable rate-compatible LDPC (RCLDPC) codes. These codes have an excellent iterative decoding threshold and performance across all design rates. PBRL codes designed thus far, for both long and short block-lengths, have been based on optimizing the iterative decoding threshold of the protograph of the RC code family at various design rates.
In this work, we propose a design method to obtain better quasi-cyclic (QC) RC-LDPC codes with PBRL structure for short block-lengths (of a few hundred bits). We achieve this by maximizing an upper bound on the minimum distance of any QC-LDPC code that can be obtained from the protograph of a PBRL ensemble. The obtained codes outperform the original PBRL codes at short block-lengths by significantly improving the error floor behavior at all design rates. Furthermore, we identify a reduction in complexity of the design procedure, facilitated by the general structure of a PBRL ensemble.
I. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Protograph-based low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] are a class of codes amenable to tractable analysis and design procedures. Protograph quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes [3], a class of protograph codes, have parity-check matrices composed of circulant permutation matrices (CPMs) and permit very low complexity decoder implementations [2].
The presence of CPMs in protograph QC-LDPC codes enables us to understand how the connections in the protograph affect the girth and minimum distance of such codes. Fossorier [3], Karimi and Banihashemi [4], and others analyze the girth of a protograph QC-LDPC code by examining the protograph of the code. More pertinent to this paper are [5] and [6]. Smarandache and Vontobel [5] derive an upper bound on the minimum distance of any QC-LDPC code that can be obtained from a protograph. Butler and Siegel [6] extend the results of [5] to QC-LDPC codes based on punctured protographs.
Protograph-based Raptor-like LDPC codes (PBRL codes) are a class of easily encodable rate-compatible (RC) LDPC code families proposed by Chen, Vakilinia et al. in [7]. PBRL code families have an excellent iterative decoding threshold
Research is supported in part by National Science Foundation (NSF) grant CCF-1618272. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF. Research was carried out in part at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology, under a contract with NASA. This work used computational and storage services associated with the Hoffman2 Shared Cluster provided by UCLA Institute for Digital Research and Education’s Research Technology Group.

[8], [2] and performance across all rates for which they are designed. In [7], the authors design PBRL protographs for long and short block-lengths by optimizing the iterative decoding threshold of the protograph at each rate. They show that PBRL QC-LDPC code families can outperform other RC-LDPC codes in the literature, both at short (≈ 1000 information bits) and long (≈ 16000 information bits) block-lengths.
This paper considers the design of RC-LDPC codes for very short block-lengths (≈ 200 information bits). While the iterative decoding threshold is the correct design metric to use for code design at long block-lengths, minimum distance is more important at short block-lengths.
One contribution of this paper is a new PBRL design approach. Given a set of design rates, we design protographs for PBRL ensembles by maximizing, at each rate, the upper bounds on the minimum distance that were derived in [5] and [6]. The resulting PBRL QC-LDPC code families outperform the ones designed by optimizing the iterative decoding threshold at each rate. The complexity of computing the aforementioned upper bounds increases quickly with the size of the protographs. A second contribution of this paper is to leverage the structure of PBRL protographs to identify a significant reduction in the complexity of the design procedure.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II provides the design procedure, derives the reduction that is possible in the computational complexity of the design procedure, and discusses design examples. Section III shows simulation results. Section IV concludes the paper. A longer version of the paper [9] expands on details that are left out.

II. DESIGNING PBRL ENSEMBLES BY MAXIMIZING AN UPPER BOUND ON THE MINIMUM DISTANCE
A PBRL ensemble is defined by its protomatrix P that has the following general form:

P=

PHRC PIRC

0 I nc×nv

(1)

Here, 0 and I refer to the all-zeros and identity matrices of appropriate size. The highest-rate code (HRC) of the rate-

compatible protomatrix is represented by PHRC, which is of size ncH × nvH . The variable nodes of the protomatrix containing the identity matrix in (1) represent the incremental re-

dundancy symbols of P . Some variable nodes of a protomatrix could also be punctured. The design rate is R (nv − nc) /nt

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-4096-4/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

1207

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

for a protomatrix with nc check nodes, nv variable nodes, and nt of the nv variable nodes that are transmitted.
A protomatrix is lifted (see [2], [7]) to obtain an LDPC code of block-length that is a multiple of nt. The use of circulant permutation matrices while lifting yields QC-LDPC
codes, which are practical and are the subject of this paper.

A. Design Method
The design of a PBRL protomatrix consists of two steps: First, we choose the HRC part, PHRC, as a protomatrix by itself. Then, we obtain the IRC part, PIRC, one row at a time. In the original work on PBRL codes by Chen, Vakilinia et al. [7], the authors first choose an HRC part with a degree distribution and an acceptable iterative decoding threshold. Then they design each row of PIRC successively to optimize the iterative decoding threshold of the protomatrix up to that rate while designing the row, keeping all previously obtained rows fixed. The best known families of RC-LDPC codes at both short and long block-lengths are the PBRL codes as designed with the heuristics proposed by Chen, Vakilinia et al. in [7].
At short block-lengths, minimum distance can be more important than the iterative decoding threshold as a criterion to use while designing LDPC codes. A key feature of QC-LDPC codes based on protomatrices is that the minimum distance of any such code obtained from a protomatrix is upper bounded by a constant that depends only on the protomatrix. In order to state the upper bounds, which were derived in earlier works, we need the definition of the permanent of a square matrix.
Definition 1 (Permanent): Denote the set {1, 2, . . . , } by [ ]. The permanent of an × square matrix A with elements ai,j, i ∈ [ ], j ∈ [ ] over some commutative ring is defined as

perm(A) =

aj,σ(j) =

aσ(j),j , (2)

σ 1≤j≤

σ 1≤j≤

where σ refers to a permutation and the summation is over all permutations of [ ]. The permanent, although it looks deceptively similar to the determinant, is harder to compute
than the determinant [10]. While the arithmetic complexity of computing the determinant is O 3 , the most efficient algorithm known to compute the permanent of any square matrix, due to Ryser [11], is of complexity Θ · 2 .
Theorem 2 (Upper bound for unpunctured protomatrices; Theorem 8 of [5]): Let a protomatrix P with a positive design rate and no punctured variable nodes be of size nc × nv. If S ⊆ [nv], denote by PS the sub-matrix of P formed by the columns indexed by elements of S. Then, any QC-LDPC code C obtained from the protomatrix P has a minimum distance dmin(C) that is upper bounded as

dmin(C) ≤

min∗

perm PS\i ,

(3)

S⊆[nv ],|S|=nc+1 i∈S

where | · | refers to the cardinality of a set, S \ i is shorthand for S \ {i}, and min∗ returns the smallest non-zero value in a
set of non-negative values with at least one positive value or +∞ if the set is {0}. Note that permanents computed from
sub-matrices of a protomatrix are always non-negative.

Theorem 3 (Upper bound for punctured protomatrices; Theorem 9 of [6]): Let a punctured protomatrix P with a positive design rate less than 1 be of size nc × nv. Let the set of punctured variable nodes, a subset of [nv], be denoted P. Denote any punctured QC-LDPC code that can be obtained from P by C and the unpunctured version of the code C by C. Then, provided that C and C have the same number of codewords in their codebooks (dimensionality), C has a minimum distance dmin(C ) that is upper bounded as

dmin(C ) ≤

min∗

perm PS\i . (4)

S⊆[nv ],|S|=nc+1 i∈S\P

With Theorems 2 and 3 in hand, we propose the following PBRL ensemble search procedure:
1) Choose an HRC matrix of size ncH × nvH with a desired degree distribution and complexity constraint. A common complexity constraint is to limit the weight of each column in the protomatrix.
2) IRC design: Select the next row of the protomatrix from a set of candidate rows to maximize the upper bound on the minimum distance via Theorem 3 or 2 (depending upon whether there are punctured nodes or not). If there are multiple candidates with the best upper bound, then select one at random.
3) Go to Step 2) if another row of IRC is required. Otherwise, terminate the search procedure.
It is not known, in general, whether the upper bounds of (3) or (4) are achievable. But our design procedure yields better RC QC-LDPC code families at short block-lengths than the design based on optimizing the iterative decoding thresholds.
For a punctured protomatrix, care must be taken to ensure that not too many variable nodes are punctured. Otherwise, the dimensionality requirement in Theorem 3 may be violated.

B. Lowering the Complexity of the Design Procedure

In this subsection, we leverage the general structure of

the protomatrix of a PBRL ensemble in (1) to reduce the

complexity of computing the upper bounds in (3) or (4).

Assume that we have a PBRL protomatrix of size nc × nv with an HRC part that is of size ncH × nvH . Assume also that the protomatrix has no punctured variable nodes1. With these

assumptions, computation of the upper bound for the pro-

tomatrix as given in (3) requires computing

nv nc +1

· (nc + 1)

permanents, each of size nc×nc. The complexity of Ryser’s al-

gorithm to compute the required permanents increases quickly

while constructing the IRC part of a PBRL ensemble. Our

following result leads to a significant reduction in both the

number of permanents that need to be computed and the size

of each permanent to be computed.

Theorem 4: Let a PBRL protomatrix P of size nc × nv with no punctured variable nodes have a positive design rate,

i.e. nv > nc. Let the HRC part be of size ncH × nvH . Assume that the upper bound in (3) for P is a positive

1We consider the case when the protomatrix has punctured variable nodes in the Appendix of the longer version of this paper [9].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1208

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

integer. Then, the same upper bound can be obtained with

at most

nvH ncH +1

· (nc + 1) permanents, each of size at most

(ncH + 1) × (ncH + 1).

Before we provide the proof, we comment on the reduction

in complexity of computing (3). The complexity of computing

each permanent would now depend only on the number of

check nodes in the HRC part, ncH . Also, the dominating factor in the expression for number of permanents to be computed is

the binomial coefficient, which again would now depend only

on the size of the HRC part, ncH × nvH , and not on the size of the entire protomatrix.

Proof: Let us first consider the case when S ⊆ [nv], |S| = nc + 1 contains the last nv − nvH columns, i.e. the columns that comprise the incremental redundancy variable

nodes of the protomatrix and have an identity matrix of size

(nv − nvH ) × (nv − nvH ). Note that nv − nvH = nc − ncH . The nc + 1 chosen columns form a sub-matrix with structure
that can be written as:

PS = c1 c2 · · · cncH +1 | PIR ,

(5)

where ci are the columns chosen from the initial nvH columns of P and PIR has the following structure:

PIR =

0 I {nc×(nv−nvH )}

(6)

Because each column in PIR contains only a single 1, the

complexity of computing each of the nc + 1 required per-

manents is at most the size of computing the permanent of

an (ncH + 1) × (ncH + 1) sub-matrix (when the removed column is from PIR). When the removed column is not from

PIR, the complexity is the size of computing the permanent

of an ncH × ncH sub-matrix since the product is zero for

permutations that select elements not in the HRC rows of

ci, 1 ≤ i ≤ ncH + 1. Furthermore, there are S ⊆ [nv] of size nc + 1 that contain PIR.

nvH ncH +1

sets

Now let us consider the general set S of nc + 1 columns in

[nv]. First, let us assume that

perm PS\i > 0,

(7)

i∈S

which implies that at least one of the nc + 1 permanents is positive. Denote by P one such nc × nc sub-matrix of PS with a positive permanent. There exists a permutation denoted σ∗ that has a positive product in (2) when computed for the
matrix P . Assume the following definition of a permanent:

perm (P ) =

pσ(j),j ,

(8)

σ 1≤j≤nc

where pi,j denotes the entries of P . Consider all columns indexed by j ∈ [nc] such that σ∗(j) > ncH . There are nc − ncH = nv − nvH such columns. Replace all these columns by the columns of the sub-matrix PIR (whenever possible), in the following manner: Replace column j whose σ∗(j) = j > ncH with the column in PIR whose only non-zero element, 1, is
present in row j , unless the column from PIR is already in

the set S of nc+1 columns under consideration. Call the newly obtained matrix P1. The sub-matrix P1 has a permanent that is positive and is at most the value of the permanent of P due to the following reasons: Permutation σ∗ yields a positive product
with P1 because the replacements (whenever possible) only lead to non-zero entries at locations (σ∗(j), j) : σ∗(j) > ncH . Furthermore, each permutation σ that yields a positive product
i∈σ pσ(j),j in P (including σ∗) yields a product with P1 that is upper bounded by the product computed with P .
Let us denote the matrix c1 c2 c3 · · · cncH +1 | PIR by P , where c1, c2, . . . , cncH +1 are the columns in PS chosen from the first nvH columns of the protomatrix P and were either in P and not replaced to obtain P1 or was not in P . Let us denote by S the columns of P that lead to P . It
is now straight-forward to see from the composition of the
matrices PS and PS that

perm PS\i ≥

perm PS \i > 0.

(9)

i∈S

i∈S

We now consider the final case of the general set of nc + 1 columns whose nc +1 permanents sum to zero. Recall that the statement of the theorem assumes that P has a positive upper bound in (3). Therefore, we may ignore such a case unless those columns contain PIR, in which case we would compute the sum of nc + 1 permanents according to the complexity as shown already.
This completes the proof as the above shows it suffices to consider subsets S that always contain the columns of PIR.
The requirement that the protomatrix have a finite upper
bound on its minimum distance (as assumed in Theorem 4
and its counterpart in the Appendix of [9] for a protomatrix
with punctured variable nodes) can be satisfied while designing every row of the IRC part via the following observation:
Lemma 5: Let a PBRL protomatrix P of size nc ×nv with a positive design rate have an HRC part of size ncH × nvH . Let the HRC part, as a protomatrix by itself, have a positive and finite upper bound dHRC as computed using (3) or (4). Then the upper bounds for each new row i = ncH + 1, ncH + 2, . . . , nc added to obtain P , irrespective of the chosen candidates for the rows, are non-decreasing and are lower bounded by dHRC.
Proof: Refer to the longer version of the paper [9].
We note that our investigation in this paper of punctured
PBRL protomatrices (see Appendix of [9]) does not identify
a similar reduction in complexity of the design procedure as
in Theorem 4 for the unpunctured case. We intend to publish
such results in a journal paper (to be submitted).

C. Design Examples
In this subsection we design PBRL protomatrices according to the new design method we have proposed. We assume the following HRC matrix for all our designs:

21212121 12121212

(10)

We consider both a punctured and an unpunctured version of the matrix in (10) in our examples. The punctured version has

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1209

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Minimum distance upper bound Iterative decoding threshold, Eb/N0 (dB)

40
P5 (threshold-based, unconstrained, punctured)

P4 (threshold-based, constrained, punctured)

35

P2 (threshold-based, constrained, unpunctured)

P3 (new PBD method, constrained, punctured)

P1 (new PBD method, constrained, unpunctured)

30

25

20

15

10

5 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Rate
Fig. 1. Comparison of minimum distance upper bounds.

3.5

P5 (threshold-based design)

3

P4 (threshold-based design) P2 (threshold-based design)

P3 (new PBD method)

2.5 P1 (new PBD method)

2

1.5

Constrained, Unpunctured

Constrained,

1

Punctured

Unconstrained,

0.5

Punctured

0 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Rate
Fig. 2. Comparison of iterative decoding thresholds over BI-AWGNC.

the first variable node punctured. Hence the design rate we start with is either 6/8 (unpunctured) or 6/7 (punctured).
Because of Lemma 5, choosing an HRC with a non-zero and finite upper bound (3) or (4) is sufficient to then use our results on reducing the complexity of search procedure to design the nc × nv protomatrix P . The HRC matrix in (10) has an upper bound of 12 when none of its variable nodes are punctured and an upper bound of 8 when its first column is punctured.
Remark 6 (Design constraints): We constrain the last nc − ncH rows of the protomatrix to have a weight of exactly 4 and do not allow any non-zero integer other than 1. These constraints facilitate good performance at short block-lengths because limiting both the density and the number of multiple edges in the protograph helps the resulting LDPC codes have good girth and avoid having too many short cycles. Explicit constraints are necessary because increasing the value of any element at any position of a protomatrix with a finite upper bound of (3) or (4) either results in an increase in the upper bound or the upper bound stays the same.
Remark 7: Our design method, which maximizes an upper bound on code minimum distance, does not depend upon the channel over which we deploy the codes. For designing codes for comparison according to the original design method that involves computing iterative decoding thresholds, we assume the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel (BIAWGNC). The threshold values computed in this work are the result of at least 1000 iterations of the reciprocal channel approximation method to computing thresholds (see [7]).
1) Unpunctured design: We design two unpunctured ensembles using the HRC matrix given in (10) with the design constraints in Remark 6. The design rates we consider decrease from 6/8 to 6/15. The first ensemble, P1, is obtained using the new permanent bound design (PBD) method proposed in this paper. For comparison, the second ensemble, P2, is designed by optimizing the iterative decoding thresholds (referred to as

“threshold-based” in results) over BI-AWGNC2. 2) Punctured design: Similarly, we design two punctured
ensembles using the HRC matrix in (10) via the design constraints in Remark 6. The first variable node is punctured3, and the design rates decrease from 6/7 to 6/15. The resulting ensembles are called P3 (PBD) and P4 (threshold-based).
3) Unconstrained design via original PBRL design method: For further comparison, we design an ensemble, called P5, using the same HRC matrix with its first variable node punctured according to the original PBRL design method. The design rates decrease from 6/7 to 6/15. For this ensemble we only have the following restriction in the IRC part: We do not permit any integer greater than 1.
We now compare the five ensembles Pi, i ∈ [5] according to two metrics. Fig. 1 shows the upper bound on the minimum distance obtained at each rate for the five ensembles. P1, the unpunctured, constrained ensemble obtained via the new PBD method, has the best upper bound at almost every rate. At the other end of the spectrum, P5, the unconstrained, punctured ensemble designed to optimize the threshold at each rate, has the worst upper bound at every rate.
The iterative decoding thresholds at each rate (over BIAWGNC) for all five ensembles are shown in Fig. 2. As expected, ensemble P5 has the best threshold at each rate. But surprisingly, both the unpunctured and punctured constrained ensembles obtained via the new PBD method, P1 and P3, have almost the same threshold at each rate as their counterpart ensembles, P2 and P4, which were obtained by optimizing the iterative decoding threshold at each rate.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
This section presents simulation results of carefully designed RC code families from each of the five ensembles.
2The longer version [9] provides all the ensembles we discuss here. 3A punctured variable node improves the iterative decoding threshold (see [2] and [7]). Also, following the observations of [7] we constrain every row of PIRC to connect to the punctured variable node in our punctured designs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1210

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Frame error rate (FER) Gap to BI-AWGNC capacity (dB)

100 10−2

5

P5 (threshold-based, unconstrained, punctured)

P4 (threshold-based, constrained, punctured)

P2 (threshold-based, constrained, unpunctured)

4

P3 (new PBD method, constrained, punctured)

P1 (new PBD method, constrained, unpunctured)

3

10−4

Rate 6/15

Rate 6/9

2

P5 (threshold-based, unconstrained, punctured)

P4 (threshold-based, constrained, punctured)

10−6

1

P2 (threshold-based, constrained, unpunctured)

P3 (new PBD method, constrained, punctured)

P1 (new PBD method, constrained, unpunctured) Normal approximation for FER 10−6, k = 198

10−8

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Rate

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. Comparison of gap to BI-AWGNC capacity at a frame error rate

(FER) of 10−6 and information block size of k = 198 for all the five codes

Fig. 3. Comparison of FER performance at rates 6/15 and 6/9

and the refined normal approximation of [13]

Codes simulated in this section are all quasi-cyclic. Lifting was performed for the nc × nv protomatrix of the lowest rate 6/15 using the circulant-PEG (C-PEG) algorithm combined with the ACE algorithm of Tian et al. [12]. The lifting factor used is 33, which resulted in k = 198 information bits for all code families. The resulting girth of all code families, at the lowest rate, is 6. Simulation results shown were obtained using a maximum of 100 iterations of full-precision, flooding, LLR-domain belief propagation over BI-AWGNC. At least 100 errors were collected for each frame error rate (FER) point in any simulated Eb/N0 vs. FER graph.
The FER of all five codes for rates 6/15 and 6/9 are shown in Fig. 3 (see [9] for performance across other rates). The QCLDPC code family obtained from ensemble P3 outperforms all the other codes at FERs 10−4, 10−5, and 10−6 and at all rates. This ensemble has the advantages of a good, if not the best, threshold due to the punctured variable node (Fig. 2) and a good upper bound on the minimum distance at all rates (Fig. 1). The code family from the ensemble P1, which has the best minimum distance upper bound at all rates, performs well at lower rates but not at higher rates.
The gap to BI-AWGNC capacity at FER of 10−6 is shown in Fig. 4. The code family of ensemble P3 achieves the best performance at all design rates. The performance of this code is about 1.5 dB away at all rates from the refined normal approximation of [13].
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a new method to design PBRL QCLDPC codes for short block-lengths. The metric used in the design is an upper bound on the minimum distance of any QC-LDPC code that can be obtained from a protomatrix. By maximizing this upper bound at each design rate of the ratecompatible family of codes, the paper obtained a significant improvement in the error floor region over PBRL codes designed according to the original method of optimizing the

iterative decoding threshold. Furthermore, the paper identified
a key reduction that is possible in the complexity of the newly
proposed design procedure.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Thorpe, “Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs,” JPL, IPN-PR 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[2] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. Jones, and K. Andrews, “CapacityApproaching Protograph Codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[3] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes From Circulant Permutation Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[4] M. Karimi and A. Banihashemi, “On the Girth of Quasi-Cyclic Protograph LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4542–4552, Jul. 2013.
[5] R. Smarandache and P. Vontobel, “Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes: Influence of Proto- and Tanner-Graph Structure on Minimum Hamming Distance Upper Bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 585–607, Feb. 2012.
[6] B. Butler and P. Siegel, “Bounds on the Minimum Distance of Punctured Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4584–4597, Jul. 2013.
[7] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. Wesel, “Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.
[8] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of CapacityApproaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[9] S. Ranganathan, D. Divsalar, and R. Wesel, “Design of Improved QuasiCyclic Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes for Short BlockLengths,” Jan. 2017, arXiv:1701.07531 [cs.IT]. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07531
[10] P. O. Vontobel, “The Bethe Permanent of a Nonnegative Matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1866–1901, Mar. 2013.
[11] H. J. Ryser, “Combinatorial Mathematics, Carus Mathematical Monographs,” 1963.
[12] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective Avoidance of Cycles in Irregular LDPC Code Construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[13] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel Coding Rate in the Finite Blocklength Regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:11:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1211

