1

Construction of Rate Compatible Length Scalable LDPC Codes with Low Implementation Complexity

Zhangmei Chen, Kewu Peng, and Yue Liu
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, Beijing 100084, China Electronic Engineering Department, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China Shenzhen City Key Laboratory of Digital TV System, Shenzhen 518057, China Email: chenzm16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn


Abstract— Due to the rapid development of communication systems, a highly flexible scheme of multi-rate multi-length channel code is urgently required. In this paper, we propose a design method of highly flexible rate-compatible (RC) length-scalable (LS) low density parity check (LDPC) codes, which is based on the progressive extension idea of both information bit/node and parity check bit/node. According to our method, a family of RC-LS-LDPC codes with one common template matrix can be generated, which facilitates hardware implementation. With the aid of multi-edge type density evolution (MET-DE) analysis, the method can achieve near-capacity performance for each code rate and code length. The simulation results show that the designed codes with arbitrary rate and variable code length are within 0.30dB to 0.48dB compared with Shannon limit at bit error rate (BER) =2*10-9 under BI-AWGN channel.
Keywords—channel coding, density evolution, extrinsic information transfer (EXIT), low-density parity-check (LDPC), rate compatible.
I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile communications need to meet the ever growing variety of services as well as extensions of application scenarios, hence a highly flexible channel coding scheme supporting multiple code rates and lengths is urgently required. As one of the big challenges, the continuity of compatible code rate and the bit-by-bit variation of scalable code length are the ultimate demand of the multi-rate multi-length codes. Taking the design and description complexity as well as hardware implementation into considerations together, the flexible coding scheme is preferred to use only a single encoder/decoder pair.
By far low density parity check (LDPC) codes is the most frequent instantiation in the field of rate-compatible and length-scalable channel codes because of its low decoding complexity and near capacity performance. An LDPC coding proposal supporting compatible rates and scalable lengths with a single common parity check matrix is feasible.
One conventional approach of obtaining a family of rate-compatible LDPC codes (RC-LDPC) called check-bit
Correspondance Author: Kewu Peng (pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn)

puncturing is to start with a single mother code of low rate and progressively puncture part of the check bits in order to get a code of higher rate [1]. Another similar approach called information-bit shortening, starting with high rate code, produces codes of lower rate by shortening parts of information bits. Analysis on the code ensemble and the asymptotic performance shows that check-bit puncturing works well when the amount of puncturing bits is relatively small, while the performance degradation is significant when the amount of puncturing bits is relatively large [2]. This also occurs with information-bit shortening. Tian Tao and Christopher R Jones first proposes a hybrid approach combining check-bit puncturing and information-bit shortening to cover code rate from 0.1 to 0.9 in [3]. Although the code-rate range is wide, this scheme still has difficulty to ensure good balanced performance through the whole code-rate range due to different optimization methods of puncturing and shortening. Thus using such techniques, a family of RC-LDPC codes over a wide range of rates could be obtained but the performance is not good enough.
To avoid such performance loss, check-bit extension has been used in previous works [2][4][5]. This method, viewed as the reverse process of puncturing, designs the high-rate daughter code first and then extends the check bits in parity check matrix progressively to obtain a family of RC-LDPC codes with descending rate. Many researches confirmed that RC-LDPC codes produced via extension has better performance than puncturing and shortening.
Another mainstream research about RC-LDPC codes is protograph-based raptor-like (PBRL) codes [6]. A PBRL code consists of a highest-rate code part and an incremental redundancy code (IRC) part. The more IRC transmission, the lower the code rate. This method is similar to the idea of check-bit extension, but the raptor-like structure helps improve the performance.
Taking into account of length-scalability, quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes are mostly employed in researches. [7] presents a design method for the construction of QC-LDPC codes which can support arbitrary block lengths and code rates but presents challenges for hardware implementation.
It is well known that a family of rate-compatible length-scalable LDPC codes (RC-LS-LDPC) can be obtained with the idea of extension and QC-LDPC codes. Inspired by above mentioned works, we propose a design method of highly flexible RC-LS-LDPC codes by using similar but

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

innovated check-node and information-node extension. The innovated extension of our proposal can generate a family of RC-LS-LDPC codes with one common template matrix and will facilitate hardware implementation greatly. Raptor-like structure and QC characteristic are also adopted in the codes construction. We also use edge switching algorithm to search sub-optimal edges based on analysis results of multi-edge-type density evolution (MET-DE) tool, which can guarantee capacity-approaching performance.
Moreover, in section II, we review the related background techniques to construct the RC-LS-LDPC codes. In section III we present the construction method of the newly designed codes. Section IV shows an example of RC-LS-LDPC code with performance evaluation results. Finally, we give conclusions in section V.

Moreover, [7] also mentions lifting process will not change QC-LDPC underlying code structure and density evolution (DE) analysis result which means the decoding performance of the ensemble with same template matrix can be predicted based on the DE analysis of template matrix.
Raptor-like LDPC code as another popular structured LDPC code have attracted the attentions for so long. Especially in low-rate region, raptor-like LDPC code with nested structure can provide an ideal framework and near capacity performance [10].
For any (N, K) Raptor-like LDPC code, its parity check matrix is given by Fig. 1.

II. TECHNIQUE REVIEWS
Gallager first proposed LDPC code in [8], later researchers re-discovered its near capacity performance with iterative decoding based on Belief Prorogation (BP) [9]. For any (N, K) LDPC code in GF(2), it can be described by a binary sparse parity check matrix HM,N where 0 1 . or a tanner graph with M check nodes and N variable nodes. Rows in HM,N correspond to check nodes in tanner graph and columns in HM,N represent variable nodes. Every non-zero element in HM,N can be viewed as an edge connecting check node with variable node in tanner graph.
QC-LDPC codes as a branch of structured LDPC codes are well known for their flexibility in hardware implementation. For a QC-LDPC code with rate 5 .1 , its check parity matrix is given by
(1)

Each sub-matrix in H representing a square circulant

matrix of size b*b, including all zero matrix and identity matrix, can be replaced by a number in template matrix T for

description simplification. Thus, T has

rows and

columns, where b is also called lifting factor. And

every element in T represents a cyclically shifted sub-matrix in

H. giving one template matrix, we can construct QC-LDPC

codes with well scaled code lengths for fixed code rate via

lifting process by using an ensemble of lifting factor {b}. In

our proposal,

, indicates the row weight of

cyclically shifted matrix. Among them, using cyclically shifted

matrix with maximum row weight of 2 can reach a

compromise between performance and design complexity.

This will present challenges for hardware implementation but

can increase the degree of freedom in code design. In addition to the template matrix T and lifting factors {b}, a set of offset

addresses representing the number of right shift position are required to complete the description of H.

Fig. 1. partiy check matrix structure of raptor-like LDPC code
In Fig. 1, I is identity matrix and Z is all-zero matrix. A, B and C are sub-matrices that need to be carefully designed and optimized. Due to the special structure, we can see the last ˄0  *˅ check bits in codeword do not have relationships with each other. They only connect with the K information bits and first G check bits corresponding to A and B. This feature facilitates the extension of parity check matrix. In another word, the (N, K) raptor-like LDPC code with rate 5 .1 can be easily obtained by [A B], as a (K+G, K) code, via check-bit extension. In this paper, we use pre-code to refer to the code represented by [A B].
As we all know, the performance of LDPC codes is closely related with the decoding algorithm. BP based iteratively decoding algorithm, also called as message passing algorithm, is widely used for its low implementation complexity and near-capacity performance [11]. Richardson et al. also presented a method called DE which can predict the performance of LDPC code ensembles with BP based decoder as the code length tends to infinity in [11]. By iteratively calculating probability density function (PDF) of the extrinsic information exchanged between variable node decoder and check node decoder during decoding process, DE analysis can be used to determine the convergence behavior of decoding algorithm and predict the decoding threshold. Reference [12] derived a visual tool called density evolution extrinsic mutual information transfer (DE-EXIT) chart to reveal the extrinsic information exchange process. It also mentioned that MET-DE can be used to accurately predict the decoding threshold of QC-LDPC code due to quasi-cyclic array structure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3

Thus, we choose sub-optimal codes based on MET-DE analysis results and give the DE-EXIT chart of designed codes in this paper.
III. PROPOSED DESIGN METHOD
In this section, we give a new design method to construct a family of RC-LS QC-LDPC codes with raptor-like structure via innovated extension. Specifically, the innovated extension of our proposal not only follows check-bit extension to obtain RC-LDPC codes in descending rate, but also generates RC-LDPC codes in ascending rate via information-bit extension. When applying to the template construction of QC-LDPC codes, check-bit extension is equivalent to check-node extension and information-bit extension means information-node extension. By using both check-node extension and information-node extension, only one nested template matrix will be needed to generate a family of RC-LS-LDPC codes over a large range of rate. On the other hand, when the number of information nodes in template matrix is fixed instead of variable, the system needs enormous lifting factors to achieve arbitrary code lengths for one fixed code rate, which leads to prohibitory complexity in design optimization and hardware implementation. In our method, we overcome this problem by designing template matrix with progressively extended information-nodes and check-nodes. Only one template matrix with a simple set of lifting factors (such as b = 2j) is needed to meet the extreme demand of multi-rate and multi-length.
The proposed design method includes the following steps. Firstly, we design the core template matrix with K b information nodes and M b check nodes as show in Fig.2. Secondly, we extend the columns of core template matrix via information node extension to get scalable information node length. Then, check node extension is used to obtained scalable parity check node length. The extension process is showed in Fig.3. Z is an all-zero matrix and I is an identity matrix corresponding to the Raptor-like structure. Later, the parity check matrix H is generated through lifting process.
Fig.2. Core template matrix

Fig.3. process of information-node extension and check node extension

In order to describe our design method more clearly we define a set of parameters used in our method and show it in Table I.

TABLE I
PARAMETERS USED IN PROPOSED DESIGN METHOD

Kbmin Kbmax Mbmax Mbmin rmax rmin TKb,Mb
HM,N
M N

the minimum number of information nodes

the maximum number of information nodes

the maximum number of check nodes

the minimum number of check nodes

UPD[

.E PD[ .E PD[  0E PLQ 

UPLQ

.E PLQ .E PLQ  0E PD[ 

Template matrix with Kb information nodes and Mb check nodes Parity check matrix of designed RC-LS LDPC codes
0 0E PD[ 
 E
1 0E PD[  .E PD[  
 E

The proposed design method aimed at constructing a family of RC-LS LDPC codes is expressed as follows.
Step1: initialize Kbmin, Kbmax, Mbmin, and Mbmax; Step2: design TKbmin,Mbmin based on MET-DE analysis results. Step3: extend columns of TKbmin,Mbmin via information node extension, getting series of matrix {TKbmin,Mbmin, TKbmin+1,Mbmin , … , TKbmax,Mbmin}. Step4: extend TKbmax,Mbmin via check node extension, getting series of matrix {TKbmax,Mbmin, TKbmax,Mbmin+1 , … , TKbmax,Mbmax}. Step5: lift TKbmax,Mbmax via lifting process to get HM,N.
Information node extension mentioned above aims to extend the number of information nodes for a given template matrix. This method extends the matrix column by column. Through progressive column extension, template matrix with arbitrary information node can be obtained. The specific steps of information node extension is given as follows. Information node extension
Step1: Input TKb,Mb. Step2: get a column randomly as the added information node Step3: add the column getting from step2 to TKb,Mb getting T’Kb+1,Mb Step4: run MET-DE analysis for T’Kb+1,Mb. Step5: select the optimal column from all possibilities based on step2, step3 and step4. Step6: Insert the optimal column after information nodes in TKb,Mb as the Kb+1 column. Step7: Return TKb+1,Mb.
Check node extension aims to expand the number of check nodes for a given code. Each operation of the check node

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4

extension can add a column and a row to the given template matrix. Especially, when this method is applied to raptor-like LDPC codes, we only need to concern the edges between check nodes represented by B and all information nodes because of its special structure. For raptor-like LDPC codes, the new added check node does not have edges with the other added check nodes. The specific steps of check node extension is given as follows.
Check node extension Step1: Input TKb,Mb. Step2: get a row with (Kbmax+Mbmin) elements randomly
as the part of added check node. Step3: append the row from step2 in TKb,Mb as the
(Mb+1)-th row getting T’Kb,Mb+1 Step4: complete T’Kb,Mb+1 based on raptor-like structure. Step5: run MET-DE analysis for T’Kb,Mb+1. Step6: select an optimal row from all possibility based on
MET-DE analysis result Step7: Insert the row from step 6 in TKb,Mb as the
(Mb+1)-th row and complete code construction, getting TKb,Mb+1.
Step8: Return TKb,Mb+1.

We use ' L to measure the quality of ith search result.
Traverse the search space and try every possibility. Save the nth search result as the optimal group of edges.

Q DUJPLQ Q ' Q

(3)

When the search space is too large (e.g. Kbmax=24, Mbmin=3, the new added row has 227 possibilities), it’s hard to find an optimal group of edges in short time.
To simplify the complexity in searching process, we can use edge switch algorithm to narrow down the searching space. The specific operations are shown below: Edge switch algorithm
Step1: Initialize the row weight (column weight) m and the size of row (column) n, total search times N and the early termination times X.
Step2: Put non-zero elements (edges) in m randomly picked positions as added row (column)
Step3: Apply MET-DE analysis to updated matrix in Step2.
Step4: Accumulate {dKbmin,Mb+1,…,dKbmax,Mb+1} and ' L . Step5: Compare ' L with ' PLQ . If ' L is less than ' PLQ ,
update ' PLQ and save the edges corresponding to the ' L .
Step6: Change the non-zero elements positions randomly. Step7: Repeat step 1-4 until ' PLQ does not decrease after
searching for X times, or total number of searches exceed N.

Fig.4. example of check node extension process

In our method, the extended information node and check

node are selected according to its performance from MET-DE

analysis. In the process of extending information node, each

template matrix has specific code rate and code length, which

means simple optimization criterion. However, in the process

of extending check node, adding one check node means the

template matrix need to be optimized for a set of code rates.

For a given template matrix TKbmax,Mb, we want to find the

sub-optimal group of edges as (Mb+1)th row in TKbmax,Mb+1. we use the set of template matrixes {TKbmin,Mb+1, TKbmin+1,Mb+1,…,

TKbmax,Mb+1} which is compatible with TKbmax,Mb+1 to find the sub-optimal group of edges. {dKbmin,Mb+1,…,dKbmax,Mb+1} is the

metric (e.g. SNR threshold) of MET-DE analysis results of the template matrixes {TKbmin,Mb+1, TKbmin+1,Mb+1,…,TKbmax,Mb+1}

obtained via one search. Accumulate
'L

.E PD[
¦ G .E0E  

.E .E PLQ

(2)

IV. DESIGNED CODES AND NUMERICAL RESULTS In this section, we first provide an example of rate-compatible length-scalable LDPC codes obtained by our proposed method in the form of template matrix. Then the numerical results of MET-DE analysis of an example template are presented in this paper. All of our simulations use flooding-scheduled sum-product algorithm and the maximum number of iteration is 60 for all code rate. We performed computer simulation based on binary-input assumption and AWGN channel.
Fig.5. parity check matrix of newly designed RC-LS-LDPC codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5

An example of designed rate-compatible length-scalable LDPC codes are given in the form of template matrix in fig.5. The template matrix has Mbmax=73 check nodes and Kbmax=24 information nodes. Among them, the Mbmin=4 and Kbmin=12. Thus the maximum supported code rate is 0.889 (In order to improve the flexibility of LDPC code design, we use information node puncturing technique and one information node is punctured in this exampled), and the minimum code rate is 0.143. When code rate is between 0.25-0.8, the code rate is fully covered for all designed code-length. A family of RC codes with parameter Kb in (Kbmin,Kbmax) and Mb in (Mbmin, Mbmax) can be obtained from the full template matrix with parameter Kbmax and Mbmax.

performance curve of designed rate-compatible template is not smooth. This is because the process of stepwise search can not guarantee globally optimal result. In order to ensure the sparsity of check parity matrix, the positions for the possible edges are limited. In each step, the different positions of the edges will cause a significant difference in performance metric. We consider the overall performance and choose edges that make good performance for all code rate.
V. CONCLUSION
To summarize, we propose a design method of highly flexible rate-compatible length-scalable channel codes which is based on progressive extension of both information bit/node and parity check bit/node. With the aid of MET-DE analysis, the method can achieve near-capacity performance for each code rate and code length. A possible structure of RC-LS LDPC codes also be presented in this paper. As a result, the designed codes which depend on only one template matrix and a simple set of address can fully cover the code rate range from 0.25 to 0.8 and have variable code length. MET-DE analysis shows our code are within 0.30dB to 0.48dB in SNR threshold compared with Shannon limit at BER=2*10-9 and 60 iterations. These highly flexible codes with near-capacity performance can be used in future mobile communications.

Fig.6. RC-LDPC codes with scalable information node length over Binary-Input AWGN channel
Fig.6 shows the MET-DE analysis results of the proposed codes. In the simulation, we fixed the number of information nodes first and got variable code rate by changing the number of check node. Later we change the number of information node and repeat the simulation. As observed in Fig.6, our proposed codes can support a wide range of code rate. When the number of information node is set to 12, our code can support code rate in (0.143,0.8). The code rate range change to (0.25,0.889) when the number of information node is change to 24. Regardless of the number of information node and code rate, the example template obtained by our method were within 0.30dB to 0.48dB compared with the Shannon limit of BI-AWGN channel at BER=2*10-9 and 60 iterations. It is noted that the performance of code with same rate but different number of information nodes is slightly different. The longer the number of information nodes, the smaller the gap between code performance and Shannon limit. In one hand, the performance of lower rate would be better due to more freedom of optimization. On the other hand, the lower-rate template requires more iterations to achieve near-capacity performance due to low-SNR conditions or the performance of lower rate would degrade gradually with limited iteration. Both of effects can be observed in the simulation results of figure.
Another noticeable point is the fluctuation of performance metrics. As shown in Fig.6, for fixed information node, the

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank the Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality (No.JCYJ20160331171115521) and the National Project of New-Generation Broadband Wireless/Mobile Communication Networks under Grant No.2016ZX03001019-002.
REFERENCES
[1] Jeongseok Ha, Jaehong Kim and S. W. McLaughlin, "Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824-2836, Nov. 2004.
[2] Li, Jing, and Krishna R. Narayanan. "Rate-compatible Low Density Parity Check Codes for Capacity-approaching ARQ Schemes in Packet Data Communications." Communications, Internet, and Information Technology. 2002.
[3] Tian, Tao, and Christopher R. Jones. "Construction of rate-compatible LDPC codes utilizing information shortening and parity puncturing." EURASIP Journal on wireless communications and networking 2005.5 (2005): 692121
[4] Yazdani, Mohammadreza, and Amir H. Banihashemi. "On construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes." Communications, 2004 IEEE International Conference on. Vol. 1. IEEE, 2004..
[5] Jacobsen, Noah, and Robert Soni. "Design of rate-compatible irregular LDPC codes based on edge growth and parity splitting." 2007 IEEE 66th Vehicular Technology Conference. IEEE, 2007.
[6] Chen, Tsung-Yi, et al. "Protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes." IEEE Transactions on Communications 63.5 (2015): 1522-1532.
[7] Beermann, Moritz, Florian Wickert, and Peter Vary. "Highly flexible design of multi-rate multi-length quasi-cyclic LDPC codes." Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), 2014 8th International Symposium on. IEEE, 2014.
[8] Gallager, Robert. "Low-density parity-check codes." IRE Transactions on information theory 8.1 (1962): 21-28.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6
[9] MacKay, David JC, and Radford M. Neal. "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes." Electronics letters 32.18 (1996): 1645.
[10] T. Y. Chen, D. Divsalar, J. Wang and R. D. Wesel, "Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes for Rate Compatibility with Short Blocklengths," 2011 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference GLOBECOM 2011, Houston, TX, USA, 2011, pp. 1-6.
[11] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi and R. L. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb 2001.
[12] Shuang Chen, Kewu Peng, and Fang Yang. "On the Performance Loss of DVB-S2 LDPC Codes and Near-Capacity QC-LDPC Code Design." WCNC,2015.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:10:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

