Spatially Coupled QC-LDPC for the Tradeoff Between MIMO BICM and BICM-ID Schemes
Yushu Zhang1, Kewu Peng1,2, Senior Member, IEEE and Jian Song1,2, Fellow, IEEE 1Electronic Engineering Department, Tsinghua University
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, Beijing 100084, P. R. China 2Shenzhen City Key Laboratory of Digital TV System, Shenzhen 518057, P. R. China Email: zhang-ys15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {pengkewu,jsong}@tsinghua.edu.cn

AbstractŌĆöThe combination of multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) and bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM)/BICM with iterative demapping (BICM-ID) is one of the key technologies to meet the high-transmission-rate requirement of the next generation broadcasting systems. However, conventional low-density parity check (LDPC) coded MIMO BICM schemes always show poor performance with iterative demapping, and vice versa. In this paper, a subset of spatially coupled codes, finite-length spatially coupled (SC-) quasi-cyclic (QC-) LDPC code, is proposed and the universality of spatially coupled codes is utilized to achieve a good tradeoff between MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes. Due to the specific code structure of SC-QCLDPC, the tool of multi-edge type density evolution (MET-DE) is employed for the performance analysis and code optimization. As an example, a finite-length SC-QC-LDPC code is optimized in binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel, and then bit error rate simulations are carried out to verify the universality of the designed code in MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes.
Index TermsŌĆöChannel coding, spatially coupled low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes, quasi-cyclic, bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM), iterative demapping
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to the capacity-approaching capability and low decoding complexity with iterative decoding algorithms [1], [2], low-density parity check (LDPC) codes have captured a lot of attention in the last two decades. And quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC), as a particularly suitable class of channel codes for high-throughput and low-complexity hardware implementation [3], [4], has been adopted by several broadcasting standards such as DVB-T2 [5], DVB-NGH [6] and ATSC 3.0 [7]. For practical systems, the utilization of QC-LDPC codes and bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) can easily break the bound of cut-off rate and achieve capacity-approaching performance [8], [9]. And BICM with iterative demapping (BICM-ID) could further enhance system performance by retrieving the independent demapping loss of BICM schemes.
Meanwhile, with the increase of large volume content service such as ultra high-definition (UHD) television and 8K Super Hi-Vision (SHV), much higher transmission rate is required for the next generation broadcasting standards. Multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) techniques are promising to meet the requirement, and can overcome the
Correspondance Author: Kewu Peng (pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn)

information-theoretic limit of single antenna wireless systems without any additional bandwidth or increased transmission power [10], [11]. And the combination of MIMO and BICM/BICM-ID systems can improve transmission robustness and system capacity, thus has been widely studied [12]ŌĆō[14]. Moreover, 2├Ś2 MIMO has already been recommended by several new broadcasting standards [6], [15].
For conventional QC-LDPC based MIMO BICM/BICMID systems, where the belief propagation (BP-) based decoding is adopted, the coded modulation schemes need to be individually optimized for different conditions. The bit interleavers are optimized for each coded modulation mode in DVB-NGH [16] and ATSC 3.0 [7]. And a much simpler bit mapping, consisting of row-column interleaving and inner-row permutation, is proposed to avoid the complicated optimization of bit interleavers and optimized for MIMO BICM and BICMID systems, respectively [14].
However, conventional QC-LDPC based systems optimized for independent demapping schemes always show poor performance with iterative demapping, and vice versa. Considering various requirements of different scenarios, itŌĆÖs worth studying coded modulation schemes which can support independent and iterative demapping simultaneously. However, for the design of bit mapping pattern or interleaver, there is difficulty in universally approaching the capacity of MIMO BICM and BICM-ID systems [14], [17].
In recent years, spatially coupled (SC-) LDCP codes have attracted a lot of attention for its provably capacity-achieving capability and universality [18], which provides a novel way to achieve a good tradeoff between MIMO BICM and BICMID systems and approach the capacity in both systems simultaneously. More specifically, the spatial coupling structure improves the asymptotic performance of SC-QC-LDPC code under BP-based decoding to that of the uncoupled code under maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding. And the universality indicates that it is possible to construct a single SC-LDPC code that is good for the whole group of binary memoryless symmetric channels with equal capacity.
In this paper, we focus on the construction of a subset of spatially coupled codes, spatially coupled (SC-) QC-LDPC code, which combines the low-complexity-implementation advantage of QC-LDPC codes and universality advantage of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6&4&/'3& (QFRGHU
6&4&/'3& 'HFRGHU

6
├Ŗ 
3



6\PERO 7[B 0DSSLQJ
[
6\PERO 7[B17 0DSSLQJ
+



├Ŗ

6

-RLQW 5[B





6\PERO

\

3

'HPDSSLQJ 5[B15

├Ŗ
Fig. 1. System model of MIMO BICM/BICM-ID scheme.

respectively, n denotes the NR-dimensional additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) vector with each element satisfies CN (0, 1). H represents the channel state information matrix of size NR ├Ś NT , and for simplicity, the independent identically distributed (i.i.d.) Rayleigh fading channel is considered in this paper. Since the transmitting symbol vector x and the channel state information matrix H are normalized, Žü can be interpreted as the received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at each receiving antenna.
The receivers of MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes are different. The receiving symbol vector y from NR receiving antennas is sent to the joint symbol demapping module first, and the output extrinsic information is sent to the channel decoder as a priori information. Then for MIMO BICM-ID scheme, the output extrinsic information of channel decoder is fed back to the joint symbol demapping module as a priori information, which is illustrated with dashed line in Fig. 1.
III. FINITE-LENGTH SC-QC-LDPC CODE DESIGN

spatially coupled codes. SC-QC-LDPC code is proposed as forward error correction scheme to achieve a good tradeoff between MIMO BICM and BICM-ID systems, and we expect that the proposed SC-QC-LDPC code could be utilized in other systems due to its universality.
In order to construct a finite-length SC-QC-LDPC code, the multi-edge type density evolution (MET-DE) [19] is adopted for the optimization of the base matrix of SC-QC-LDPC code in this paper. Due to the specific code structure of SC-QCLDPC codes, MET-DE can provide more accurate performance predictions for these codes than conventional singleedge type density evolution. Bit error rate (BER) simulations are also performed to verify the universal optimality of the designed SC-QC-LDPC code for both MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the system model of MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes. In Section III, the code structure of the proposed finite-length SC-QC-LDPC codes is introduced, and an SCQC-LDPC code is designed and optimized with MET-DE. The BER simulations are carried out in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

The system model of MIMO BICM/BICM-ID scheme is

shown in Fig. 1. MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes have

identical transmitter, which consists of channel encoder, bit

interleaver and MIMO symbol mapper. The information bits

are first encoded, interleaved, and then converted to multi-

dimensional complex symbol vector for multiple transmitting

antennas. The MIMO channel with NT transmitting antennas

and NR receiving antennas can be modeled as follow

ŌłÜ

y = ŽüHx + n,

(1)

where x and y denote the NT -dimensional transmitting symbol vector and NR-dimensional receiving symbol vector,

A. The Proposed Finite-length SC-QC-LDPC Code

A finite-length SC-QC-LDPC code can be represented by

its parity check matrix H, which can be constructed from a

base matrix B. The base matrix of the proposed SC-QC-LDPC

code is spatially coupled and given as follow

’Ż«

B0

B = ’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż░’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»

B1 ...
BwŌłÆ1

B0
B1 ...
BwŌłÆ1

... ... ... ...

’Ż╣

B0
B1 ...

’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż╗’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║

, (2)

BwŌłÆ1 (L+wŌłÆ1)┬Ęm├ŚLn

where w is called smoothing parameter and L is called the

length of coupling chain. The entries of each m ├Ś n submatrix

Bi, i = 0, ..., wŌłÆ1, are chosen from {0, 1}. Then the designed base matrix is lifted to construct the parity check matrix of the

proposed SC-QC-LDPC code. In the lifting process, each zero

entry in B is replaced by a b ├Ś b zero matrix, and each non-

zero entry in B is replaced by a b ├Ś b circulant permutation

matrix. The code length of the constructed SC-QC-LDPC code

is Lnb and the parity check length is (L + w ŌłÆ 1)mb.

For conventional SC-LDPC codes, the parity check matrix

of uncoupled component code of H is a decomposition of

the parity check matrix of a designed LDPC block code.

However, for a finite-length SC-LDPC code, the row number

n of the base matrix of the uncoupled component code is

limited to maintain sufficient coupling chain length, which is

important to reduce the performance loss due to finite code-

word length [20]. In this component code Bunc =

[paBpe0Tr,

the base matrix of B1T . . . BwTŌłÆ1

u]nTc,owuphleerde

(┬Ę)T denotes the transpose, is jointly optimized to achieve

better performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

As we can see, finite-length SC-QC-LDPC codes face the problem of rate loss due to the finite length of coupling chain. For a finite-length SC-QC-LDPC code with the base matrix (2), the code rate is 1 ŌłÆ (L + w ŌłÆ 1)m/(Ln), which is less than the code rate of 1 ŌłÆ m/n as the length of coupling chain L approaches infinity. As a result, the last few rows of B could be removed in our design in order to reduce rate loss due to finite L.
In the optimization of the base matrix B, each base matrix with represents an SC-QC-LDPC code ensemble rather than a specific SC-QC-LDPC code. To analyze the performance of an SC-QC-LDPC code ensemble sharing the same base matrix, the tool of MET-DE [19] is employed in this paper. During the iterative decoding process of LDPC codes, density evolution traces the probability density functions (PDFs) of the propagated messages through edges between check nodes and variable nodes. For conventional density evolution with single-edge type assumption, all edges are assumed to be statistically equivalent. However, considering the special code structure of multi-edge type LDPC codes, such as SC-QCLDPC codes, the edges, especially those connected to nodes with different degrees in the Tanner graph, should be treated differently during analysis. Therefore, MET-DE, which is capable of tracing PDFs of different-type edges, can provide more accurate asymptotic performance prediction of an SCQC-LDPC code ensemble and facilitate the optimization of the base matrix.

B. A Design Example of Finite-Length SC-QC-LDPC Code

In this subsection, an instantiation of finite-length SC-QC-

LDPC code is designed with the aid of MET-DE. Considering

the universality of SC-LDPC codes, the code is optimized

neither for MIMO BICM scheme, nor for MIMO BICM-ID

scheme. Instead, binary-input AWGN channel is assumed in

the optimization. Firstly, the coupling chain length is L = 60,

the smoothing parameter is w = 7, and the base matrix

uncoupled component code Bunc is optimized and given as

’Ż«

’Ż╣

11

Bunc

= ’Ż»’Ż░’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»’Ż»

0 0 0 1 0

1 1 1 0 1

’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż║’Ż╗’Ż║ .

10

Then, to reduce rate loss due to finite coupling length, the last 4 rows of B are removed, which makes the code rate to be 58/120. Finally, in the lifting process of the base matrix B, the size of circulant permutation matrix is chosen to be 512├Ś512, and thus the code length is 61440.

IV. SIMULATIONS
The BER simulations of MIMO BICM/BICM-ID schemes with the designed SC-QC-LDPC code are carried out. Since the number of the antennas is limited in terrestrial broadcasting (usually no more than two), the maximum a posterior (MAP)

-1
10
-2
10

MIMO BICM-ID MIMO BICM Theo. limit, BICM-ID Theo. limit, BICM

-3
10

BER

-4
10
-5
10

Gap: 1.52dB

Gap: 1.48dB

-6
10
8

9

10

11

SNR (dB)

12

Fig. 2. Performance of MIMO-BICM and BICM-ID schemes with the designed SC-QC-LDPC code and corresponding theoretic limits.

demapping algorithm is adopted at the receiver of MIMOBICM/BICM-ID schemes, and two transmitting antennas and two receiving antennas are assumed in the simulations.
Gray mapped amplitude phase shift keying (GrayAPSK) [21] is adopted as the constellation mapping for its shaping gain compared with conventional quadrature amplitude modulation in both independent and iterative demapping systems. Instead of Shannon capacity with Gaussian inputs, the theoretic limits with constellation constrained inputs of independent demapping system and iterative demapping system, as detailed in [14], are taken as a reference since the coded bits of practical BICM/BICM-ID system are modulated into finite constellation symbols.
Note that no interleaver is employed in the simulations and coded bits are consecutively mapped to constellation symbols. The simulation results are depicted in Fig. 2, where the modulation mode of 32APSK├Ś32APSK is considered and the SNR thresholds are obtained at BER=10ŌłÆ5.
The spectral efficiency is 4.83 bits/channel use. As shown in Fig. 2, the gap between the SNR threshold and the corresponding constellation constrained capacity for MIMO BICM scheme is 1.48dB, and that for MIMO BICM-ID scheme is 1.52dB. The gap difference of MIMO BICM and BICMID is only 0.04 dB. This demonstrates that a single SCQC-LDPC code, optimized in binary-input AWGN channel and with no interleaver employed, is capable of approaching the constellation constrained capacity of MIMO-BICM and MIMIO-BICM-ID systems simultaneously. And a good tradeoff can be achieved via SC-QC-LDPC code without relatively complicated optimization of bit interleaving towards independent or iterative demapping schemes.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a finite-length SC-QC-LDPC code ensemble is proposed to achieve a good tradeoff between MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes with its universality. Considering the finite codeword length, the base matrix of the uncouple component code is jointly optimized with the MET-DE tool, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

can provide more accurate performance prediction of an SCQC-LDPC code ensemble represented by a specific base matrix than conventional density evolution with single-edge type assumption. A design example is given and BER simulations are carried out. Simulation results show that the proposed finite-length SC-QC-LDPC code, optimized in binary-input AWGN channel, is capable of approaching the corresponding theoretical limits of MIMO BICM and BICM-ID schemes with constellation constrained inputs simultaneously.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality (No.JCYJ20160331171115521), the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) under Grant 2012CB316000 and the State Grid Corporation of China (SGCC)Research on Near Space Communication Technology Based on High Altitude Platform Station (HAPS).
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, ŌĆ£Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,ŌĆØ Electronics letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645ŌĆō1646, 1996.
[2] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, ŌĆ£Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619ŌĆō637, 2001.
[3] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, ŌĆ£High-throughput LDPC decoders,ŌĆØ IEEE transactions on very large scale integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976ŌĆō996, 2003.
[4] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, ŌĆ£Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71ŌĆō81, 2006.
[5] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI EN 302 755 Std., Apr 2012.
[6] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Next generation broadcasting system to handheld, physical layer specification (DVB-NGH), ETSI EN 303 105 Std., Jun 2013.
[7] L. Michael and D. Go┬┤mez-Barquero, ŌĆ£Bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) for ATSC 3.0,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 181ŌĆō188, 2016.

[8] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, ŌĆ£Bit-interleaved coded modulation,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927ŌĆō946, 1998.
[9] Y. Wang, L. Xie, H. Chen, and K. Wang, ŌĆ£Improved decoding algorithm of bit-interleaved coded modulation for LDPC code,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 103ŌĆō109, 2010.
[10] J.-S. Han, J.-S. Baek, and J.-S. Seo, ŌĆ£MIMO-OFDM transceivers with dual-polarized division multiplexing and diversity for multimedia broadcasting services,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 174ŌĆō182, 2013.
[11] S. Saito, T. Shitomi, S. Asakura, A. Satou, M. Okano, K. Murayama, and K. Tsuchida, ŌĆ£8K terrestrial transmission field tests using dual-polarized MIMO and higher-order modulation OFDM,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 306ŌĆō315, 2016.
[12] B. M. Hochwald and S. Ten Brink, ŌĆ£Achieving near-capacity on a multiple-antenna channel,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 389ŌĆō399, 2003.
[13] Q. Xie, J. Song, K. Peng, F. Yang, and Z. Wang, ŌĆ£Coded modulation with signal space diversity,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 660ŌĆō669, 2011.
[14] T. Cheng, K. Peng, F. Yang, J. Song, and Z. Yang, ŌĆ£A near-capacity MIMO coded modulation scheme for digital terrestrial television broadcasting,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 367ŌĆō375, 2015.
[15] D. Go┬┤mez-Barquero, D. Vargas, M. Fuentes, P. Klenner, S. Moon, J.-Y. Choi, D. Schneider, and K. Murayama, ŌĆ£MIMO for ATSC 3.0,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 298ŌĆō305, 2016.
[16] D. Go┬┤mez-Barquero, C. Douillard, P. Moss, and V. Mignone, ŌĆ£DVBNGH: The next generation of digital broadcast services to handheld devices,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 246ŌĆō257, 2014.
[17] S. Chen, K. Peng, and T. Cheng, ŌĆ£Trade-off in LDPC coded MIMO systems with iterative and independent demapping,ŌĆØ in 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting. IEEE, 2014, pp. 1ŌĆō4.
[18] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, ŌĆ£Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761ŌĆō7813, 2013.
[19] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke et al., ŌĆ£Multi-edge type LDPC codes,ŌĆØ in Workshop honoring Prof. Bob McEliece on his 60th birthday, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, 2002, pp. 24ŌĆō25.
[20] S. Chen, K. Peng, H. Jin, and J. S. Tsinghua, ŌĆ£On the performance of fixed-length spatially coupled LDPC code,ŌĆØ in Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB), 2016 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 1ŌĆō4.
[21] Z. Liu, Q. Xie, K. Peng, and Z. Yang, ŌĆ£APSK constellation with Gray mapping,ŌĆØ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 1271ŌĆō1273, 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:09:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

