IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

4387

Jointly Designed Architecture-Aware LDPC Convolutional Codes and Memory-Based Shuffled
Decoder Architecture
Yeong-Luh Ueng, Member, IEEE, Yu-Luen Wang, Li-Sheng Kan, Chung-Jay Yang, and Yung-Hsiang Su

Abstract—In this paper, we jointly design architecture-aware

(AA) low-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs)

and the associated memory-based decoder architecture based on

shuffled message-passing decoding (MPD). We propose a method

for constructing AA-LDPC-CCs that can facilitate the design of a

memory-based shuffled decoder using parallelization in both iter-

ation and node dimensions. Through the use of shuffled MPD, the

number of base processors and, hence, the decoder area is signif-

icantly reduced, since a fewer number of iterations is required in

order to achieve a desired error performance. In addition, the use

of memory instead of registers minimizes the implementation cost

of each base processor. In the memory-based decoder, collisions

in memory access can be avoided and the difficulty in exchanging

information between iterations (processors) is overcome by using

simple permutation networks. To demonstrate the feasibility of

the proposed techniques, we constructed a time-varying (479, 3,

6) AA-LDPC-CC and implemented its associated shuffled decoder

using a 90-nm CMOS process. This decoder comprises 11 proces-

sors, occupies an area of 5.36

, and achieves an information

throughput of 1.025 Gbps at a clock frequency of 256.4 MHz

based on post-layout results.

Index Terms—Convolutional codes (CCs), low-density parity-check (LDPC) convolutional codes, VLSI.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check block codes (LDPC-BCs) [1], [2] are capacity-approaching codes [3] and have been applied to many applications. Many decoders for LDPC-BCs have been designed and implemented using
Manuscript received July 10, 2011; revised March 25, 2012; accepted April 16, 2012. Date of publication May 04, 2012; date of current version July 10, 2012. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Warren Gross.
Y.-L. Ueng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan, R.O.C. (e-mail: ylueng@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
Y.-L. Wang was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 30013, Taiwan, R.O.C. He is now with MediaTek Inc., Science Park, Hsinchu 30075, Taiwan, R.O.C. (e-mail: d9561620@oz.nthu.edu.tw).
L.-S. Kan was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 30013, Taiwan, R.O.C.. He is now with the Silicon Motion Technology Corporation, Hsinchu County 30265, Taiwan, R.O.C. (e-mail: gonlison1229@hotmail.com).
C.-J. Yang and Y.-H. Su are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan, R.O.C. (E-mail: r91942083@ntu.edu.tw, frank30616@yahoo.com.tw).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2012.2197749

layered message-passing decoding (MPD) [4]–[7] or shuffled MPD [8]–[11]. LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs), first introduced in [12], are convolutional codes defined by sparse parity-check matrices (PCMs) and can be decoded using sliding-window based MPD. The construction method provided in [12] yields a simple shift-register-based systematic encoder. As with LDPC-BCs, LDPC-CCs have excellent error-correction capability. The fact that LDPC-CCs possess ideal distance properties and the confirmation that time-varying LDPC-CCs can achieve near-capacity performance were revealed in [13] and [14], respectively. Compared with LDPC-BCs, LDPC-CCs have unique application scenarios, including continuous transmission and block transmission with an arbitrary frame size [15]–[18].
Though the low-complexity decoder presented in [19] was designed using a serial architecture, LDPC-CCs are suitable for highly parallel decoder implementation. A high-throughput LDPC-CC decoder design usually uses several (base) processors to perform decoding on its Tanner graph [20], where these processors are cascaded to form a pipeline architecture and each processor is responsible for the decoding operations of one iteration [21]. Consequently, a decoder with processors can perform iterations. If parallelization in the node dimension is also used, where several nodes are processed in parallel, we can further increase the decoding throughput [22]–[25]. In the high-throughput decoders presented in [22]–[25], intermediate decoding messages are stored in registers in order to avoid collisions in memory access. In addition, exchanging decoding messages between processors (iterations) is accomplished by shifting these messages along the shift registers. Since the decoding scheduling adopted in each processor is based on two-phase MPD [1], [2], the value of is sufficiently large, e.g., 20, such that a satisfactory performance can be achieved. As a result, a register-based iteration-parallel LDPC-CC decoder usually occupies a large chip area.
In order to reduce the number of base processors without degrading the BER performance, we apply shuffled MPD to the LDPC-CCs and propose an associated pipeline-based decoder architecture. To achieve a higher throughput, parallelization in both iteration and node dimensions is adopted in this decoder. Moreover, intermediate decoding messages are stored in memory rather than in registers and all the base processors share the same memory banks so as to minimize the implementation cost of the entire decoder. However, in a memory-based decoder, it is difficult to efficiently exchange decoding messages between processors (iterations) and also access the contents in the

1053-587X/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

memory without encountering collisions. For example, the where the syndrome former matrix , which is the transpose

memory-based architecture proposed in [26] is not suitable for of the PCM , is given by

node parallelization due to the collisions in memory access. In

[33], a number of single-port memory blocks were used to solve the memory collision problem by adopting a graph-coloring algorithm, however, tens of memory blocks are required, and

...

...

the design of memory access control becomes a burdening task. In this paper, we propose a method for constructing

...

...

...

architecture-aware (AA) LDPC-CCs that facilitates the design of a memory-based shuffled decoder. In the proposed decoder, collisions in memory access can be avoided at the stage of code construction, and node parallelization can be achieved by increasing the word length of the memory. Exchange of decoding messages between processors (iterations) is accomplished by adopting the memory sharing technique and simple permutation networks.
Although the methods presented in [25], [27]–[31] can be used to construct LDPC-CCs with a high quality error-correction performance, an approach to constructing codes for a nodeparallel decoder architecture was only addressed in [25]. The architecture is designed for a memory-based processor, however, and, since some specific memory functions are not sup-

...

...

(2)

The parameter is called the syndrome former memory and

each submatrix

,

, is a

matrix.

The constraint length of the LDPC-CC is defined by

.

Since the LDPC-CC considered in this paper is systematic, the

first rows of

correspond to information bits, and

the remaining

rows correspond to

parity bits. The

LDPC-CC is periodic with a finite period if the submatrices

,

, are periodic, i.e.,

for all values [12]. If

, the LPDC-CC is time-in-

variant. Otherwise, it is time-varying. In this paper, we consider

regular-

LDPC-CCs, where and denote the row

ported in ASICs, the authors implemented the processor using weight and column weight of , respectively. If

is full

registers rather than SRAM modules. In contrast, in this paper, rank, the code sequence

we propose a method for constructing periodic time-varying

of an LDPC-CC can be directly obtained using

AA-LDPC-CCs for a memory-based shuffled decoder architec- the PCM, where each

is a -tuple, including

ture that can be realized in ASIC. The constructed codes are suit- a -bit information vector and a

-bit parity vector

able for decoders that use parallelization in both the node and

. Using (1) and (2), we have

iteration dimensions. To demonstrate the feasibility of the pro-

posed techniques, we constructed a (479, 3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC

decoder and implemented its associated shuffled decoder using

(3)

a 90–nm CMOS process. Compared to the decoder presented in

[25], the proposed decoder can achieve a similar BER performance using a significantly lower number of base processors. In addition, the area of each proposed memory-based processor is smaller than that presented in [25].

It is evident from (3) that we can obtain

from

if

for all values.

and, hence, is full rank

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, the encoding and decoding of LDPC-CCs presented in [12] and [25] are reviewed. In Section III, a shuffled MPD for LDPC-CCs is introduced. In Section IV, the proposed construction method for AA-LDPC-CCs is presented. In Section V, a memory-based pipeline decoder architecture using a shuffled MPD is described. In Section VI, the implementation results for the (479, 3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC decoder are reported and a comparison with other decoders presented in the literature is given. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section VII.

B. Iteration-Parallel Decoding

In this subsection, the LDPC-CC decoder presented in [12]

that uses a two-phase MPD and an iteration-parallel node-se-

rial architecture is illustrated using a rate-1/2 time-invariant reg-

ular-(3, 2, 4) LDPC-CC, where each row of the PCM of the

LDPC-CC is

. Fig. 1(a) shows the

association between the processed check equation and the cor-

responding processor for the (3, 2, 4) LDPC-CC, where three

processors operate in parallel. It is worth noting that the ma-

trix shown in Fig. 1(a) is the PCM rather than , and each

parity check constraint is defined by a row vector in this ma-

II. REVIEW OF LDPC-CC ENCODERS/DECODERS

trix. If Processor 0 performs decoding operations corresponding to the th check equation in cycle , Processor performs de-

coding operations corresponding to the

th

A. Encoding

check equation at the same time. In cycle

, each pro-

cessor will advance by one check equation (or, equivalently, one

A rate- , where , LDPC-CC is the null space of a sparse check node). Thus, the check node will be processed by Pro-

PCM with infinite dimensions denoted as . Its code sequence cessor at cycle

when this check node is in

must satisfy

the th decoding iteration. Thus the decoding operation can be

viewed as sliding-window-based decoding with a window size

(1) of

check nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: JOINTLY DESIGNED AA-LDPC-CCS

4389

Fig. 1. The decoder presented in [12] for the rate-1/2 (3, 2, 4) LDPC-CC when

. (a) Decoder schedule. (b) Decoder block diagram.

In this rate-1/2 decoder, two channel log-likelihood ratios

and . Finally, the VNU in Processor 1 takes the channel

(LLRs), including one intrinsic soft information bit and one in- LLRs and the C2V messages stored in and as inputs

trinsic soft parity bit, are fed to the first processor (Processor and calculates the corresponding V2C messages for use by Pro-

0). If we let and

denote the indices for the intrinsic cessor 2. The mathematical description is identical to (6). Al-

soft parity and soft information bits received by Processor 0 in though (6) is described for shuffled decoders, this equation is

cycle , respectively, the variable-to-check (V2C) messages re- also valid for two-phase decoders. It can be seen that the number

ceived by Processor ,

, in cycle are of shift registers used to store V2C and C2V messages is equal

passed to variable nodes

and

. to the column weight of , which is 2 in this example.

After receiving these V2C messages from Processor

, the For a rate-1/2 decoder with processors, each processor

check-node unit (CNU) in Processor can update the corre- contains

stages of shift register , and the

sponding check-to-variable (C2V) messages. The updated total number of stages of

is

. In this iter-

C2V messages for soft bits

and

are ation-parallel architecture, processors operate in parallel.

used in the variable-node unit (VNU) of Processor to update The check-node and variable-node operations performed in

the corresponding V2C messages in the same cycle . These up- Processor

, are based on two-phase

dated messages will be used by Processor for the following MPD. It is worth noting that the C2V messages are used to

cycles. Consequently, updated V2C messages can be passed update the V2C messages for the successive processor only

from Processor to Processor

. This iteration-parallel at the boundaries of the processors. The check-node and

decoder can be implemented by cascading processors to variable-node operations are similar to those performed for

form a pipeline, where each processor is responsible for the de- LDPC-BCs and the details can be found in [12].

coding operations involved in a single iteration. Consequently, Since the code considered in Fig. 1 is time-invariant, the in-

the number of processors is equal to the number of decoding it- terconnections between the CNUs (VNUs) and the shift reg-

erations for this architecture.

isters are fixed for each cycle. The decoder architecture for a

Fig. 1(b) shows the associated decoder architecture for the time-varying LDPC-CC is the same as that of a time-invariant

rate-1/2 code. The channel LLRs are stored in the shift registers LDPC-CC, except that the interconnections between the CNUs

marked CV_SR, and the V2C and C2V messages are stored in (VNUs) and the shift registers are not the same for each cycle.

the shift registers marked and . We now use Processor If the LDPC-CC being considered is periodic time-varying, we

1 to illustrate the behavior of the decoder. The V2C messages can use MUXs to select the corresponding routing network be-

produced by the VNU in Processor 0 are passed to Processor 1 tween the CNUs (VNUs) and the shift registers in each cycle.

and then stored in and in Processor 1. After these V2C messages are shifted to the positions connecting to the CNU, the C. Node-Parallel Encoding and Decoding

CNU uses these V2C messages to produce the C2V messages, In order to increase the encoding and decoding throughput,

which are stored in and . This means that the new C2V parallelization in the node dimension can be adopted in addi-

messages replace the original V2C messages that were stored in tion to parallelization in the iteration dimension [22]–[25]. By

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

Fig. 2. A shuffled LDPC-CC decoder for the rate-1/2 (3,2,4) code using three processors and

.

applying a node parallelization factor of to the decoder ar- A. Algorithm Description

chitecture shown in Fig. 1(b), the number of CNUs and VNUs,

and the number of messages accessed in each base processor

become times greater, meaning that the decoding throughput

can be increased by a factor of . More clearly, in node-parallel

encoders and decoders, all the data, such as information bits,

parity bits, channel LLRs, and decoding messages, is processed

in groups, where each group contains messages or bits with

respect to the node expansion factor. To further implement a

memory-based node-parallel encoder and decoder, and consid-

ering the memory configuration, the code structure should be

taken into consideration at the stage of code construction so as

to facilitate the encoder and decoder design. For example, for

a non-AA LDPC-CC, from (3), after moving the information

part on the left-hand side (LHS) of (3) to the right-hand side

(RHS), it can be seen that (the parity part of ) can be

obtained by multiplying the RHS of (3) with the inverse of the

parity part of

. If the parity part of

does not have

a full rank, the inverse does not exist, so the encoding process

does not work. If it has a full rank, but the column weights are

greater than 1, it signifies that two parity bits are dependent on

each other, and the inverse operation needs to be used in the en-

coding. Consequently, the encoding complexity and length of

the critical path will increase. As a result, all implementation

constraints should be taken into consideration at the code con-

struction stage in order to realize an efficient high-throughput

encoder and decoder [25].

First we illustrate the group-based shuffled MPD for rate-

codes when the variable nodes in each processor are divided

into

groups, and the size of each group is

variable

nodes. Note that in this example, no node-parallelization is em-

ployed, and the definition of “group” is just “a multiple number

of nodes or messages.” Fig. 2 shows a shuffled decoder for

the rate-1/2 (3, 2, 4) LDPC-CC, where

. In this decoder,

channel LLRs are stored in the shift register marked CV_SR.

For check node with degree , we have V2C messages,

respectively, denoted as

,

where

denotes the V2C message for the th 1 of the

th row of (or equivalently, the th check node) and

is the index of the associated variable node. Following the

idea proposed in [10] and [11], a compressed form of V2C

messages corresponding to each check node is stored in

register

. Specifically, the contents in an ordered set

that contains the magnitudes of the least reliable V2C

messages

, where

and

, are stored in

. In addition, the contents of the associated index set

that contains indices

, the signs of all the

V2C messages

,

,

and the total sign

are also stored in

. The format of

shown in Fig. 2 is for the (3, 2,

4) LDPC-CC using

, where

,

, are cas-

caded to form a shift register denoted as CN_SR. Using a larger

value, we can achieve a better error performance, but at the

cost of greater complexity [11]. Based on the results reported

III. GROUP-BASED SHUFFLED MPD FOR LDPC-CCS

in [11], a good tradeoff between complexity and performance

is to use

, which is considered in this paper.

It was demonstrated in [8]–[11] that an LDPC-BC using a Also shown in Fig. 2 is the association between the pro-

shuffled MPD requires a fewer number of iterations to achieve cessed variable nodes and the corresponding processor for the

a desired BER performance compared to using two-phase MPD. rate-1/2 (3, 2, 4) LDPC-CC, where three processors operate

In this paper, we proposed applying a shuffled MPD to a group- in parallel. If Processor 0 performs decoding operations corre-

based LDPC-CC decoder, so that the number of processors (it- sponding to variable nodes and

in cycle , Processor ,

erations) can be reduced without degrading the error-correction performs decoding operations corresponding to variable nodes

performance, and the overall decoder area can be significantly

and

using the contents of CV_SR

decreased.

and CN_SR. In cycle , each processor will advance by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: JOINTLY DESIGNED AA-LDPC-CCS

4391

(the group size) variable nodes. These decoding operations are

performed by the variable-check unit (VCU) in each processor.

The details of the VCU will be described in Section V.

For

, let

denote the check-node index

corresponding to the th 1 of the th column of (or, equiva-

lently, variable node ). Let denote the channel LLR cor-

responding to variable node , and let

denote the V2C

message produced by Processor for the th nonzero entry, i.e.,

1, in the th column of . Similarly, let

denote the

C2V message produced by Processor for the th 1 in the th

column of . In cycle , the first processor receives two channel

LLRs,

and

. The check-node, variable-node, and

update operations performed in Processor

,

are based on the shuffled MPD. For each variable node

and each

, write

and perform the check-node, variable-node, and update opera-

tions as follows:

Check-node operations: Compute C2V messages

according to

if otherwise

(4)

(5)

using the contents of CN_SR. Variable-node operations: Compute V2C messages
, according to

(6)

Fig. 3. BER for the time-varying regular-(479, 3, 6) LDPC-CC in the additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. (A) Shuffled MPD

. (B)

Shuffled MPD

. (C) Shuffled MPD

. (D) Two-phase MPD

. (E) Two-phase MPD

. (F) Two-phase MPD

.

in Fig. 1(b), which updates information only at the processor boundaries, the proposed shuffled decoder can utilize the up-todate information within each processor and, hence, the BER of the shuffled decoder converges faster. It can be seen from Fig. 3 that shuffled MPD requires about one half of the number of iterations to achieve the same BER performance compared to two-phase MPD. This improvement in convergence speed by LDPC-CCs matches the results when applying shuffled MPD to LDPC-BCs [8]–[11].

using the contents of CV_SR and CN_SR.

Update step: The contents of CN_SR are updated in this

step. We first update

according to

(7)

and then update the total sign

using the updated

. The ordered set

is updated in the following

manner. If

, replace

in

with

and then update

by reordering the elements

in

. If

, compare

with the elements

in

to obtain

. Discard the largest element in

to obtain

. Accordingly, the index set

is updated based on the updated ordered set.

In the last processor, i.e., Processor , hard decisions are

made for variable nodes ,

based on the sign of the a posteriori prob-

ability (APP)

according to

(8)

B. BER Performance

In Section IV, we will provide a construction method for

LDPC-CCs that is suitable for a shuffled MPD with a group size

of variable nodes. Using the proposed method, we construct

a rate-1/2 time-varying regular-(479, 3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC

decoder where

. In our simulation platform, the check

node algorithm is adopted as the offset min-sum algorithm

(OMSA) [32]. Fig. 3 shows the BER performance for the (479,

3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC decoder, respectively, using two-phase

MPD and shuffled MPD. Since the up-to-date information can

be utilized within each processor in the shuffled decoder, the

proposed shuffled MPD requires fewer iterations to achieve a

desired BER compared to using a two-phase MPD. In addition,

a shuffled MPD where

can achieve a satisfactory

BER performance. Consequently, in the decoder implementa-

tion that will be presented in Section V, we chose

to

implement the shuffled LDPC-CC decoder. It is worth noting

that if we want to perform decoding iterations,

processors need to be implemented, since the first processor is

used for pre-loading.

From the above description, it is obvious that the ordered sets are updated immediately after each node operation and provide

IV. CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR-

AA-LDPC-CCS

FOR A MEMORY-BASED SHUFFLED DECODER

the up-to-date information for the next node operation within In [25], an approach was presented for constructing

the same processor. Compared to the two-phase decoder shown AA-LDPC-CCs that are suitable for a node-parallel processor

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

Fig. 4. Construction procedure for a rate-

regular LDPC-CC with a column weight

and a row weight

. (a) Information and parity parts of

the

matrix. (b) Global index and local index for a subarray. (c) The

matrix. (d) The base matrix

of the LDPC-CC.

implementation and two-phase MPD. In addition, iterative (cyclically shifted versions of the

identity matrix) and the

decoding can be accomplished by cascading a number of

zero matrix. For simplicity of presentation, each column

identical processors. Each processor has a number of memory of circulants, which includes columns, is called a block

blocks, and the total number of memory blocks is the product column, and each processor simultaneously processes a single

of the number of memory blocks in each processor and the block column. In addition, the LDPC-CCs should possess the

number of processors in the decoder. Based on the contribution advantage of simple parallel encoding that can be implemented

presented in [25], we provide a code construction method such using the associated PCM. Finally, a high level of decoding

that both the shuffled MPD and the memory sharing technique performance for the constructed AA-LDPC-CC should still

are taken into consideration. In the proposed decoder, the be maintained. These requirements can be achieved based on

messages associated with each decoding iteration, i.e., each constraints C1, C2, C5, and C6, which will be described below.

processor, share the same memory banks in order to reduce Constraints C3 and C4 should also be taken into consideration

the number of individual memory blocks and to simplify the in the construction of time-varying AA-LDPC-CCs. The details

memory access control. In other words, all the processors share of the implementation-oriented constraints (C1-C4) and the

the same memory banks. As a result, the channel values and the performance-oriented constraints (C5-C6) for constructing

contents of the ordered sets, which are compressed V2C values, AA-LDPC-CCs are described as follows:

are stored in two major memory banks called the CV memory

C1: Encoding constraint: In order to encode information

and the CN memory, respectively. Since rate-

codes

bits using the PCM directly, the submatrix

are most commonly used in communication systems, in this

of must be full rank for all values, as described in

section, we propose a method of constructing a time-varying

Section II-A.

rate-

regular-

AA-LDPC-CC which is suitable

C2: Parallel encoding constraint: Since the PCM of the

for implementing shuffled MPD and node-parallel decoding.

AA-LDPC-CC is also used for node-parallel encoding, i.e.,

a group of parity bits corresponding to the same block

A. Constraints for Constructing AA-LDPC-CCs

column of the PCM are produced in parallel, no parity bit should be dependent on other parity bits in the same group

As with the joint code-encoder-decoder designs for

(block column).

AA-LDPC-BCs [34], AA-LDPC-CCs should be constructed

C3: Memory-access constraint: Since the variable-node

based on both implementation-oriented and performance-ori-

degree of the desired regular-

LDPC-CC is ,

ented constraints. As indicated in [25], in order to increase

there are, at most, check nodes that will be involved

the decoding throughput, node-parallel decoding with a paral-

in the simultaneous processing of variable nodes. In the

lelization factor of can be achieved by constructing the

proposed shuffled decoder, we intend to read (or write)

matrix of the AA-LDPC-CC with weight-

circulants

both the decoding messages corresponding to the check

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: JOINTLY DESIGNED AA-LDPC-CCS

4393

Fig. 5. Relationship between the matrix and the CN memory, where

,

, and

.

nodes from the CN memory and the channel LLRs corre- cedures are addressed as follows. First, we construct a PCM,

sponding to the variable nodes from the CV memory in which is denoted by

for a rate-

LDPC-BC, where

a single cycle.

can be divided into both the information and parity parts.

C4: Memory-sharing constraint: In order to achieve Specifically, there are

arrays in the information part and

memory sharing, the messages required for all processors one array in the parity part, and each array consists of

sub-

should be stored in the same word of both the CN memory arrays. The

matrix can be divided into layers. Fig. 4(a)

and the CV memory. It will be evident in Section IV-C shows the case where

. As shown in Fig. 4(b), each sub-

that by designing the PCM such that

, we array (e.g., the block denoted by

) is constructed by re-

can achieve this goal.

placing each 1 and each 0 in an

circulant matrix with a

C5: Convergence constraint: Similar to LDPC-BCs, the

weight-1 circulant matrix and a

zero matrix, respec-

BER convergence rate for LDPC-CCs using the shuffled tively. Thus, the size of each subarray in

is

and

MPD will be degraded if the up-to-date messages of the the size of each array is

, where

. The shift

previously-processed groups cannot be utilized in the pro- index of an

circulant matrix is denoted by , which is

cessing of the current group. Due to the pipeline delay, the called the global index, and the shift index of each

circu-

up-to-date messages may not be utilized if these messages lant matrix is denoted by , which is called the local index. It

are required before they are written to the memory. We can can be seen from Fig. 4(b) that all the weight-1

circulant

conquer this problem in the code construction stage. As- matrices in the same subarray are designed to have the same

suming it takes cycles to update the associated decoding local index in order to reduce the implementation complexity,

messages corresponding to one processing group, the

which will be evident in Section V. Note that in the array corre-

matrix of the AA-LDPC-CC is constructed such that each sponding to the parity part, the three subarrays on the diagonal

row in any consecutive block column has a weight not have shift indices (0,0).

greater than 1.

After forming the matrix , we can reorder its columns

C6: Girth constraint: The girth of the LDPC-CC should to form another matrix . In Fig. 4(c) it can be seen that the

be greater than 4 in order to avoid length-4 cycles in the first block columns in

are the first block columns of all

Tanner graph of , which are detrimental to the BER per- the arrays of , the second block columns in

are

formance.

the second block columns of all the arrays of , etc. The

B. The Proposed Code Construction Approach

circulant denoted by is the

identity matrix, which comes

from the (0,0) subarrays in the parity part illustrated in Fig. 4(a).

In this subsection, taking the constraints C1-C6 and the paral- Then, we cut and move the lower part along the diagonal (the

lelization factor into consideration, the code construction pro- bold line in

shown in Fig. 4(c)) of the

matrix to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

Fig. 6. Relationship between the global indices and the CN memory addresses for rate-1/2 codes with a column weight

and a row weight

.

right of the remaining part, and we can form the base matrix of

the AA-LDPC-CC, denoted by

, as shown in Fig. 4(d).

Finally, we repeat this

matrix in the lower right direction

to form an infinite PCM of the LDPC-CC.

C. The Associated Consideration of Memory Configuration

It is worth remembering that the channel LLRs and the con-

tents of the ordered sets, which are compressed V2C values, are

stored in two major memory banks, which are called the CV memory and the CN memory, respectively. In the proposed de-

Fig. 7. Determination of the local indices.

coder, each processor performs decoding operations for all vari-

able nodes corresponding to a single block column of in par- the

block columns corresponding to the variable nodes

allel. In other words, the variable nodes corresponding to

processed simultaneously have the same matrix structure, i.e.,

block columns of are processed simultaneously. In order to they are downward-shifted versions of each other. The relation-

satisfy constraint C3, we should access the associated messages ship between the matrix and the CN memory is illustrated in

from both the CN memory and the CV memory in a single cycle. Fig. 5, where

,

, and

. In this example, it can

Since the column weight of , which is the same as that of be seen that, based on the memory configuration that can satisfy

, is and signifies that compressed V2C messages should C3 described previously, the addresses for the messages used for

be accessed from the CN memory, the CN memory is partitioned the second iteration are the same as those used for the first iter-

into memory blocks, where each memory block has words. ation. Consequently, the two messages and, hence the messages

In order to accomplish node-parallel decoding, the elements in for the following iterations, have the same addresses because of

the ordered sets corresponding to a block row (a row of

the identical structure of the processing block columns. If the

circulants) should be accessed at the same time. As a result, LDPC-CC is constrained by C4, i.e.,

, the

the contents of consecutive check-node registers (CN_Rs) de- matrix possesses the desired property. Therefore, the decoding

scribed in Section III-A are stored in a single memory word, and messages corresponding to all

processors are stored in

the decoding messages corresponding to the same layer of the a single memory word of the CN memory, and each memory

matrix are stored in the same memory block. Based on this word contains decoding messages corresponding to

type of memory configuration, the memory address required for check nodes, as shown in Fig. 5. The CV memory can be con-

the CN memory in each cycle depends only on the global index figured in a similar manner.

of the related subarray. The other memory configuration constraint is C4, which guar- D. Determination of the Global and Local Indices

antees that the contents in the same memory address of the CN In this subsection, we present a method of determining the

memory can be shared by each of the

processors. To global and local indices for a rate-1/2 LDPC-CC such that con-

achieve this goal, we should ensure that the nonzero parts of straints C1, C2, C5, and C6 are satisfied. The proposed deter-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: JOINTLY DESIGNED AA-LDPC-CCS

4395

D4: (a)

, and

, for

,

(b)

, and

, for

,

Since the code constructed is a periodic time-varying code

with a code period of , the criterion described in D4 is neces-

sary. In a similar manner, the global indices for the remaining

two layers

can be determined. The conditions de-

scribed in - can be simplified into the following three:

Fig. 8. The global and local indices of the constructed (479, 3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC.

Da: for

,

, and

,

Db:

, and

,

for

,

mination approach can be easily generalized for any rate-

Dc:

codes. For constraint C1, it can be seen that both global and After determining the global indices for each subarray, we

local indices for the diagonal subarrays of the array in the parity can check the global indices of the four subarrays located in the

part of the

matrix are set to 0. All the rows in the resultant four corners of any rectangle in

. For example, the four

shown in Fig. 4(d) are then ended by an identity matrix, subarrays with global indices , , , and , as shown in

and the rank of each

is guaranteed to be full. In addition, Fig. 7, are positioned at the four corners of a rectangle. If the

C2 can also be satisfied since the row weight of the parity part condition where

(mod ) is not satisfied,

in each

is exactly 1 [25].

then the associated variable nodes and check nodes will

For constraint C5, the PCM of the desired LDPC-CC should never form length-4 cycles [35], no matter what the value of the

only contain rows whose weight is 1 within any consecutive local index is. As a result, the local indices of the four subarrays

block columns. Fig. 6 shows an example of the relationship can be arbitrarily chosen while constraint C6 is satisfied. On the

between the global index and the required address of the CN other hand, if

(mod ), we should choose

memory for a rate-1/2 code. First, according to the construction the local indices which avoid length-4 cycles. Using the above procedure, the block columns of the PCM obtained from the in- procedure, we can design a rate-1/2 (479, 3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC

formation and parity parts are interleaved, and the memory ad- for which the

matrix is given in Fig. 8.

dresses for each starting block columns depend on the global index of the corresponding subarray. Since the proposed decoder, which will be presented in Section V, takes 4 cycles to

V. PROPOSED MEMORY-BASED DECODER ARCHITECTURE USING A SHUFFLED MPD

update the associated decoding messages in a pipelined struc-

ture, i.e.,

, in the following, we illustrate how to determine

the global indices in order to satisfy constraint C5 where

. From Fig. 6, the required CN memory addresses for block

columns 0, 1, 2, 3, … are

,

respectively, where and are the global indices of the asso-

ciated subarrays and % represents the modulo operation. Since

In this section, we illustrate the proposed decoder architecture

for the constructed (479, 3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC. The parameters

of the code are as follows:

,

,

,

, and

. Each block column (row) of the

and

matrices consists of 8 columns (rows).

A. Decoder Architecture

the required CN memory address for any block column cannot

be equal to any one of the memory addresses of consecutive

block columns nearby, the following conditions should be

guaranteed. According to the required CN memory address for

the considered block column, the conditions are classified into

the four categories, respectively, denoted as - , as shown

in Fig. 6. If we let and be positive integers, conditions

- such that constraint C5 can be satisfied are written as

follows:

D1:

D2: (a)

, and

, for

Fig. 9 shows the block diagram for the proposed memory-based shuffled decoder of the constructed (479, 3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC. To perform ten decoding iterations, the decoder comprises 11 processors, respectively, denoted as Processor 0, Processor 1,…, and Processor 10. Processor 0 performs preloading and the remaining 10 processors, respectively, perform the operations for the ten decoding iterations. The major components are described as follows:
1) CV Memory: As shown in Fig. 9, the CV memory is used to store the channel LLRs and consists of two major blocks where one, denoted as CV_i, stores the channel LLRs

,

corresponding to the information part, and the other, denoted as

(b)

, and

, for CV_p, stores the parity-part channel LLRs. Each part consists

,

of

memory words. In the proposed node-par-

(c)

allel and iteration-parallel decoder, all the LLRs simultaneously

D3: (a)

, and

, for required by the decoder are stored in the same memory word

,

and processed in parallel. This means that all the messages

(b)

, and

, for required by the first ten processers, where each processor

,

demands

messages, are stored in the same memory word.

(c)

Each memory word in the proposed decoder thus contains

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

Fig. 9. Memory-based shuffled decoder architecture for the rate-1/2 (479, 3, 6) LDPC-CC code with a parallelization factor of

.

, where represents the number from the memory blocks in a single cycle, where each word

of quantization bits. It is worth noting that the channel LLRs of each memory block consists of the messages for

check

corresponding to the last processor do not need to be stored nodes. Consequently, there are

memory

in the memory since the outputs of this processor are the final words in each memory block. If we let denote the number of

decoded bits.

quantization bits for each element in and let denote the

In Sections V-B–V-C, an approach where CV_i memory and number of bits used to represent each element in , then the

CV_p memory are alternately read and written will be intro- size of each memory word is

duced. As a result, we can use single-port memory to implement

. However, since each memory

these two memory blocks and use multiplexors and switches block is simultaneously accessed for read and write operations,

to control the associated read-write access. The reading multi- dual-port memory blocks are adopted in the implementation.

plexor and writing switch have different controllers and . 3) VCU: The check-node, variable-node, and update opera-

For example, if the messages are read from the CV_i memory tions described in Section III and illustrated in Fig. 2 are real-

block and written into the CV_p memory block in cycle , then, ized in the VCUs, where the detailed block diagram for a VCU

in the next cycle, the reading and writing access operations for is shown in Fig. 10. It can be seen from Fig. 2 that each pro-

these two blocks will be exchanged.

cessor contains a VCU, and each VCU consists of 3 subunits

2) CN Memory: In order to satisfy constraint C3, we parti- since the column weight of the LDPC-CC considered here is

tion the CN memory into memory blocks, where

for 3. Each subunit of a VCU can be divided into three parts: the

this decoder example. That is, through the code construction CNU, the VNU, and the Update unit. In the VCU of Processor

procedure introduced in the previous section, and by utilizing , the CNUs in each of the three subunits select the C2V mes-

memory partitioning, we can access the required CN messages sages

between

and

,

, 1,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: JOINTLY DESIGNED AA-LDPC-CCS

4397

Fig. 10. The VCU architecture.

2 based on (4) and (5). The VNUs then compute the V2C mes- the next iteration. The details of the message exchange process

sages ,

, 1, 2 using (6). Finally, these V2C messages will be described in Section V-C.

are used to update the ordered set, index set, and sign bits of row

, where

, 1, 2. Note that both a comparator and B. Pipelined Decoding Schedule

a selector, which selects the three smallest values, are required For the proposed rate-1/2 (479, 3, 6) decoder, the dimensions

in order to update the ordered sets stored in the CN memory. of the

matrix are 480 960. As shown in Fig. 12(a), the

4) Permutation Unit (PU): Fig. 11 shows the architecture of

matrix consists of

information block columns

the permutation unit (PU). Each PU is a bidirectional routing

and 60 parity block columns

. That

network, where permutates the messages loaded from the is, each processor should process 60 information block columns

CN memory, and after these messages are updated by the VCUs and 60 parity block columns to complete a single iteration. From

in each processor, they are sent back to the CN memory through the construction approach described in Section IV, the column

the backward permutation unit

. In addition, it can be seen weight of each column in

is

. For each column,

that there are PUs, respectively, for the CN memory blocks, there is exactly one nonzero entry placed in one of the three re-

where

is considered. These permutation units are re- gions

, 1, 2, as represented by the dashed lines. That is,

quired since the PCM of the LDPC-CC is constructed based on by storing the decoding messages associated with these three

circulants, and the numbers of cyclic-shift positions are nonzero entries in three distinct memory blocks, we can access

only dependent on the local indices. and

can be im- all the required messages associated with a block column in a

plemented using size- cyclic shifters. It is worth remembering single cycle. Since the group-based shuffled decoder processes

that the constituent weight-1

circulant matrices of the variable nodes corresponding to a block column simultaneously,

subarray of the

matrix have the same shift index (local the information part messages and the parity part messages are

index), as shown in Fig. 4(b). In addition, for the constructed accessed in an interleaved manner. Clearly, if we perform de-

(479, 3, 6) AA-LDPC-CC, there are only two different local in- coding operations for an information block column in cycle ,

dices in each layer of the associated

matrix, as shown in then we will perform decoding operations for a parity block

Fig. 8. Consequently,

only needs to support two column in cycle , as shown in Fig. 12(b). This explains the

different shift indices, and we do not need to use a more com- reason why the two parts of the CV memory can be implemented

plex flexible barrel shifter to implement

. Finally, using single-port memory blocks, a multiplexor, and a switch. In

at the outputs of the

units, there are switches which are Fig. 13, the timing schedule for the proposed decoder is shown.

used to exchange decoding messages between processors. That It can be seen that for each block column, it takes four cycles

is, after the decoding operations reach the processor boundary, to process one group of variable nodes. In addition, the adopted

the written messages are advanced by one position for use by pipeline scheduling enables all the computing units (CNU and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

Fig. 11. Block diagram for the proposed permutation units (PUs).

Fig. 12. Illustration of the pipelined decoding schedule. (a) The block column and the layer number.

matrix, where denotes the identity matrix; (b) The relationship between the processed

VNU), and the memory blocks in the decoder to be fully uti- It is also obvious from the timing schedule that the contents in lized. Consequently, the efficiency of the decoder is very high. the memory can be accessed without encountering collisions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: JOINTLY DESIGNED AA-LDPC-CCS

4399

Fig. 13. Timing schedule for the (479, 3, 6) decoder.

same memory word to store the messages for all the processors

becomes reasonable. Consequently, the memory configuration

can be simplified. As shown in Fig. 9, each word in the three

CN memory blocks contains decoding messages from the 11

processors that, respectively, handle 11 block columns with

the same form, and these messages can be accessed simulta-

neously. It is worth remembering that the decoding messages

corresponding to the same layer of the

matrix are stored

in the same memory block. As a result, the decoding messages

corresponding to the three 1 s of the matrix are, respectively,

stored in three distinct CN memory blocks, and the exact

memory block in which the decoding messages are stored

depends on its layer number.

The message exchange between processors is illustrated in

Figs. 11 and 12. In the proposed decoder, each block row of the

matrix will be sequentially processed by Processors 0, 1, and

so on. Since the proposed decoding scheduling is block-column

Fig. 14. BER for the (479, 3, 6) LDPC-CC in the AWGN channel using shuffled

MPD with

. (A) Floating-point. (B) 6-bit fixed-point. (C) 5-bit fixed-

point. (D) 4-bit fixed-point.

based, each processor performs decoding operations block column by block column. After Processor processes the last parity block (the highlighted block denoted as ) of a

block row, the associated decoding messages corresponding

C. Exchange of Decoding Messages Between Processors

to this block row should be passed to Processor

. For a

register-based decoder, the exchange of decoding messages be-

As described in Section IV, in order to achieve memory tween processors (iterations) can be accomplished by shifting

sharing among all the processors, the period of the PCM these messages along the shift registers. For the proposed

is forced to be equal to

(constraint C4), and the 11 memory-based decoder, the difficulty in exchanging decoding

block columns simultaneously handled by the 11 processors messages between processors (iterations) can be overcome in

always have the same nonzero part. The memory access for the following manner. In Fig. 11, the write-back switches are

all the processors are thus the same, and, hence, using the positioned on the LHS by default, but they are turned right

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012
TABLE II COMPARISON TABLE

Fig. 15. Layout plot for the (479, 3, 6) LDPC-CC decoder.
TABLE I IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR THE (479,3,6) LDPC-CC DECODER

† Synthesis results based on the number of equivalent NAND gates.

# Post-layout results. The CV memory consists of eight 60x120 SRAMs.

The CN memory consists of 33 20 x 144 SRAMs and 24 20 x 143 SRAMS.

Power was estimated based on received noisy codewords at an SNR of

coder architecture, where the value used is 3. Fig. 14 shows

2.12 dB.

the BER results for the (479, 3, 6) LDPC-CC using the pro-

when the operation associated with the last parity block has

been completed, and the associated decoding messages will

be used in the next iteration (or, equivalently, the following

processor). For the proposed decoder, the write-back switches

in

are turned right when the decoder is processing block

columns

, while the write-back switches in

and

are turned left. The write-back switches in

are

turned right when the decoder is processing block columns

, while the write-back switches in

and

are turned left. The write-back switches in

are

turned right while the write-back switches in

and

are turned left when the decoder is processing block columns

. In other words, the write-back switches in

only one of the three PUs are turned right at any one time, and

the write-back switches in the remaining two PUs are turned

left.

posed shuffled decoder, where both floating-point and hardware fixed-point results are given. Since the proposed LDPC-CC construction enables the data read from the ordered set memory to always be up to date, there is no performance loss caused by memory conflict issues. It can be seen from Fig. 14 that the BER curve for our decoder using 6-bit quantization is close to the associated floating-point BER curve. As a result, in the ASIC implementation, 6-bit quantization was adopted.
The decoder was implemented using a generic UMC 90 nm CMOS process with nine metal layers and a core voltage of 1.0 V, synthesized using the Synopsys Design Compiler, and placed and routed using SOC Encounter. The power estimates were obtained using the power analysis tool, Synopsys PrimeTime PX. Fig. 15 shows the associated layout plot. Post-layout results show that the shuffled LDPC-CC decoder consisting of 11 processors achieves an information throughput of 1.025 Gbps at a clock frequency of 256.4 MHz, results in a power consump-

VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

tion of 682 mW, occupies an area of 5.36 , and achieves a

A. Implementation Results

BER of

at an of 2.12 dB. Table I summarizes the im-

plementation results of the decoder. It is worth noting that when

We implemented a decoder for a periodic time-varying reg- we vary the number of decoding iterations, i.e., processors, the

ular-(479, 3, 6) LDPC-CC based on the proposed shuffled de- decoding throughput will not change since the processors are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: JOINTLY DESIGNED AA-LDPC-CCS

4401

cascaded using pipelines. On the other hand, the decoding la- registers minimizes the implementation cost of each base

tency is proportional to the number of processors.

processor. The memory-sharing technique, which avoids the

need for a large number of distributed small memory blocks,

B. Comparison With Other Existing LDPC-CC Decoders

can also be achieved when certain constraints are satisfied in

Table II compares the proposed decoder with the parallel

LDPC-CC decoders reported in [22], [25] and [33]. The

LDPC-CC used in [22] is a time-invariant code. In contrast, the

proposed AA-LDPC-CC is a time-varying code. Time-varying

LDPC-CCs, in general, provide a better error-correction per-

formance compared to time-invariant LDPC-CCs [31]. The

decoder presented in [33], which consists of only a single pro-

cessor, was designed for an LDPC-CC with a syndrome former

memory of 128, i.e.,

, based on two-phase MPD.

In contrast, the proposed decoder consisting of 11 processors

was designed for an LDPC-CC where

based on the

the code-construction stage. As a result, we have proposed a method for constructing AA-LDPC-CCs that can facilitate the design of the memory-based shuffled decoder. Based on the proposed techniques, we can design an efficient LDPC-CC decoder, as demonstrated by the implemented (479, 3, 6) decoder, which achieves a similar/better BER performance compared to existing LDPC-CC decoders. The decoder described in [25] is a superior design for higher throughput applications. On the other hand, from the perspective of throughput-to-area ratio, the proposed work provides a more efficient solution for applications demanding throughput not exceeding 1 Gbps.

shuffled MPD method. Consequently, the proposed decoder provides an improved error-correction performance compared

REFERENCES

to the decoder presented in [33].

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.

In [25], the authors reported the synthesis results for a (472, 3, 6) LDPC-CC processor. This type of architecture is designed for a memory-based processor, where the “single-port-write/dual-

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962. [2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse
matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

port-read” memory function is required. However, since the specific memory function is not supported in general ASIC flows, the authors of [25] implemented the processor using registers

[3] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[4] M.-M. Mansour and N.-R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC de-

rather than SRAM modules.

Taking the benefits from the code construction approach

presented in Section IV, the proposed memory-based archi-

tecture is feasible for ASIC implementation. Constraint C4

also enables the adoption of the memory sharing technique to

reduce the memory control complexity. Furthermore, using

two-phase MPD and 30 iterations, the LDPC-CC presented in

[25] achieves a BER of

at an of 2.15 dB. Since each

processor in the proposed shuffled decoder handles a group of

eight variable nodes in each cycle, while each processor in the

design described in [25] handles a group of eight check nodes

in each cycle, the throughput of the proposed decoder is about

one half that of the decoder presented in [25]. However, the

proposed shuffled decoder using 10 iterations can achieve a

BER performance similar to that of the decoder presented in

coders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003. [5] M.-M. Mansour, “A turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4376–4392, Nov. 2006. [6] D.-E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112. [7] Y. L. Wang, Y. L. Ueng, C. L. Peng, and C. J. Yang, “Processing-task arrangement for a low-complexity full-mode WiMAX LDPC codec,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 415–428, Feb. 2011. [8] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005. [9] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, J. Toush, and J. Danger, “Generic description and synthesis of LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2084–2091, Nov. 2007. [10] Y. L. Ueng, C. J. Yang, and C. J. Chen, “A shuffled message-passing decoding method for memory-based LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2009, May 2009, pp. 892–895.

[25], which requires 30 processors cascaded together in order to execute two-phase MPD using 30 iterations. It is worth noting that the area required for the 30 processors used in the design

[11] Y. L. Ueng, C. J. Yang, K. C. Wang, and C. J. Chen, “A multimode shuffled iterative decoder architechure for high-rate RS-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2790–2803, Oct. 2010.

presented in [25] is 27.72

, which is significantly larger

than that of the proposed decoder. Similarly, the overall latency

incurred by cascading the 30 processors is 7.2 ns, which is also

[12] A. Jiménez-Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varing periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[13] A. Sridharan, D. Truhachev, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr, and K. S.

longer than the latency of the proposed decoder based on an equal-performance perspective.

Zigangirov, “Distance bounds for a class of LDPC convolutional codes constructed from permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, pp. 4537–4555, Dec. 2007.

VII. CONCLUSION

[14] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.

We have presented a memory-based decoder architecture for LDPC-CCs using a group-based shuffled MPD method. The exchange of decoding messages between processors is accomplished using simple permutation networks. In this pipelined iteration-parallel decoder, the use of the shuffled MPD sig-

[15] S. Bates, Z. Chen, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity check convolutional codes for ethernet networks,” in Proc. IEEE Pacific Rim Conf. Commun., Comput. Signal Process., Victoria, B.C., Canada, Aug. 2005.
[16] S. Bates, D. G. Elliot, and R. Swamy, “Termination sequence generation circuits for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 1909–1917, Sep.

nificantly reduces the number of processors and, hence, the decoder area, without any degradation in BER compared to using two-phase MPD. The use of SRAM blocks instead of

2006. [17] S. Bates, L. Guntorphe, A. E. Pusane, Z. Chen, K. S. Zigangirov, and D.
J. Costello, Jr, “Decoders for low-density parity-check convolutional codes with large memory,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

[18] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity check convolutional codes applied to packet based communication systems,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, 2005.
[19] S. Bates, Z. Chen, L. Gunthorpe, A. E. Pausane, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “A low-cost serial decoder architecture for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, no. 7, pp. 1967–1976, Aug. 2008.
[20] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[21] R. Swamy, S. Bates, T. L. Brandon, B. F. Cockburn, D. G. Elliott, J. C. Koob, and Z. Chen, “Design and test of a 175-Mbps rate-1/2 (128,3,6) low-density parity-check convolutional code encoder and decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, pp. 2245–2256, Oct. 2007.
[22] E. Matus, M. B. Tavares, M. Bimberg, and G. Fettweis, “Towards a Gbits/s programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2007, May 2007, pp. 1657–1660.
[23] M. B. Tavares, E. Matus, S. Kunze, and G. Fettweis, “A dual-core programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2008, May 2008, pp. 531–535.
[24] M. B. Tavares, E. Matus, and G. P. Fettwies, “On the structured parallelism of decoders for LDPC convolutional codes—An algebraic description,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2008, May 2008, pp. 752–755.
[25] Z. Chen, T. L. Brandon, D. G. Elliott, S. Bates, W. A. Krzymień, and B. F. Cockburn, “Jointly designed architecture-aware LDPC convolutional codes and high-throughput parallel encoders/decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 836–849, Apr. 2010.
[26] S. Bates and G. Block, “A memory based architecture for FPGA implementations of low-density parity-check convolutional decodes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS 2005, May 2005, pp. 336–339.
[27] A. Sridharan and D. J. Costello, Jr., “A new construction method for low density parity check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Bangalore, India, Oct. 2002, pp. 212–212.
[28] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2005.
[29] Z. Chen and S. Bates, “Constuction of low-density parity-check convolutional codes through progressive edge-growth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1058–1060, Dec. 2005.
[30] G. Richter, M. Kaupper, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Irregular low-density parity-check convolutional codes based on photographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1633–1637.
[31] A. E. Pausane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “On deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from QC LDPC block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007.
[32] J. Chen and M.-P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commum. Lett., vol. 6, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[33] T. Brandon, J. Koob, L. v. d. Berg, Z. Chen, A. Alimohammad, R. Swamy, J. Klaus, S. Bates, V. C. Gaudet, B. F. Cockburn, and D. G. Elliott, “A compact 1.1-Gb/s encoder and a memory-based 600-Mb/s decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1017–1029, May 2009.
[34] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[35] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 1788–1794, Aug. 2004.
Yeong-Luh Ueng (M’05) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2001.
From 2001 to 2005, he was with a private communication technology company, where he focused on the design and development of various wireless chips. Since December 2005, he has been a member of the faculty of the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering. His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and communication ICs.

Yu-Luen Wang received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Dong Hwa University, Hualien, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2004 and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2010.
He is now with MediaTek Inc. His research interests include error control coding and related VLSI designs.
Li-Sheng Kan received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Yuan Ze University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2008, and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2010.
He is now with Silicon Motion Technology Corporation. His research interests include VLSI designs for channel coding and storage systems.
Chung-Jay Yang received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Chung Cheng University, Chiayi, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2002 and the M.S. degree in communication engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2004.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. From 2004 to 2008, he was with Realtek Semiconductor Corporation. His research interests include VLSI designs for channel coding and storage systems.
Yung-Hsiang Su received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2010.
He is currently working toward the M.S. degree in electrical engineering at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. His research interests include error control coding and related VLSI designs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:14:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

