2042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

Transactions Letters

Dithered Belief Propagation Decoding
François Leduc-Primeau, Student Member, IEEE, Saied Hemati, Senior Member, IEEE, Shie Mannor, Senior Member, IEEE, and Warren J. Gross, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We introduce two dithered belief propagation decoding algorithms to lower the error floor with a minimal hardware overhead. One of the algorithms can additionally improve the decoding performance in the waterfall region using a large iteration limit but with a negligible increase in the average time complexity.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, belief propagation decoding, error floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes offer good error-correction performance when decoded with low complexity iterative message passing algorithms, that we collectively refer to as belief propagation (BP) algorithms. Although it has been shown that LDPC codes with very long block lengths can be designed to perform very close to capacity under BP decoding, for practical block lengths (in the thousands, or less), the performance of BP decoding can be significantly inferior to the optimal maximum likelihood (ML) decoding. This is particularly notable at higher signalto-noise ratios (SNR), where BP decoding can be affected by early error floors, which are problematic in many applications.
The suboptimal outcomes of BP decoding of LDPC codes are most often characterized by a failure to converge to a codeword, and are therefore detectable. We are interested in exploring a general approach for resolving BP decoding failures that does not require information feedback from the decoder, other than the indication of a decoding failure. We are proposing to achieve this using randomized BP algorithms that we call dithered belief propagation algorithms. Our approach is inspired by randomized non-linear optimization algorithms such as simulated annealing, and by previous work that considered how the randomness of a stochastic belief propagation decoder improves error floors [1]. The lack of information feedback allows to achieve a very low
Paper approved by T. M. Duman, the Editor for Coding Theory and Applications of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received May 26, 2011; revised January 19, 2012.
S. Mannor is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel (e-mail: shie@ee.technion.ac.il).
F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, and W. J. Gross are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada (e-mail: francois.leduc-primeau@mail.mcgill.ca, {saied.hemati, warren.gross}@mcgill.ca).
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). Part of this work was presented at the IEEE Globecom 2010 Conference.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2012.050812.110115A

implementation complexity overhead, while maintaining the average data throughput of a standard BP decoder.
We present two dithered BP algorithms. The first, named Random Sign Flip (RSF), removes the error floor (at least down to a bit-error rate of 10−12) on the code used in the IEEE 802.3an standard, with a practical maximum number of iterations. The second, named Random Initial State (RIS), also provides good gains in the floor region. Additionally, large gains can be obtained both in the waterfall and error floor regions by using a large iteration limit. At medium to high SNR, these gains are achieved without any significant increase in the average time complexity, compared to standard BP decoding algorithms.
II. BACKGROUND
A trapping set T can be defined as a set of variable nodes (VN) that remain incorrect despite an arbitrary increase in the number of decoding iterations. We will use N (X) to mean the set of all nodes in the Tanner graph that are connected to at least one element of set X, i.e. the neighborhood of set X. We will also define the special neighborhood functions Ne(X) and No(X) that include only nodes that have respectively an even and odd number of connections to set X. Finally, we will refer to the subgraph of the Tanner graph induced by T ∪ N (T ) as the trapping set subgraph.
Absorbing sets, which represent the dominant trapping sets of several structured codes [2], are defined as a set T of VNs such that each element of T has more neighbors in Ne(T ) than in No(T ). On the binary symmetric channel, it can be shown that if each VN in T has either an incorrect prior, or has two more connections to Ne(T ) than to No(T ), then there exists a stable state of the absorbing set subgraph for which the a-posteriori decisions are incorrect. In this stable state, all check nodes (CN) in Ne(T ) have even parity. An important consideration for what follows is that, if an absorbing set subgraph is in an incorrect stable state, it is possible, given the knowledge of T , to correct a node x ∈ T by changing the parity of some of its neighbors in Ne(T ) such that a majority of messages into x are correct. Furthermore, the parity of CNs in Ne(T ) depends on the parity of messages received from N (Ne(T )).
It was noted in [2] and [3] that for several codes, a dominant portion of the errors of BP algorithms in the error floor region are stable under the decoding algorithm and have the property that the associated set of unsatisfied CNs, U , is relatively small. Several algorithms have been proposed to

0090-6778/12$31.00 c 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:13:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEDUC-PRIMEAU et al.: DITHERED BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING

2043

tackle this type of error. Most of them share a common A codeword X is chosen randomly and transmitted through

procedure. The BP algorithm is first run normally (we will a channel corrupted by additive white Gaussian noise, which

refer to this as the first decoding phase). In cases of decoding outputs a random received vector Y. We will write R(X, L)

failure, a second phase is launched that attempts to resolve to refer to the set of received vectors that are decoded to

the failure by first identifying the sets U and N (U ), and performing modifications to VNs in N (U ) (however, note that the incorrect VNs are not necessarily all in N (U )).
The “Algorithm B” proposed in [4] performs search steps that consist in selecting a node in N (U ), modifying its prior as well as the priors of the closest VNs in N (U ), and running

X by a standard BP decoding algorithm using a maximum of L iterations. Let LI be the iteration limit for Phase-I, and LII the iteration limit for Phase-II. For the dithered Phase-II, our aim is to identify a random operation that can be applied uniformly on all the variable or check nodes and that offers a good probability of successful convergence

a number of BP iterations. However, the algorithm only works for a code having dv = 3. The “post-processing” algorithm in [5] uses a similar idea, but operates on the BP messages, and modifies simultaneously all messages going into N (U ). The modification of the messages into N (U ) \ T introduces new

for received vectors that lie outside R(X, LI). A uniform operation allows targeting all nodes in T or Ne(T ), which are not directly observable, and additionally removes the need
for identifying the set of unsatisfied CNs U and the related neighborhood N (U ). A random operation is used to simplify

errors, but the algorithm relies on some further BP iterations the implementation, and in particular to avoid the need for

to correct them. The algorithm is shown to eliminate most memory and global control, which can be costly to implement.

decoding failures caused by absorbing sets on the code used A few randomized BP algorithms have been proposed before.

in the IEEE 802.3an standard. However, we have observed In analog decoders, randomness occurs naturally in the form

that the algorithm does not work for codes having trapping of transistor mismatch. In studying the effect of transistor

sets such that T N (U ).

mismatch, the authors of [7] observed that the randomness in

One approach that does not require the dynamic identifi- the decoding algorithm could yield some gains in error rate.

cation of U is the use of a Generalized LDPC decoding al- In [8], it was noted that the dynamic equations of an analog

gorithm [6]. However, this substantially increases the decoder Min-Sum decoder become singular for codes with cycles,

complexity, since the constraint nodes are no longer simple and message dithering was used to resolve the singularity

parity checks. Also, the floor is lowered, but not eliminated, and remove an early error floor. For discrete BP decoders, a

and the decoding graph design method is complex. Contrary to the solutions presented so far, the Augmented
BP algorithm [3] is an algorithm that attempts to resolve all types of BP decoder failures. It proceeds by selecting a VN v ∈ N (U0), where U0 is the set of unsatisfied CNs at the end of the first decoding phase, and fixing its input to a saturated log-likelihood ratio (LLR) +S or −S. For

probabilistic message schedule was proposed in [9], where the choice of message to update is performed randomly according to pre-defined probabilities derived from an analysis of the Tanner graph.
In order to minimize implementation complexity, the BP algorithm used for Phase-I also serves as a starting point for designing the dithered algorithms. This BP algorithm will be

each input value, the decoder is run for a pre-determined referred to as the base algorithm. While any BP algorithm can

number of iterations. This generates two new sets U1 and U2. be used as the base algorithm, here we choose Normalized The process is repeated for each new set generated, creating Min-Sum (NMS) [10] for its low implementation complexity

a binary tree of decoding attempts. For every split in the and good error-correction performance. tree, a new VN v ∈ N (Uk) must be selected according to some criterion. The authors report important improvements B. Random Sign Flip

in error-correction performance on the Margulis code for a

large maximum number of iterations. However, the algorithm requires complex functionality to be implemented beyond the base BP algorithm, and therefore would offer a poor ratio of data throughput to implementation complexity.
III. DITHERED DECODING
A. General Approach
We consider a two-phase approach, where received vectors that fail to be decoded by the standard BP algorithm (PhaseI) are attempted again with the dithered decoding algorithm (Phase-II). As long as the error rate of Phase-I is sufficiently low, Phase-II has little impact on the average time complexity of the decoding. Therefore, when the main concern is data throughput, this motivates searching for a Phase-II algorithm that adds little complexity to the decoder implementation, yet allows achieving low error rates. Note that in this paper,

Algorithm 1 RSF Phase-II

1: procedure RSF-NMS(y)

2: νj,i ← 0, ∀i, j

3: for l ← 1 to LII do

4:

for i ← 1 to n do

5:

for all j ∈ Vi do

6:

μi,j ← yi + k∈Vi,k=j νk,i

7:

for j ← 1 to m do

8:

for all i ∈ Cj do

9:

νj,i

←

al,j α

sign(μk,j )
k∈Cj

min
k∈Cj k=i

|μk,j |

k=i

10:

Compute xˆ

11:

Exit loop if xˆ is a valid codeword

12: return xˆ

throughput always refers to the average time complexity. We

use a boldface font for vectors, and in the case of random For this algorithm, we consider the case of received vectors

variables, a lowercase variable denotes a realization.

for which the decoder converges to absorbing set stable states,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:13:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2044

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

as defined in Section II. We are proposing to randomize the
decoding algorithm in such a way that an incorrect absorbing
set state becomes transient, that is, has a non-zero probability of not occurring again. Note that if the decoder monitors the syndrome of xˆ and terminates when a codeword is found, the randomized algorithm is not required to maintain the stability of codeword states. Given an absorbing set T in an incorrect stable state, it is possible to correct specific nodes in the set by altering the parity of some CNs in Ne(T ). With a BP algorithm that uses LLR messages, a simple operation that will
achieve this consists in randomly flipping the sign of outgoing messages in the CNs. Algorithm 1 describes the RSF Phase-
II, with NMS as the base algorithm. The algorithm takes as input a given received vector Y = y and returns an estimate xˆ of the transmitted codeword. Let vi denote the variable node with index i ∈ [1, n], and cj denote the check node with index j ∈ [1, m]. In the algorithm, we let Vi = {j : cj ∈ N (vi)} and Cj = {i : vi ∈ N (cj )}. We denote a message sent from vi to cj by μi,j, and a message sent from cj to vi by νj,i. We have sign(x) = 1 if x ≥ 0, sign(x) = −1 if x < 0, while α is the scaling factor defined in [10]. The random sign flip is handled by random variable A ∈ {−1, 1}, distributed such that P (A = −1) = p, where p is a parameter chosen by the designer. The decoding procedure draws a realization al,j of A for every iteration l and every check node j. Note that setting al,j = 1 gives back the standard NMS algorithm.
The RSF algorithm adds very little implementation complexity to the base BP algorithm. It only requires one random
bit per node, and the ability to invert the sign bit of the LLR messages. Conditionally inverting all output signs in

distributed components with zero mean and variance σd2, the L2 norm ||D||2 has a scaled Chi distribution (with parameter

n). For large vector length n, this distribution is approximately

Normal, with mean σd

n − 1/2

and

variance

σd 2

2

.

A

vector

with i.i.d. uniformly distributed components over [−a, a] and

the

same

variance

σd2

=

a2 3

has

approximately the

same

norm

distribution, but is less complex to generate. In Phase-II, the

algorithm performs t = LII/LT decoding trials, each trial having an iteration limit of LT (we assume that LT divides LII). Since RIS only operates on the inputs of a standard BP decoder, it can be easily added to an existing decoder

implementation.

It is interesting to consider how the error rate achieved by

the RIS algorithm compares to an ML decoder. For this we

will briefly discuss how the algorithm behaves in the limit of

the number of trials. For a given Y = y (and X = x), a

BP decoding trial has three possible outcomes depending on D: Xˆ = x (Success), Xˆ ∈/ C (Failure) and Xˆ ∈ C, Xˆ = x

(Undetected error), where C denotes the set of codewords. We

will denote the probability of each outcome by φS (y), φF (y) and φU (y). We assume that φS(y) > 0 and φF (y) < 1, for all y. We can then show that the probability of a decoding

error on y in Phase-II is given by

ξ(y, t)

=

φU

(y) + φS (y)φF 1 − φF (y)

(y)t

.

(1)

We define an event FI = {Y ∈/ R(c, LI), ∀c ∈ C}. We can then express the frame-error rate (FER) of Phase-II alone as

ΦII(t) = E[ξ(Y, t)|FI], where E denotes expectation. In the limit, we have

a check node only requires a single 2-input XOR gate (per node), since the inversion can be applied to the total sign bit. Furthermore, nothing is added to variable nodes, which represent the majority of nodes in the decoder.

lim
t→∞

ΦII(t)

=

E

lim ξ(Y, t)
t→∞

FI

=E

φU (Y) 1 − φF (Y)

FI ,

(2)

C. Randomized Initial State
The Random Initial State (RIS) algorithm consists in searching around the received vector Y for a convergence region of the base BP algorithm, by adding a dithering random vector D to Y. Algorithm 2 provides the complete decoding procedure, including both Phase-I and Phase-II. The invocation of the base BP algorithm on a given Y = y with an iteration limit of L is written as BP(y, L), which returns a codeword estimate xˆ. During Phase-II, we draw up to t realizations of D, denoted d1, . . . , dt. By choosing D with zero-mean, independent and

where convergence is in the sure sense. Let RML(X) denote the ML decision region of codeword X, and define a second event M = {Y ∈ RML(X)}. If E[φU (Y)|FI, M ] = 0, ΦII(∞) is the ML error rate. On the codes that we tested, no undetected errors were ever observed in Phase-II. However, if E[φU (Y)|FI, M ] > 0, we can use a variant of the RIS algorithm that unconditionally achieves an error rate arbitrarily close to an ML decoder. For this algorithm, named RIS-m, we keep a list V of valid codewords. Line 7 of Algorithm 2 is modified to:
7: Append xˆ to V , Exit loop if V contains m elements
and line 8 to:

Algorithm 2 Two-Phase RIS Belief Propagation

1: procedure RIS-BP(y)

2: xˆ ← BP(y, LI)

Decoding Phase-I

3: if xˆ is not a valid codeword then

4:

for i ← 1 to t do

5:

xˆ ← BP(y + di, LT )

6:

if xˆ is a valid codeword then

7:

Exit loop

8: return xˆ ∈ V such that ||Y−xˆ||2 ≤ ||Y−xˆi||2, ∀xˆi ∈ V

Note that setting m = 1 gives back the original RIS algorithm.

Since arg minx∈C ||Y − x||2 is equivalent to ML decoding, RIS-m will return the ML estimate xˆML if xˆML ∈ V . For y ∈

RML(x), it can be shown that the asymptotic error probability

on y is

ξ(y, ∞) =

φU (y) 1 − φF (y)

m
.

(3)

8: return xˆ

Since for any y, ξ(y, ∞) ≤ 1,

identically distributed (i.i.d.) components, we obtain a simple way to search around the received vector. If D has normally

lim
t→∞

ΦII(t)

≤

E

φU (Y) m 1 − φF (Y)

FI, M P(M |FI)

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:13:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions +apPply(.M |FI),

LEDUC-PRIMEAU et al.: DITHERED BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING

TABLE I ERROR EVENTS STATISTICS

10−2

Simulation

Errors

Undetected Errors after best

after Phase-I in Phase-I

Phase-II

RS-LDPC, 4.0 dB ** 102,998

1

223

RS-LDPC, 4.2 dB **

73,788

7

38

10−4

RS-LDPC, 4.6 dB *

1,050

1

115

RS-LDPC, 4.7 dB *

456

1

17

RS-LDPC, 4.75 dB *

304

0

6

Margulis, 2.2 dB ***

10,132

0

29

10−6

Margulis, 2.4 dB ***

33,305

0

17

Margulis, 2.6 dB **

30,045

0

8

Margulis, 2.8 dB **

1,005

0

80

Max. Phase-I iterations: (*) 25; (**) 100; (***) 200.

10−8

2045
Floating−point SPA, 200 iter Normalized Min−Sum (NMS), 200 iter NMS 100 iter + RSF 200 iter NMS 100 iter + RIS 200 iter NMS 100 iter + "post−proc." 100 iter NMS 200 iter + RIS 500K iter NMS 200 iter + RIS 50M iter

BER −− FER FER

10−4

Floating−point SPA, 100 iter Normalized Min−Sum (N−MS), 100 iter

10−10 2

2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 Eb/No [dB]

N−MS 20 iter + post−proc. 10 iter [5]

N−MS 25 iter + RIS 75 iter

N−MS 25 iter + RSF 75 iter N−MS 100 iter + RIS 24M iter

Fig. 2. FER of the Margulis code when adding a dithered Phase-II using

10−6

Random Sign Flip or Random Initial State, compared with Normalized Min-

Sum. All cases use 4-bit inputs and an internal LLR range of [−8, 8],

except the SPA curve, for which inputs and messages have full floating-point

precision. The “post-processing” curve was generated using the algorithm of

10−8

[5] (with optimized parameters).

10−10

number of error events recorded for the lowest error rate points

appearing in Fig. 1 and 2, at the given SNR.

Both RSF and RIS include parameters to be optimized.

10−12

The optimization can be performed on a set S of received

4

4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8

Eb/No [dB]

vectors for which the Phase-I algorithm fails to converge. The set only needs to be generated once, and this step is

Fig. 1. BER (solid lines) and FER (dashed lines) of the RS-LDPC code when adding a dithered Phase-II using Random Sign Flip or Random Initial State, compared with Normalized Min-Sum and with the decoder of [5]. All cases use 4-bit inputs and an internal LLR range of [−8, 8], except the SPA curve, for which inputs and messages have full floating-point precision.

not part of the optimization process. Set S depends on LI, therefore LI should be chosen first. This can be done in the usual way, by considering the marginal return of increasing
LI on the Phase-I FER. Assuming for now that the PhaseII algorithm has a single parameter p to be optimized, we

can express the FER of Phase-II alone as ΦII(LII, p), and it can be measured by simulating the Phase-II algorithm on

where M = {Y ∈/ RML(X)}. As m increases, (4) converges to the error rate of an ML decoder.
IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS A. Simulation Setup
We present simulation results for the (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code [11] adopted in the IEEE 802.3an standard for 10 Gbps Ethernet, and for the (2640,1320) Margulis code [12]. Both codes are widely used for empirical work on LDPC decoding

the elements of S. For any measurement of ΦII(LII, p), a
sufficient number N of errors must be observed, such that the
measurement can be considered noise-free in the optimization step. Let p∗(LII) = arg minp ΦII(LII, p) and let Φ∗II(LII) be the corresponding minimum. Supported by empirical evidence,
we assume that ΦII(LII, p) is convex with respect to p and that for Φ∗II(LII) ≤ r, p∗ is independent of LII. After choosing LI, we simulate the Phase-I algorithm to generate a set S with at least N/r elements. We used N = 100 and r = 10−1,
except for the cases seen in Table I where |S| ≥ 1000 could

algorithms. The algorithms were simulated in software in a

distributed computing environment. We quantize the received

values on 4 bits, and in the RIS algorithm, inputs are also

quantized on 4 bits after applying the random offset. In Alg. 1,

we

use

α

=

2

for

the

RS-LDPC

code

and

α

=

4 3

for

the

Margulis code. For both codes, undetected error events are

not be achieved because the Phase-I FER was too low. We then simulate the Phase-II algorithm on S to find p∗ and ΦI∗I(LII) using a simple direct search. Starting with an initial guess, the value of LII might have to be adjusted so that Φ∗II(LII) ≤ r and |S|ΦI∗I(LII) ≥ N . In all cases the optimal parameter was found in a few minutes using a single CPU

rare under BP decoding. When a received vector results in core, since r is large and the computational time for evaluating

an undetected error in Phase-I, it cannot be passed on to ΦII(LII, p) is proportional to N/r. The RIS algorithm has two Phase-II. In our simulations, we never observed undetected design parameters, but we will present a heuristic method for

errors in Phase-II. Table I shows the numerical details of choosing one of the parameters, leaving only one parameter

the observations. The last column in the table indicates the to be optimized.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:13:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2046
100

RIS, 4.6dB RIS, 4.7dB RIS, 4.75dB RSF, 4.6dB RSF, 4.7dB RSF, 4.75dB

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 60, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012
100 10−1

FER gain FER gain

10−1

10−2

10−2 0

20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 Iterations

RS−LDPC, 4.0dB

10−3

RS−LDPC, 4.2dB

RS−LDPC, 4.6dB

Margulis, 2.2dB

Margulis, 2.4dB

Margulis, 2.6dB

10−4

100

102

104

106

108

Iterations

Fig. 3. FER gain provided by Phase-II (Φ∗II) in terms of the maximum number of Phase-II iterations (LII) (linear scale) for the RS-LDPC code. Dashed curves correspond to the RIS algorithm, and solid ones to the RSF
algorithm.

Fig. 4. FER gain provided by RIS in Phase-II (ΦI∗I) in terms of the maximum number of Phase-II iterations (LII), on a logarithmic scale.

optimized parameters. The Margulis code has trapping sets

B. RSF Results

with the T N (U ) property, which is the likely cause of the

The sign-flip parameter p of RSF is optimized as described bad error rate gain of the PP algorithm on this code. above. We observed that p∗ is constant with respect to SNR

(up to the precision of the optimization). For the RS-LDPC code, we get p∗ = 0.07, and for the Margulis code, p∗ = 0.011.
The decoding performance of the algorithm on the RSLDPC code is shown in Fig. 1. Despite the algorithm’s simplicity, LII = 75 iterations is sufficient to get a good slope and reach the bit-error rate (BER) of 10−12 required by the 10Gbps Ethernet standard. Furthermore, Fig. 3 shows that for a given LII, ΦI∗I(LII) decreases as the SNR increases. Therefore, we expect the decoding performance to reach lower error rates without any increase in the iteration limit. The “postprocessing” (PP) solution of [5], which appears to be the best existing solution for the RS-LDPC code, is shown in Fig. 1 for comparison. RSF has the advantage of a lower implementation complexity, since it only requires small additions to the check nodes, while the PP algorithm’s complexity is proportional to the number of edges in the decoding graph. On the high rate RS-LDPC code considered here, there are ndv = 12,288 edges, but only 384 check nodes. Therefore, the RSF algorithm offers higher throughput when normalized to implementation complexity. With LII = 75, it also offers marginally better error rates, such that the latency of RSF can be reduced to LII = 50 iterations for similar performance (see Fig. 3). With LI = 20 and LII = 50, the nominal1 latency of RSF is 2.3 times higher.
Compared with the RIS algorithm, Fig. 3 shows that RSF achieves lower error rates for small iteration budgets. On the Margulis code, Fig. 2 shows that RSF provides a FER gain of about 1 order of magnitude, but the gain does not increase much as the SNR goes from 2.6 dB to 2.8 dB. Fig. 2 also includes a simulation of the PP algorithm of [5], with
1Without taking into account the lower implementation complexity of RSF.

C. RIS Results
RIS has two parameters, σd and LT , that must be jointly optimized. However, our simulations show that the perfor-
mance is not very sensitive to the value of LT . For a given code and SNR, we found that l = LT could be chosen such that dΦI(l)/dl is close to 0, where ΦI(l) is the FER of the base algorithm with an iteration limit of l. As SNR increases, the base BP algorithm converges faster, and the optimal LT decreases. The optimal σd was observed to increase with SNR. It also has a small dependence on LII, that we choose to ignore to simplify the optimization. The results presented use
a different LT and σd for each SNR. The error rate performance on the RS-LDPC code is shown
in Fig. 1, and on the Margulis code in Fig. 2. For small
iteration budgets, the error rates of RIS are similar to those obtained using RSF. However, unlike for RSF, Φ∗II(LII) keeps decreasing as LII increases. On the RS-LDPC code, using LII = 2.4 · 107 iterations, RIS can achieve a decoding gain of 0.35 dB at a FER of 2.3·10−9 with respect to RSF, and 0.40 dB with respect to the decoder of [5]. At this SNR (4.2 dB) and for
this LII, the increase in average time complexity is only 3.5%. However, at 4.0 dB, the complexity is increased by 528%. On
the Margulis code, the FER gain provided by RIS is limited to
one order of magnitude when LII is small (200 iterations), but large error rate gains are possible once the budget increases. At 2.6 dB, LII = 5 · 105 iterations provides a FER gain of almost 4 orders of magnitude (Φ∗II = 2.7 · 10−4), while the average time complexity increase is approximately 0%. Fig. 4
shows the FER gain obtained for each code as a function of LII, for various SNRs. For both codes, ΦI∗I(LII) decreases as SNR increases for a given LII. This, combined with some improvement in ΦI, results in a decrease of the average time

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:13:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEDUC-PRIMEAU et al.: DITHERED BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING

2047

100 10−1

RS−LDPC, 4.0dB RS−LDPC, 4.2dB RS−LDPC, 4.6dB Margulis, 2.2dB Margulis, 2.4dB Margulis, 2.6dB

FER gain

10−2

10−3

10−4 0

5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40

Increase in average time complexity (%)

Fig. 5. FER gain provided by RIS in Phase-II (ΦI∗I), in terms of the increase in average decoding time (in percentage) over Phase-I alone.

overhead as the SNR increases, as in the examples above. For each curve in Fig. 4, the cost of the FER gains in terms of the average time complexity overhead is shown in Fig. 5. At medium to high SNRs, significant gains can be obtained with close to no overhead.
If the decoder is allowed to output decoded frames out-oforder, the decoder can alternate between processing “normal” frames that are decoded by standard BP, and “difficult” frames that require several RIS trials, ensuring that these difficult frames do not cause an overflow in the input buffer. Therefore, in this case LII has little impact on the size of the input buffer. Note that the RIS algorithm can conveniently stop and resume the processing of a frame without storing any state information. Example applications for high-latency RIS include deep-space communications, where having long delays on some frames is not a concern, and magnetic recording, where RIS can be used to recover bad sectors.
V. CONCLUSION
We presented two randomized algorithms that modify a base BP decoder to reduce the number of decoding failures. The algorithms have a minimal impact on the implementation complexity of a standard BP decoder. When used for

improving error floors, they have no impact on the throughput of the standard decoder, and therefore allow achieving low error rate targets with a better throughput/complexity ratio than comparable solutions, while their latency remains practical. The RIS algorithm can also be used to obtain significant coding gains with respect to the BP waterfall curve, at the cost of a large latency, but still with a small impact on implementation complexity and throughput. To the best of our knowledge, the error rates achieved by RIS are the best results ever reported for the codes simulated, despite using a 4-bit number representation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments, and the CLUMEQ Supercomputing Center for providing computing resources.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “A relaxed half-stochastic iterative decoder for LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2009 Global Telecommun. Conf.
[2] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2007 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., pp. 6261–6268.
[3] N. Varnica, M. Fossorier, and A. Kavcic, “Augmented belief propagation decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1308–1317, 2007.
[4] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, “Improvements in belief-propagation decoding based on averaging information from decoder and correction of clusters of nodes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 846–848, 2006.
[5] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE Globecom Conf., pp. 1–6.
[6] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, June 2009.
[7] F. Lustenberger and H.-A. Loeliger, “On mismatch errors in analogVLSI error correcting decoders,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., vol. 4, pp. 198–201.
[8] S. Hemati and A. Yongaçoglu, “On the dynamics of analog minsum iterative decoders: an analytical approach,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2225–2231, Aug. 2010.
[9] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414–416, 2001.
[10] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar 2002.
[11] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, July 2003.
[12] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 2000 Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Computing, pp. 248–257.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:13:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

