5042

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

Verification Decoding of High-Rate LDPC Codes With Applications in Compressed Sensing
Fan Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Henry D. Pfister, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper considers the performance of

-reg-

ular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with message-passing

(MP) decoding algorithms in the high-rate regime. In particular,

we derive the high-rate scaling law for MP decoding of LDPC

codes on the binary erasure channel (BEC) and the -ary sym-

metric channel ( -SC). For the BEC and a fixed , the density

evolution (DE) threshold of iterative decoding scales like

and the critical stopping ratio scales like

. For the

-SC and a fixed , the DE threshold of verification decoding

depends on the details of the decoder and scales like

for

one decoder. Using the fact that coding over large finite alphabets

is very similar to coding over the real numbers, the analysis of ver-

ification decoding is also extended to the compressed sensing (CS)

of strictly sparse signals. A DE-based approach is used to analyze

the CS systems with randomized-reconstruction guarantees. This

leads to the result that strictly sparse signals can be reconstructed

efficiently with high probability using a constant oversampling

ratio (i.e., when the number of measurements scales linearly with

the sparsity of the signal). A stopping-set-based approach is also

used to get stronger (e.g., uniform-in-probability) reconstruction

guarantees.

Index Terms—Compressed sensing (CS), low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, -ary symmetric channel, stopping sets,
verification decoding.

I. INTRODUCTION
C OMPRESSED sensing (CS) is a relatively new area of signal processing that has recently received a large amount of attention. The main idea is that many real-world signals (e.g., those sparse in some transform domain) can be reconstructed from a relatively small number of linear measurements. Its roots lie in the areas of statistics and signal processing [1]–[3], but it is also very much related to previous work in computer science [4], [5] and applied mathematics [6]–[8]. CS is also very closely related to error-correcting codes and can be seen as source coding using linear codes over real numbers [9]–[15].
In this paper, we analyze the performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with verification decoding [16] as applied to CS. The resulting approach is almost identical to that of Sudocodes [9], but our new perspective allows one
Manuscript received July 28, 2009; revised January 22, 2012; accepted January 23, 2012. Date of publication May 25, 2012; date of current version July 10, 2012.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77840 USA (e-mail: fzhang.tamu@gmail.com; hpfister@tamu.edu).
Communicated by H.-A. Loeliger, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2201344

to numerically compute sparsity thresholds for a broad class of measurement matrices under verification-based decoding. Changing the ensemble of measurement matrices also allows an unbounded reduction in the oversampling ratio relative to Sudocodes. A scaling approach is adopted to derive simple expressions for the sparsity threshold as it approaches zero. Since many interesting applications of CS involve very sparse (or compressible) signals, this is a very interesting regime. From a coding perspective, this corresponds to the high-rate limit and our results also have implications for verification-based decoding of LDPC codes over large finite fields.
The analysis of CS in this paper is based on the noiseless measurement of strictly sparse signals [3], [6], [9]. In the real world, the measurement process may introduce noise and reconstruction algorithms must be implemented with finite-precision arithmetic. Although the verification decoder discussed in this paper is unstable in the presence of noise, this does not imply that its performance analysis is not useful. The verification decoder can be seen as a suboptimal version of list-message-passing (LMP) decoder [17], which itself can be seen as a high-signal-to-noise-ratio limit of the full belief-propagation (BP) decoder for CS [10], [11]. Ideally, one would study the BP decoder directly, but the DE analysis technique remains intractable for decoders that pass functions as messages. Still, we expect that a successful analysis of the BP decoder would show that its performance is lower bounded by the verification decoder.
Sparse measurement matrices and message-passing (MP) reconstruction algorithms for CS were introduced in [9] and [10]. Both ideas have since been considered by a number of other authors [12], [13], [18]–[24]. For example, Berinde et al. [18], [19] show empirically that sparse binary measurement matrices with linear-programming (LP) reconstruction are as good as dense random matrices. In [22] and [23], dense matrices with i.i.d. Gaussian random entries and an iterative thresholding algorithm, which is an MP type of algorithm, are proved to have the same sparsity-undersampling tradeoff as convex optimization reconstruction. In [20], sparse measurement matrices and MP decoder are used to solve a sparse signal recovery problem in the application of per-flow data measurement on high-speed links. All these works imply that sparse matrices with MP reconstruction algorithms can be a good solution for CS systems.
For reconstruction, the minimum number of measurements depends on the signal model, the measurement noise, and the reconstruction algorithm, and the way reconstruction error is measured. Consider the reconstruction of a length- signal that has nonzero (or dominant) entries. For strictly sparse signals, Donoho and colleagues computed sparsity thresholds

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PFISTER: VERIFICATION DECODING OF HIGH-RATE LDPC CODES

5043

below which LP reconstruction succeeds with high proba- B. Structure of the Paper

bility (w.h.p.) for high-dimensional signals [25], [26]. For

a compressible signal with noisy measurements, Sarvotham

et al. [27] derive an information-theoretic bound that shows

noisy measurements are required. In [28], it is

shown that

noisy measurements are needed to

reconstruct a strictly sparse signal. In [29], it is shown that

the lower bound

cannot be further improved

(reduced) for a certain compressible signal model. In this

paper, we show that verification-based reconstruction allows

linear-time (in the signal dimension) reconstruction of strictly

sparse signals with

measurements using real-valued

Section II provides background information on coding and CS. Section III summarizes the main results. In Section IV, proofs and details are given for the main results based on DE. While in Section V, proofs and details are provided for the main results based on stopping-set (SS) analysis. Section VI discusses a simple information-theoretic bound on the number of measurements required for reconstruction. Section VII presents simulation results comparing the algorithms discussed in this paper with a range of other algorithms. Finally, some conclusions are discussed in Section VIII.

measurement matrices and noiseless measurements. At first, this seems to violate the lower bounds on the number of

II. BACKGROUND ON CODING AND CS

measurements. However, we provide a information-theoretic A. Background on LDPC Codes

explanation that shows the

lower bound does not

apply to this system because the measurements are real-valued

and provide an infinite amount of information when there is no

measurement noise.

LDPC codes are linear codes introduced by Gallager in 1962 [31] and rediscovered by MacKay in 1995 [32]. Binary LDPC codes are now known to be capacity approaching on various channels when the block length tends to infinity. They can be

represented by a Tanner graph, where the th variable node is

connected to the th check node if the entry on the th column

A. Main Contributions

and th row of its parity-check matrix is nonzero.

LDPC codes can be decoded by an iterative MP algorithm,

This paper provides detailed descriptions and extensions of which passes messages between the variable nodes and check

work reported in two conference papers [13], [14]. We believe nodes iteratively. If the messages passed along the edges are

the main contribution of all these results are as follows.

probabilities, then the algorithm is also called BP decoding. The

1) The observation that the Sudocodes reconstruction algo- performance of the MP algorithm can be evaluated using density

rithm is an instance of verification decoding and its de- evolution (DE) [33] and stopping-set analysis [34], [35] . These

coding thresholds can be computed precisely using numer- techniques allow one to compute noise thresholds (below which

ical DE [13]. For ensembles with at least three nonzero decoding succeeds w.h.p.) for average-case and worst-case error

entries in each column, this implies that no outer code is models, respectively.

required. For signals with nonzero entries, this reduces the lower bound on the number of noiseless measurements B. Encoding and Decoding

required from

to

.

An LDPC code is defined by its parity-check matrix , which

2) The introduction of the high-rate scaling analysis for can be represented by a sparse bipartite graph. In the bipartite

iterative erasure and verification decoding of LDPC codes graph, there are two types of nodes: variable nodes representing

[13], [14]. This technique provides closed-form upper and code symbols and check nodes representing parity-check equa-

lower bounds on decoding thresholds that hold uniformly tions. In the standard irregular code ensemble [36], the connec-

as the rate approaches 1. For example, it shows that tions between variable nodes and check nodes are defined by

-LDPC codes achieve 81% of capacity on the binary the degree distribution (d.d.) pairs

and

erasure channel (BEC) for sufficiently large . This also

, where and are the maximum vari-

shows that, for strictly sparse signals with nonzero en- able and check node degrees and and denote the fraction

tries and noiseless measurements, measurements are of edges connected to degree- variable and check nodes, re-

sufficient (with

-LDPC codes) for verification-based spectively. The sparse graph representation of LDPC codes im-

reconstruction uniformly as

. While it is known that plies that the encoding and decoding algorithms can be imple-

measurements are sufficient for reconstruction via mented with linear complexity in the block length.1 Since LDPC

exhaustive search of all support sets [30], this shows that codes are usually defined over the finite field GF instead of

measurements also suffice for sparse measurement the real numbers, we need to modify the encoding/decoding al-

matrices with low-complexity reconstruction. In contrast, gorithm to deal with signals over real numbers. Each entry in

the best bounds for LP reconstruction require at least the parity-check matrix is chosen either to be 0 or to be a real

measurements.

number drawn from a continuous distribution. The parity-check

3) The application of the high-rate scaling analysis to com-

pute the stopping distance of erasure and verification

decoding. For example, this shows that almost all long

-LDPC codes, with

, can

matrix

can also be used as the measurement matrix

in the CS system (e.g., the signal vector

is observed as

); if there are no degree-1 nodes, then it will be full-rank

w.h.p.

correct all erasure patterns whose fraction of erasures is

1The complexity here refers to both the time and space complexity in terms

smaller than .

of basic field operations and storage of field elements, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5044

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

(FV). In order to guarantee there are no FVs, one can add a con-

straint on the signal such that the weighted sum, of any subset

of a check node’s nonzero neighbors, does not equal to zero [9],

[12]. Another scenario where it makes sense to assume no FV is

when we consider random signals with continuous distributions

so that FV occurs with probability zero. Finally, if the measured

signal is assumed to be nonnegative, then FV is impossible for

the LM1 decoding algorithm.

Fig. 1. Structure of the encoder.

Verification decoding was originally introduced and analyzed

The process of generating the measurement variables can also be seen from the bipartite Tanner graph representation. Fig. 1 shows the encoder structure. Each nonzero entry in is the edge-weight of its corresponding edge in this graph. Therefore, the measurement process associated with a degree- check node is as follows.
Encoding: The measurement variable is the weighted sum

for the -SC. It is based on the observation that, over large alphabets, the probability that “two independent random numbers are equal” is quite small. This leads to the verification assumption that any two matching values (during decoding) are generated w.h.p. by the same set of nonzero coefficients. The primary connection between CS, codes over real numbers, and verification decoding lies in the fact that:

(using the edge weights) of the neighboring variable

nodes given by

.

The verification assumption applies equally well to both large discrete alphabets and the real numbers.

In this paper, we consider only strictly sparse signals and we

use two decoders based on verification, which were first pro- C. Analysis Tools

posed and analyzed in [16]. The second algorithm was also proposed independently for CS in [9]. The decoding process uses the following rules.
1) If a measurement is zero, then all neighboring variable nodes are verified as zero.
2) If a check node is of degree one, then verify the variable node with the value of the measurement.
3) [Enhanced verification] If two check nodes overlap in a single variable node and have the same measurement value, then verify that variable node to the value of the measurement.
4) Remove all verified variable nodes and the edges attached to them by subtracting out the verified values from the measurements.
5) Repeat steps 1–4 until decoding succeeds or makes no further progress.
Note the first algorithm follows steps 1, 2, 4, and 5. The second algorithm follows steps from 1 to 5. These two algorithms correspond to the first and second algorithms in [16] and are referred to as LM1 and node-based LM2 (LM2-NB) in this paper.2 The Sudocodes introduced in [9] are simply LDPC codes with a regular check d.d. and Poisson variable d.d. that use LM2-NB reconstruction. One drawback of this choice is that the Poisson variable d.d. with finite-mean has (w.h.p.) a linear fraction of variables nodes that do not participate in any measurement [38]. For this reason, Sudocodes require a two-phase encoding that prevents the scheme from achieving a constant oversampling rate. A detailed discussion of the LM2-NB algorithm, which is a node-based improvement of the message-based LM2 (LM2-MB), can be found in [17].
In general, the scheme described previously does not guarantee that all verified symbols are actually correct. The event that a symbol is verified but incorrect is called false verification

Based on the sparse graph structure, LDPC codes can be de-

coded efficiently using iterative MP algorithms. The average

performance of MP decoding algorithms can be analyzed with

DE [33] or extrinsic information transfer charts [39]. The con-

centration theorem [33] shows that random realizations of de-

coding are close to the average behavior w.h.p. for long block

lengths. DE analysis provides a threshold below which decoding

(or reconstruction) succeeds w.h.p. as the block length goes to

infinity. The decoding threshold can also be improved by opti-

mizing the edge d.d. pair

and .

Decoding can also be analyzed using combinatorial methods

such as stopping-set analysis [34] and [35]. Stopping-set anal-

ysis gives a threshold below which all error patterns can be re-

covered with certainty under the assumption of no FV. In gen-

eral, DE and stopping-set analyses lead to different thresholds.

Since stopping-set analysis implies uniform recovery of all the

error patterns, instead of just most of them, the threshold given

by stopping-set analysis is always lower than the one given by

DE. For example, DE analysis of

regular codes on the

BEC shows that almost all erasure patterns of size less than

0.429 of the block length can be corrected w.h.p. [36]. On the

other hand, stopping-set analysis guarantees that most codes

correct all erasure patterns of size less than 0.018 of the block

length as

.

Likewise, in CS systems, there are two standard measures

of reconstruction: uniform reconstruction and randomized (or

nonuniform) reconstruction. A CS system achieves randomized

reconstruction for signal set (e.g., -sparse signals) if most ran-

domly chosen measurement matrices recover most of the sig-

nals in the signal set. While a CS system achieves uniform re-

construction if a measurement matrix and the decoder recover

all the signals in the signal set with certainty. Another crite-

rion, which is between uniform reconstruction and randomized

2In [16], the second algorithm (which we refer to as LM2) was described reconstruction, is what we call uniform-in-probability recon-

in a node-based (NB) fashion (as above), but analyzed using a message-based (MB) DE. There is an implicit assumption that the two algorithms perform the same. In fact, they perform differently and the LM2-NB algorithm is superior as observed in [17] and [37].

struction. A CS system achieves uniform-in-probability reconstruction if, for any signal in the signal set, almost all randomly chosen measurement matrices achieve successful decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PFISTER: VERIFICATION DECODING OF HIGH-RATE LDPC CODES

5045

Since DE and the concentration theorem lead to w.h.p. state-

ments for MP decoding over all signals and graphs, it is nat-

ural to adopt a DE analysis to evaluate the performance of ran-

domized reconstruction CS systems based on LDPC codes. For

uniform reconstruction, a stopping-set analysis of the MP de-

coder is the natural choice. While this works for the BEC, the

possibility of FV prevents this type of strong statement for ver-

ification decoding. If the nonzero entries of are chosen ran-

domly from a continuous distribution, however, then the proba-

bility of FV is zero for all signals. Therefore, one can use stop-

ping-set analysis to analyze MP decoding of LDPC code ensem-

bles and show that the LDPC codes with MP decoding achieves

uniform-in-probability reconstruction for the CS system. The

reader is cautioned that these results are somewhat brittle, how-

ever, because they rely on exact calculation and measurement Fig. 2. Thresholds versus 1- , where is the code rate, for LM1 DE, LM1

of real numbers.

stopping set, LM2 DE, BEC stopping set, and LP reconstruction analysis.

While the methods discussed previously can be used to nu-

merically compute sparsity thresholds of verification-based re-

construction for irregular LDPC-type measurement matrices, we are particularly interested in understanding how the number of measurements scales when the signal is both high-dimensional and extremely sparse. To compare results, we focus on the oversampling ratio (i.e., the number of measurements divided by the number of nonzero elements in the signal) required for reconstruction. This leads us to consider the high-rate scaling of DE and stopping-set analyses.

-regular LDPC code. A standard performance measure is

the noise threshold (or sparsity threshold for CS) below which

decoding succeeds w.h.p. The threshold of the LM1 algorithm

in this case is 0.170. This means that a long random

-reg-

ular LDPC code will correct a -SC error pattern w.h.p. as long

as the error rate is less than 0.170. Likewise, it means that using

the same code for LM1 reconstruction of a strictly sparse signal

will succeed w.h.p. as long as the sparsity rate (i.e., fraction of

nonzero elements) of the signal vector is less than 0.170. The

D. Decoding Algorithms

LM2-MB algorithm improves this threshold to 0.210 and the LM2-NB algorithm is conjectured to improve this threshold to

In CS, optimal decoding (in terms of oversampling ratio) re- more than 0.25 [17].

quires a combinatorial search that is known to be NP-hard [40]. Likewise, the stopping-set analysis of the LM1 algorithm in

Practical reconstruction algorithms tend to either be based on LP Section V shows that a

-regular code exists where LM1

(e.g., basis pursuit [1]) or low-complexity iterative algorithms succeeds (ignoring FV) for all error (or sparsity) patterns whose

(e.g., orthogonal matching pursuit [41]). A wide range of algo- fraction of nonzero entries is less than 0.0055. In comparison,

rithms allow one to tradeoff the oversampling ratio for recon- the BEC stopping set threshold of the

code is 0.018 for

struction complexity. In [9], LDPC codes are used in the CS erasure patterns. However, both of these thresholds can be in-

system and the algorithm is essentially identical to the verifi- creased significantly (for the same code rate) by increasing the

cation-based decoding proposed in [16]. The scaling-law anal- variable node degree. In fact, the

-regular LDPC code

ysis shows that the oversampling ratio for LDPC-code-based gives the best (both LM1 and BEC) stopping-set thresholds and

CS system can be quite good. Encoding/decoding complexity is they are (respectively) 0.0364 and 0.0645. Finally, if the signal

also a consideration. LDPC codes have a sparse bipartite-graph is nonnegative, then FV is not possible during LM1 decoding

representation so that encoding and decoding is possible with and therefore 0.0364 is a lower bound on the true LM1 rate-

complexity linear in the block length.

threshold for uniform reconstruction. Fig. 2 shows the best de-

There are several existing MP decoding algorithms for LDPC coding/recovery thresholds for -regular LDPC codes with

codes over nonbinary fields. In [36] and [42], an analysis is in- BEC stopping-set analysis, LM1 stopping-set analysis, LM1 DE

troduced to find provably capacity-achieving codes for erasure analysis, LM2-MB DE analysis, and the phase transition for LP

channels under MP decoding. Metzner presents a modified ma- decoding of plus–minus signals with dense Gaussian measure-

jority-logic decoder [43] that is similar to verification decoding. ment matrices [21]. The stopping-set bounds are shown for op-

Davey and MacKay develop and analyze a symbol-level MP timized , while the DE bounds are shown for

and

decoder over small finite fields [44]. Two verification decoding a range of . As we can see from Fig. 2, LM2-MB DE gives

algorithms for large discrete alphabets are proposed by Luby the best threshold in the high-rate regime and even beats LP

and Mitzenmacher [16] and are called LM1 and LM2 in this reconstruction with dense Gaussian matrices. Note that if the

paper. The LMP algorithm [17] provides a smooth tradeoff be- signal coefficients are nonnegative, the threshold of LM1 given

tween the performance and complexity of the two decoding al- by stopping-set analysis is comparable to the strong bound given

gorithms introduced by Shokrollahi and Wang [45]. All of these in [46, Fig. 1(a)], and the threshold of LM1 given by DE anal-

algorithms are summarized in [17].

ysis is comparable to the weak bound given in [46, Fig. 1(b)].

One can get a rough idea of the performance of these al- Since the scaling-law analysis becomes somewhat tedious

gorithms by comparing their performance for the standard when complicated algorithms are applied, we consider only the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5046

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

-regular code ensemble and the relatively simple algo-

of the optimal

threshold. Conversely, if the

rithms LM1 and LM2-MB. The rather surprising result is that,

erasure probability

, then decoding fails

even with regular codes and simple decoding algorithms, the

(w.h.p. as

) for all .

scaling law implies that LDPC codes with verification decoding ii) [SS-BEC] For any

, there is a

such

perform very well for noiseless CS systems with strictly sparse

that, for all

,a

-regular LDPC code with

signals.

can recover all erasures (w.h.p. as

) of

E. Signal Model

size iii)

. For the

, when one chooses

There are some significant differences between coding theory

a code randomly from the

regular ensemble with

and CS. One of them is the signal model. The first difference is

and uses LM1 as decoding algorithm, then there

that coding theory typically uses discrete alphabets (see [47] for

is a

such that one can recover almost all error

one exception to this) while CS deals with signals over the real

patterns of size for

(w.h.p.

numbers. Fortunately, some codes designed for large discrete al-

as

) for all

. Conversely, when

phabets (e.g., the -ary symmetric channel) can be adapted to the

there is a

such that the

real numbers. By exploring the connection and the analogy be-

decoder fails (w.h.p. as

) for all

.

tween real field and finite field with large , the CS system can be iv)

For the

, when one

seen as an essentially a syndrome-based source coding system

chooses a code randomly from the

regular ensemble

[13]. Using the parity-check matrix of a nonbinary LDPC code

with

and uses LM2-MB as decoding algorithm,

as the measurement matrix, the MP decoding algorithm can be

then there is a

such that one can recover almost

used as the reconstruction algorithm.

all error patterns of size for

(w.h.p. as

The second difference in the signal model is that CS usually

). The constant is independent of and gives the

models the sparse signal

as coming from a particular set,

fraction of the optimal

threshold. Conversely,

such as the -dimensional unit -ball. This constraint enforces

there is a

such that the decoder fails (w.h.p. as

an “approximate sparsity” property of the signal. In information

) when

for all

.

theory and coding, the signal model is typically probabilistic. v)

For any

, there is a

Each component of the signal is drawn i.i.d. from a distribu-

such that: For all

, a -regular LDPC

tion, on the real numbers, that defines the signal ensemble. A

code with

using LM1 decoding can recover (w.h.p

strictly sparse signal can be captured in this probabilistic model

as

) all

error patterns of size

by choosing the distribution to contain a Dirac delta function at

if no FVs occur.

zero [10], [11], [21].

For the sake of simplicity and uniformity, the constants ,

F. Interesting Rate Regime

, and are reused even though they may take different values in (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), and (v).

In coding theory, the code rate depends on the application and the interesting rate regime varies from close to zero to al-

IV. HIGH-RATE SCALING VIA DE

most one. In CS systems, the signal is sparse in some domain and becomes increasingly sparse as the dimension increases. Intuitively, this means that one can use codes with very little redundancy or very high code rate to represent the signal. The setting where CS systems achieve the largest gains corresponds to the high-rate regime in coding. Therefore, we consider how the system parameters must scale as the rate goes to one. It is important to note that the results provide bounds for a wide range of rates, but are tight as the rate approaches one.

A. DE Scaling-Law Analysis for the BEC

DE analysis provides an explicit recursion, which connects

the distributions of messages passed from variable nodes to

check nodes at two consecutive iterations of MP algorithms.

In the case of BEC, this DE analysis has been derived in [48]

and [36]. It has been shown that the expected fraction of era-

sure messages, which are passed in the th iteration, called ,

evolves as

, where is the erasure

probability of the channel. For general channels, the recursion

III. MAIN RESULTS
The main mathematical results of this paper are now listed. Details and proofs follow in Sections IV and V. Note that all results hold for asymptotically long randomly chosen regular LDPC codes with variable-degree and check-degree . The main idea is to fix and observe how the decoding threshold scales when we increase . This provides a scaling law for the decoding threshold and leads to necessary and sufficient conditions for successful reconstruction.

may be much more complicated because one has to track the

general distributions, which cannot be represented by a single

parameter [49].

To illustrate the scaling law, we start by analyzing the BEC

case using DE. Although this is not applicable to CS, it moti-

vates the scaling-law analysis for the

, which is related

to CS.

The scaling law of LDPC codes of check-regular ensemble

over the BEC is shown by the following theorem.

i) [DE-BEC] For the BEC, there is a

such that: a Theorem 1: Consider a sequence of check-regular LDPC

check-regular LDPC code with average variable-degree codes with fixed variable d.d. and increasing check degree

and check-degree can recover a

. Let

be the average variable degree and

fraction of erasures (w.h.p. as

) when

. , which is called -threshold, be the largest such that

The constant is independent of and gives the fraction

for

. For the erasure probability

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PFISTER: VERIFICATION DECODING OF HIGH-RATE LDPC CODES

5047

, the iterative decoding of a randomly chosen

length- code from this ensemble fails (w.h.p as

) for

all if

. Conversely, if

, then there exists a

such that iterative decoding succeeds (w.h.p as

) for all

.

Before proceeding to the proof of Theorem 1, we introduce

two lemmas that will be used throughout the paper.

Lemma 2: For all

,

and

, the sequence

is strictly increasing in and

(1)

Proof of Lemma 2: We restrict our attention to

because the proof is simplified in this case and the continua-

tion does not require

. We show that is strictly in-

creasing with by considering the power series expansion of

, which converges if

. This gives

(2)

that

for

. Since

uniformly on

, there must exist a

such that

for

and

. Therefore, the

recursion

will converge to zero (from

)

for all

and iterative decoding will succeed w.h.p. as

. In practice, one can choose to be the smallest

such that

for

.

The following corollary determines a few -thresholds explicitly.

Corollary 4: For

regular LDPC codes, the

of BEC decoding is given by with

,

, and

.

Proof: See Appendix A.

-threshold

Remark 5: For example, if

and

,

then numerical results show that

suffices so that DE

converges for all

when

. Therefore,

this approach provides a lower bound on the threshold for all

that is tight as

.

and keeping only the first term shows that

.

Since all the terms are negative and decreasing with , we see

that is strictly increasing with . Since is convex in for

, the lower bound

follows from the

tangent lower bound at

.

Lemma 3: Let

be an open connected set containing

and

be a sequence of functions that are

analytic and uniformly bounded on . If

converges to

for all

, then

(all its derivatives) converge

uniformly to

on . If, in addition,

for all ,

then

also converges uniformly to

on .

Proof of Lemma 3: Since the set

contains an

accumulation point, the first statement follows directly from Vi-

tali’s Theorem [50]. When

also holds, the power se-

ries about

implies that the function

is analytic and

uniformly bounded on . Therefore, Vitali’s Theorem again im-

plies uniform convergence.

Proof of Theorem 1: Using the substitution,

,

the DE recursion is scaled so that

B. DE Scaling-Law Analysis For the -

1) DE Scaling-Law Analysis for LM1: For the simplicity of

our analysis, we only consider -regular code ensemble and

the LM1 decoding algorithm [16] for the

with error

probability . The DE recursion for LM1 is (from [16])

(4)

where is the fraction of unverified messages in the th iter-

ation. Our analysis of the scaling law relies on the following

lemma.

Lemma 6: Let functions

and

be defined by

and

(3)

By Lemma 2,

increases monotonically (for

where

,

, and

. For

and

) to , and therefore

decreases monotonically to

, these functions satisfy (i)

, (ii)

. If

, then the definition of is monotonically decreasing with for

, and (iii) we

implies that

for some

. Since

have

and each

is continuous, it follows that the

recursion

will not converge to zero (from

) for all w.h.p. as

. Therefore, iterative decoding will also fail .

Proof: See the Appendix B.

For the next part, we notice that each

is an Theorem 7: Consider a sequence of

-regular

entire function satisfying

and

LDPC codes with fixed variable degree

and in-

. Therefore, we can apply Lemma 3 (with creasing check degree . Let be the largest such that

) to see that

is a se-

for

. If the sparsity of the

quence of continuous functions that converges uniformly to signal is for

and

, then there

on . If

, then the definition of implies exists a such that by randomly choosing a length- code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5048

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

from the

regular LDPC code ensemble, LM1 reconstruc-

tion succeeds (w.h.p as

) for all

. Conversely,

if

then there exists a such that LM1 reconstruction

fails (w.h.p as

) for all

.

Proof: Scaling (4) using the change of variables

and

gives

.

Lemma 6 defines the sequence

and shows that

for

. It will also be useful to observe

2) Scaling-Law Analysis Based on DE for LM2-MB: For the second algorithm in [16], the DE recursion for the fraction of unverified messages in the th iteration is
(6)

that

and

are both sequences of continuous func-

tions that converge uniformly to

on . To see this,

we can apply Lemma 3 with

be-

cause

and

are sequences of entire functions that can

be uniformly bounded on .

If

, then the definition of implies that

Like the analysis of LM1, we first introduce a lemma to bound

the scaled DE equation.

Lemma 11: The functions

and

are defined

for all

. Since

uniformly on

, there must exist a

such that

for

and

. Since

, the recursion

will converge to zero (from

) for all

and iterative decoding will succeed w.h.p. as

In practice, one can choose

to be the smallest

. such

where

that

for all

.

If

, then (by the definition of )

for some

. Since

, there must exist a

such that

for all

. Since each

is

continuous, the recursion

will not converge to

zero (from

) and iterative decoding will fail w.h.p. as

for all

.

For

and

Remark 8: Consider a randomly chosen code from the

, (ii)

regular ensemble is applied to a CS system with LM1 recon-

struction. For sufficiently large , randomized reconstruction

succeeds (w.h.p as

) when the sparsity is with

, i.e.,

, and

, these functions satisfy (i) where
(7)

. Let

and observe that an oversampling ratio

larger than

implies

. This implies that

measurements

suffice (w.h.p as

) for

and suffi-

ciently small . The following lemma shows how to calculate the scaled

threshold .

Corollary 9: For

regular LDPC codes with

, the

-threshold of LM1-MB is given by

and numerical

calculations show

,

and

.

Proof: See Appendix C.

Corollary 10: For regular LDPC codes and LM1 reconstruc-

tion, choosing

allows one to upper bound the over-

sampling ratio by

for sufficiently small .

Proof: For sufficiently small , a sufficient oversampling

ratio is

because

.

Choosing

and taking the logarithm of both sides

shows that

and (iii)

is a monotonically decreasing function of .

Proof: See Appendix D.

Theorem 12: Consider a sequence of

-regular LDPC

codes with variable node degree

. Let be the largest

such that

for

. If the sparsity of the signal is with

and

, then there exists a succeeds (w.h.p as

such that LM2-MB reconstruction

) for all

. Conversely, if

then there exists a such that LM2-MB decoding

fails (w.h.p as

) for all

.

Proof: The LM2-MB DE recursion is given by (6). Using

the change of variables

and

, the scaled DE

equation can be written as

Lemma 11 defines

the sequence

and shows that

.

It will also be useful to observe that

and

are

both sequences of continuous functions that converge uniformly

to

on . To see this, we can apply Lemma 3 with

because

and

are se-

quences of entire functions that are uniformly bounded on .

If

, then the definition of implies that

for

. Since

uniformly on , there

(5)

must exist a

and

. Since

such that

for

, the recursion

will converge to zero (from

) for all

and iterative

decoding will succeed w.h.p. as

. In practice, one can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PFISTER: VERIFICATION DECODING OF HIGH-RATE LDPC CODES

5049

choose

to be the smallest such that

for

all

.

If

, then (by the definition of )

for

some

. Therefore, there exists a

such that

for all

. Since each

is continuous,

the recursion

does not converge to zero (from

) and iterative decoding will fail w.h.p. as

for

all

.

For

, the quantity

is undefined because

. This implies

that

regular LDPC codes do not obey this scaling law for

LM2-MB decoding.

Remark 13: If a randomly chosen code from the

reg-

ular ensemble is applied to a CS system with LM2-MB recon-

struction, then randomized reconstruction succeeds (w.h.p as

) when the sparsity is with

. This re-

quires

measurements and an oversampling ratio of

.

Remark 14: For

regular LDPC codes, the -threshold

of LM2-MB is given by and can be calculated numerically

to get

and

.

The interesting part of this result is that the number of mea-

surements needed for randomized reconstruction with LM2-MB

(as

) is upper bounded by uniformly as

. All

previous reconstruction methods with moderate complexity re-

quire

measurements as

.

edge. The scaling law below uses the average stopping-set enumerator for LDPC codes as a starting point.

A. Scaling-Law Analysis for Stopping Set on the BEC

The average stopping-set distribution

is defined as

the average (over the ensemble) number of stopping sets with

size in a randomly chosen

regular code with variable

nodes. The normalized stopping-set distribution

is de-

fined as

The critical stop-

ping ratio is defined as

Intuitively, if the normalized size of a stopping set is greater

than or equal to

then the average number of stopping sets

grows exponentially with If the normalized size is less than

then the average number of stopping sets decays exponen-

tially with . In fact, there exist codes with no stopping sets of

normalized size less than . Therefore, the quantity can

also be thought of as a deterministic decoding threshold.

The normalized average stopping-set distribution

for

regular ensembles on the BEC is given by [35]

where is the entropy of a binary distribution and the bound

holds for any

. The optimal value is the unique

positive solution of

(8)

V. SCALING LAWS BASED ON STOPPING-SET ANALYSIS

This gives the following theorem.

DE analysis provides the threshold below which the random-

ized (or nonuniform) recovery is guaranteed, in the following

sense: the signal and the measurement matrix are both chosen

randomly, and w.h.p. the reconstruction algorithm gives the cor-

rect answer. If the reconstruction algorithm is guaranteed to suc-

ceed for all signals of sufficient sparsity, this is called uniform

recovery. On the other hand, if reconstruction algorithm is uni-

form over all support sets of sufficient sparsity, but succeeds

w.h.p. over the amplitudes of the nonzero elements (i.e., has a

small but nonzero failure probability based on amplitudes), then

the reconstruction is called uniform-in-probability recovery.

According to the analysis in Section IV, we know that the

number of measurements needed for randomized recovery

by using LM2-MB is

for a -sparse signal. Still, the

reconstruction algorithm may fail due to the support set (e.g., it

reaches a stopping set) or due to the nonzero amplitudes of the

signal (e.g., an FV occurs).

In this section, we will analyze the performance of MP de-

coding algorithms with uniform-in-probability recovery in the

high-rate regime. This follows from a stopping-set analysis of

the decoding algorithms. A stopping set is defined as an erasure

pattern (or internal decoder state) from which the decoding al-

gorithm makes no further progress. Following the definition in

[34], we let

be the Tanner graph of a code,

where is the set of variable nodes, is the set of check nodes

and is the set of edges between and A subset

is a

BEC stopping set if no check node is connected to via a single

Theorem 15: For any

, there is a

such that,

for all

, a randomly chosen

regular LDPC code

will (w.h.p. as

) correct all erasure patterns of

size less than

.

Sketch of Proof: Here, we provide a sketch of proof for

the interest of brevity. Since there is no explicit solution for

, we use a second-order expansion of the LHS of (8) around

and solve for . This gives

. Since

holds for all

, we have

(9)

Next, we expand the RHS of (9) around

and neglect the

high order terms; solving for gives an upper bound on the

critical stopping ratio

It can be shown that this bound on is tight as

.

This means that, for any

, there is a such that

for all

. Therefore, the critical stopping ratio scales like

as

.

Remark 16: Although the threshold is strictly increasing with , this ignores the fact that the code rate is decreasing with .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5050

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

However, if one optimizes the oversampling ratio instead, then

the choice of

is nearly optimal. More-

over, it leads to the simple result

which implies an

oversampling ratio that grows logarithmically in . In fact, this

oversampling ratio is only a factor of 2 larger than the optimal

result implied by the binary entropy function.

B. Stopping-Set Analysis for the - With LM1-NB

A stopping set for LM1-NB is defined by considering a de-

coder where

are disjoint subsets of corresponding to

verified, correct, and incorrect variable nodes. Decoding pro-

gresses if and only if 1) a check node has all but one edge at-

tached to or 2) a check node has all edges attached to

.

Otherwise, the pattern is a stopping set. In the stopping-set anal-

ysis for -SC, we can define

as the average number

of stopping sets with

correctly received variable nodes

and

incorrectly received variable nodes where is the

code length.

The average number of stopping sets

can be

computed by counting the number of ways,

, that

correct variable nodes, incorrect variables nodes, and

verified variable nodes can be connected to check nodes to

form a stopping set. The number

can be computed

using the generating function for one check

Theorem 17: The normalized average stopping set distribu-

tion

for LM1 can be bounded by

where the tightest bound is given by choosing unique positive solution of

(13) to be the

(14) and

(15)

Proof: Starting from (10) and using Stirling’s formula, it can be verified easily that

which enumerates the number of edge connection patterns (“1” counts verified edges, “ ” counts correct edges, and “ ” counts incorrect edges) that prevent decoder progress. Generalizing the approach of [35] gives

where

is the entropy in nats of a ternary distribu-

tion. Using a Chernoff-type bound for

(i.e.,

for all

), we define

(10) Minimizing the bound over gives

where

For this study, we are mainly interested in largest for which

goes to zero as

. Since the growth (or

where

is the unique positive solution of (14) and (15).

Also, one can show the bound is exponentially tight in .

decay) rate of

is exponential in , this leads us

to consider the normalized average stopping set distribution

, which is defined as

C. Scaling-law Analysis for LM1 Stopping Sets
For many CS problems, the primary interest is in scenarios where is small. This means that we need to perform stop-

(11) ping-set analysis in the high-rate regime or to the signal vectors with sparse support. For the convenience of analysis, we

Likewise, the critical stopping ratio is defined as

only derive the analysis for

regular codes though it can

be generalized to irregular codes [35]. In our analysis, the vari-

(12) able node degree is fixed and the check node degree is in-

creasing. By calculating the scaling law of

, we find the

where

uniform-in-probability recovery decoding threshold , which tells us the relationship between the minimum number of mea-

surements needed for uniform-in-probability recovery and the

Note that

describes the asymptotic growth rate of the

average number of stopping sets with number of incorrectly re-

ceived nodes The average number of stopping sets with size

sparsity of the signal. The following theorem shows the scaling law of LM1 for the .

less than

decays exponentially with and the ones with Theorem 18: There is a code from

regular LDPC code

size larger than

grows exponentially with

ensemble and a constant such that for the - , all error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PFISTER: VERIFICATION DECODING OF HIGH-RATE LDPC CODES

5051

patterns of size for

by LM1 (w.h.p. as

) for

positive root of the implicit function

can be recovered which equals where is the unique
defined by

(17) (16)

when is chosen to be

.

Lemma 19: Consider sequences of

given by (14)

and (15), which satisfy

as goes

to infinity. In this case, the quantities , , and must all

tend to zero.

Proof: See Appendix E.

Lemma 20: For the -SC with LM1 decoding and

, the

average number of stopping sets with size sublinear in goes

to zero as

. More precisely, for each

there

exists a

such that

Proof: See Appendix F.

Proof of Theorem 18: The main idea of the proof is to start

from (13) and find a scaling law for

as grows. Since

is the exponent of the average number of stopping sets

and the resulting scaling function is negative in the range

, almost all codes have no stopping sets of size with

. Because finding the limiting func-

tion of the scaled

is mathematically difficult, we first

find an upper bound on

and then analyze the limiting

function of this upper bound.

Before we make any assumptions on the structure of and

we note that picking any and gives an upper bound of To make the bound tight, we should pick good values

for and For example,

that leads to the tightest bound

is the positive solution of (14) and (15). Since we are free to

choose the variables and arbitrarily, we assume that and

scale like

. This implies that the Taylor expansions of

(14) and (15) converge.

Applying Taylor expansion for small have

to (14) and (15), we

Plugging gives

into this equation for

(18)

Scaling the RHS of (18) by

gives the limiting

function (16). Next, we maximize the scaled upper bound of

over by maximizing

over . The resulting

function

is a scaled upper bound on

as goes to infinity. Taking the derivative w.r.t. , set-

ting it to zero, and solving for gives the unique solution

(19)

Since the second derivative

is negative, we have found a maximum. Therefore, can be defined implicitly by (16) and (19). The only positive root of
is denoted and is a constant independent of Fig. 3 shows the curves given by numerical evaluation of the scaled
, which is given by
and the limiting function The proof is not yet complete, however, because we have not
yet considered stopping sets whose sizes are sublinear in . To handle these, we use Lemma 20, which shows that the average number of stopping sets with size sublinear in also goes to zero.

Solving these equations for and gives the approximations

Next, we choose

for

, which requires3 that

. Applying these substitutions to (13) gives

Remark 21: In a CS system with strictly sparse signals

and LM1 reconstruction, we have uniform-in-probability

reconstruction (w.h.p. as

) of all signals with spar-

sity at most where

. This re-

quires

measurements and an oversampling rate of

.

Remark 22: If the signal has all nonnegative components,

then the verification-based algorithm will have no FV because

3The scaling regime we consider is

and this leads to the scaling

of . This scaling of also implies that

. So we see that,

although there exist stopping sets with

, they do not occur in the scaling

regime we consider.

the neighbors of a check node will sum to zero only if these neighbors are exactly zero. Therefore, the above analysis implies uniform recovery of nonnegative signals that are sufficiently sparse.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

VI. INFORMATION THEORY AND SPARSE CS

This implies that

As we mentioned in Section I, many previous works show

that, for -sparse signals of length- , there is a lower bound

of

on the number of measurements for CS

systems with noisy measurements [19], [27]–[29]. In general,

these bounds can be obtained by thinking of the CS system

as a communication system and treating the measurements as

different observations of the sparse signal through the mea-

surement channel. The bound can be calculated by dividing the

entropy in the unknown sparse signal by the entropy obtained

by each measurement. For the cases that the entropy of the

sparse signal scales as

and the capacity of the

measurement channel is finite, the lower bound

on the number of measurements is essentially the best lower

bound shown in [19] and [29]. For example, let’s consider a

-sparse signal with 1s at the nonzero coefficients. The entropy

of the signal is

bits. If the measurement

is noisy, i.e., the capacity of the measurement channel is finite,

it is easy to see the minimum number of measurements should

scale as

in order to recover the signal.

At first glance, the results in this paper seem to be at odds with

existing lower bounds on the number of measurements required

for CS. In this section, we explore the fundamental conditions

for linear scaling using sparse measurements from an informa-

tion-theoretic point of view.

Let and be check and variable degrees; let be the

number of variable nodes and

be the number of

check symbol nodes. The random signal vector has i.i.d.

components drawn from

and the random measurement

vector is . The number of nonzero elements in the signal

is controlled by assuming that the average number of nonzero

variable nodes attached to a check node is given by . This

allows us to write

, where is

the random variable associated with a nonzero signal element.

Since

, the condition

implies

and

that the number of nonzero variable nodes attached to a check

node becomes Poisson with mean . Therefore, the amount of

information provided by the measurements is given by

Since is the average fraction of nonzero variable nodes, the entropy of the signal vector can be written as

Since a necessary condition for reconstruction is , we therefore find that

is required for reconstruction. This implies, that for any CS al-

gorithm to work, either

has to be infinite or has to grow

at least logarithmically with This does not conflict with the

analysis of LM2-MB for randomized reconstruction because,

for signals over real numbers or unbounded alphabets, the en-

tropy

can be infinite.

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we provide the simulation results of LM1,

LM2-MB and LM2-NB reconstruction algorithms and compare

these results with other reconstruction algorithms. We consider

two types of strictly sparse signals. The first type is the zero-one

sparse signal where the entries of the signal vector are either 0

or . The second type is the Gaussian sparse case where the

entries of the signal are either 0 or a Gaussian random variable

with zero mean and unit variance. We choose the signal length

and number of measurements

.

We compare different recovery algorithms such as LP

[40], subspace pursuit [51], regularized orthogonal matching

pursuit [52], reweighted minimization

- [53],

LM1, LM2-MB, and LM2-NB. The measurement matrices

for LM1, LM2-MB, and LM2-NB are generated randomly

from the

, (4,8), and (5,10) ensembles without double

edges and four cycles. We also pick the nonzero entries in the

measurement matrices to be i.i.d. Gaussian random variables.

In all other algorithms, the measurement matrices are i.i.d.

Gaussian random matrices with zero mean and unit variance.4

Each point is obtained by simulating 100 blocks. Fig. 4 shows

the simulation results for the zero-one sparse signal and Fig. 5

shows the results for Gaussian sparse signal. From the results,

we can see that LM2-MB and LM2-NB perform favorably

when compared to other algorithms.

From the simulation results, we can see that LM2-NB outper-

forms LM2-MB. In [17], the authors provide details about the

analysis of LM2-NB and LM2-MB. In general, node-based al-

gorithms perform better than message-based algorithms for the

same code.

Another interesting observation is that LM1, LM2-MB and

LM2-NB are not sensitive to the magnitudes of the nonzero co-

efficients. They perform almost the same for zero-one sparse

signal and Gaussian sparse signal. This is due to the verifica-

tion-based nature of the decoding algorithm. The other advan-

tage of LM1 and LM2-NB is that they have lower complexity in

both the measuring process (i.e., encoding) and the reconstruc-

tion process (i.e., decoding) than all other algorithms.

4We also tried the other algorithms with our sparse measurement matrices (for the sake of fairness), but the performance was worse than the dense Gaussian random matrices.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PFISTER: VERIFICATION DECODING OF HIGH-RATE LDPC CODES

5053

Fig. 3. Numerical evaluation

and theoretical bound .

Fig. 5. Simulation results for Gaussian sparse signals of length 256 with 128 measurements.

For the LM2-MB algorithm, if the variable and check node

degrees are constants independent of , it is easy to show the

linearity of complexity. However, in our setting, check node

degree goes to infinity as goes to infinity. We cannot show

the complexity is linearly in . Fortunately, for small and ,

and large , LM2-MB runs almost as fast as NB algorithm based

on our simulation.

We also find the maximum sparsity for perfect reconstruc-

tion when we use parity-check matrices from

and

ensembles (with different ) as the measurement matrices when

is large and try to see how scales with the code rate. In

the simulation, we fix

, try different ’s (or ’s)

and use LM2-MB as the decoding algorithm. Fig. 6 shows how

scales with in high-rate regime. We also show the theo-

retical scaling in Fig. 6, which is

with

and

. Since we are considering high-rate

Fig. 4. Simulation results for zero-one sparse signals of length 256 with 128 measurements.

scaling as

and fixing , which also means

,

where is the number of measurements. Therefore, our results

are more accurate when is small. Notice that the simulation

and the theoretical results match very well in the high-rate re-

In NB verification decoding, if the decoding finally succeeds, in each iteration there is at least one node in the bipartite graph removed due to verification. In each decoding iteration, all variable nodes and check nodes are operating in parallel. Suppose that there is only one node removed in each iteration, the number of multiplication and addition operations on each node, or the time that a half-iteration takes, is linear in the check node degree
(since we fix the variable node degree ). Since the check node degree also scales with and goes to infinity in our setting, the complexity of a check-node operation is linearly with . Notice that there are variable nodes removed in each check node verification, the complexity for removing each variable node is

gion.

The simulation results for

,

and

ensem-

bles are shown in Figs. 7 and 8. The results show that for

short block length and rate a half, using measurement matrix

from ensemble with higher VN/CN degree leads to worse

performance. This seems to conflict the results shown in Fig. 6,

since the results in Fig. 6 show that

ensemble should

perform better than

ensemble. The reason for this is that

our scaling-law analysis is only accurate when code rate is

high. In the scaling-law analysis, we consider rates close to 1

and large block length, which is not satisfied in the simulation

of Figs. 7 and 8.

a constant independent of . Since there are variable nodes in the graph, the complexity for successful decoding scales lin-

VIII. CONCLUSION

early with . For the LM1 algorithm, it has equivalent MB and We analyze MP decoding algorithms for LDPC codes in the

NB implementations [17]. Therefore, the complexity of LM1 high-rate regime. The results can be applied to CS systems

also scales linearly with .

with strictly sparse signals. A high-rate analysis based on DE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

Fig. 6. Simulation of high rate scaling of

and

ensembles for block Fig. 8. Simulation results for Gaussian spikes of length 256 with 128 measure-

length

.

ments by using

,

and

ensembles.

Next, we substitute

and simplify to get (21)

For

, this function is unbounded as

or

, so the minimum must occur at an interior critical point .

Choosing

and setting the derivative w.r.t. to zero

gives

(22)

Fig. 7. Simulation results for zero-one spikes of length 256 with 128 measure-

ments by using

,

and

ensembles.

is used to derive the scaling law for randomized reconstruction CS systems and stopping-set analysis is used to analyze uniform-in-probability/uniform reconstruction. The scaling-law analysis gives the surprising result that LDPC codes, together with the LM2-MB algorithm, allow randomized reconstruction when the number of measurements scales linearly with the sparsity of the signal. Simulation results and comparisons with a number of other CS reconstruction algorithms are also provided.

APPENDIX A PROOF OF COROLLARY 4

Canceling terms and simplifying the numerator gives

, which can be rewritten as

. Ignoring

, this implies that is given by the unique

intersection of and

for

. That intersection

point can be written in closed form using the nonprincipal real

branch of the Lambert W-function [54],

, and is given

by, for

(23) Using this, the -threshold for -regular ensembles is given by

. For

, the minimum occurs as

and the limit gives

.

Proof: to get

Starting with for

the convergence condition , we first solve for

APPENDIX B PROOF OF LEMMA 6

(20)

Proof: All statements are implied to hold for all

,

all

, and all

. Since

is concave

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PFISTER: VERIFICATION DECODING OF HIGH-RATE LDPC CODES

5055

for

, the tangent upper bound at

. This implies that

shows that (24)

To calculate the limit of

, we can use the fact that

whenever

exists. Using this, we see that can be rewritten as

Since

, we can use (24) to get the bound

where the last step follows from (25).

APPENDIX C PROOF OF COROLLARY 9

Proof: Recall that is defined as the largest s.t.

for

. Solving this in-

equality for allows one to express as

This completes the proof of (i).

The fact that

is monotonically decreasing follows

from Lemma 2. This completes the proof of (ii). Lemma 2 also

shows that the limit of

is

This proves the first part of (iii). Next, we will show that

(26)

where

Since

, it follows that

for

. Therefore,

for

.

Notice that

is a monotonically increasing function of

when

. So we have

First, we show that

When

goes to infinity when goes to either 0 or

1, so the infimum is achieved at an interior point . By taking

derivative of and setting it to zero, is the solution of

(25)

In light of the upper bound (24), the limit is clearly upper

bounded by

. Using the lower bound in Lemma 2,

So

we see that

(27)

By solving this numerically, we find that

and

Substituting

have

.

into (26), we and

This implies that Together with

APPENDIX D PROOF OF LEMMA 11

Proof: Let us define the function

with

we see that the limit (25) holds.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5056
To prove (i), we will show we must simply observe that

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

To see that contradicts

If

and

, the limit

contradicts

This can be seen by working from the inner expression outwards If

and

and using the facts that

and

. Each step

gives a result that is bounded between 0 and 1.

To show

we first change variables to

where

. This allows

to be written

as a function of with

(28) and this contradicts

. , the limit satisfies
.

Taking the derivative of

with respect to gives (29)

which is negative for

. So

is a monotonically de-

creasing function of Using the inequality

we find that

.

Next, we will prove (ii) by showing the limits of

and

are the same. First, we take the term by term limit of

to see that

APPENDIX F PROOF OF LEMMA 20

Since all stopping sets with size sublinear in shrink to the

zero point on the scaled curve, we must treat sublinear stopping

sets separately. The proof proceeds by considering separately

stopping sets of size

and size for very small . The

number of correct and incorrect variable nodes in a stopping set

is denoted, respectively, and (i.e.,

and

).

Proof: Using (10) and Lemma 23, we can bound

with

Next, we use the fact that

The coefficient

can be bounded using a Chernoff-

(30) type bound and this gives

to see that

From this, we find that the term by term limit of

is also

equal to (30). To prove (iii), we recall that, using the change of variables

,

is a monotonically decreasing func-

tion of . Moreover,

does not depend on and

is a monotonically increasing function of (e.g.,

see Lemma 2). So

is a monotonically decreasing function

of .

for arbitrary

and

. Choosing

and

gives the bound

(32)

where is a constant independent of . Applying (32) to the

bound shows that

satisfies

APPENDIX E PROOF OF LEMMA 19

Proof: Consider whether the sequences and con-

verge to zero or not. Clearly, there are only four possible cases.

If

and

, the limit

(33)

(31) where

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PFISTER: VERIFICATION DECODING OF HIGH-RATE LDPC CODES

5057

Now, we can use this to show that

where nats.
Proof: Rewriting

is the entropy function in with binomial coefficients gives

Since a stopping set cannot have a check node that attaches

to only verified and correct edges, a simple counting argument

shows that

if

. Therefore, the

aforementioned condition can be simplified to

Using Stirling’s approximation, each binomial coefficient can be bounded [55] using

(34)

Starting from (33), we note that

and

implies that

for large enough .

Therefore, we find that the double sum in (34) is upper bounded

by

Applying this bound to

gives, after some manipulation, that

for large enough . Since the exponent

of is negative as long as

and

, we also find

that the limit of the double sum in (34) goes to zero as goes to

infinity for any

.

Now, we consider stopping sets of size greater than

but less than . Combining (13) and Lemma 23 shows that

Notice that (17) is an accu-

rate upper bound on

for small enough and its max-

imum over is given parametrically by (16). Moreover, is

strictly decreasing at

, and this implies that

is

strictly decreasing in at

for all valid . Therefore, there

is a

and

such that

and Finally, we observe that This completes the proof.

REFERENCES

for all

. From this, we conclude that

, which implies that

where can be made arbitrarily large by increasing .

Choosing

so that

shows that

This completes the proof.
APPENDIX G LEMMA 23
Lemma 23: The ratio

is bounded by

[1] S. Chen, D. Donoho, and M. Saunders, “Atomic decomposition by basis pursuit,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 33–61, 1998.
[2] D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[3] E. J. Cand´es, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Robust uncertainty principles: exact signal reconstruction from highly incomplete frequency information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 489–509, Feb. 2006.
[4] G. Cormode and S. Muthukrishnan, “An improved data stream summary: the count-min sketch and its applications,” J. Algorithms, vol. 55, no. 1, p. 75, 2005.
[5] A. C. Gilbert, M. J. Strauss, J. A. Tropp, and R. Vershynin, “One sketch for all: Fast algorithms for compressed sensing,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 2007, pp. 237–246.
[6] A. Cohen, W. Dahmen, and R. DeVore, Compressed sensing and best k-term approximation, RWTH-Aachen, Aachen, Germany, IGPM Rep., Jul. 2006.
[7] W. Johnson and J. Lindenstrauss, “Extensions of Lipschitz maps into Hilbert space,” Contemp. Math., vol. 26, pp. 189–206, 1984.
[8] E. D. Gluskin, “Norms of random matrices and widths of finite-dimensional sets,” Math. USSR Sbornik, vol. 48, pp. 173–182, 1984.
[9] S. Sarvotham, D. Baron, and R. G. Baraniuk, “Sudocodes-fast measurement and reconstruction of sparse signals,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 2804–2808.
[10] S. Sarvotham, D. Baron, and R. Baraniuk, Compressed sensing reconstruction via belief propagation, Rice University, Houston, TX, Tech. Rep. ECE-06-01, Jul. 2006.
[11] D. Baron, S. Sarvotham, and R. Baraniuk, “Bayesian compressive sensing via belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 269–280, Jan. 2010.
[12] W. Xu and B. Hassibi, “Efficient compressive sensing with deterministic guarantees using expander graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2007, pp. 414–419.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5058

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 8, AUGUST 2012

[13] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, “Compressed sensing and linear codes over real numbers,” in Proc. Workshop Inf. Theory Appl., La Jolla, CA, Feb. 2008.
[14] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, “On the iterative decoding of high rate LDPC codes with applications in compressed sensing,” presented at the 46th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2008.
[15] W. Dai and O. Milenkovic, “Weighted superimposed codes and constrained integer compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 2215–2229, May 2009.
[16] M. Luby and M. Mitzenmacher, “Verification-based decoding for packet-based low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 120–127, Jan. 2005.
[17] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, “Analysis of verification-based decoding on the -ary symmetric channel for large ,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 6754–6770, Oct. 2011.
[18] R. Berinde and P. Indyk, Sparse recovery using sparse matrices, Technical Report MIT-CSAIL, Cambridge, Tech. Rep. TR-2008-001, 2008.
[19] R. Berinde, A. Gilbert, P. Indyk, H. Karloff, and M. Strauss, “Combining geometry and combinatorics: A unified approach to sparse signal recovery,” presented at the presented at the 46th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, 2008.
[20] Y. Lu, A. Montanari, and B. Prabhakar, “Counter braids: Asymptotic optimality of the message passing decoding algorithm,” presented at the 46th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, 2008.
[21] D. Donoho, A. Maleki, and A. Montanari, “Message-passing algorithms for compressed sensing,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 106, no. 45, pp. 18914–18919, 2009.
[22] D. Donoho, A. Maleki, and A. Montanari, “Message passing algorithms for compressed sensing: I. Motivation and construction,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Jan. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[23] D. Donoho, A. Maleki, and A. Montanari, “Message passing algorithms for compressed sensing: II. Analysis and validation,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Jan. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[24] A. Gilbert and P. Indyk, “Sparse recovery using sparse matrices,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 937–947, Jun. 2010.
[25] D. Donoho and J. Tanner, “Neighborliness of randomly projected simplices in high dimensions,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 102, no. 27, pp. 9452–9457, 2005.
[26] D. Donoho, “High-dimensional centrally symmetric polytopes with neighborliness proportional to dimension,” Discrete Comput. Geometry, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 617–652, 2006.
[27] S. Sarvotham, D. Baron, and R. G. Baraniuk, “Measurements vs. bits: Compressed sensing meets information theory,” presented at the presented at the 44th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2006.
[28] E. Candes, J. Romberg, and T. Tao, “Stable signal recovery from incomplete and inaccurate measurements,” Commun. Pure Appl. Math., vol. 59, pp. 1207–1223, 2006.
[29] K. D. Ba, P. Indyk, E. Price, and D. P. Woodruff, “Lower bounds for sparse recovery,” in Proc. 21st Annu. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, Austin, TX, Jan. 17–19, 2010, pp. 1190–1197.
[30] D. Baron, M. Wakin, M. Duarte, S. Sarvotham, and R. Baraniuk, Distributed compressed sensing, 2005, preprint.
[31] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[32] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[33] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[34] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[35] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[36] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.

[37] F. Zhang and H. D. Pfister, “List-message passing achieves capacity on the -ary symmetric channel for large ,” in presented at the IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Washington, DC, Nov. 2007.
[38] M. Luby, “LT codes,” in Proc. 43rd Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., Washington, DC, Jun. 2002, p. 271.
[39] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[40] E. J. Candès and T. Tao, “Decoding by linear programming,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 4203–4215, Dec. 2005.
[41] J. A. Tropp and A. C. Gilbert, “Signal recovery from random measurements via orthogonal matching pursuit,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4655–4666, Dec. 2007.
[42] M. A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Applicable Algebra Eng., Commun. Comput., 1999, pp. 65–76.
[43] J. J. Metzner, “Majority-logic-like decoding of vector symbols,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1227–1230, Oct. 1996.
[44] M. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low density parity check codes over GF( ),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 58–60, Jun. 1998.
[45] M. A. Shokrollahi and W. Wang, “Low-density parity-check codes with rates very close to the capacity of the -ary symmetric channel for large ,” Personal Communication.
[46] M. A. Khajehnejad, A. G. Dimakis, W. Xu, and B. Hassibi, Sparse recovery of positive signals with minimal expansion, 2009, Available in Arxiv preprint cs.IT/0902.4045v1.
[47] J. K. Wolf, “Redundancy, the discrete Fourier transform, and impulse noise cancellation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-31, no. 3, pp. 458–461, Mar. 1983.
[48] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Practical lossresilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1997, pp. 150–159.
[49] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[50] R. P. Boas, Invitation to Complex Analysis. Washington, DC: Math. Assoc. Amer., 2010.
[51] W. Dai and O. Milenkovic, “Subspace pursuit for compressive sensing signal reconstruction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 55, no. 5, pp. 2230–2249, May 2009.
[52] D. Needell and R. Vershynin, “Uniform uncertainty principle and signal recovery via regularized orthogonal matching pursuit,” Found. Comput. Math., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 317–334, Jun. 2009.
[53] R. Chartrand and W. Yin, “Iteratively reweighted algorithms for compressive sensing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2008, pp. 3869–3872.
[54] R. Corless, G. Gonnet, D. Hare, D. Jeffrey, and D. Knuth, “On the Lambert W function,” Adv. Comput. Math., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 329–359, 1996.
[55] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
Fan Zhang (SM’03) received his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Texas A&M University in 2010 and joined the read-channel architecture group at LSI Logic. He spent 3 years at UTStarcom Inc. before joining Texas A&M University. His current research interests include information theory, error correcting codes, and signal processing for wireless and data storage systems.
Henry D. Pfister (S’99–M’03–SM’09) received his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from UCSD in 2003 and he joined the faculty of the School of Engineering at Texas A&M University in 2006. Prior to that he spent two years in R&D at Qualcomm, Inc. and one year as a post-doc at EPFL. He received the NSF Career Award in 2008 and was a coauthor of the 2007 IEEE COMSOC best paper in Signal Processing and Coding for Data Storage. His current research interests include information theory, channel coding, and iterative decoding with applications in wireless communications, data storage, and signal processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:10:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

