2240

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

A Versatile Variable Rate LDPC Codec Architecture
Colm P. Fewer, Mark F. Flanagan, and Anthony D. Fagan

Abstract—This paper presents a system architecture for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes that allows dynamic switching of LDPC codes within the encoder and decoder without hardware modification of these modules. Thus, rate compatibility is facilitated without the performance degradation inherent in a puncture-based system. This versatility also allows the LDPC system to be used in a variety of applications since the encoder and decoder can be used with codes that span a wide range of lengths and rates.
Index Terms—Implementation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, puncturing, rate-compatible, versatile.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have received a great deal of attention in the literature over recent years since it was discovered that they have very good error correcting performance over a variety of channel types. Originally discovered by Gallager [1] in 1962, LDPC codes were independently rediscovered by MacKay [2], [3] and by Luby et al. [4]. Since this time, much work has been carried out on the design of good codes and on the analysis of their performance [5]–[7].
Although the primary goal of any error correcting code is to achieve a performance that is close to the Shannon limit, it is ultimately just as important that they lend themselves to practical implementations so they can be integrated into real systems. Thus, the requirements of an LDPC communications system may be prioritized as follows.
1) The LDPC code must provide error-correcting performance as close as possible to the Shannon limit.
2) The encoder and decoder implementations for the code must perform at high throughputs to accommodate the data-rates of modern communications systems.
3) The encoder and decoder must make efficient use of logic resources.
The random nature of the connections between nodes in the bipartite graph of a typical LDPC code means that decoders in particular are difficult to implement efficiently in a fully parallel fashion and are not scalable [8]. This is well recognized in the most recent work on decoder architectures [9]–[12] and has prompted a move to partially parallel implementations. It is also becoming commonplace to construct the LDPC code in unison with the decoder so that the implementation can benefit from the structure of the code, although this process often neglects the complexity of the encoding process. Most decoder architectures (with [11] being one exception) have some portion of
Manuscript received April 5, 2006; revised October 4, 2006. This work was supported by the Informatics Commercialization initiative of Enterprise Ireland. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor F. C. M. Lau.
The authors are with the University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland (e-mail: cfewer@ee.ucd.ie).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2007.904641

their architecture fixed to a specific code, which means that the

decoder must be redesigned in order to accommodate codes of

different rates or lengths. In [11], the code requires significant

storage and so it is somewhat impractical to facilitate multiple

codes.

In terms of LDPC encoding, the traditional method involves

the multiplication of the message bits with the generator matrix

(constructed from the parity-check matrix). Since the generator

matrix is typically dense, the computational complexity of this

operation is

. Specific families of LDPC codes such as

Repeat-Accumulate codes inherently lend themselves towards

efficient encoding, but often at the expense of decoder com-

plexity. More recently, it has become common to base encoder

architectures on Richardson and Urbanke’s work [13], which

admits nearly linear encoding complexity [12], [14]. Of these,

only the parallel implementation provided in [12] meets the high

bandwidths required of modern systems. However, this design

is fixed to a specific code and provides little flexibility.

One desirable feature mentioned is the ability to facilitate

dynamic switching of LDPC codes in both the encoder and

decoder. This would allow new use models for such a codec

implementation.

• Rate compatibility is a vital facet of any transmission

system that operates over a time-varying channel. The

ability to dynamically switch codes would allow a variable

rate system to be built without the need for puncturing.

In addition to the logic savings, transmissions at higher

code rates would not suffer the performance degradation

inherent in puncture-based systems.

• The ability to use a single encoder-decoder pair for a wide

variety of code rates and lengths means they could be used

in an equally wide variety of applications. Ultimately, this

means that hardware costs would be reduced since it would

not be necessary to redesign these modules for every new

application.

Sun et al. [15] proposed a generalized decoder structure, but it

handles only regular codes and uses the min-sum decoding al-

gorithm which has a significant negative impact on code perfor-

mance. As mentioned, Lee et al. introduced a flexible encoder

design [14]. However, the throughput of this implementation is

too low to be useful for practical applications.

This paper introduces a block-structured methodology

for LDPC code synthesis. The code is constrained using

[13] as a guideline and the resulting codes have a very low

memory footprint. A partly parallel encoder is then designed

using the constructed codes. This implementation provides

high throughput, is remarkably compact and allows dynamic

switching of codes. The structural constraints applied to the

code allow us to build on the decoder in [11], performing

several optimizations at the architectural level. The resulting

decoder is more efficient and has higher throughput, and also

1549-8328/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FEWER et al.: VERSATILE VARIABLE RATE LDPC CODEC ARCHITECTURE

2241

Fig. 1. Concurrent design flowchart of encoder, decoder, and LDPC code.

allows the dynamic switching of codes. This unified architecture of code, encoder and decoder yields a practical high-speed codec implementation for LDPC codes while providing a very high level of versatility.

careful balance must be struck between this parameter and the code length.
B. Construction Procedure

II. CODE CONSTRUCTION METHODOLOGY

The code design uses the concept of irregularly partitioned

permutation matrices (IPPMs) [10], [16], [17]. This construc-

tion involves construction of a small “macro-matrix” with

the desired properties. This matrix then undergoes a scaling

process, where each nonzero entry is replaced by a

per-

mutation submatrix and each zero entry is replaced by a

zero matrix. The submatrix can be either a pseudorandom

permutation or some cyclic shift of the identity. In general, the

submatrix contains one 1 per row and one 1 per column so that

the expanded matrix maintains the degree distribution of the

macro-matrix. The resultant parity-check matrix has dimension

.

A. Construction Constraints

A concurrent design methodology is used to ensure that the

code, the encoder and the decoder are all architected with an

awareness of one another. A series of constraints are passed be-

tween the encoder and decoder design processes to the code con-

struction process, as depicted in Fig. 1.

The following code construction constraints are derived from

the encoder architecture (see Section III).

• The encoder requires that the LDPC code be designed with

an IPPM-type structure.

• The expansion submatrices must take the form of a shifted

identity matrix.

• It must be possible to convert the macro-matrix for the code

into an approximate lower triangular (ALT) form as shown

in Fig. 1. The gap value for the conversion must be 1.

• Following the ALT conversion and the expansion of the

macro-matrix, the matrix

must be

invertible.

In addition to the encoder constraints, following code construc-

tion constraint is derived from the decoder architecture (see Sec-

tion IV).

• The expansion factor has a direct relation to the number

of computational modules required in the decoder, so a

With the aforementioned hardware-based constraints and

with the implicit constraint of ensuring good error correcting

performance, the code construction methodology may now be

described as follows, with reference to Fig. 3.

1) Choose code parameters.

• Choose code length and rate.

• Choose expansion factor based on maximum desired

hardware complexity (encoder and decoder).

2) Choose degree distributions.

• Select degree distribution based on optimal values from

[18].

3) Fill macro-matrix.

• Pseudorandomly fill nonzero entries of the macro-ma-

trix according to degree distributions.

• Ensure no cycles exist consisting solely of weight-2 vari-

able nodes.

4) Perform expansion based on approximate cycle extrinsic

message degree (ACE) criteria [19].

• Expand the macro-matrix by replacing each nonzero

entry with a shifted-identity submatrix of size

.

The expansion process converts the rows and columns

of the macro-matrix in to “block rows” and “block

columns” in the expanded form.

• Use ACE criteria to choose shift values so that harmful

cycles are removed using a modified implementation of

the theory in [20] (including those of length 4). This

helps to ensure that the codes have a low error floor.

5) Perform ALT conversion.

• Perform ALT conversion using a modified form of the

Greedy Algorithm A (from [13]).

• Ensure the gap is 1.

6) Check Invertible.

• Ensure that can be inverted. In practice this is almost

always possible.

7) Completion.

• Store the ALT form of the macro-matrix and the shift

associated with each nonzero entry.

• Store (dense

matrix).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Fig. 2. Macro-matrix in approximate lower triangular form (from [13]).

III. VERSATILE ENCODER ARCHITECTURE

A. Efficient Encoding

The versatile LDPC encoder uses an extended version of the

encoding technique presented in [13]. The involves converting

the parity check matrix into ALT form as shown in Fig. 2. Since

this is obtained solely by using row and column swaps, the

ALT form of remains sparse. By letting the codeword

, where denotes the user data portion of the code-

word, and combined denote the redundant portion of

the codeword the parity check equation (

) can be

rewritten as

(1)

Multiplying from the left by

and solving, we get

(2) (3)

Fig. 3. Flexible code construction flowchart.

where

.

Thus, it is possible to determine and and, hence, gen-

erate the codeword for using partitions of the ALT form of

. Note that calculations involving can be performed as

forward substitution operations since

, which can be solved since is lower triangular.

With the exception of multiplication by , the processing

time required for all of the computations is proportional to the

number of nonzero entries in the macro-form of the partition

being operated on. Since each of these partitions are sparse

(since the ALT form of is sparse), the total computation time

is approximately . The single operation that involves

is

. However, since is equal to 1 for the macro-matrix

this calculation has only a modest affect on the overall compu-

tation time.

We now extend this algorithm to cover circulant IPPM-type

matrices. In order to do this, the different computations involved

in the encoding operation are identified and then generalized for

IPPMs, so that they may all be handled by a single calculation

engine. From (2) and (3), the computations can be divided into

three classes, described in the following section.

B. IPPM Encoding Operations

A major advantage in constructing codes using this technique is that the macro-matrix is small. As a result, the generation and expansion of this matrix and checking the suitability of the resulting code for encoding may be performed rapidly. Thus, if a

1) Macro-Multiplication: Macro-multiplication is the term

given here to the process of performing matrix-vector multipli-

cation operations using IPPMs. Consider the following case of

the equation

:

particular code in the ensemble does not meet the requirements,

it can be discarded and another generated instead. Given typical degree distributions and an expansion factor , it is possible to generate a suitable code in a very short time from the ensemble.

...

... . . . ...

...

...

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FEWER et al.: VERSATILE VARIABLE RATE LDPC CODEC ARCHITECTURE

2243

where each submatrix is either a zero matrix or shifted code construction algorithm) and the resulting matrix is non-

identity matrix and each and are 1 subvectors. A sub- singular, then is a dense circulant matrix composed of

vector is calculated as

the superposition of several shifted identity submatrices. Thus

(5)

All of the terms for which is a zero matrix can be ignored.

For the remaining terms, denote

as an operator which

cyclically shifts a vector by the shift value associated with .

Since multiplication of a vector by is equivalent to a cyclic

shift of the vector, we can rewrite (5) as

where

are the component shifts that make up

and

. As a result of this structure, multiplication

by can be decomposed into a series of multiplications by

the constituent elements that make up the matrix

(6) In summary, all of the computations required by the encoding

Thus, the entire computation can be reduced to a series of shiftand-add operations. Since the majority of the entries in a typical matrix are zero, the number of shift-and–add operations for the entire macro-multiplication is equal to the number of

procedure can be reduced to a combination of vector cyclic

shifts and

addition operations. Thus, an efficient encoder

may be implemented by constructing a small high-speed com-

putation engine to perform these operations.

nonzero submatrices within , which is small since the macroform of is sparse.
2) Macro-Forward Substitution: Macro-forward substitution is the term given here to the operation of performing forward substitution using a partition of an IPPM. Consider the case of
where is the unknown vector. Multiplying by on both sides, we obtain

C. Encoder Structure
The encoder structure is shown in Fig. 4. The encoder is designed such that several frames are processed at once in an interleaved manner. This has no inherent affect on the throughput of the design, but allows operations that require feedback in the calculation engine to be stretched out over time, therefore allowing pipelining stages to be added to this module for addi-

tional speed. For the purposes of this discussion, it is assumed

...

... . . . ...

...

that four frames are processed together.

...

(7) The following sections provide a description of each of the

functional modules of the design.

1) Input Storage: The input storage module is a -bit wide

Then, solving for each subvector of , we get

dual-port double buffered memory that holds the user data frames until they can be processed by the calculation engine.

Initially four frames of user data are written to this memory in

word-interleaved form. When the write operation is complete,

...

the control finite state machine (FSM) is triggered to initiate reading of this data. A second buffer is provided in this memory

(8) to allow another set of four frames to be written to the memory while the initial set is being processed. Once the first frame

Two factors make the aforementioned computations more simple than they appear.
• Just as macro-multiplication is equivalent to a vector rotation, macro-multiplication by an inverse is equivalent to a vector rotation in the reverse direction.
• Two vector rotations may be compounded into one by observing that the result of two sequential vector rotations is also a vector rotation.
Thus, the general form of (8) may be rewritten as

set is processed (calculation of and is complete) the first buffer is freed up to allow another frame set to be written. This scheme ensures that there is always sufficient data waiting to be processed by the calculation engine and that there are no processing gaps.
2) Code RAM: The Code RAM is used to store information on the LDPC code being used, the entries of which constitute commands for the sequencing of the Control FSM. The RAM contains an entry for each nonzero element of the macro-matrix, segmented according to the partitions in Fig. 2. An example of

(9) how the fields of an entry might be constructed is Fig. 5. • The column location represents the column location within

where

for

and

and where all

the relevant partition of the the macro-matrix.

the aforementioned macro-multiplications can be accomplished • The shift value indicates the right cyclic shift applied to the

using cyclic rotations since is always a shifted identity ma-

submatrix represented by that entry in the range 0 to .

trix. Note that this computation is of the same form as that re- • The end of row flag indicates that the current entry of the

quired for macro-multiplication.

code RAM is the last entry of the row in the current parti-

3) Dense Multiplication: Dense multiplication is the term we

tion.

use to denote the operation requiring multiplication by . If • The skip row flag indicates that there are no nonzero entries

the gap value of the ALT conversion is 1 (as is required in the

on this row.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Fig. 4. Versatile high-speed encoder structure.

The

accumulator is simply a bank of XOR gates in par-

allel with a delayed feedback to account for the interleaved na-

ture of the accumulated data. The calculation engine structure

is shown in Fig. 6 for a value of

.

Some of the macro-forward substitution operations require

that a data value generated at the output be fed back to the input

immediately for the next operation. Rather than stalling the cal-

Fig. 5. Code RAM entry structure.

culation engine while waiting for this value, four channels are processed in an interleaved fashion. This means that from the

perspective of the data for a single channel, the calculation en-

• The last Row flag indicates that this entry is the last in a given partition.
The entries in the Code RAM are used in strict sequence, starting with the first nonzero entry in the partition and ending with the last entry in the partition. This is required to satisfy the order of computation.
3) Control FSM: The control finite state machine is used to manage all of the computations during the encoding process. It reads entries sequentially from the code RAM and converts them into memory address values for the buffers and shift values for the calculation engine. It also uses the flags embedded in the code RAM entries to determine when to start calculations for a new macro-matrix partition. Note that all

gine has a pipeline delay of one clock cycle instead of the actual delay of four cycles.
5) Intermediate Storage: The intermediate storage holds the results of intermediate calculations during the encode process. It is divided up into four banks internally to allow multiple blocks of data to be stored simultaneously. Typically, the calculation engine will read from one bank of the intermediate storage and write results back to a different bank.
6) Output Memory: The output memory is used to store the partial codeword sections as they are being calculated. This storage is required so that a processing of successive frames may be carried out with a minimal processing gap.
D. Encoder Summary

of the operational controls are embedded in the code RAM. Therefore, in order to perform encode operations with a different LDPC code, is is only necessary to modify the contents of the code RAM; no modifications of any other portion of the

The architecture described forms the basis of a compact highthroughput LDPC encoder. Since the specifics of the code being used are stored in a compact memory it is possible to modify this information with only a small processing impact, or indeed

design is necessary.

to store the code information for two or more codes and switch

4) Calculation Engine: The calculation engine is the pro- between them with no throughput impact. An example imple-

cessing core of the encoder. It is used to perform all the vector- mentation is presented in Section V.

based shift-and–add operations described in Section III-B. The calculation engine is a compact vector shifter and accumulator

IV. DECODER ARCHITECTURE

(with accumulations being done in

). A series of shift The decoder architecture for the versatile LDPC system

stages is implemented. Each shift stage implements a basic op- described in this paper is based on Mansour and Shanbhag’s

tional fixed shift by a different power of two. Thus, the first stage work in [11] and [21]. One of the principal contributions of this

implements a shift by 0 or 1, the next stage shifts by 0 or 2, the work was developing and implementing a turbo-like decoder

next by 0 or 4 and so on. In this way sufficient stages are com- for LDPC codes. A brief summary of this material is presented

bined to provide an efficient means of shifting from 0 to . here. For further details, refer to [11] and [21].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FEWER et al.: VERSATILE VARIABLE RATE LDPC CODEC ARCHITECTURE

2245

Fig. 6. Structure of the calculation engine.

In order to compute the updated values for the SISO mes-

sages, an efficient approximation to the Jacobian logarithm is

used called the max-quartet bivariate function

defined

as

(11)

where the first two terms are principal part of the equation and the last two terms are the bivariate correction function. Using this equation as a fundamental foundation, a simplified form of the BCJR algorithm is used for decoding. The key equations for this algorithm in terms of the function are

Fig. 7. Trellis representation of a portion of the Tanner graph (from [11]).

(12)

A. Turbo Decoding Message Passing (TDMP) Algorithm

where and are the forward and backward metric differ-

Each row of a parity-check matrix can be thought of as a ences respectively for a given trellis, and are the input and

single parity check equation, where the

addition of the output channel reliability values for a given bit, respectively, and

relevant bits of the codeword must equal zero. Thus, if the th and are the input and output extrinsic reliability values ob-

row of the parity-check matrix has nonzero entries in locations tained by decoding the bits on the assumption that they belong

then the corresponding bits of the codeword only to a specific block row division within the code.

form an even parity-check equation as follows:

These functions are collectively implemented in a module

called a message processing unit (MPU), which is shown in

(10) Fig. 8. The MPU forms the central computation unit for the message processing operation. An array of individual MPU modules

The rows of can, therefore, be thought of as representing a single parity-check (SPC) code over a portion of the codeword to be decoded. Since each of these SPCs are equivalent to a two state trellis, the entire code can be converted to a series of these trellises. An example of this conversion is shown in Fig. 7.
A connection exists between individual trellises where the corresponding rows of overlap in one or more column position. Thus, the bit-to-check and check-to-bit messages are re-

are assembled as part of the decoder. The structure of the entire decoder is shown in Fig. 9.
Since all the rows in a block row are independent, they can be processed at the same time. Thus, MPU modules are implemented, one for each row in a block row. A subiteration is the term given to the procedure of processing a single block row. There are block rows in the expanded matrix (see Fig. 2) and, thus, subiterations in a single decoding iteration.

placed by a single message type called a SISO message. By creating in a IPPM-type fashion, the trellises associated with the B. Optimized TDMP Architecture

rows in each block row are independent (since no column po- The TDMP decoder architecture introduced in [11] and

sitions overlap within a block row), and, therefore, can be pro- [21] and described briefly demonstrates many advantages

cessed in parallel.

over existing decoder architectures. As well as providing high

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Fig. 8. Serial MPU structure (from [21]).

Fig. 9. TDMP decoder structure (from [21]).

throughput and fast convergence, the TDMP algorithm yields a 2) Since each submatrix is a shifted identity matrix, the in-

logic- and memory-efficient implementation.

terleaver and de-interleaver operations will always involve

The constraints placed on the code construction in Section II

a cyclic shift. This means that these modules can be re-

allow us to perform several optimizations to this decoder archi-

placed by efficient vector rotation modules (also known as

tecture. These are made in order to improve the efficiency of the

a barrel shifter) rather than a more general pseudorandom

design as well as ensure that the decoder is compatible with the

interleaver structure. Henceforth, the interleaver is known

encoder implementation described in the previous section.

as the shift module, whereas the de-interleaver is known as

1) TDMP With Circulant IPPMs: The TDMP decoder struc-

the reverse shift or revshift module.

ture is sufficiently versatile to allow the use of a wide variety 2) Reduced Complexity Function: To provide additional

of code types. The work in [11] uses a pseudorandom type of logic efficiency, we have chosen to reduce the complexity of

IPPM based on Ramanujan graphs. However, we choose to im- the fundamental function used in the TDMP algorithm. This

plement the TDMP decoder using circulant IPPMs of the type involves simply replacing

in (11) with its principal

described in Section II. There are several practical advantages part

to using IPPMs of this type.

1) The storage requirements for circulant IPPMs is signifi-

cantly smaller than for pseudorandom IPPMs. This is be-

(13)

cause each submatrix in the code structure may be repre-

sented by a single value (the shift value) rather than a series

of values (the positions of each bit within the submatrix). The logic savings for this optimization are significant. An

In addition, the memory bandwidth for the -memory is FPGA implementation of

occupies

look-up ta-

vastly reduced, since only a single value is required to pro- bles (LUTs), where is the number of bits used to represent

gram the interleaver for each value read from -memory. the channel reliability values. By comparison, using

re-

These facts allow the -memory and the -memory to sults in

LUTs. In addition to this logic saving, the latency

be merged into a single memory block, called the code through the this logic is reduced by more than a factor of two.

memory.

This allows the design to be run at a higher clock speed resulting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FEWER et al.: VERSATILE VARIABLE RATE LDPC CODEC ARCHITECTURE

2247

We can remove the revshift rotation by compounding it with

the next shift module rotation. Thus, instead of a forward ro-

tation by , the shift module performs a forward rotation of

. Since all the rotation values are known in advance

it is a simple matter to modify each rotation value stored in the

code memory such that it accounts for the previous reverse ro-

tation. Hence, the revshift module is no longer required.

One consequence of implementing only the shift module is

that the channel reliability values stored in -memory are no

longer in the correct order. Therefore, when a decoding op-

eration is complete, it is necessary to route the outgoing data

through the shift module one last time, rotating the values in the

reverse direction in accordance with the last rotation that was

applied for that column. In the example illustrated in Fig. 11,

the rotation applied during this step would be

. This final

rotation requires a small amount of additional logic to imple-

Fig. 10. Comparison of BER performance for Q(x; y) versus q (x; y) for two IPPM codes, ten decoder iterations.

ment, but is significantly smaller than the logic required by the two revshift modules that have been removed.
4) Multiframe Processing: During decoding operations

values are read from -memory, rotated in the shift module and

processed by the MPUs. The resulting values are then written

back to the same locations in -memory. In order to provide for

high clock rate this datapath must be pipelined. The resulting

latency means that several clock cycles elapse between reading

the last value from -memory and writing the last value back.

Consider the portion of a matrix shown in Fig. 11 and

the resultant datapath timing in Fig. 12(a). Because the and

submatrices are vertically adjacent they both operate on

the same set of channel values. In addition, the subiteration

involving must wait until all the channel values from the

Fig. 11. Portion of an IPPM H matrix showing sequence of shift operations, where the shaded column contains entries of the interest.

previous subiteration are written to -memory before it can start to read these values. Ultimately this means that the MPUs spend a portion of the decoding time in an idle state, thus

resulting in inefficient use of the logic.

in higher throughputs. Since there are four functions compu-

tations in each MPU, the efficiency of this function has a signif-

icant effect on the final logic size of the decoder. In our example

implementation (see Section V), the function constitutes 44%

of the MPU logic area. Using

would increase the size

of each MPU by almost 50%.

Simulations show that the loss of performance for our class

of structured codes is

dB at a BER of

for ten

decoder iterations. This is illustrated in Fig. 10 with reference

to the codes to be described in Section V-A.

3) Compound Rotations: The revshift module on the return

path of the -memory is required to reorder channel reliability

values after processing by rotating them in the reverse direction

to that of the shift module. Consider the highlighted column in

the portion of an example matrix shown in Fig. 11, where

represents a cyclic rotation by .

This bottleneck may be removed by processing subiterations from multiple frames in an interleaved manner as illustrated in Fig. 12(b). In this case, a subiteration for frame 1 (F1) is performed, followed immediately by a subiteration for frame 2 (F2). By the time processing for the subiteration needs to begin for frame 1, the required values have already been written back to -memory for the subiteration. The MPUs are now fully utilized, thus improving efficiency and maximizing the processing throughput. A consequence of this scheme is that the
-memory now requires four ports for full speed operation (left and right read ports and left and right write ports). To facilitate this a dual-port memory is run at twice the clock speed of the remainder of the decoder in order to provide the required bandwidth. Note that the same structure must be applied to the
-memory in addition to the -memory.
C. Decoder Summary

When processing the channel values associated with this The optimizations described in the previous section allow the column, the values are first rotated by in the shift module. implementation of a more efficient and higher throughput LDPC After MPU processing they are then rotated by the revshift decoder as illustrated in Fig. 13. As with the encoder presented

module in the reverse direction by the same amount (which is in Section III, all of the code information is stored in a single

equivalent to a forward rotation of

). The next subitera- code memory module which act as instructions for the control

tion will read the same block of data and rotate it by in the sequencer module. The compact method of code storage allows

shift module. Note that the data values are, therefore, stored in the code to be changed easily on the fly or for multiple codes to

-memory in the correct order.

be stored at once, thus facilitating rate compatibility.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Fig. 12. Decoder timing for (a) suboptimal MPU usage and (b) optimal MPU usage.

Fig. 13. Optimized TDMP decoder structure.

V. IMPLEMENTATION EXAMPLE A. Structured LDPC Code Synthesis

Note that codes of different lengths may also be easily created by either modifying the scaling factor or using a different size for the macro-matrix.

In order to demonstrate the versatility of the construction B. Encoder Implementation

methodology described, four codes of varying rates were gen- The encoder was implemented in VHDL and verified using

erated. These were the following.

the ModelSim VHDL simulator. Each of the codes generated

1) Code A: A rate 0.33 LDPC code of length 6912.

was simulated and verified in the encoder, with the only mod-

2) Code B: A rate 0.50 LDPC code of length 6912.

ification to the encoder in each case being the contents of the

3) Code C: A rate 0.66 LDPC code of length 6912.

Code RAM.

4) Code D: A rate 0.75 LDPC code of length 6912.

Following verification, the design was targeted to a Virtex-4

The macro-matrix in each case was 108 where varied part (XC4VLX25–12-FF668) using XST as a synthesis tool and

depending on the code rate. In each case the scaling factor used ISE 7.1.03i. The design achieved a maximum clock frequency of

during the expansion process was 64. The relative performance 278 MHz. The design size was 614 slices with 11 BlockRAMs

of these codes is shown in Fig. 14 for 200 decoder iterations. used. This equates to approximately 17-k ASIC gates).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FEWER et al.: VERSATILE VARIABLE RATE LDPC CODEC ARCHITECTURE

2249

Fig. 15. Fixed point performance curves for code B, ten decoder iterations.

Fig. 14. IPPM code performance over AWGN with varying rates, 200 decoder iterations.

TABLE II VERSATILE DECODER THROUGHPUTS

TABLE I VERSATILE ENCODER THROUGHPUTS

ISE 7.1.03i. The design achieved a maximum clock frequency

of 181 MHz. The design size was 10 970 slices with 46 Block-

RAMs used (approximately 300 k ASIC gates). The throughputs

Throughputs for the encoder for each of the codes tested are for each of the four codes tested are shown in Table II.

shown in Table I.

VI. COMPARISON WITH OTHER IMPLEMENTATIONS

C. Decoder Implementation

When comparing with other LDPC implementations in the

The decoder was implemented based on the architecture literature, we focus only on those that provide some flexibility

shown in Fig. 13. A series of simulations was performed in in terms of code rates or lengths supported. Unfortunately,

order to select an optimum fixed point representation for the many implementations are presented without logic usage and

channel reliability values. Bit widths of 4, 5, 6, and 8 were throughput metrics, making comparison difficult. In the area

simulated for code B with a variety of prescaling factors. The of encoders, Li et al. [22] presented a generalized encoding

best performing quantization for each bit width is shown in scheme based on QC-LDPC codes, which have been shown to

Fig. 15, as well as the performance curve for floating point provide good distance properties [23]. However, this imple-

simulations.

mentation would appear to require significant logic resources.

It is observed that curves for bit widths of 5, 6, and 8 are close In addition, the density of the transformed generator matrix

together, whereas there is a significant degradation associated

is likely to be quite high, ultimately requiring a complex

with the curve for the 4-bit quantization. As a result, a 5-bit rep- computation process. Miles et al. [24] proposed an architecture

resentation was chosen for the decoder with a prescaling factor for a specific pair of high-rate QC-LDPC codes. Although the

of 0. Thus, channel values are stored in -memory using 5 bits of implementation could be adapted for other codes and is hard-

precision. During processing in the MPU, the bit-growth associ- ware efficient (approximately 2500 FPGA slice equivalents for

ated with the various arithmetic operations is accommodated by 1 Gbps throughput), application to codes of lower rate would

increasing the bit width of the internal buses. Each of the MPUs require either a significant increase in logic usage or a corre-

incorporates a saturation module at its output that truncates the sponding decrease in throughput. As previously mentioned,

values back to 5 bits.

Lee et al. [14] introduced a flexible encoder architecture using

The design was coded in VHDL and verified using the Mod- a serial version of the ALT encoding scheme used in this paper.

elsim VHDL simulator. A bit-accurate Matlab model was used However, due to the lack of structure in the code and the serial

to provide input and decoded codewords for the simulations. nature of the processing, the ratio of throughput to logic usage

Each of the four IPPM codes generated in Section V-A was ver- for this implementation is quite low (40 Mbps and 1340 slices

ified across a range of

values.

for a length 4000 code).

Following verification, the design was targeted to a Virtex-4 There has been more extensive work done in the area of

part (XC4VLX40-12-FF668) using XST as a synthesis tool and LDPC decoders, although few of these have been very versatile.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Keinle et al. [25] proposed an implementation of a decoder for the DVB-S2 standard with some background from [26]. The resulting decoder yields a high throughput (7.6 Gbps) and can accommodate several codes rates , although the code length is fixed. In addition, the implementation requires significant logic resources (approximately 4.5 million gates in 0.13 technology). Rovini et al. [27] introduced a decoder based upon the work in [28]. This implementation is very efficient and provides significant throughput (5.7-Gbps, 375-k gates). However, the codes supported are of fixed length and are quite restricted in their construction.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced an encoder/decoder pair and code construction methodology for LDPC codes. The IPPM code synthesis scheme allows the creation of codes with a wide variety of rates and code lengths which yield good performance and low error floors. The encoder is extremely compact in terms of logic usage and is built around a central high-speed processing engine that allows high levels of throughput across a variety of code rates. The decoder exhibits the high-speed convergence and logic scalability of a TDMP decoder and includes a series of optimizations that have been made to take advantage of the structured IPPM codes that have been developed. Most significantly these implementations allow dynamic switching between any codes in the IPPM class.
Although implementations of most encoders and decoders typically excel with respect to throughput, logic efficiency or code performance, few can be said to provide an efficient balance of all of these. The work presented in this paper attempts to do just that, while yielding a level of versatility that permits the use of a wide range of code lengths and rates. The assembled system (code, encoder, and decoder) allows a practical versatile variable rate LDPC system to be built without the performance degradation seen in puncture-based systems.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” presented at the IMA Conf. Cryptography and Coding, 1995.
[3] D. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] N. Alon and M. Luby, “A linear time erasure-resiliant code with nearly optimal recovery,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1732–1736, Nov. 1996.
[5] T. J. Richarson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] T. J. Richarson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[7] S. Chung, G. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[8] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[9] J. K. Lee, B. Lee, J. Thorpe, K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Hamkins, “A scalable architecture of a structured LDPC decoder,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2004, p. 292.

[10] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, May 2003, pp. 2801–2712.
[11] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[12] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[13] T. J. Richarson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[14] D. Lee, W. Luk, C. Wang, C. Jones, M. Smith, and J. Villasenor, “Low-density parity-check code constructions for hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, 2004, pp. 101–111.
[15] L. Sun and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Field programmable gate array implementation of a generalized decoder for structured low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Field-Programmable Technology, 2004, pp. 17–24.
[16] D. Sridhara, T. Fuja, and R. M. Tanner, “Low density parity check codes from permutation matrices,” presented at the John Hopkins Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, 2001.
[17] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894–2901, Aug. 2005.
[18] R. L. Urbanke, LDPCOpt—A Tool for Determination of Optimal Degree Distributions. [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/index.php
[19] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, May 2003, pp. 3125–3129.
[20] J. Kang and P. Fan, “Flexible construction of irregular partitioned permutation LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 534–536, Jun. 2005.
[21] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “A novel design methodology for highperformance programmable decoder cores for AA-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Process. Syst., Aug. 2003, pp. 29–34.
[22] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, 2005, pp. 1205–1210.
[23] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[24] L. Miles, J. Gambles, G. Maki, W. Ryan, and S. Whitaker, “An (8158,7136) low-density parity-check encoder,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Custom Integr. Circuits, 2005, pp. 699–702.
[25] F. Keinle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for DVB-S2 LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Design, Autom. Test, 2005, pp. 100–105.
[26] F. Keinle and N. Wehn, “Design methodology for IRA codes,” in Proc. ASP Des. Autom. Conf., 2004, pp. 459–462.
[27] M. Rovini, N. E. L’Insalata, F. Rossi, and L. Fanucci, “VLSI design of a high-throughput multi-rate decoder for structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 8th Euromicro Conf. Digital Syst. Des., 2005, pp. 202–209.
[28] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Joint code-encoder-decoder design for LDPC coding system VLSI implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, May 2004, vol. 2, pp. 389–392.
[29] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
Colm P. Fewer recieived the B.E. degree in electronic engineering and the M.Sc.Eng. degree from the University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, in 1996 and 2006, respectively.
From 1996 to 2000, he was with Parthus Technologies developing advanced storage devices. From 2000 to 2005, he was with Xilinx, Inc., implementing high-speed digital designs in the design services division. He is currently with Acra Control, Ltd., developing point-to-point radio links for the aviation industry. His research interests include forward-error correction with an emphasis on LDPC codes, in addition to cryptography and coded modulation for wireline and wirelss communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FEWER et al.: VERSATILE VARIABLE RATE LDPC CODEC ARCHITECTURE

2251

Mark F. Flanagan received the Ph.D. degree in electronic and electrical Engineering from University College Dublin (UCD), Dublin, Ireland, in 2005.
From April 2005 until March 2007, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the Digital Signal Processing Research Group at UCD. He is now a Postdoctoral Researcher with the Claude Shannon Institute for Discrete Mathematics, Coding, and Cryptography. His research interests include the design of iterative receivers, algebraic constructions of LDPC codes, and coded modulation for wireline and wireless communication systems.

Anthony D. Fagan received the Ph.D. degree from the University College Dublin (UCD), Dublin, Ireland, in 1978.
He was a Research Engineer at Marconi Research Laboratories, Essex, from 1977 to 1980, where he worked on digital signal processing (DSP) for advanced communication systems. In 1980, he became a Lecturer in the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, UCD, where he established the DSP Research Group. The group carries out a balanced mix of theoretical and applied research in the areas of digital communications (wireline and wireless), speech and audio processing, image processing, pattern recognition, and biomedical signal processing. He is a member of the editorial board of Digital Signal Processing, as well as a reviewer for many international journals. He frequently acts as a reviewer of projects and an evaluator of proposals for the European Commission. He has been instrumental in the establishment of a number of Irish companies that carry out work at the highest level in the area of physical layer communications, and he is widely consulted by many international communication companies. His main research interest is in the application of DSP techniques to advanced digital fixed-line and wireless communications, with a particular interest in synchronization techniques, adaptive modulation, equalization, detection methods, and flexible use of the radio spectrum. He also has research interests in the areas of speech, audio, and image processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:59:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

