Architecture and Design Methodology for Structured LDPC Decoder
Jean-Baptiste Dore´, Pierre Pe´nard and Marie-He´le`ne Hamon France Telecom, Research and Development Division, 4 rue du clos courtel, 35512 Cesson-Se´vigne´, France
{jeanbaptiste.dore, pierre.penard, mhelene.hamon}@orange-ftgroup.com

Abstract— In this paper we propose a decoding architecture for turbo-like decoding algorithm of a particular class of Low-Density Parity Check codes. We define a methodology to design codes. In a first step a hardware architecture and the decoding scheduling are first selected. Then rules for the design of these codes are derived, aiming at improving the convergence of the decoding algorithm, while fitting with the proposed architecture. Last, performance results and details on the decoder implementation are provided to illustrate the interest of the approach.
Keywords– LDPC, hardware implementation, design methodology
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have raised a significant interest in the scientific community for the past few years and are now increasingly considered for introduction into communication systems and standards (IEEE 802.16e and 802.11n for example). This evolution towards industrialization motivates the design of LDPC codes suitable for hardware design.
In the literature, there has been a tremendous amount of work on the design and optimization of LDPC codes. Decoding algorithms have also been deeply investigated. In general, the natural approach consists in first designing a code and then associating a decoding algorithm and architecture [1]. These different stages are usually not optimized jointly and it could lead to complex architectures or codes not really suited for an hardware implementation.
Moreover decoding architecture has often been investigated for the classical Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm. Modified schedulings of BP should also be considered and studied as convergence and architecture are improved. A complete state of art is proposed in [2]. More recently the design of LDPC codes that simplifies implementation has been investigated [3]. These code are labelled ”architecture aware” or ”VLSI oriented” LDPC codes [2]. The parity check matrices of these codes are partitioned into blocks which allows efficient decoding architecture [2].
In this paper we first introduce a class of structured LDPC codes, in which the parity check matrices are constructed from circularly shifted identity matrices. We first propose a specific decoding architecture associated with a turbo-like decoding algorithm for this class of codes. We then derive design rules according to this architecture. The last section illustrates performance and complexity of this approach.
II. DEFINITION AND DECODING OF A STRUCTURED LDPC
CODES
We first introduce a structured LDPC code construction derived from the Quasi Cyclic Repeat Accumulate codes of

Tanner et al [4]. The parity check matrix of the code is based on shifted identity matrices and has the following structure:

H = [Hs Hp]

(1)

where Hs is a sparse (N − K) × (K) matrix and Hp is a (N − K) × (N − K) triangular matrix. Using the following notation x = [c p], where c is the information word and p is
the parity word, x is a codeword if and only if:

HxT = [Hs Hp]

cT pT

= 0T

(2)

We denote by v the projection vector and parity bits are

computed using:

vT = HscT

(3)

pT = Hp−1vT

(4)

First, Hs is a low density matrix of size (mz) × (kz), where z is called the expand factor. This matrix consists of blocks

of circularly shifted identity matrices or zero matrices of size

z × z and can be represented as:

 Iδ(0,0)

Iδ(0,1)

···

Iδ(0,k−1) 

Hs = 

Iδ(1,0) ...

Iδ(1,1) ...

··· Iδ(i,j)

Iδ(1,k−1) ...



(5)

Iδ(m−1,0) Iδ(m−1,1)

Iδ(m−1,k−1)

If δ (i, j) is positive then Iδ(i,j) is defined to be a z × z circularly left shifted identity matrix by δ (i, j) mod z po-
sitions, where mod denotes the modulo function. If δ (i, j)
is negative, Iδ(i,j) is defined to be as z × z zero matrix. For instance, we can construct Hs from an expand factor z = 3
and matrix defined as follow:

Hs =

I1 I−1 I2 I0

(6)

which corresponds to: 0 0 1 0 0 0

Hs = 

1 0 0 0

0 1 1 0

0 0 0 1

0 0 1 0

0 0 0 1

0 0 0 0



(7)

100001

Finally, we propose to define Hp by:

I

I1 

Hp =  I

I I

...

I



(8)

0

II

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
1-4244-0264-6/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

1142

where I is a z × z identity matrix and I 1 is a z × z identity

matrix left shifted by one position:

0

··· 0 

I1 = 

1
0 ...

0 1

... ...

... 

(9)

0

10

It is important to note that the shift is not done circularly

to ensure the existence of the inverse of Hp, or in other

words, to guarantee the existence of an encoder. It can be

easily verified that the proposed construction can be view as

a simple accumulator code. It should be mentioned that these

codes are similar to the systematic version of IRA codes [5].

The code structure proposed, allows several possible de-

coding algorithms, such as the Belief Propagation (BP). This

property is strengthened by the use of codes constructed

from circulant permutation matrices, which enable efficient

decoding architectures. In this paper we propose to implement

a turbo like decoding algorithms [2], [6]. Turbo like decoding

consists in isolating trellis-like sub graphs [7] and locally

applying the BCJR algorithm [8]. The application of this

scheduling is straightforward for the proposed structure: the

decoder is exactly the dual of the encoder. The decoder is

divided into two sub-decoders, outer and inner decoder. The

outer decoder is a SPC (Single parity check) decoder, while

the inner decoder is an accumulator decoder.

The SPC decoder works in two steps as shown in Figure

1. A first step, labelled SPC inward, consists in computing, at

iteration

i,

messages

mOi I (k)

from

outer

to

inner 

decoder:

miOI (c) = g 

Aji−1 − mci−j 1 

j∈Vc

(10)

where Vc is the set of systematic variable nodes connected to the check node c. mcj denotes messages from check to variable nodes while Av is the sum of both all check to variable messages and the channel observation for bit
corresponding to variable node v. Function g(.) is defined by:

g (a, b, c) = g (a, g (b, c))

(11)

and in a suboptimal way, this function can be written:

g (a, b) = sign(a)sign(b) min (|a| , |b|)

(12)

The algorithm is labelled Turbo-like Min Sum when this

approximation is used. The second step computes new information mIi O(c), messages from check node c to systematic variable nodes connected to check node c and the a posteriori

probabilities Aj: 



mciv = g miIO(c),

Aij−1 − mic−j 1  (13)

j∈Vc /v

Avi = yvs +

mci kv

ck ∈Cv

(14)

where Ck is the set of check nodes connected to the systematic variable node v and yvs the systematic channel observation (LLR) of variable node v.

y1p

y2p

y3p

B1

B2

F1

F2

SP C Inward SP C Outward

miOI(c10101) 1010 101010011100 011011000110miIO(c3) 10101100 00110110c11001 0101mjic101 0110 01011010c10103 0011mci3j 1010 0110 0101 1001 1010 0110 A1010ij
Fig. 1. Illustration of the decoding algorithm on the code graph: First the SPC inward step is realized (e.g check c1), then the accumulator code is decoded by a FBA and the SPC Outward step is computed (e.g check c3)

Standard Forward Backward Algorithms (FBA) such as BCJR algorithm can be used for the inner decoder (i.e accumulator code). The FBA processing on an accumulator can be simply described in terms of additions and function g (.). The graph of an accumulator is shown on Figure 1. The FBA processing can be formulated through the following equations:

Fj = yjp + g (Fj−1, mOI (j))

(15)

Bj = yjp + g (Bj+1, mOI (j + 1))

(16)

mIO (j) = g (Fj−1, Bj )

(17)

where yjp denotes the channel observation (LLR) of the parity bit j, while Fk and Bk represent the forward and backward messages respectively.
The natural scheduling of this algorithm consists in first computing the M parity equations in the inward phase, then running the inner FBA algorithm and finally computing all parity equations in the outward phase.
To decrease the memory requirements, a sliding window (SW) decoding can be applied [9]. Indeed, to decrease the storage required for buffering SPC inward and outward metrics, a SPC window decoding scheme can be used. The principle consists in computing the parity equations required to start the windows decoding of a part of the accumulator code corresponding to one window. The window size, i.e the number of parity equations computed, must be equal to the size of a decoding window of the inner code. In order to simplify the implementation and the code design, we propose to fix the window size to m. Moreover a very simple decoder architecture can be derived as shown in Figure 2. The decoder is divided in three sub-decoders, SPC inward, SPC outward

SPC inward Processor

Buffer
FBA decoder Processor

SPC outward Processor

Memories
Fig. 2. Architecture proposed for turbo like decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1143

Windows 2

SPC I − 1

SPC I − 2

Inner − 1

Inner − 2

SPC O − 1

SPC O − 2

SPC I − z Inner − z SPC O − z

Iteration

Fig. 3. Chronogram of a serial scheduling decoding algorithm

and inner sub-decoder. In order to simplify the SPC inward and outward processor implementation, the number of ones in the systematic part Hs of the parity check matrix should be constant and equal to J (while degrees of variable nodes can be irregular without overhead of complexity for SPCs processors). The channel observations, the messages from check to variable nodes and the systematic a posteriori values are stored into memory banks.

III. DESIGN METHODOLOGY
First we investigate a serial scheduling algorithm which consists in decoding serially each window. A new window decoding starts at the end of the decoding of the previous one as shown in Figure 3. This scheduling of operations is aimed to improve the convergence of the decoding algorithm, and design rules should be derived accordingly. We thus derive a design rule enabling that a systematic variable node will be updated as many times as its connection degree, and this rule can be described as follows:
A systematic bit must be used only once in a decoding window
The application of this rule to the proposed code, constructed from circulant identity matrices, can be easily described: in a column, positive coefficients must be different. Mathematically the design rule on positive coefficients is:

δ(i, j) = δ(k, j), ∀i = k, ∀j

(18)

This condition maximizes the convergence of the decoding algorithm since during one window decoding, all decoding information are the most up-to-date ones. This corresponds to the shuffle scheduling, introduced in [10], applied to the proposed decoding algorithm. An example of the decoding gain with different numbers of iterations is illustrated in Figure 4. In this example, a code is constructed according

K = 768, R = 1/2 10−1
SS algorithm − 1 SW SS algorithm − z SW

10−2

BER

10−3

10−4

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb / No

Fig. 4. Bit Error Rate (BER) performance over Additive White Gaussian
Noise (AWGN) channel of a code for 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12 and 15 iterations of both proposed scheduling (◦) and classical scheduling ( ) algorithm.

SPC I index

m l

m t t

Trellis

stage

p

m

t

t

SPC O

index

q

m

t

l+2m+p+q

t

Fig. 5. Optimized serial scheduling algorithm.

to the design rule stated previously, with parameters n = 24, m = 12 and z = 64. First, the classical scheduling algorithm is performed (equivalent to a window of size mz: it consists in checking all parity equations of the outer code and then decoding the inner code) for 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12 and 15 iterations with a turbo-like min-sum algorithm. The same code is also decoded with a serial scheduling algorithm by windows. As can be see on the Figure 4, the proposed scheduling converges faster. This property can be particularly interesting when high throughput is required. In this exemple five iterations of the proposed scheduling is equivalent to seven iterations of the classical scheduling, enabling a throughput gain of 40 %. In this case the performance loss compared to 15 iterations is less than 0.2dB. Moreover, our investigations have demonstrated that the performance are equivalent to 50 iterations of BP algorithm.
The scheduling algorithm illustrated in Figure 3 can be improved by a ”semi-pipeline” processing. In others words, as soon as a parity equation is checked in the inward phase, the result is directly treated by a forward processor which computes and saves the state metrics. At the end of the forward recursion, the backward recursion computes state metrics and soft outputs. As soon as a soft metric is available, the corresponding parity equation is checked in the outward way. This scheduling algorithm is depicted in Figure 5 using the graphical representation introduced in [11]. Horizontal axis represents the time t, with units of clock periods. It is assumed that a forward and a backward recursion of one stage, and one parity check can be performed in exactly one clock cycle. It is also assumed the window size is m (thus there are z windows to be decoded). Vertical axis represents the indexes of parity equations and trellis stages. Values l, p and q represent latency between the different phases. Under these assumptions the decoding throughput can be expressed by:

Db =

(2m

k + α)

Imax

fclk

(bit/sec)

(19)

where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1144

• Imax is the number of decoding iterations; • fclk is the clock frequency. A synchronous architecture
design is assumed; • α is the sum of latency l, p and q.
Parameter α should be small compared to m in order to achieve the maximum throughput. Actually, the proposed expression of the decoding throughput is an upper bound of the true one. This bound is achievable if latency between two windows, two iterations and two decoded blocks is null.

IV. DECODER IMPLEMENTATION
In this section we propose to describe the implementation of the proposed architecture. Each decoding processor is described and discussed. The decoding algorithm studied is a normalized Turbo-like Min Sum algorithm. The impact of this approximation is negligible in term of performance if a suitable correcting term is applied to output messages of parity equations.

A. SPC inward and outward processors

The SPC inward processor computes messages for the input of the accumulator decoder through equation (10). First values Aj and mcj are loaded from memories and then signals mjc is computed:
mjc = Aj − mcj

The signals mjc (see Figure 1) are then compared (in absolute value) to determine the outgoing messages mOI . Moreover during the SPC outward step, the same messages mjc should
be compared with new extrinsic information from the inner

decoder: these messages are then stored into a buffer. The
classical way to compute new messages mcj at the SPC outward step consists in J comparisons of J different values.
However during the SPC inward step, J of these messages

were previously compared. This information can consequently

be used during the SPC outward process, and thus only two
comparisons are needed at this step. Let’s assume |m1| is the smallest message |mjc| and i1 the index of the corresponding variable node. We also denote |m2| the second smallest message |mjc| and i2 the index of the corresponding variable node. The calculation of new messages mcj requires only two comparisons between message from inner decoder |mIO| and both |m1| and |m2|. The SPC outward decoding computation
can then be expressed by:

if |mIO(c)| < |m1|

then

|mcj| = |mIO(c)| , ∀j ∈ Vc

else if |mIO(c)| > |m2|

|mcj| = |m1| , ∀j ∈ Vc/i1 |mci1 | = |m2|

(20)

else

|mcj| = |m1| , ∀j ∈ Vc/i1 |mci1 | = |mIO(c)| end

The calculation of the sign of each message mcj requires J XOR functions with J inputs. However the complexity of such

a computation is very low compared to the other functions.

The last step of the SPC outward process consists in the computation of the value Aj. If the design rule expressed in

Sign Magnitude mOI mIO

mjc
mcj Aj

Buffer

i1

i2

Min +

SPC Outward
Comparison + Aj

SPC Inward

Memories

index mcj

Fig. 6. Architecture of SPC inward and outward processors.

the previous section is respected, a systematic bit j is used only once in a decoding window, then:

Aj = (Aj − mcj ) + mcj = mjc + mcj

(21)

The computation of Aj needs only a sum between the new messages mcj and the messages mjc stored into the buffer. To sum up, this simple architecture requires the storage between the SPC inward and outward steps of both m messages mjc and m times indexes i1 and i2. The architecture of SPC inward and outward processors is illustrated Figure 6. Concerning the organization of the memories, values Aj and messages mcj should be stored. A memory of size K words is required for value Aj. Moreover, without simplification, a memory size of at least JM words is needed for the storage of messages mcj. The product JM is equivalent to the number of edges connected to systematic variable nodes and is large compared to K. Memories are thus dominated by the storage of these messages mcj. We have previously demonstrated (equation (20)) that messages mcj can take only two different absolute values. We therefore propose to store only the two different
messages, the index of the variable node corresponding to
the smallest value and the sign of all messages. The memory gain is illustrated figure 7 for various J and quantification parameter Q. When J becomes large then the gain is about
70%.

Memory Gain %

80

70

60

50

40

Q=4

30

Q=5

Q=6

20

10

0

−10

−20

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

J

Fig. 7. Illustration of the memory gain with the proposed organization of memory. Q represents the memory quantization.

B. Inner decoder processor and address generator
The inner code can be viewed both as a two-states trellis or zig-zag graph. The implementation of this decoder is well known and has been largely investigated in the literature. Concerning the address generator, the proposed construction from circularly shifted identity matrices enables a very simple

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1145

address generation. When permutation coefficients are known,

100

addresses are computed on the fly by a simple counter modulo

the size of a shifted identity matrix.

10−2

N = 16320 bits − 15it − QPSK

V. IMPLEMENTATION EXAMPLE
In order to evaluate the proposed architecture, we implemented it on an hardware platform. We designed a decoder which aims at fitting with a large range of coding size and coding rate. Table I summarizes the decoder parameters and implementation complexity. The quantization at the input of the decoder is 4 bits (i.e a range of +/-7) resulting in a loss of 0.1dB on AWGN channel compared to 5 or more bits . The architecture was implemented on a ALTERA EP1S80F FPGA. The proposed architecture consumed 16% of logic cells and 19% of memory bits of the FPGA. The design was tested and clocked at a frequency of 50MHz (the synthesis tool predicts a higher maximum clock frequency) which correspond to a decoding throughput of 5.4Mbit/s for 7 iterations. Comparison with other implementation results in the literature should be undertaken cautiously, as many papers about decoder implementation deal with ASIC realization which enables a higher clock frequency (up to 10 times higher), and therefore higher throughputs. We also investigated a fully pipelined architecture, allowing a higher throughput (7it, 14.28 Mbit/s) at the cost of a slight increase in complexity. However, this architecture sets additional constraints on the design of codes, and the selection of appropriate codes fitting this architecture is more difficult. Note that only one decoder processor is considered and the data rate can be increased if the decoder processor is duplicated.
Performance in one scenario is illustrated on Figure 8. This configuration illustrates the performance for a coding block size N = 16320 bits, which corresponds to the block size of systems such as DVB-S2. For performance under 10−7, the stopping criterion is 50 error blocks. Performance curves down to bit error rates below 10−10 are provided even for high coding rates. These performance demonstrate the validity of the architecture: no early error floor is introduced by both the proposed implementation (quantization and clipping effects) and the code design.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we proposed an efficient implementation for the decoding of structured LDPC codes. These codes,

Decoder parameter

Coding Rate

1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, 5/6,...

N

up to 63 426 bits

m

up to 31

z

up to 1023

J

4l ∀l

Decoder implementation

Channel quantization

4 bits

mcj quantization: Q Parallelism factor

5 bits 2

Complexity

Target

Altera EP1S80c6

Logic Cells

12 722

16%

Memory bits

1 443 200 19%

TABLE I PARAMETERS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECODER.

10−4

BER/PER

10−6

10−8 10−10

R=1/2 R=2/3 R=3/4 R=5/6 R=7/8

10−12

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/No

Fig. 8. Performance over AWGN channel with codes of size N = 16320 bits decoded with 15 iterations.

with parity check matrices constructed from shifted identity matrices, can be viewed as a subclass of IRA codes. Necessary conditions on positions of the ones in the systematic part of the parity check matrix, based on the constraints set by the architecture and the scheduling algorithm employed, are proposed. Theses rules are then directly derived in the case of the subclass of IRA codes investigated, resulting in conditions on the permutation coefficients. Details on the implementation of the decoder have been then provided and discussed. A simplification of the computational complexity of the decoding process is proposed in the case of a window decoding. The performance achieved with the proposed architecture are illustrated and demonstrates the benefits of the proposed architecture.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “A 220mW 1Gb/s 1024-bit rate-1/2 low density parity check code decoder,” IEEE Conference on Custom Integrated Circuits, May 2001.
[2] M. Mansour, “High-performance decoders for regular and irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, December 2004.
[3] F. Kienle and N. Wehn, “Design methodology for ira codes,” Asia South Pacific Design Automation Conference, Jan 2004.
[4] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. of. the 37th Allerton Conference, 1999.
[5] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” 2nd International Symposium on Turbo-Codes and Related Topics, Sept 2000.
[6] F. Kienle, T. Lehnigk-Emden, and N. Wehn, “Fast convergence algorithm for ldpc codes,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, May 2006.
[7] A. Roumy, S. Guemghar, G. Caire, and S. Verdu, “Design methods for irregular repeat accumulate codes,” IEEE Transaction on Information theory, vol. 50, August 2004.
[8] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 20, March 1974.
[9] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and A. F. Pollara, “Soft output decoding algorithms for continuous decoding of parallel concatenated convolutional codes,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, June 1996.
[10] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” Conference Record of the Thirty-Sixth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, vol. 1, Nov 2002.
[11] E. Boutillon, W. Gross, and P. Gulak, “VLSI architectures for the map algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, February 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:02:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1146

