IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

3925

Improved Data Recovery from Patterned Media With Inherent Jitter Noise Using Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Ioannis T. Ntokas1, Paul W. Nutter1, Cen J. Tjhai2, and Mohammed Z. Ahmed2
School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, U.K. School of Computing, Communications and Electronics, University of Plymouth, Plymouth PL4 8AA, U.K.
Patterned magnetic media promises areal densities in excess of 1 Tbit/in2 for data storage. However, current imperfect patterning techniques result in a variation in the dimensions and distribution of the fabricated islands. As a result, this variation introduces jitter in the replay waveform that makes data recovery difficult. In this paper, we investigate the use of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and iterative decoding for mitigating the effects of lithography jitter and improving the read channel performance in patterned media storage systems. In addition, we show that the adoption of LDPC coding techniques permits an increase in the data storage capability of the medium to approximately 1.6 Tbit/in2 with acceptable bit-error-rate performance.
Index Terms—Lithography jitter, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, perpendicular patterned media, read channel performance.

I. INTRODUCTION
THE general view is that the use of a continuous thin-film storage medium in current magnetic data storage systems will be unsuitable for attaining storage densities in excess of 1 Tbit/in , due to the onset of thermal stability issues at ultrahigh storage densities [1], [2]. As such, new storage technologies, such as the use of a patterned magnetic storage medium, must be explored [1]. However, the development of patterned magnetic media as a viable storage solution is currently limited by the availability of efficient and cost-effective fabrication techniques, capable of producing uniform, nanometer-sized islands, regularly spaced over large areas. As a result of the limitations of existing fabrication techniques, there is an inherent variation in the size and position of the fabricated islands. If the islands are sufficiently small to exhibit single domain behavior then, as a consequence of the variation in island geometry media, noise in patterned media is dominated by lithography jitter [1], [3]–[6], unlike perpendicular continuous media where transition noise is dominant [7]. The effect of lithography jitter, which can be shown to be Gaussian in nature [8], is to degrade the replay waveform and make the reliable recovery of stored data more difficult [9].
There have been a number of published works addressing the issue of data recovery and channel designs for patterned media [2], [9]–[13]. Early studies by Hughes have investigated read channel designs for patterned media [2], [10]. A study by Nair and New [11] investigated how island edge imperfections were a cause of noise in patterned media recording. Nutter et al. investigated how the island geometry affected the replay waveform and data recovery process [9], [13]. Recent work by Hu et al., makes a comparison between various coding and iterative decoding schemes in patterned media storage systems [12], including simple convolutional codes, turbo codes, and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. This work demonstrated that the incorporation of coding and iterative decoding techniques leads to a significant coding gain. However, this work failed to take into account the significant signal degradations introduced as a result of the presence of lithography jitter.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2007.903349

In this paper, we concentrate on the application of LDPC codes and iterative decoding techniques to magnetic storage systems incorporating a patterned magnetic storage medium, for the more realistic case where lithography jitter is present. We demonstrate that the adoption of LDPC codes and iterative decoding offers a means of improving the read channel bit-error-rate (BER) performance in the presence of lithography jitter. In addition, an acceptable BER performance can be observed even when the storage density of the medium is increased to 1.6 Tbit/in (reduced island periodicity/track period of 20 nm) for the same giant magnetoresistive (GMR) read head configuration.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the simulations that have been developed in order to model the replay and data recovery processes in a patterned media storage system, as well as the application of LDPC coding techniques. In Section III, the effect of lithography jitter on the BER performance of the read channel is investigated, with and without the use of LDPC codes. Finally, Section IV summarizes conclusions arising from the work undertaken.
II. READ CHANNEL SIMULATION
The performance of the read channel in a storage system incorporating a patterned magnetic storage medium has been evaluated using MATLAB simulations of the replay and data recovery processes. Fig. 1 illustrates the structure of the complete read channel simulated, which consists of three functional blocks (illustrated as shaded boxes): the replay model, the data recovery channel, and the LDPC encoder/decoder. The structure and simulation of each of these functional blocks are described below.
A. Replay Model
The replay model predicts the signal waveform that would be observed from a GMR read sensor as it scans along a track of islands in a magnetic storage system incorporating a patterned perpendicular magnetic storage medium. The replay model is based on an extension of the standard two-dimensional (2-D) reciprocity approach to three-dimensional (3-D) space and takes into account the geometrical aspects of both the patterned recording medium and the GMR read sensor used. The complete modeling process is outlined in more detail in [13] and is covered briefly below.

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3926

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the complete read channel simulation. The three functional blocks of the simulation are shown in the shaded boxes: the replay model, the data recovery channel, and the LDPC encoder/decoder.

The voltage signal from the GMR read head is proportional In this analysis the medium magnetization and potential

to the signal flux injected into the GMR sensor at the air-bearing distributions are calculated over an area 20.48 nm 20.48 nm

surface (ABS). Hence, when the read head is at position along below the center of the GMR read sensor, and are represented

the scan direction, , the signal flux at the GMR sensor, , is using matrices of dimensions 2048 2048 at a spatial resolu-

given by

tion of 0.1 nm (in both along track and across track directions).

Once the recorded magnetization pattern in the storage

medium has been generated, such as an isolated magnetic

island, then the 3-D reciprocity model can be used to predict

the output response to that magnetic structure. More impor-

(1) tantly, the model allows the generation of a readout waveform

where is the scalar magnetic field potential, which varies in the along-track direction, , the across-track direction, , and the position below the ABS of the GMR read head, . is the perpendicular magnetization component of the medium, which varies in the along-track, , and across-track, , directions only.
Equation (1) can be expressed in the form

including the presence of inter-track interference (ITI) introduced as a result of the read head sensing islands along tracks adjacent to the main data track. The inclusion of ITI is pertinent in patterned media storage systems where the bit-aspect-ratio (BAR) may very well be 1 due to the patterning processes used typically producing square or circular islands.
If data is recorded to a patterned medium such that each island

is used to store a single recorded bit, then the replay waveform

due to a train of random recorded data is produced by the su-

(2) perposition of an ideal step response, generated for an isolated island using the 3-D reciprocity model described. This process

where : and : are Fourier transforms pairs, is the
complex conjugate of , IFT is the inverse Fourier transform operation, and and are the Fourier transform wavenumbers in and directions, respectively. Thus, the calculation of the voltage signal from the GMR read head is simply a Fourier transform process involving the magnetization distribution across the plane of the storage medium, and simulated potential distributions below the ABS of the GMR read sensor.
The 2-D potential distribution along the plane of the ABS is calculated using the analytical approach of Wilton [14]. In the following analysis, a patterned perpendicular magnetic storage medium with no SUL has been adopted, as this media configuration has been shown to offer optimum read channel performance [9]. In this case, projected potential distributions at any plane below the ABS, as required for (2), can be calculated using the simple filter function [9], [14]

involves the superposition of the step response at points in the replay waveform corresponding to the ideal physical location of the leading and lagging edges of each island as the GMR read head scans along a track of islands. As lithography jitter leads to variations in the position of the edges of each island, it is easily introduced into the simulated replay waveform by varying the position at which the step response is superposed. Here, the random shift in the edge position due to lithography jitter is defined to be a Gaussian distribution [8] of zero mean and variance , where is specified in nanometers from the ideal position of the island edge. The Gaussian distribution in this case is truncated so that the edge shift introduced is no greater than the separation between islands. Jitter is added in the along-track direction only, as jitter across-track has little effect on the replay signal due to the relatively large read sensitivity function of the head compared with the track width [11].
The effect of ITI is easily introduced into the simulated re-

(3) play waveform as a result of adopting the 3-D reciprocity model described [13], [15]. Replay waveform contributions due to the

where

.

read head sensing adjacent tracks are calculated independently

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NTOKAS et al.: MPROVED DATA RECOVERY FROM PATTERNED MEDIA WITH INHERENT JITTER NOISE

3927

in a similar manner to that used to generate the signal from the main data track. However, in this case the step response used in the superposition process is evaluated with the read head displaced off-track by a track pitch. The replay waveform with ITI is then the linear sum of the isolated signal contributions from three tracks: the main track and the two adjacent tracks either side of the main track.
A replay waveform of specific signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is produced by adding additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) to the simulated replay waveform with rms noise voltage, , defined by

that have been processed through the read channel. A decision as to whether a recovered bit is in error is made by comparing the data bits at the output of the Viterbi detector, or the LDPC decoder, with the known input data. Replay waveforms are generated for repeated frames of data (4096 uncoded bits) for each specific SNR value, which are processed by the read channel, and the total number of bits in error is counted. In order to make a reasonable measure of the BER, the simulation stops, and the BER is calculated, when a minimum of 10 frames are found to contain one or more recovered bits in error.
C. LDPC Codes

(4) LDPC codes, which are iteratively decoded, have been

selected as the most appropriate error correction codes for a

where is the peak signal of the simulated replay waveform due to a spread of random data [4].
The noisy signal, which now approximates a realistic replay waveform, is then sampled at the channel data rate , where is the island period, such that the data samples are extracted from the replay waveform at (assumed ideal) points corresponding to the position of the center of each island along the main data track. The replay samples are then passed to the data recovery channel simulation in order to recover the recorded data.
In the following analysis, the input data to the read channel simulation is a randomly generated 4096-bit frame of random data.

recording system incorporating a patterned storage medium, due to the significant enhancement in the performance they offer in continuous media. Related work that does not include the effect of jitter also concludes that significant gain is achievable using error correction codes, like LDPCs [12]. The error correction codes used in this paper have linear encoding time, high rate, and good performance when iteratively decoded, especially with this channel model.
The LDPC codes used are irregular codes constructed with a zigzag parity pattern [17], resulting in linear-time encoding complexity. They are constructed in such a way so as to maximize the girth of the underlying Tanner Graph of the decoder using the progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [18]. The parity-check matrix of the LDPC codes is split into two parti-

B. Data Recovery Channel Simulation

tions, referred to as parity, , and information, , sections,

i.e.,

. The LDPC codes used are of code rate 0.9,

The data recovery channel, as illustrated in Fig. 1, consists of a finite-impulse response (FIR) filter, for signal equalization, followed by either a Viterbi detector, in the case of a partial-response maximum-likelihood (PRML) read channel, or a MAP detector, in order to transmit bit probabilities to the LDPC decoder when LDPC codes are adopted.
In the simplest scenario, where no coding scheme is employed, the data recovery channel is a simple PRML channel consisting of an FIR filter followed by a Viterbi detector. Here,

with parity length of 456, information length of 4096, and re-

sulting code length of 4552. Assuming that and are used

to denote the th row and th column of and , respectively,

then if is of zigzag pattern, then

for both and

where

. A codeword, denoted as

, can be partitioned in a similar manner,

, where are

the parity bits,

), and are the informa-

tion bits,

). The encoding process can be

accomplished using

the sampled data sequence is equalized by the FIR filter such

that the resulting equalized data sequence closely resembles the ideal sample values generated using a desired target filter, such

(5)

as a partial-response (PR) or generalized partial-response (GPR) target. In the case of a PR target, the FIR coefficients are found and

using the least-mean-square (LMS) algorithm for a known data

sequence at a specified SNR value. In the case of a GPR target,

both the GPR target and FIR filter coefficients are found simul-

taneously following the method described in [16]. Following

(6)

equalization, the recorded data are recovered from the equal-

ized data samples using a Viterbi detector.

The LDPC decoder is implemented using the sum-product

In the case where the use of LDPC codes is investigated, the algorithm (SPA), where the LDPC decoder receives the a pos-

LDPC encoder and the LDPC decoder are added to the channel teriori probabilities (APP) from the channel MAP detector and

simulation, and the Viterbi detector is replaced with a MAP de- generates the APPs of the recovered data. We define an LDPC

tector in order to transmit bit probabilities to the LDPC decoder. iteration as the passing of extrinsic information from the output

The GPR target and FIR filter are still optimized and used in the of the LDPC decoder to its input, whereas a system iteration

same manner as in the PRML channel.

is the feedback of extrinsic information from the output of the

The performance of the read channel is evaluated via plots of LDPC decoder to the input of the MAP detector. For the system

the BER of the recovered data against replay waveform SNR, as simulated, five LDPC iterations and two system iterations have

defined by (4). The BER is calculated as the ratio of the number been found to offer the best compromise between number of it-

of bits recovered in error divided by the total number of bits erations and read channel performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3928

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Fig. 2. Plots of BER against SNR for varying lithography jitter with no coding
scheme adopted at a storage density of 1 Tbit/in ( in nm).

Fig. 3. Plots of BER against SNR for varying amounts of lithography jitter with
LDPC codes adopted ( in nm). Here, the code rate loss is taken into account
by increasing the storage density to 1.27 Tbit/in .

III. RESULTS

In the following analysis, a theoretical GMR read head with

a read sensor of width 20 nm (across track), length 4 nm (along

track), and shield-to-shield spacing 16 nm has been used. The

patterned perpendicular recording medium is of thickness 10 nm

and its top surface is placed 10 nm below the ABS of the read

head. It has been shown that for the specific media/head configu-

rations adopted, a patterned medium with no SUL offers overall

better BER performance compared to a patterned medium em-

ploying a SUL [9]. In addition, the performance is improved

significantly through the use of hexagonally packed islands [15].

Hence, a magnetic storage medium with no SUL and the islands

hexagonally packed has been adopted in this analysis. Initially,

the length/width of the square islands is 12.5 nm and the pe-

riod/track pitch is 25 nm, corresponding to an areal density of

1 Tbit/in . The islands are assumed to be single domain, which is a valid assumption at such dimensions [19], such that media noise is dominated by lithography jitter.

Fig. 4. Plots of BER against SNR for varying lithography jitter when LDPC
codes are taken into account for a storage density of 1.6 Tbit/in ( in nm).

The data recovery channel contains a 7-tap FIR filter that

is used to equalize the replay data samples to an optimized period/track pitch have been scaled by the code rate, which for

GPR target of length 5, which have been shown to be sufficient a code rate of 0.9, requires a reduction of the island period and

for improved channel performance in the case of perpendicular island size to 22.5 nm and 11.25 nm, respectively, resulting in a

recording [20]. The optimized GPR target for the system was storage density of 1.27 Tbit/in .

, which was found at an SNR In the case where no lithography jitter is present, the use of

of 10 dB, with no lithography jitter present, using the approach LDPC codes results in approximately 5.5 dB improvement in

detailed in [16]. In the following discussion, we define an ac- the SNR that can be tolerated for an acceptable BER, compared

ceptable BER to be

.

to the uncoded case (Fig. 2). In the case of lithography jitter with

Fig. 2 illustrates plots of BER against SNR in the case of

nm, the gain in allowable SNR extends to approxi-

no coding scheme employed for varying amounts of increased mately 10 dB when adopting LDPC codes while still achieving

lithography jitter.

an acceptable BER; the acceptable SNR in this case is over 2 dB

It is evident from Fig. 2 that the read channel can tolerate the less than that of the uncoded case with no jitter present. In ad-

presence of jitter with up to

nm while still maintaining dition, it is clear that by incorporating LDPC codes, the system

an acceptable BER performance. However, any further increase can tolerate lithography jitter with

nm and still achieve

in the amount of jitter results in a severe degradation of the BER an acceptable BER at a minimum SNR of 16 dB.

performance (not shown). Hence, jitter with

nm is Fig. 4 illustrates BER against SNR curves for varying

the maximum the system can tolerate with no coding scheme amounts of lithography jitter when the island period and track

employed.

pitch have been scaled to 20 nm, leading to an increase of

In Fig. 3, the advantage of using LDPC codes to improve the areal density to 1.6 Tbit/in . In this case the island length

the BER performance in the presence of lithography jitter is and width have been kept at 12.5 nm, leading to increased

demonstrated. In order to take into account the code rate loss inter-symbol-interference (ISI) in the replay signal waveform

due to the presence of the LDPC code, the island geometry and due to the reduced separation between islands.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NTOKAS et al.: MPROVED DATA RECOVERY FROM PATTERNED MEDIA WITH INHERENT JITTER NOISE

3929

It is clear from Fig. 4 that an acceptable BER performance can still be achieved even with increased ISI present. Here, an acceptable BER can be observed at an SNR of approximately 9 dB with no lithography jitter present, whereas in the uncoded case at the same storage density (not shown) the BER performance is unacceptable, even with no lithography jitter present. Fig. 4 demonstrates that the read channel can tolerate up to
nm of jitter while still maintaining an acceptable BER performance.

IV. CONCLUSION

Using a novel simulation of the readout process in a patterned

magnetic media storage system and a comprehensive simula-

tion of the data recovery channel, we have demonstrated that

the use of LDPC codes offers one way of achieving accept-

able BER performance in a 1 Tbit/in patterned media storage

system. The introduction of jitter arising due to imperfections

introduced by the nonperfect lithography process can have a sig-

nificant impact on the BER performance of the read channel.

However, the adoption of LDPC coding techniques allows the

presence of lithography jitter to be tolerated while still main-

taining an acceptable BER performance. Results have been pre-

sented illustrating the read channel performance using curves of

BER against read waveform SNR, with and without the use of

an LDPC coding scheme, with varying amounts of lithography

jitter present.

The introduction of lithography jitter has a detrimental effect

on the performance of the conventional PRML read channel,

in particular when no LDPC coding scheme is adopted. By

adopting LDPC coding techniques the maximum amount of

jitter noise that can be tolerated can be increased from

nm (with no LDPC code) to

nm (with the LDPC code

at an increased storage density of 1.27 Tbit/in ) while still

maintaining acceptable BER performance.

This work supports the viability of patterned media as a pos-

sible future storage medium, and more specifically demonstrates

that the adoption of LDPC codes and iterative decoding tech-

niques should be considered to alleviate the detrimental effect

that lithography jitter has on the reliable recovery of stored data.

The use of LDPC codes is one example of a range of iterative ar-

chitectures available. Future work will concentrate on the inves-

tigation of other suitable iterative coding schemes [21] and their

application, with an emphasis on the comparison of these archi-

tectures with respect to read channel performance, complexity,

robustness, and applicability [22] in patterned media storage

systems. The use of noise prediction methods [23] and alterna-

tives, such as SNR mismatch methods [24], which have the po-

tential to further improve the performance of the read channel,

are also being investigated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, U.K., under Grant GR/R63479.

[2] G. F. Hughes, “Read channels for patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 2310–2312, Sep. 1999.
[3] J. Moritz, L. Buda, B. Dieny, J. P. Nozières, R. J. M. van de Veerdonk, T. M. Crawford, and D. Weller, “Writing and reading bits on pre-patterned media,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 84, pp. 1519–1521, 2004.
[4] S. X. Wang and A. M. Taratorin, Magnetic Information Storage Technology. New York: Academic, 1999.
[5] J. G. Zhu, X. Lin, L. Guan, and W. Messner, “Recording, noise, and servo characteristics of patterned thin film media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 23–29, Jan. 2000.
[6] H. J. Richter, A. Y. Dobin, O. Heinonen, K. Z. Gao, R. J. M. van de Veerdonk, R. T. Lynch, J. Xue, D. Weller, P. Asselin, M. F. Erden, and R. M. Brockie, “Recording on bit-patterned media at densities of 1 Tbit/in and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2255–2260, Oct. 2006.
[7] M. H. Kryder and R. W. Gustafson, “High-density perpendicular recording—Advances, issues, and extensibility,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 287, pp. 449–458, 2005.
[8] M. M. Aziz, C. D. Wright, B. K. Middleton, H. Du, and P. W. Nutter, “Signal and noise characteristics of patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 1964–1966, Sep. 2002.
[9] P. W. Nutter, I. T. Ntokas, and B. K. Middleton, “An investigation of the effect of island geometry on read channel performance in patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4327–4334, Nov. 2005.
[10] G. F. Hughes, “Read channels for prepatterned media with trench playback,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 2564–2566, Sep. 2003.
[11] S. K. Nair and R. M. H. New, “Patterned media recording: Noise and channel equalization,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1916–1918, Jul. 1998.
[12] J. Hu, T. M. Duman, E. M. Kurtas, and F. Erden, “Coding and iterative decoding for patterned media storage systems,” Electron. Lett., vol. 42, pp. 934–935, Aug. 2006.
[13] P. W. Nutter, D. Mc. A. McKirdy, B. K. Middleton, D. T. Wilton, and H. A. Shute, “Effect of island geometry on the replay signal in patterned media storage,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 3551–3558, Nov. 2004.
[14] D. T. Wilton, D. Mc. A. McKirdy, H. A. Shute, J. J. Miles, and D. J. Mapps, “Approximate 3-D head fields for perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 148–156, Jan. 2004.
[15] P. W. Nutter, I. T. Ntokas, B. K. Middleton, and D. T. Wilton, “The effect of island distribution on error rate performance in patterned media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3214–3216, Oct. 2005.
[16] J. Moon and W. Zeng, “Equalization for maximum likelihood detectors,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1083–1088, Mar. 1995.
[17] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[18] L. Ping, W. K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, “Low-density parity-check codes with semi-random parity-check matrix,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 38–39, Jan. 1999.
[19] B. D. Belle, F. Schedin, N. Pilet, T. V. Ashworth, E. W. Hill, P. W. Nutter, H. J. Hug, and J. J. Miles, “High resolution magnetic force microscopy study of e-beam lithography patterned Co/Pt nanodots,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 101, 2007.
[20] H. Sawaguchi, Y. Nishida, H. Takano, and H. Aoi, “Performance analysis of modified PRML channels for perpendicular recording systems,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 235, pp. 265–272, 2001.
[21] A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Capacity-approaching codes: Can they be applied to the magnetic recording channel?,” IEEE Commun. Mag., pp. 122–130, Feb. 2004.
[22] R. Lynch, E. M. Kurtas, A. Kuznetsov, E. Yeo, and B. Nikolic, “The search for a practical iterative detector for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 213–218, Jan. 2004.
[23] E. Eleftheriou and W. Hirt, “Improving performance of PRML/ EPRML through noise prediction,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3968–3970, Sep. 1996.
[24] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Signal-to-noise ratio mismatch for low-density parity-check coded magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 498–506, Mar. 2004.

REFERENCES
[1] B. D. Terris and T. Thomson, “Nanofabricated and self-assembled magnetic structures as data storage media,” J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 38, pp. R199–R222, Jul. 2005.

Manuscript received November 29, 2006; revised June 22, 2007. Corresponding author: P. W. Nutter (e-mail: p.nutter@manchester.ac.uk).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

