On the Optimized Patent-Free LDPC Code Design for Content Distribution Systems
Dejan Vukobratovic´, Vojin Sˇ enk Department of Communications and Signal Processing
University of Novi Sad, Serbia {dejanv,ram senk}@uns.ns.ac.yu

Abstract— In this paper, we analyze the application of asymptotic and finite-length analysis and design of low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes for the large scale content distribution systems over packet based networks, such as MBMS or DVB-H. We show connections of the classical coding theory performance measure, the Bit Error Rate (BER) performance, and the measure called the overhead factor which is of interest in the content distribution systems. We point out to LDPC codes design methods that can provide an excellent overhead factor performance. Particularly, we are interested in performance limits of the class of patent-free LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
The problem of reliable and efficient distribution of large content of data to large number of users over packet-based networks using Forward Error Correction (FEC) mechanisms became increasingly popular lately due to an introduction of Digital Fountain (DF) approach [1]. Unlike the traditional FEC implementations that use Reed-Solomon codes [2] equipped with the maximum distance separability (MDS) property, modern solutions rely on the sparse-graph based FEC codes. The sparse-graph solutions are advantageous in their linear complexity decoding which allows practical FEC codes of very large lengths. Solutions where additional encoded packets have to be generated as needed are possible (DF).
In this paper, we assume a setting where (due to e.g. delay limitations) the number of generated encoded packets is limited, i.e., the code rate is fixed in advance instead of letting it tend to zero as in the DF approach. Unlike the DF code design, we are faced with the well studied problem of the design of LDPC codes for the packet erasure channel. In the content distribution setting, instead of the traditional symbol (packet) erasure rate vs. channel erasure rate performance metric (curve), a new performance metric, the average overhead needed for successful decoding, is of more interest. These two metrics are tightly related and we can use results and experience in analyzing former, to anticipate the behavior of LDPC codes with respect to the later.
We are interested in the LDPC code design for the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) and we review state-of-the-art design algorithms. Since the asymptotic behavior predicted by Density Evolution (DE) technique (see [3] for the BEC and [4] for general MBIOS channels) dominates at very large block lengths, these algorithms are particularly beneficial at short to medium block lengths, where finite-length phenomena dominates. In this domain and in the classical setting, use

of these algorithms can substantially improve so called errorfloor behavior of the classical performance curves. To what extent a careful design can help to improve the overhead factor behavior and the domain of codeword lengths in which these effects could be notable is the main topic of this paper. Particularly, we are interested in the performance limits of the class of patent-free LDPC codes [5], as a possible competitors for the Application Layer-Forward Error Correction (AL-FEC) schemes in MBMS [6] and DVB-H [7] systems.

II. LDPC CODES OVER THE BEC

In this paper, we are interested in the performance of LDPC

codes over the packet erasure channel. Performance metrics of

interest do not depend on the size of the symbol alphabet, i.e.,

the number of bits contained in the source/encoded packet.

Therefore, we assume without loss of generality the transmis-

sion of binary LDPC codes over the BEC, and use words

bit and packet interchangeably. Behavior of LDPC codes over

the BEC decoded using the iterative Belief-Propagation (BP)

decoding algorithm is well understood from a theoretical view-

point. Both asymptotic [3] and finite-length [8] analysis have

been conducted and the most important behavior phenomena

have been identified. We will review them shortly (for a

comprehensive treatment please refer to [9].)

Assume (n, k) LDPC code of length n and (designed)

dimension k is defined by its m × n parity-check matrix

H, where m = n − k. If the number of ones per row and

per column of matrix H is constant, we refer to the parity-

check matrix and the corresponding LDPC code as regular,

otherwise, it is called irregular. Asymptotic analysis deals with

the ensemble behavior of LDPC codes. An ensemble of (l, r)-

regular LDPC codes of length n is the set of all LDPC codes

defined

by

regular

(m

=

n·

l r

)

×

n

matrices

H

with

l

ones

per column and r ones per row. The designed rate of this

ensemble

equals

R

=

1

−

l r

.

An

ensemble

of

(λ,

ρ)-irregular

LDPC codes of length n is the set of all LDPC codes defined

by m × n matrices H that satisfy irregular distributions on

the number of ones per column and row defined by so called

edge-oriented degree distribution polynomials λ(x) and ρ(x)

[9]. The number of rows and the designed rate of (λ, ρ)-

irregular LDPC n(1 − R) = n

·c(o(RRd0011eλρ(e(xxn))sddexxm)) .blAesoyfmlpetnogtitch

n is given as: m = analysis shows that

optimized irregular LDPC code ensembles outperform their

regular counterparts of the same length and rate.

1-4244-0979-A9u/t0ho7r/iz$e2d5li.c0e0ns©ed 2us0e0l7imIitEedEtoE: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u6n5e 24,2026 at 04:59:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. RestrictionsIaEpEplEy. ISWCS 2007

Let us now introduce a new setting. A large content (file) is to be distributed over a packet-based network for a massive amount of users. After being divided into k equal length source packets, the content is encoded using (n, k) LDPC code into n encoded packets of the same length as source packets. Encoded packets are sent in random order (see [11], Chapter 9) and decoded as received using the standard iterative message-passing decoder for the BEC. Note that this setup makes erasure probability of the BEC irrelevant as long as the receiver is able to collect enough encoded packets to perform succesful decoding. We are interested in the minimum amount of encoded packets (1 + f ) · k neccessary at the receiver for successful decoding, expressed through the overhead factor f .

A. Asymptotic Overhead Behavior

By Shannon, for the ensemble of LDPC codes of the

designed rate R, we can theoretically hope for an asymptotic

(as n → ∞) error-free transmission over the BEC up to the BEC erasure probability parameter equal to Sh = 1 − R.

However, limitations introduced by selection of the particular

LDPC ensemble and the suboptimal iterative BP decoding

algorithm cause that the asymptotic error-free transmission is possible ”only” up to some threshold value = T h < Sh. Density Evolution analysis provides T h = T h(λ, ρ)

value for a given pair (λ, ρ). The asymptotic analysis proves

another nice behavior of LDPC code ensembles, so called

concentration property [4][9]. By this property, as n → ∞,

all but an exponentially (in n) small fraction of codes in the

ensemble behave arbitrarily close to the ensemble average. Asymptotically, the connection between T h and f seems

quite intuitive, and we discuss this connection informally. As

n grows, the number of erased packets after the BEC with parameter T h sharply concentrates around n· T h (in the space

of possible erasure position sequences all the probability mass

concentrates around typical erasure position sequences with exactly n · T h erasures.) On the other hand, this is the largest

BEC parameter admitted for the vanishing error probability, so with n(1 − T h) received packets asymptotically we have

error-free transmission. Equalizing with (1 + fn→∞) · k, we

obtain:

fn→∞

=

1 − Th R

−1

(1)

It follows that the asymptotic value of the overhead factor is determined by the code DE threshold, which we verify later through the simulation experiments (see Figure 4).

B. Finite-length Overhead Behavior
Recently emerging finite-length analysis techniques of the iterative decoding assume identification of the set of all pseudo-codewords of the LDPC code Tanner graph. This set includes the set of all codewords, but there are a lot more ”points of attractions” to which the iterative decoder can converge undesirably. In the case of the BEC, the set of pseudo-codewords reduces to the set of all stopping sets [8].
The Tanner graph G(H) of LDPC code is derived from the LDPC code parity-check matrix H, where n variable or

left nodes (associated to encoded packets) correspond to n

columns, m check or right nodes correspond to m rows, and

edges correspond to ones in the parity check matrix. The set of

variable nodes in G(H) such that every check node neighbor

of this set is connected to this set at least twice is called the

stopping set. If the erased set of encoded packets contains

stopping set, the iterative decoder fails to recover packets

that correspond to variable nodes in the largest stopping set

contained in the set of erased packets. Therefore, the set

of all stopping sets in the Tanner graph G(H) determines

the error-probability performance of the corresponding LDPC

code defined by the parity-check matrix H. This set is effec-

tively represented by the stopping sets enumerator polynomial

SH (x) =

n i=smin

Sixi,

where

Si

denotes

the

number

of

stopping sets of size i in G(H), and smin is the size of

the smallest stopping set. The size of the smallest stopping

set smin dominantly influence the finite-length performance

of LDPC codes in the region of small erasure probabilities

(error-floor region of the BER curve). This is notable from the

expression of the probability that the transmitted codeword is

not recovered at the iterative-decoding receiver:

n

Perr =

Di i(1 − )n−i ∼ Ssmin s,

(2)

i=smin

where Di is the number of sets of left nodes in G(H) of size i that contain at least one stopping set (dead-end sets, see [14]) and is the erasure probability of the BEC. As it was the design goal in the classical coding theory to maximize the minimum distance of the designed (n, k) binary linear code, it is the design goal of modern scenario (in the BEC case) to maximize the size of the minimal stopping set in the designed (n, k) LDPC code1. However, finding the size of the minimal stopping set smin in general LDPC code graph is proved to be NP-hard problem [10].
The BP decoding process over the BEC will be successful if the set of received packets does not contain any stopping set. It is obvious from (2) that, the larger the minimum stopping set is, the smaller is the probability that the transmitted codeword will remain unrecovered throughout the receiving process, which influences the overhead factor. A careful code design that avoids small stopping sets significantly lowers the error-floor BER performance. By optimizing the error-floor behavior, we expect to decrease the average overhead factor f in the region of short to medium code lengths, compared with the random constructions.

III. LDPC CODE DESIGN
In this section we review the LDPC code design algorithms analyzed in the next section. Guided by [5] and [11], we adopt the same design restrictions that lead to the patent-free LDPC codes. These classes of LDPC codes are named LDGMtype codes in [5] and two of their realizations are suggested:

1The size of the stopping set is the BEC case of the measure called pseudoweight defined on the set of all pseudo-codewords; see [13] for details.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u6n6e 24,2026 at 04:59:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LDGM-Staircase and LDGM-Triangle codes [5]2. Our motivation is a collection of experimental results for the
class of LDGM-type patent-free codes provided in [11], which can be used for comparison. Our goal is to see if, and to what extent, the careful finite-length design helps in lowering the average overhead factor f for the short to medium block length codes. For the long codes, we expect and show by simulation results, that f converges to fn→∞ = fn→∞( T h). Ultimately, we would like to provide finite-length, patent-free LDPC code design of comparable performance with DF Raptor codes, decoded using the iterative BP decoder.
A. LDGM-type Design
We begin with the general description of the LDGM-type codes. LDGM-Staircase code m × n parity-check matrix H consists of two parts, H = [H1S], where H1 is m×k columnregular submatrix corresponding to the source packets, and S is the staircase submatrix corresponding to the parity packets (since LDGM-type codes are systematic, we can divide the set of encoded packets into the sets of source and parity packets.) LDGM-Staircase codes are in fact regular Repeat-Accumulate (RA) codes [17], i.e., their extended version (see [18] and [19] for the details on eIRA codes, and the motivation behind and settings in which is the staircase structure of S useful.)
LDGM-Triangle codes are an improvement of LDGMStaircase design obtained by allowing random filling of the below staircase part of the matrix S. This gives a new general form of the matrix H equal H = [H1T ], where T is in the lower-triangular form. The general form of S and T matrices is given in Fig. 1. Intuitively, adding more reliability to the parity packets improves the overall code performance, without significant change in the encoding complexity. However, the LDGM-Triangle code design does not give performance improvement in every setting, since there are code rates and LDGM-type design restrictions on the degree distributions where DE analysis propose close to 50% of degree 2 variable nodes, which is exactly what the staircase design provides.

1 11
11 1

1 11
11 1
1

S=

...

T= 1

...

1

1 11

1

11

11 1

1 11

11 1

1

11

1

1

1

B. Optimized LDGM-type Design
Randomly generated LDGM-type codes typically suffer from high error-floors. This is because, except for the staircase structure in the LDGM-Staircase codes (this structure yields cycle-free subgraphs induced from the degree 2 parity packet nodes in G(H) and prevents small stopping sets created by the degree 2 nodes only), no further care is taken to avoid small stopping sets. There is no explicit construction that optimizes irregular LDPC code design with respect to minimal stopping set size and this presents one of the most attractive open problems in the finite-length LDPC code design. However, some heuristic LDPC code design algorithms, shortly described in what follows, are capable of increasing the size of the minimal stopping set, thereby improving code performance in the errorfloor region.
The design of good LDPC code graph assumes maximizing the size of a minimal stopping set. It is pointed out in [20] that the stopping set is comprised of one or several interconnected cycles. Since every stopping set possess cycle, one can drop down to the level of cycles and design good LDPC code by influencing cycles. The traditional approach to remove all short cycles is essentially good, since it removes all small stopping sets. Progressive-Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm [21] proceeds in this fashion. However, cycles of the same length are not equally bad. Based on this observation all cycles of the same length can be classified with respect to the Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD) metric [20]. EMD of the cycle measures the connectivity of the cycle with the rest of the graph. If a cycle in the LDPC code graph has low EMD, than its connectivity with the rest of the graph is limited. This limits the amount of new evidence about values of variable nodes in the cycle that could be collected from the rest of the graph. In the extreme case, when EMD of the cycle is zero, the variable nodes in the cycle are isolated from the rest of the graph and the cycle is a stopping set. It is not an easy task to find EMD of the cycle and the approximated version of this metric, Approximated Cycle EMD (ACE), is proposed instead. ACE-constrained code construction algorithm is developed to design (dmax, η) ACE-constrained LDPC codes where, by construction, each cycle of length less than or equal to 2dmax has ACE value larger than η. Simulation results [20] confirm that (dmax, η) LDPC codes are able to reach low error-floors for a selected values of (dmax, η). However, the region of feasible pairs (dmax, η) is limited and depends on the length, rate and degree distributions of the constructed LDPC code.

Fig. 1. LDGM-Staircase and LDGM-Triangle Submatrices
2We note that in the majority of LDPC coding literature, LDGM codes correspond to the class of systematic LDPC codes where parity symbols are obtained as a linear combination of the source symbols, i.e., their parity check matrix consists of concatenated identity matrix that corresponds to the parity symbols, and sparse submatrix that corresponds to the source symbols. These codes are known to suffer from high error-floors, which can be lowered by concatenating it with the outer LDPC code.
Note that Luby’s LT codes can be considered as a special class of LDGM codes with punctured source symbols and increased (logk) density of the source symbols sparse submatrix, whereas Shokrollahi’s Raptor Codes [16] can be considered as a special class of concatenated LDPC/LDGM codes.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Our main goal is to demonstrate and quantify the influence

of careful finite-length code design on the average overhead

factor f in the domain of short to medium length LDPC codes.

All

the

codes to

be analyzed

are rate

R

=

1 2

codes.

For

this purpose we created four classes of LDGM-type codes

described as follows:

• Random LDGM-type construction: This construction is proposed in [5] and is based on a column-regular H1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u6n7e 24,2026 at 04:59:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Average Overhead Factor f Overhead Factor f

Random LDGM−Staircase

0.28

Random LDGM−Staircase wo 4−cycles

PEG LDGM−Staircase

ACE (6,2) LDGM−Staircase

0.26

0.24

0.22

0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500
Codeword Length n

Fig. 2. Overhead Factor Performance of the LDGM-Staircase Codes.

LDGM−Triangle 0.28 0.26 0.24 0.22 0.2 0.18 0.16 0.14 0.12 0.1
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 Codeword Length n
Fig. 3. Overhead Factor Performance of the LDGM-Triangle Codes.

submatrix, and deterministic submatrix S in the LDGMStaircase version, or randomly generated submatrix T in the LDGM-Triangle version. • Random LDGM-type construction w/o 4-cycles: The same construction as above, but without cycles of length 4 in G(H) (this simple modification is for the purpose of improvement comparison only.) • PEG LDGM-type construction: obtained using PEG algorithm with the same quasi-regular column distribution. • ACE-constrained LDGM-type construction: obtained by using ACE-constrained algorithm with selected pairs (dmax, η) and the same quasi-regular column distribution.
We use all of the four classes of codes for the design of the LDGM-Staircase codes and only the first class for the design of the LDGM-Triangle codes. All the LDGM-Staircase codes are left quasi-regular [5] where the columns of H1 are of degree 3, and the remaining columns of T are of degree 2. The same holds for H1 part of the LDGM-Triangle codes, but in this case T is randomly left-irregular by construction. Simulation results are independent of the codeword transmitted, so we assume that the all-zero codeword is repeatedly sent. After being randomly permuted by permutation σ, allzero-codeword bits are received by the “greedy” iterative BP decoder until sufficient number of (1 + f ) · k bits is received for successful decoding. The resulting overhead factor f , is a function of the randomly selected permutation σ and the matrix H only, i.e., f = f (σ, H).
For each class of randomly constructed codes (first two classes), in each Monte Carlo (MC) simulation experiment, we randomly generate both σ and H and perform single transmission simulation. We estimate the average overhead factor favg through Nσ,H = 1000 repetitions of the MC simulation. For the last two classes of optimized codes (PEG and ACE design), we construct only one instance of the code graph G(H) and repeat Nσ = 1000 independent transmissions to estimate average overhead factor favg. The simulation scenario is repeated for each type and class of codes with different code lengths up to n = 1500 with step 100. The average class overhead factors as a function of codeword

length n for the LDGM-Staircase and the LDGM-Triangle codes, are given in Figures 2 and 3.
For the LDGM-Staircase type constructions we obtain significant improvement over the purely random (class 1) design. Eliminating 4-cycles (class 2) already substantially improve performance for short lengths. However, due to a similar right node degree distributions (that tends to Poisson), these differences vanish for larger code lengths. PEG design (class 3) is shown to be the most promising, both for avoiding short cycles and because of the concentrated right degree distribution (the consequence of the PEG algorithm). Therefore, its asymptotic behavior is much better than for the first two random-type designs. To verify this, we have averaged (λ, ρ) pairs for all the class 1 and class 3 (PEG) designed codes, found their T h(λ, ρ) using DE technique, and calculated their fn→∞ using equation (1). Improvement obtained by the check-concentrated PEG design is apparent from Figure 4. ACE designed LDGM-Staircase codes (class 4) were a slight disappointment. We managed to construct only ACE (6,2) codes, but their performance were not comparable with class 3 (PEG) design. We conclude that it is the (quasi) regular left degree structure that prevents ACE algorithm to perform close or better than PEG design, as it is the case with non-restriced (DE optimized) irregular LDPC codes. Being limited to only degree 2 and 3 left nodes substantially limits the flexibility in the ACE design, which is notable in the code performance.
The performance of the LDGM-Triangle design improves over the LDGM-Staircase design due to a larger degree of parity bits. We design class 1 LDGM-Triangle codes and present their overhead performance on Figure 3. It is notable that the performance of the optimized PEG LDGM-Staircase type design is comparable with the LDGM-Triangle design, so we conclude that, for the rate one-half LDPC codes, using the more complex LDGM-Triangle design is not justified.
An interesting question is how far is the overhead factor behavior of the patent-free classes of LDPC codes, compared with the non-restricted DE optimized irregular LDPC codes. Figure 5 presents the performance of the DE optimized irregular PEG LDPC codes. We note a significant improvement

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u6n8e 24,2026 at 04:59:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

0.3

Random LDGM−Staircase

Asymptotic Overhead Limit

PEG LDGM−Staircase

0.25

Asymptotic Overhead Limit

Average Overhead Factor f

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05 0

500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 5000 Codeword Length n

Fig. 4. Asymptotic Overhead Factor Behavior of the LDGM-Staircase Codes.

Average Overhead Factor f

0.2 Irregular DE optimized PEG
0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1

0.08 0

200

400

600

800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000

Codeword Length n

Fig. 5. Overhead Factor Performance of the DE optimized irregular LDPC Codes.

in their overhead factor performance compared to the patentfree restricted optimized codes. Additionally, we note that their overhead factor seems to converge very slowly to its asymptotic value, which equals fn→∞ = 0.023.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we investigated the performance of patentfree classes of LDPC codes (named LDGM-Staircase and LDGM-Triangle codes) proposed for the large scale content distribution applications in MBMS system [5]. We noted that their asymptotic overhead factor can be determined using the DE threshold. On the other hand, a careful finite-length design (using PEG or ACE constrained algorithm) results in significant improvements in the average overhead factor f for short to medium LDPC code block lengths.
For our future work, we would like to identify classes and design methods for the patent-free LDPC codes that optimize their overhead behavior at short to medium codeword lengths. Also, we would like to investigate how far the overhead behavior of the patent-free LDPC codes is from the state-ofthe-art finite-length DF codes, such as Raptor codes, decoded using the iterative decoding algorithm.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank to members of the special
interest group (SIG) on Hybrid Cellular and Broadcasting Net-
works within COST 2100 action, particularly David Gomez
Barquero and Kristian Nybom, for useful discussions on
various aspects of DVB-H system. Also, we would like to
thank to Zlatko Lovcˇevic´ and Aleksandra Sorak for performing
and reconfirming many simulation results included in this
paper while working on their diploma theses.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Byers, M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher and A. Rege, A digital fountain approach to reliable distribution of bulk data, ACM SIGCOMM 98, pp. 56-67, Sept. 2-4, 1998.
[2] L. Rizzo, Effective erasure codes for reliable communication protocols, ACM Computer Communication Review, 27(2), April 1997.
[3] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi and D. A. Spielman, Analysis of low density codes and improved design using irregular graphs, Proc. of the 30th Annual ACM Symp. On Theory of Computing, pp. 249-258, 1998.
[4] T.J. Richardson, R.L. Urbanke, The Capacity of Low-Density ParityCheck Codes Under Message-Passing Decoding, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618, February 2001.
[5] V. Roca and C. Neumann, Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Forward Error Correction, June 2005. Work in Progress: <draft-roca-rmt-ldpc00.txt>
[6] “Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS): Mobile Broadcast/Multicast Service (MBMS): Protocols and Codecs”, 3GPP TS 26.346, Version 6.3.0, Release 6, December 2005.
[7] “Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): Transmission System for Handheld Terminals (DVB-H)”, ETSI EN 302 304 V1.1.1, 2004.
[8] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T.J. Richardson, R.L. Urbanke, Finite Length Analysis of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes on the Binary Erasure Channel, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570-1579, June 2002.
[9] T.J. Richardson, R.L. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory, preprint of the book, available at http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/ /mct/index.php.
[10] K. M. Krishnan, and P. Shankar, On the Complexity of finding Stopping Distance in Tanner Graphs, preprint, available at the ArXiv: arxiv.org/pdf/cs.IT/0512101, 2005.
[11] C. Neumann, Large Scale Content Distribution applied to Files and Videos, PhD Thesis, University of Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France, December 2005.
[12] J. Plank and M. Thomason, On the practical use of ldpc erasure codes for distributed storage applications, Research Report UT-CS-03-510, University of Tennesee, Sept. 2003.
[13] G. D. Forney, R. Koetter, F. Kschischang and A. Reznik, On the effective weights of the pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles, vol.123, Ch. 5, pp.101-112, IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, 2001.
[14] K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar and J. H. Weber, On parity-check matrices with optimal stopping and/or dead-end set enumerators, Proc. of the Turbo Coding Symposium 2006, Munich, Gerany, 2006.
[15] M. Luby, LT Codes, Proc. of the 43rd Annual IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), Vancouver, Canada, November 2002.
[16] A. Shokrollahi, Raptor Codes, IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 52, No. 6, pp. 2551–2567, June 2006.
[17] H. Jin and R. McEliece, AWGN Coding Theorems for Serial Turbo Codes, Proc. of the 37th Annual Allerton Conference, pp. 893-894, 1999.
[18] M. Yang, W.E. Ryan, Y. Li, Design of Efficiently Encodable ModerateLength High-Rate Irregular LDPC Codes, IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 52, pp. 564-572, April 2004.
[19] Y. Zhang and W.E. Ryan, Structured IRA Codes: Performance Analysis and Construction, IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 55, pp. 837-845, May 2007.
[20] T.Tian, C. Jones, J.D. Villasenor, R.D. Wesel, Selective Avoidance of Cycles in Irregular LDPC Code Construction, IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 52, pp. 1242-1247, August 2004.
[21] X.Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.M. Arnold, Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs, in Proc. IEEE Global Telecomm. Conference, pp. 995-1001, San Antonio, USA, 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J3u6n9e 24,2026 at 04:59:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

