IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

2245

Design and Test of a 175-Mb/s, Rate-1/2 (128,3,6)
Low-Density Parity-Check Convolutional Code
Encoder and Decoder
Ramkrishna Swamy, Student Member, IEEE, Stephen Bates, Senior Member, IEEE, Tyler L. Brandon, Bruce F. Cockburn, Member, IEEE, Duncan G. Elliott, Member, IEEE, John C. Koob, Student Member, IEEE, and
Zhengang Chen, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check block codes (LDPC-BCs) are quickly becoming the forward error correcting code of choice for emerging communication standards. However, low-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs), the convolutional counterpart of LDPC-BCs, seem to be better suited in applications with streaming data or variable sized packets. A rate-1/2, (128,3,6) LDPC-CC ASIC has been implemented in 180-nm, 1.8-V CMOS technology. We present the VLSI architecture of a register-based LDPC-CC encoder and decoder that includes an on-chip, pseudo-random additive white Gaussian noise channel emulator. The decoder comprises a pipeline of ten identical processing units and attains up to 175 Mb/s of decoded throughput.
Index Terms—Capacity-approaching codes, CMOS integrated circuits, convolutional codes, forward error correction, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check codes, soft decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE first notable error correcting codes were the Hamming codes, which were described in 1950 shortly after Shannon published his seminal article that founded information theory [1]. Advances in information theory and the increasing need for reliable transmission led to the discovery of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in the early 1960s by Robert Gallager [2]. However, these codes were not pursued further at that time because of the prohibitively large computational demands of the decoding algorithm. The renewed interest in LDPC codes over the past decade occurred when it was realized that they were, in fact, among the most powerful and known class of error correcting codes to date [3]. There exist LDPC block codes today that can reach within 0.0045 dB of the capacity of a binary, antipodal modulated additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [4]. The demonstrated potential of LDPC codes has led to the design and development of LDPC block codes and their implementations in hardware. Numerous LDPC block code decoder architectures have been developed in academia and industry [5]–[7].
Manuscript received July 19, 2006; revised April 16, 2007. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada and Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) under Grant 1170. 001. Portions of Sections I and III were presented at the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS 2005), Kobe, Japan, May 23–26, 2005.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2V4 Canada (e-mail: swamy@ece.ualberta.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2007.905232

In 1999, Felström and Zigangarov proposed a convolutional version of LDPC codes [8]. Henceforth, the convolutional version and the block version will be denoted as LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) and LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs), respectively. It has been shown that LDPC-CCs may be better suited to certain applications, such as streaming video and variable-length, packet switching networks, than LDPC-BCs [9]. Another advantage is that the packet encoding and decoding can be done starting from a known state. This constraint can be utilized at the decoder to greatly reduce the probability of a bit error over the first few hundred bits of the packet. This is advantageous because in most packet formats, especially important routing information is located in the header prefix. In this paper, we present the first known ASIC implementation of an LDPC-CC system. Our register-based architecture includes an encoder, decoder, an approximate AWGN channel emulator and associated test/peripheral circuitry. The 180-nm CMOS design realizes a (128,3,6), rate-1/2 code1 and yields an information throughput of 175 Mb/s. Sections II and III give an overview of LDPC-CCs, the iterative message-passing algorithm and the implemented system, respectively. Subsequently, Sections IV and V describe the test procedure and the results obtained. Section VI concludes the paper.

II. OVERVIEW OF LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

LDPC-CCs are similar to LDPC-BCs in that they are also

linear codes that generate code-bits based on parity-check op-

erations [10]. On the other hand, they have a few important at-

tributes that clearly distinguish them from LDPC-BCs.

1) Any given code-bit, , is generated using only the

present and the

most recent information-bits (i.e.,

) and the previously generated

code-bits (i.e.,

).

2) Information blocks of varying bit length may be encoded.

3) Bit error rate (BER) performance is comparable for the

two LDPC code classes. However, for similar BER perfor-

mance, the memory of an LDPC-CC is much smaller

than the block size of an LDPC-BC [8], [11].

1The rate-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC-CC code is intellectual property owned by the University of Notre Dame, Indiana. To obtain the code, you may contact Daniel Costello and Ali Emre Pusane from the Department of Electrical Engineering via e-mail at costello.2@nd.edu and apusane@nd.edu, respectively.

0018-9200/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2246

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

For a rate-1/2 code, the time-varying binary information sequence of length
is encoded as the binary sequence of length

bits correspond to a parity-check constraint that appears

in a correctly coded bit sequence.

(c) The trailing

elements are all 0. These en-

tries remove from consideration future bits from the code

sequence,

, that cannot have any effect on the

parity constraints.

For example, consider the following phase matrix, where

and

:

(3) such that

(1)

As a consequence of these constraints, the parity-check ma-

trix,

, is lower triangular, and this reduces the encoding

latency to zero and simplifies the encoding process. More pre-

cisely, the finite corresponding

section of the transposed,

semi-infinite parity-check matrix , denoted by

, has

the form given in (2) at the bottom of the page. Matrix

has a periodic structure with a period of size . The elements of

are either 0 or equal to elements in a

binary phase matrix,

. The columns of

de-

fine parity-check constraints that are satisfied for subsequent

code-bits in the coded bit sequence. The last row of the phase

matrix, , is constructed to contain only ones to enable direct

encoding (i.e., formulation of the code-bit constraints). Thus,

,.

The entries in the -th column of

, where

, are defined by three regions going down the column.

(a) If

, there are no leading elements. If

,

then the leading

elements are all 0. These en-

tries remove from consideration past bits from the coded

sequence,

, that exceed the finite memory of the

code.

(b) The next

elements are identical to

the last

elements in the

-th

column of the phase matrix

, respectively. These

The corresponding parity-check matrix show six phases, is illustrated in (4):

, extended to

(4)

Given the information sequence and the example parity-check matrix, the sequence of codebits can be verified to be as follows:

...

...

...

...

...

(2)

...

...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SWAMY et al.: DESIGN AND TEST OF A 175-MB/S, RATE-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODE ENCODER AND DECODER

2247

Note that the addition operations occur within

and

hence, are XOR operations. The corresponding coded sequence

would thus be

We will assume that the code is regular, which implies that the

number of ones in each row of and the number of ones in

each column of are constant. For a

LDPC-CC, pa-

rameter determines the amount of memory. This parameter

is monotonically related to BER performance, but the attendant

increase in encoder and decoder complexity are also important

considerations [11]. Another important parameter is the repeti-

tion period of the matrix. It has been shown that increasing

tends to improve BER performance [12]. However, this per-

formance increase is much less when compared to the effects of

increasing . Choosing

adds phases to the decoding

process, thus assisting synchronization in the hardware decoder.

In this paper, we restrict ourselves to

phases. For a

detailed discussion on the construction of LDPC-CCs, refer to

[8], [12]–[14].

Given an matrix, we can derive parity-check equations

to generate the code-bits at the encoder and then reconstruct

the original information stream using the received information-

bits and code-bits at the decoder. This would mean we have

phases—and hence, different operations for subsequent

phases, —for the encoder and decoder circuits before the

operations repeat themselves.

Fig. 1. Flowchart showing the datapath for an LLR.

A. LDPC-CC Encoding

Given an information sequence (i.e.,

), we

can determine the corresponding encoded sequence (i.e.,

) for a rate-1/2, systematic and

regular code using the equations

(5)

and

(6)
Fig. 2. Simplified datapath of the decoder.

where we assume an initialization state of

and

,

. Therefore, the code-bit is computed as a subset

of the XOR of the

most recent information-bits and the

most recent code-bits. The output stream is obtained by

systematically interleaving the stream of information-bits and

code-bits.

“LLRs” will refer to the messages on the edges of the bipartite graph. As the LLRs are processed by the chain of processors, their certainty will tend to increase as the decoding algorithm converges to a consistent and corrected coded bitstream. This arrangement of processors was proposed in [8] and was the

starting point for our decoder implementation. The B. LDPC-CC Decoding Using the Message Passing Algorithm serially-concatenated processors in our decoder all execute the

LDPC-CCs employ a soft-decision, iterative, mes- same set of operations.

sage-passing decoding algorithm. The message passing Our implementation of the MPA processor performs the fol-

algorithm (MPA) passes messages containing probabilistic lowing five steps using

first-in first-out (FIFO) delay

information from one decoder processor to the next in a chain lines to store the LLRs. Note that Steps 2–5 below apply to every

of identical processors [2]. Each probabilistic message is a LLR that is shifted in all register stages in any processor [8].

log-likelihood ratio (LLR), which is the natural logarithm of Fig. 1 shows the LLR data processing steps mentioned below,

the ratio of the probability that the corresponding bit is a 1 to and Fig. 2 shows an abstract datapath of the corresponding hard-

the probability that the bit is a 0. For convenience, the term ware decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2248

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

1) Initialization: Initialize all FIFOs in the decoder by

loading the dummy belief value “ ” in all locations. Belief

messages are represented in the decoder in fixed-point sign plus

magnitude format. The initial message value is thus the largest

representable positive value. Proceed to Step 2.

2) Shifting Step: An LLR will be denoted by

, where

references a particular delay line in either

the information LLRs, or

the code LLRs. The index

, where

, represents the minimum latency

in clock cycles of a selected delay line. At each synchronization

step, we shift in the new information and code LLRs from the

channel—

and

, respectively—to all the FIFOs in

the first processor, i.e.,

and

for

. In this paper, we assume an AWGN channel

model with signals modulated using binary phase-shift keying

(BPSK) as shown in Fig. 3. We model the AWGN channel as

having the information-bit and code-bit encoded using BPSK.

These channel LLRs are related to the channel’s characteristics

by the equations

(7)

where is the estimated energy per information-bit,

is the estimated average noise power, and come from the

definition, and and are the received sym-

bols. The LLRs

,

for

from pro-

cessor

are input into the FIFOs of processor . The LLRs

excluding

will be called intermediate as they are altered

during the course of subsequent phases. If the shifted LLR

corresponds to a required parity-check symbol, we proceed to

Step 3. However, if the LLR corresponds to a variable node

symbol, we proceed to Step 4. Otherwise, Step 2 is repeated.

Fig. 3. LDPC-CC channel model.

quite complex to implement exactly in hardware, a well-known

approximation can be employed to reduce the implementation

complexity while causing some acceptable degree of perfor-

mance degradation [15]. This simpler approximation shown in

(9) is known as the min-sum approximation and is much easier

to realize in hardware. In (8) and (9), the elements of

are

determined by the phase, , and the locations of the ones

in the relevant columns of the transposed parity-check matrix,

. If the outputs of the parity-check operation are required by

the variable node operation, go to Step 4; otherwise go to Step 2.

4) Variable Node Operation: The variable node operation

takes place just before the LLRs leave a processor. This oc-

curs phases after the corresponding LLRs arrive at the pro-

cessor. In processor , the variable node operation takes LLRs

and computes (10), where

and

. If the variable node is in one of the leading

processors, then proceed to Step 2; otherwise, for the -th (i.e.,

the last) processor, proceed to Step 5.

if (10)
if

5) Final Hard Decision Step: The hard decision step takes

(8) place for the information-bit LLR outputs of the last processor and determines whether a logic one or logic zero was realized

for

after iterations. The code-bit LLR outputs from

the last processor would be discarded as they encode no useful

information. In BPSK modulation, a logic zero is represented as

(9)

and a logic one as

, for

. More

precisely, the hard decision step is given by

3) Parity-Check Node Operation: In each processor ,

, intermediate LLRs are read from the FIFOs, al-

tered by the parity-check node and then the updated LLRs

are written back to their respective positions in the FIFOs. For

instance, if one of the parity-check inputs within a processor

, at some time , is denoted

, then

.

Here

is the set of indexes in processor for all in-

puts at each synchronization step, hence

. The

parity-check node implements (8) where

,

,

and

denotes the

set

excluding the element

. As this operation is

(11)

In (11),

calculates the overall certainty of the output bit

being a one or zero. The remaining events in (11) translate the

output bit from BPSK to a logic one or zero.

C. Coding Performance
LDPC-CCs possess the same excellent error correcting capabilities as their better known block counterparts. In Fig. 4, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SWAMY et al.: DESIGN AND TEST OF A 175-MB/S, RATE-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODE ENCODER AND DECODER

2249

m N Fig. 4. LDPC-CCs versus LDPC-BCs with respect to sum-product algorithm
versus min-sum algorithm; = 128 versus = 1024.

compare the performance of a rate-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC-CC with

a rate-1/2 (1024,3,6) LDPC-BC. Although the two codes have

similar performance, LDPC-CC decoders are easier to pipeline

and require fewer parity-check and variable nodes [11]. That is,

the small cost of optimizing critical paths of LDPC-CCs is less

than for LDPC-BCs.

Both LDPC codes have a regular (3,6) structure and both were

simulated with double-precision LLRs, using the approximate

min-sum algorithm and sum-product (tanh-based) parity opera-

tion. A performance degradation is seen in both min-sum curves.

Frame errors for LDPC-CCs are not included in this discussion,

as it involves generating and appending a unique frame termina-

tion sequence onto the encoded output. This is beyond the scope

of this paper but more information is available in [12], [16]. The major design decisions that affect BER performance and
size include the number of required processors and the precision of an LLR (quantization). Software simulations were conducted

Fig. 5. Rate-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC-CC design parameters using the min-sum algorithm. (a) Plot showing the effect of the number of LLR magnitude bits on BER for a fixed SNR and 10 processors. (b) Plot showing the dependency of BER on the number of processors or iterations.

to decipher a suitable value for each design decision.

Fig. 5(a) shows the dependency of BER on the number of magnitude bits used to represent the LLR. It is clear that the required number of bits varies as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). If too few bits are used, then the quantization noise becomes the dominating impairment in the decoder. Four bits of precision offers a suitable compromise between complexity and performance for an SNR of 3 dB. In Fig. 5(b), we plot simulation results for a varying number of processors. It is clear that at

using VHDL and later implemented in TSMC’s 180-nm CMOS process [17]. This prototype comprises a rate-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC-CC encoder and a corresponding decoder operating with the min-sum parity-check algorithm, an approximate AWGN channel emulator for built-in-self-test (BIST), test circuitry and peripheral/control modules for performing a number of on-chip operations and controlling data flow.

higher SNRs, more processors are required to obtain all the ben-

efits of the error correcting capabilities of the code. We would A. Register-Based Encoder need around 30 to 50 processors to minimize the errors caused

by too few iteration steps. Here the plots show curves for a low The encoding operation described in Section II-A can be re-

SNR and a high SNR, which is used to convey the progressing alized by the circuit given in Fig. 6.

pattern of the curves with respect to increasing or decreasing A direct translation of (5) and (6) into hardware ideally pro-

SNR. These SNR points were selected as they fall within our duce two FIFOs of length : one to store the incoming informa-

test operating region of 1 dB to 3 dB.

tion-bits, , and the other to store the derived code-bits, .

III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

It should be noted that Fig. 6 shows a slightly optimized version of our LDPC-CC code. Specifically, the FIFOs are slightly less

Our LDPC-CC encoder and decoder system was first pro- than since the LLRs near the end are not used and hence, the

totyped on a field programmable gate-array (FPGA) platform associated registers can be omitted. The addition operations for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2250

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Fig. 6. Encoder architecture for a rate-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC-CC.

are calculated in GF(2) as XOR operations. For our partic-

ular LDPC-CC, four of the five inputs to the XOR operation vary

at each phase,

. The fifth input, which happens to

be a code-bit in our case, is fixed. Two multiplexers, controlled

by , select the remaining four inputs to the XOR operation:

three from the information-bit FIFO and one from the code-bit

FIFO.

Unlike LDPC-BCs, data flows unidirectionally through the

simple encoder logic. Therefore, there is no need for a control

mechanism to read and shift a frame into the encoder, encode the

frame, while transmitting the previously encoded frame. As a

result, and are produced at the output and forwarded

to the channel emulator with very little latency.

Fig. 7. An approximate AWGN channel emulator using a 74-bit LFSR as the random number generator.

B. Channel Emulator

The simple channel emulator included in this design models

an AWGN channel using an approximately Gaussian noise

sample that exploits the central limit theorem (CLT) [18]. In

this module, the SNR is adjusted by varying the signal energy,

, rather than by varying the noise power, . Seven preset

levels of signal power are available, ranging from an SNR of

12 dB to 4 dB in steps of approximately 3 dB.

The emulator, as shown in Fig. 7, also converts the input sig-

nals to 6-bit LLR values before it enters the decoder. The noise

is generated using a 74-bit, primitive polynomial linear feed-

back shift register (LFSR). For each of the two noise generators,

127 one-bit pseudo-random values are generated by XORing dif-

ferent taps in the LFSR. Making use of the CLT, the 127 one-bit

pseudo-random values are then summed to produce a 7-bit noise

sample. Thus, one noise sample is available to distort the in-

formation-bit and another for the code-bit. This noise generator

produces a pseudo-random Gaussian distribution with a mean

64 and a variance

4. The noise distribution is scaled

to be centered around 0 by subtracting 63 from each noise

sample. Each noise sample was then quantized to four bits of

precision for the magnitude in addition to the sign bit and the

saturation bit, which represents the dummy belief value in the

initialization step of the MPA.

slicer that determines the final decoder output. Soft-decision information in the form of LLRs estimated from channel measurements made from an assumed receiver front end. These initial channel LLRs enter processor 1, propagate unidirectionally through the serially-linked chain of processors and exit via the last processor . At this time, the soft-decision output of processor enter the hard-decision slicer, where associated LLRs are added together according to (11). For BPSK emulation, the sign bit of the accumulated result alone determines the estimated information-bit that leaves the decoder.
For our rate-1/2 LDPC-CC decoder, each processor contains one parity-check node and two variable nodes. The term “node” is used to reflect the analogy between these subsystems in the LDPC-CC decoder and the node processors in an LDPC-BC decoder. Each processor instance in the LDPC-CC decoder is analogous in its role to one iteration in LDPC-BC decoding. For example, BER performance improves as we instantiate more processors until an upper bound is reached [9].
The simple iterative architecture of LDPC-CC decoders makes them ideal for both ASIC and FPGA implementations. The design effort can thus be focussed on the development of one processor. The same processor design can then be tiled as many times as required or as permitted by available resources. A given array of processors can be reconfigured to provide

different processing options. For example, we may structure 30

C. Register-Based Decoder

processors as three independent decoders with 10 processors each, or as one large decoder using all 30 processors. The

As shown in Fig. 2, the decoder architecture is a cascade of former enables us to achieve higher throughput with multiple

identical soft-decision processors followed by a hard-decision data streams at the cost of a lower BER performance in each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SWAMY et al.: DESIGN AND TEST OF A 175-MB/S, RATE-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODE ENCODER AND DECODER

2251

N = Fig. 8. Simplified view of a register-based processor where

140 is the latency of each.

stream. However, the latter achieves better BER performance

for one data stream.

Fig. 8 shows a simplified model of a processor. It performs the

operations as set out by the parity-check matrix. For each of the

129 phases, specific LLRs are read from the delay lines and

forwarded to the parity-check node. The manipulated LLRs are

then returned to their respective delay lines. The variable node

operation is performed by adders as the LLRs exit the processor,

as shown in Fig. 8. Each LLR is modified by the parity-check

node and the variable node only once in every processor. There

are eight delay lines for the storage of the 1032 LLRs, i.e.,

four dedicated to the information-bits and another four for the

code-bits. We note that the processor’s latency is greater than

due to the extra pipelining stages in the parity-check node and the variable nodes. This helped to alleviate some circuit performance bottlenecks but with a slight overhead cost of some ad-

Fig. 9. Simplified top-level architecture containing an encoder, decoder, channel emulator, BER counter and a hard decision slicer.

ditional control logic.

Each delay line is six bits wide, corresponding to the width of To avoid this, we added the ability to inject the channel LLRs

a single LLR value. Of the six bits, one is allotted for the sign, into any one of the ten processors. We also ensured that any

one bit to indicate saturation or infinity, and four bits are used for processor’s output LLRs could be connected to the hard-slice

the magnitude or certainty of its received bit. The magnitude bits unit. Therefore, in the event of any single processor failure, a

use a fixed-point representation, where the values range between nine-processor decoder would still be realizable.

0 and 3.75. For simplicity reasons, we will refer to the 4-bit values using an integer representation with values ranging from E. Top-Level Overview

0 and 15.

The system in Fig. 9 requires 38 signals, comprising 20 high-

Due to limited area on the multi-project silicon wafer, we speed inputs and 18 low-speed control signals. The high-speed

were only able to incorporate 10 processors in our design. How- inputs carry incoming LLRs to the processors in the decoder

ever, it would be straightforward to extend the design with ad- at the same frequency as the target clock frequency. Similarly,

ditional processors to achieve better BER performance.

there are 16 high-speed output signals for the LLRs exiting the

D. Peripheral and Control Modules

final processor in the decoder chain and for the cumulative BER up to that time instant. In total, the design contains 103 pins: 57

The peripheral and control modules played an important role pins for signal I/Os and 46 pins for power.

in enhancing the testability of the design in terms of functionality and defect avoidance. For BIST, a test pattern generator F. Implementation

along with a bit error counter were incorporated. This enabled The 180-nm, 1.8-V CMOS design was specified using behav-

us to quickly test the chip and obtain BER measurements that ioral VHDL synthesized to a netlist of black-box standard cells

confirmed silicon functionality.

and then automatically placed and routed using six metal layers.

Since the ten processors are concatenated, a failure in any We employed a two-step synthesis flow, starting with the opti-

one of them could have led to a complete failure of the decoder. mization of a single processor and finishing with the top-level

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2252

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

Fig. 11. Histogram comparison of net lengths in our design versus that of the LDPC-BC decoder in [5].

IV. TEST ENVIRONMENT

Fig. 10. Die photograph of the presented LDPC-CC system.

The testing was conducted using two methods: software simulations and ASIC BISTs controlled by an FPGA-based test

system. Software simulations were carried out using a C/Matlab

integration of the I/O components, the decoder’s ten processors and the remaining modules. Since the number of decoder iterations is analogous to the number of processors, design effort can be spent of designing a single processor.
From Fig. 10, we note that the ten processors that formulate the decoder take up most of the chip’s area. A major portion of the processor is dedicated to LLR storage since we require 6 bits/LLR 8 rows 140 registers/row 6720 registers. This circuitry does not include any logic for the parity-check nodes or variable nodes. Another challenge is the number of message nets that are routed to and from the parity-check node. For our particular code, there are 3060 wires running from the eight reg-

model. The ASIC testbed consisted of a custom printed circuit board (PCB) and an Altera NIOS development board [19]. The selection of the 120-CQFP package and placement of the power/ ground pins were chosen to comply with a prior LDPC-BC chip to allow the same test fixture to be re-used with minimal changes [20]. All the I/O signals on the ASIC pass from the daughter board to the NIOS core, which are then routed to components on the FPGA board or relayed to a software user interface hosted on a PC. Once the FPGA has initialized the 18 control bits, all tests were carried out using the on-chip BIST. These 18 control signals are semi-static and, hence, issues with glitching or skew were avoided.

ister rows to multiplexers, which then select 24 nets to forward to the parity-check node. This contrasts with the much smaller number of wires entering or leaving a processor. Specifically, 96 wires are required for the input and output of 16 six-bit LLRs and another eight wires carry the control signals. Fig. 11 shows a histogram of all the nets and their lengths in our chip (all modules) versus the LDPC-BC decoder chip presented in [5]. With over 330,000 nets in our chip, fewer than 0.1% of the nets exceed 0.4 mm; some nets as long as 7 mm could be attributed to

V. RESULTS
Average power and BER measurements were obtained from the fabricated ASIC. Table I summarizes the power readings and other characteristics of the chip while operating at its peak frequency of 175 MHz. Note that although the decoder is the largest and most complicated component, the power figures reported are pessimistic in that they include dissipation from the other modules.

VDD/VSS rails, clock tree nets and design-for-testability control circuitry. Also, over 99% of all the nets are 0.2 mm or less, A. Error Correcting Performance

largely due to the simple cascaded processor architecture and the The BER performance of our LDPC-CC was plotted in

absence of global interleaver wiring. The average net length in Fig. 12. As mentioned in Section III, a channel emulator was

Howland and Blanksby’s LDPC-BC design was around 3 mm included on the ASIC to assist with the BIST. Although the

using five metal layers, whereas it is only 0.1 mm in our de- channel emulator included an approximate AWGN generator,

sign using six metal layers [5]. Even if the decoder in [5] had a design error in that block caused the noise to deviate signifi-

six routing layers, a 97% net length reduction to meet our value cantly from an ideal Gaussian distribution. In Fig. 12(a) we plot

would be highly improbable. In the new cascaded processor ar- the BER performance of the decoder for the seven available

chitecture, the amount of global routing is greatly reduced and signal power settings. It is clear from Fig. 12(a) that as the

design effort can be focussed on optimizing the cell placement signal power is increased, the error correcting capability im-

and routing within a processor.

proves significantly. It is also clear that using all 10 processors

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SWAMY et al.: DESIGN AND TEST OF A 175-MB/S, RATE-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODE ENCODER AND DECODER
TABLE I SUMMARY OF CHIP CHARACTERISTICS DURING PEAK OPERATION

2253

Fig. 13. Plots show the actual average power dissipation in different modes of operation.

were limited to ten processors in the prototype due to silicon area constraints.

B. Power Analysis in Bist Mode

The power distribution was analyzed under different test

modes and for varying supply voltages. The results are plotted

in Fig. 13. In reset mode, the main source of power dissipa-

tion is the clock tree network, which includes all associated

clock buffers and related black-box cells. Note that there is

no difference in power dissipation in the ten-processor mode

versus the one-processor mode and hence, only one curve is

shown. This is because an average power measurement was

taken from the power pins that supplied the entire digital core

and there was no facility to selectively decouple the clock. At a

low clock frequency of 1 MHz, we measured 5.4 mW of total

power with no inputs/outputs toggling, except for the clock

pins. To estimate the static power from the power results for the

Fig. 12. (a) BIST error rate. (b) Simulated and measured BER with AWGN. reset mode in Fig. 13, we used a second order approximation to reduce the residual error. Using this method, the static power

leads to more error correction than using a single processor. This demonstrates that the coding gain of the ASIC increases with the number of processors.
We also verified the design functionality and obtained accurate performance results by introducing noise-corrupted LLRs that were generated off-chip and fed into the decoder via the high-speed interface. For the BER data plotted in Fig. 12(b), the noise is drawn from an accurate Gaussian distribution. Here the performance of the silicon is compared against a finite-precision software simulation and an HDL simulation using an event-driven simulator. The HDL simulation and silicon measurements are in excellent agreement. As expected, the finite-precision simulations give better performance as they do not capture all the saturation effects in the variable node.

consumption is about 3 mW. Fig. 13 also shows that approximately two-thirds of the total operating power dissipation is consumed during reset mode, which is due in part to the clock tree network [21].
To simplify the prototype’s design and reduce design time, the ASIC is a register-intensive design with over 20% of the cells being sequential elements. When this is coupled with the fact that synthesis was time-driven and not power-driven, the resulting energy per decoded-bit was 7.6 nJ at an estimated 3 dB SNR. This is higher than the 1.3 nJ/decoded-bit at 3 dB SNR from Howland and Blanksby’s 690 mW LDPC-BC decoder [5].
Using voltage scaling, it is possible to obtain lower power dissipation or higher throughput. In Fig. 13, the supply voltage was reduced down to 1.2 V. Here we can operate efficiently at 20 MHz dissipating only 83 mW. This lowers the energy per

Again, these results demonstrate that our circuit was prop- decoded-bit to 4.1 nJ.

erly correcting errors and indeed achieved a BER of 0.0018 (approximately 10 ) at 3 dB. This performance could be C. Performance Comparison

improved easily by increasing the number of processors, as As this is the first known ASIC hardware implementation of

shown in Fig. 5(b). However, as mentioned in Section III, we an LDPC-CC, there are no previous convolutional LDPC de-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2254

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007
TABLE II SUMMARY OF OTHER PUBLISHED DIGITAL LDPC CODE DECODER IMPLEMENTATIONS.
IF AND WHEN AVAILABLE, INFORMATION THROUGHPUT IS INDICATED BY ( )

coders to compare against. On the other hand, several LDPC-BC Several other digital implementations exist and Table II sum-

implementations have already been described in industry and marizes the facts for a select list of more recent work on FPGA

academia. Although LDPC-BCs and LDPC-CCs are based on and ASIC platforms.

similar theoretical principles, they differ greatly in implementation architecture [11]. LDPC-BC implementations can be fully

VI. CONCLUSION

parallel and hence, much higher throughputs are theoretically This paper described the first known ASIC implementation

possible. LDPC-CCs require significant work to approach the of a low-density parity-check convolutional code (LDPC-CC)

same throughputs. Nevertheless, we will make a comparison encoder and decoder. The ASIC implements a rate-1/2,

with some existing LDPC-BC architectures.

(128,3,6) code and provides a decoded information throughput

Howland and Blanksby’s 1024-bit, rate-1/2, parallel of 175 Mb/s. It dissipates 1.3 W of power from a 1.8-V supply

LDPC-BC decoder operated at 500 Mb/s of decoded throughput in a low noise environment. The LDPC-CC decoder employs

using 64 iterations, dissipating 690 mW on a 160-nm, 1.5-V a soft-decision, message-passing algorithm that executes on

CMOS process [5]. Scaling these results linearly with feature a unidirectional cascade of ten identical processing units.

size and quadratically with supply voltage yields an estimated The ASIC was not especially power-efficient because of the

power of 1.1 W in a 180-nm, 1.8-V CMOS. A linear scaling of register-intensive architecture that was adopted for design con-

throughput with feature size gives an information throughput venience. Significantly reduced power and increased decoding

of 444 Mb/s and thus, an energy per decoded-bit of 2.5 nJ. throughput should be achievable using customized multi-port

Moreover, 52.5 mm of silicon area is dedicated just for the memories that are matched at the layout level with the associ-

decoder in [5]. We could potentially fit more than three of our ated processor logic.

decoders in the same area attaining decoded throughputs in The simple, iterative decoder architecture of LDPC-CCs

excess of 500 Mb/s.

simplifies design scalability and avoids severe global routing

Darabiha implemented a (2048,1723) RS-based Gallager (6,32)-regular LDPC-BC using a hard-decision MPA to reduce interconnect complexity [22]. This design operated at 3.2 Gb/s of coded throughput and is a higher-rate code (rate 0.841). This makes the comparison difficult as higher-rate codes and hard-decision decoders are more conducive to high throughputs. Such decoders require fewer computations per information bit. However, this decoder was a hard decoder operating on single-bit LLRs. Hence, error correcting performance was significantly degraded with respect to a soft-decision decoder.

issues, which is a major problem with LDPC-BCs decoders. The capacity-approaching coding performance of LDPC-CCs is comparable to LDPC-BCs, Turbo codes and Turbo Product codes. With LDPC-BCs becoming the forward error correcting code of choice in next-generation communication standards such as 802.16e (WiMAX), 802.11n (Wi-LAN) and 802.3an (10GBASE-T), further investigation of the convolutional code alternative is warranted.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Mansour’s design is another LDPC-BC decoder but based on a turbo decoding algorithm [7]. That design also used a 180-nm, 1.8-V CMOS process but the reported results are only from simulation. That LDPC-BC decoder targeted a 2304-bit, rate-2/3, irregular code with 10 iterations per frame. It is assumed to have 128 Mb/s of decoded throughput with an average power

The authors would like to extend their gratitude to the Canadian Microelectronics Corporation (CMC) for providing the technical expertise, CAD tools, IC technology files, and subsidized access to IC fabrication.
REFERENCES

consumption of 1.2 W and hence, an energy per decoded-bit of 9.2 nJ. In addition, this design does not scale well with more iterations. This means that each additional iteration reduces the decoder’s throughput, whereas only the initial latency increases in our LDPC-CC decoder design.

[1] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, pp. 379–423, 623, Oct. 1948.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SWAMY et al.: DESIGN AND TEST OF A 175-MB/S, RATE-1/2 (128,3,6) LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODE ENCODER AND DECODER

2255

[4] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[5] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[6] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “A 54 MBPS (3,6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing, Oct. 2002, pp. 127–132.
[7] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[8] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[9] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity check convolutional codes applied to packet based communication systems,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (GlobeCom), St. Louis, MO, 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1250–1254.
[10] C. Schlegel and L. Perez, Trellis and Turbo Coding, 1st ed. New York: IEEE Press, 2004.
[11] D. J. Costello, Jr, A. E. Pusane, S. Bates, and K. S. Zigangirov, “A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes,” presented at the IEEE Information Theory and Applications Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2006.
[12] Z. Chen and S. Bates, “Construction of low-density parity-check convolutional codes through progressive edge-growth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1058–1060, Dec. 2005.
[13] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello, Jr, “Ldpc block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[14] A. Sridharan and D. Costello, Jr, “A new construction method for low density parity check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Oct. 2002, p. 212.
[15] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linkoping Univ., Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[16] S. Bates, D. G. Elliott, and R. Swamy, “Termination sequence generation circuits for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 1909–1917, Sep. 2006.
[17] R. Swamy, S. Bates, and T. Brandon, “Architectures for ASIC implementations of low-density parity-check encoders and decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS’05), May 2005, pp. 4513–4516.
[18] D. E. Knuth, Seminumerical Algorithms, ser. The Art of Computer Programming, 3rd ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1997, vol. 2.
[19] Stratix EP1S80 DSP Development Board Data Sheet, Ver. 1.3, Altera Inc., 2004 [Online]. Available: http://altera.com/literature/ds/ds_stratix_dsp_bd_pro.pdf
[20] T. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. Gaudet, B. F. Cockburn, S. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, P. Goud, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. G. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange,” Integration VLSI J., 2007, DOI: 10.1016/J.VLSI.2007.07.003.
[21] B. Waldo and J. Flynn, “Techniques for power optimization,” in Compiler Issues. Mountain View, CA: Synopsys Inc, 2004.
[22] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-gbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS05), May 2005, pp. 5194–5197.
[23] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “A 170 MBPS (8176,7156) quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder implementation with FPGA,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS’06), May 2006, pp. 5095–5098.
[24] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[25] C.-C. Lin, K.-L. Lin, H.-C. Chang, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 3.33Gb/s (1200,720) low-density parity-check code decoder,” in Proc. 31st Eur. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ESSCIRC), 2005, pp. 211–214.
Ramkrishna Swamy (S’05) received the B.Sc.
(Cooperative) degree in computer engineering from
the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada,
in 2004. He is currently working toward the M.Sc.
degree in electrical and computer engineering at
the University of Alberta, pursuing research in the
areas of FPGA and VLSI architectures for LDPC
Convolutional Codes (LDPC-CC).
He was the primary VLSI designer of the first
LDPC-CC encoder and decoder ASIC. His other
research interests include circuit design and syn-

thesis, digital ASIC design and low-power system architectures for high-speed applications. He is currently working as a Semiconductor Product Engineer for Micron Technology in Boise, ID.
Mr. Swamy was the recipient of the Best Paper in Session award at the Semiconductor Research Corporation’s (SRC) TECHCON 2005 conference.

Stephen Bates (S’94–M’03–SM’07) received the Ph.D. degree from Edinburgh University, Scotland, U.K., in 1997.
He then worked for Massana, an Irish Fabless Semiconductor company specializing in high-speed Ethernet transceiver design. In 2003, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Alberta as an Assistant Professor. His research interests include circuits and systems for high-speed wireline communication protocols, circuits for advanced forward error correction schemes and the use of reconfigurable logic to solve problems related to communications and bio-informatics.

circuit design.

Tyler L. Brandon received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 1999 and 2003, respectively. Currently, he is working toward the Ph.D. degree at the University of Alberta, pursuing research in the areas of ASIC architectures for logarithmic-based processing, parallel computing architectures and low-density parity-check codes.
He holds five patents in the areas of homogeneous three-dimensional integrated circuit design, multi-level hybrid ROM and SRAM-ROM and IC

Bruce F. Cockburn (S’86–M’95) received the B.Sc. degree in engineering physics from Queen’s University at Kingston, Canada, in 1981, and the M.Math. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1985 and 1990, respectively. His doctoral thesis considered the analysis and design of provably optimal test algorithms for semiconductor memories.
He is currently an Associate Professor and the Director of Computer Engineering in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. From 1981 to 1983, he worked as a test engineer and software designer at Mitel Corporation, Kanata, ON, Canada. His research interests include VLSI design and test, parallel signal processing algorithms and architectures, and high-performance application-specific architectures with application to broadband digital communications. Dr. Cockburn is a member of the IEEE Computer Society, the IEEE Communications Society, the IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society, the IEEE Signal Processing Society, and the Association for Computing Machinery. He is a registered Professional Engineer in the Province of Alberta, Canada.

Duncan G. Elliott (M’97) received the B.A.Sc. degree in engineering science and the Masters and Doctorate degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
He is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. Previously, he worked at Nortel in data communications, at MOSAID Technologies as a DRAM designer, and at IBM Microelectronics as a contractor in application-specific memory design. He spent his last sabbatical at the MIT Microsystems Technology Laboratories. His research interests include logic-enhanced memories,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2256

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2007

computer architecture, 3-D IC architecture, high-speed circuits and microfluidic systems.
Prof. Elliott was the 2001 winner of the Colton Medal in microelectronics for his work on Computational RAM, which has been commercialized. He is a member of the IEEE Solid-State Circuits, Circuits and Systems, Computer and Communications Societies and of the ACM.

Mr. Koob is a past recipient of the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Award and currently is a recipient of the Alberta Ingenuity Studentship Award and the Alberta Informatics Circle of Research Excellence (iCORE) Award. He is a member of the IEEE, the IEEE Computer Society, and the IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society. He is also a registered Professional Engineer in the province of Alberta.

John C. Koob (S’94–M’96–S’01) received the B.Sc. degree in computer engineering (with distinction) and the M.Sc. degree in electrical and computer engineering, from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 1995 and 2004, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering also at the University of Alberta.
His primary research involves the evaluation of economical file memory for multi-level buffer cache architectures. Other research interests include multi-level DRAM design and logic-enhanced memories. He holds three U.S. patents.

Zhengang Chen (S’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He is working towards the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
His research interests include error control coding, communication systems, digital application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) design and pattern recognition. He is currently working on VLSI architectures for advanced channel coding schemes such as lowdensity parity-check codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:00:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

