2017 17th IEEE International Conference on Communication Technology

An Efficient Post Processing Scheme to Lower the Error Floor of LDPC Decoders

Wenjie Li, Jun Lin, Zhongfeng Wang
School of Electronic Science and Engineering Nanjing University, China
e-mail: wenjielinju@sina.com, {jlin, zfwang}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract—Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have extensive applications in numerous communication systems. However, iterative LDPC decoders may suffer from error floor. In this paper, a low complexity post processing scheme (PPS) is proposed to significantly improve the error correction performance of a Min-Sum based LDPC decoder in the error floor region. Instead of using trapping set elimination algorithms, the proposed PPS introduces perturbations so that a decoder can escape from undesired local maximums. After decoding failure, for these unreliable code bits, the proposed PPS generates carefully modified soft messages, which are employed in the following decoding iterations. Numerical results demonstrate that the presented PPS significantly lowers the error floor for simulated LDPC codes.
Keywords-LDPC codes; error floor; post processing; local maximum
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, first proposed by Gallager [1], achieve excellent error correction performance under Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm. Normalized Min-Sum and offset Min-Sum [2], as approximations for BP algorithm, are proposed with superior hardware efficiency. On the other hand, their performance are worse than conventional BP algorithm, especially for irregular codes [3]. For regular codes, the performance degradation caused by normalized Min-Sum can be compensated by finding an optimal scaling factor [4]. But for irregular codes, this approach is not efficient because there does not exist a fixed globally optimal scaling factor. It has been found that check nodes with different degrees have different optimal scaling factors and the optimal factors also change with iterations [5] [6]. Because most practical LDPC codes are irregular, improving the performance of normalized or offset Min-Sum is definitely necessary. Many methods have been proposed to improve the performance of irregular LDPC codes by determining the dynamical optimal scaling factors [6] [7]. While some of them perform well at the cost of heavy overhead, some of them are not practical to implement in hardware.
Error floor is evident in the Min-Sum decoding. Trapping sets [8] or near-codewords [9] was shown to be the origin of error floor. They lead to a small number of error bits that would never be corrected by the iterative decoder itself. Hence, trapping sets prevent expected performance in high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region. Apart from designing LDPC codes with low error floors [10]–[12], many decoding algorithms [13]–[15] were also proposed to lower the error

floor of LDPC decoders. Since most of them require to identify trapping sets, it is inefficient to implement them in hardware.
Local maximums are introduced to explain how a decoder is influenced by trapping sets in a mathematical way. In [16], the authors proposed some algorithms to prevent Bit Flipping (BF) decoders from being trapped in local maximums. Moreover, not only BF decoders but also many other iterative decoders suffer from local maximums [17]. In this paper, a low complexity post processing scheme (PPS) for iterative normalized Min-Sum algorithm is proposed. After a decoding failure is detected, perturbations are introduced by carefully modifying the output soft messages concerning unreliable code bits. In the next, more iterations are performed based on updated soft messages so that an iterative decoder could converge to the transmitted codeword.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Min-Sum algorithm is reviewed in Section II. In Section III, error floors phenomenon is discussed and the proposed method is presented. Simulation results of several irregular LDPC codes are shown in Section IV. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. MIN-SUM ALGORITHM
LDPC codes can be represented by Tanner graph [18]. Tanner graph is a bipartite graph, where nodes are connected to others by edges. Variable nodes and check nodes in a Tanner graph correspond to the columns and rows of the parity-check matrix, respectively. If there is a nonzero element in parity check matrix H, the corresponding edge should be drawn. Fig. 1 illustrates a simple example of Tanner graph.
Min-Sum decoding is a kind of iterative decoding algorithm that transmits and updates the messages during iterations. These messages transmitted between check nodes and variable nodes are called extrinsic information, which represent probabilities in the form of a posterior probability (APP). Since normalized Min-Sum and offset Min-Sum exhibit almost the same performance, only the former is considered in this paper.
For a binary ( , ) LDPC code, let M and N denote the number of rows and columns of its parity-check matrix, respectively. Let ( ) and ( ) denote the check nodes connected to variable node n and the variable nodes connected to check node m, respectively. Let y = ( , , … , ) be the transmitted vector. Let r = ( , … , ) be the received vector, which is equal to y + n, where n is an additive white Gaussian noise vector. We use

978-1-5090-3944-9/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

122

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

= ( , , … , ) to represent channel log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages. , denotes the message from check node m to variable node n. , denotes the message from variable node n to check node m. Let denote the LLR of variable node n, which is used to estimate corresponding bit in every iteration. = ( , , … , ) denotes the estimated vector. The normalized Min-Sum algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
FKHFNQRGHV

YDULDEOHQRGHV Figure 1. A simple example of Tanner graph.

Algorithm 1: Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm
input : = ( , , … , ) output: = ( , , … , ) 1Initialization: 2 for = 1 to N do 3 for ∈ ( ) do

4

,=

5 end for

6 end for

7 Iteration: for = 1,2, … , do

8 Horizontal Step: 9 for = 1 to do 10 for ∈ ( ) do

11

, = ∙ ∏ ∈ ( )\

,∙

12 end for 13 end for

∈ ( )\ (| , |)

14 Vertical Step: 15 for = 1 to do 16 for ∈ ( ) do

17

, = + ∑ ∈ ( )\

,

18 end for

19 end for

20 Estimation:

21 for = 1 to do

22 for ∈ ( ) do

23

= +∑ ∈ ( ) ,

24 end for

25

0, ≥ 0 = 1, < 0

26 end for

27 If = , end decoding

After initialization, every , is set as corresponding channel LLR. During iterations, messages are first transmitted from check nodes to variable nodes in the horizontal step. Then, it turns to the vertical step. At the end of every iteration, a codeword should be estimated according to the updated soft messages. α is the scaling factor, which improves the error correction performance of Min-Sum algorithm. As a scaling factor, α varies with different codes and different levels of convergence. For regular LDPC codes, optimal scaling factors can be found. Unfortunately, it is difficult for irregular LDPC codes to identify a globally optimal scaling factor [6], which means that there exists a performance gap between normalized Min-Sum and conventional BP.
III. THE PROPOSED METHOD
A. Error Floor Phenomenon of Irregular LDPC Codes
In our simulations, LDPC codes from the IEEE 802.11n and the IEEE 802.16e standard, which are both irregular QCLDPC codes, show significant error floors in high SNR region. Lower error floors can be achieved by employing a better scaling factor. A number of scaling factors are employed to find the optimal one. For practical application, we only choose scaling factors that can be implemented easily, such as 0.75, 0.8125 and 0.875.
In order to guarantee sufficient convergence, the maximum number of iterations is set to 60 and layered schedule is employed as well. It is worth noting that layered decoding is widely used in practical applications. This is not only because it converges faster than flooding schedule, but also because it has advantages in hardware implementation. We use the rate 1/2 LDPC codes of length 2304 bits from IEEE 802.16e standard as an example. In our simulation, decoding stops when 20 codewords are decoded incorrectly. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 show the number of error bits of these unsuccessfully decoded codewords after 60 iterations with scaling factors 0.75 and 0.8125, respectively. Note that 0.8125 is the optimal factor for this code.
It is obvious that there exist some codewords with no more than 10 error bits in the unsuccessfully decoded ones. We refer the error bits as “small error sets”. For α = 0.75, the small error set exhibit nearly uniform distribution. For α = 0.8125, they center on the higher SNR region, implying a lower error floor.
These small errors sets can be attributed to trapping sets [8]. The suboptimal scaling factors make the Min-Sum decoder more susceptible to trapping sets, which explains why the performance of decoder with α = 0.8125 is superior to that of others. Although 0.8125 leads to lower error floor, small error sets still appear in high SNR region. Our post processing is designed to deal with these error bits.
B. Post Processing
Iterative decoding is a process that searches the global maximum point. Initialized by the intrinsic information, i.e., channel LLR, Min-Sum decoder is set to a starting point. When iteration begins, the decoder searches the global maximum on its route. Global maximum is the point that

123
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

presents the transmitted codeword. The searching route is determined by algorithm itself. For example, in [16], the objective function reveals the level of convergence through monitoring the searching route. When the objective function achieves the maximal value, searching point is at the global maximum.
Figure 2. For α = 0.75, error bits of unsuccessfully decoded codewords after 60 iterations.

the added perturbation. Our method is only adopted when decoding is failed.

Algorithm 2: The Proposed Post Processing Scheme

input : = ( , , … , ) output: = ( , , … , ) 1 Normalized Min-Sum

2 if = and ≠ 0 then 3 for = 1 to do 4 if | | < T then

5

=

6 else

7

=

8 end if

9 end for

10 Normalized Min-Sum

11 end if

In the step of estimation, updated soft message is used to judge its corresponding bit. Hence, indicates the reliability of bit n. In other words, bit with smaller | | is more unreliable. We use a threshold T as the criterion to filter the incorrect bits. For different codes with different decoding algorithms, thresholds are different. Extensive simulation experiments are required to obtain the suitable T.
As suspectable bits are selected, the local maximum is identified. Observed in our simulation, selected bits are almost equal to the small error sets. In high SNR region, the number of these bits is very small. We change the soft messages for all the suspectable bits by resetting their values. A set of values are tried and our simulation results show that a constant perturbation L is good enough for escaping from a local maximum. The value of the constant L also differs for different codes with different decoding algorithms. However, from our simulation results, we find that in a large range, different L lead to almost the same performance. Therefore, the choice of L is flexible.

Figure 3. For α = 0.8125, error bits of unsuccessfully decoded codewords after 60 iterations.
Trapping sets lead to the existence of local maximums. On the other hand, any changes of the algorithm will influence the searching route. As aforementioned, with different approximations, BP based algorithms have different performance. This is because the searching routes of them changes. Due to the trapping sets and the different searching routes, decoders are probable to be captured by local maximums. Since a trapping set only consists of a few variable nodes, a small perturbation may be helpful to release the decoder from a local maximum and lower the error floor [16].
Based on the above discussion, we attempt to change the searching point to make the decoder escape from the local maximum. The proposed method is presented in Algorithm 2, where T is a fixed threshold and L is a constant containing

Figure 4. Perturbation can help searching point escape from the local maximum.
After of all selected bits are reset, searching point is changed as well. These artificially added perturbation help the decoder to escape from the local maximum that cannot

124
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

be dealt with by itself. The last step is operating the decoder again with the new searching point. The maximum number of iterations is set to the same with previous step. Fig. 4 illustrates how a small perturbation can help a decoder to approach the correct codeword. Note that the perturbation should be moderate to prevent the decoder from being captured by another local maximum. Hence, L which contains the perturbation should be specified by extensive simulation experiments.
IV. RESULTS
A. Simulation Results
In Fig. 5, the error correction performance of the rate 1/2 LDPC codes of length 2034 bits from IEEE 802.16e standard in different conditions is presented with the maximum number of iterations = 60, which guarantees sufficient convergence. It is noteworthy that in order to optimize the performance, of second step is also set to 60 in our simulations. As discussed before, extensive simulation experiments are conducted to obtain the suitable T and L. | | of incorrect bits are observed and we find that almost of them are smaller than 2. So T = 2 is large enough to filter these error bits. On the other hand, in a proper range, simulations with different parameters are conducted. Fig. 6 shows the corresponding error correction performance.

is because at higher SNR, more small error sets can be solved by the proposed method. With suboptimal scaling factor, the proposed method is more powerful. When FER is 10 , the proposed method can achieve about 0.8 dB gain over the conventional one.
To verify our argument, error bits recorded after the post processing are shown in Fig. 7. It is shown that almost all small error sets cannot be found any more. The disappearance of under-10 errors demonstrates the efficiency of our proposed post processing method.
Figure 6. FER performance of the LDPC codes from IEEE 802.16e standard with different parameters.

Figure 5. FER performance of the rate 1/2 LDPC codes from IEEE 802.16e standard.
Simulation results show that with these different parameters, the difference of error performance is very small. Hence, T is set as 2 and L is set as 0 without any degradation in performance.
Normalized Min-Sum algorithm exhibits much better performance with optimal factor, which is equal to 0.8125 for this simulated code. As shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, the large performance gap between normalized Min-Sum and BP is caused by these small error sets. Once small error sets arise, the error floor phenomenon exhibits.
The proposed method compensates the effect of error floors and achieves about 0.2 dB gain over conventional algorithm with optimal scaling factor at the FER of 10 . In addition, the gain is getting larger in higher SNR region. This

Figure 7. For α = 0:8125, error bits of unsuccessfully decoded codewords after 60 iterations and post processing.
Several QC-LDPC codes that suffer from severe error floors under normalized Min-Sum algorithm have been simulated and results show that most of them can achieve considerable gain with our post processing method. Due to the limitation of space, we only post up another one of these simulated codes in Fig. 8.
B. Complexity Analysis
The proposed scheme is conducted only when decoding fails. Hence, the overall computational complexity of the proposed scheme is low. In Fig. 8, when FER is 10 , our method would be employed only once for every 10

125
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

codewords in average. Besides the low average complexity, the induced overhead is also negligible. Since the threshold is a constant, a much simpler comparator can be employed to identify unreliable bits. After modifying the soft messages, they are sent to the same decoder to perform following iterations, which requires few extra circuits.
Figure 8. FER performance of the rate 1/2 LDPC codes from IEEE 802.11n standard.
The self-corrected Min-Sum decoding proposed in [19] is also a simple method that deals with the soft messages. It erases the , according to the change of its sign. To store the signs of , , more memories are required. Moreover, this method is conducted for every codeword, even if it can be decoded successfully by the original decoder. Considering significant improvement in performance and negligible implementation overhead, the proposed method shows a clear advantage compared to the method in [19].
V. CONCLUSION In order to lower the error floor of LDPC codes, a low complexity post processing scheme is proposed in this paper. The proposed method releases normalized Min-Sum decoders from local maximums by adding certain perturbation. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme brings significant coding gain for simulated LDPC codes from several industry standard. Moreover, the extra coding gain brought by the proposed scheme is more significant when suboptimal scaling factors are employed. Considering its negligible overhead, this method is very suitable for practical implementations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grants No. 61604068 and 61774082; the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No. 021014380045 and 021014380065.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallage, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., ol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, 1999.
[3] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching rregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, 2001.
[4] J. Chen and M. P. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved bpbased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, 2002.
[5] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, and D. Gu, “Two-dimensional correction for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 180–182, 2006.
[6] G. Lechner and J. Sayir, “Improved sum-min decoding for irregular LDPC codes,” in Turbo Codes&Related Topics; 6th International ITGConference on Source and Channel Coding (TURBOCODING), 2006 4th International Symposium on. VDE, 2006, pp. 1–6.
[7] G. Lechner and J. Sayir, Improved sum-min decoding of LDPC codes, Ph.D. thesis, ISITIA, 2004.
[8] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of the annual Allerton conference on communication control and computing. The University; 1998, 2003, vol. 41, pp. 1426–1435.
[9] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Posto, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[10] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, 2001.
[11] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Communications, 2003. ICC’03. IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2003, vol. 5, pp. 3125–3129.
[12] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: Geometry decomposition and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134, 2007.
[13] Yang Han and W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, 2009.
[14] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error floor avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2005. PIMRC 2005. IEEE 16th International Symposium on. IEEE, 2005, vol. 4, pp. 2386–2390.
[15] M. Chertkov, “Reducing the error floor,” in Information Theory Workshop, 2007. ITW’07. IEEE. IEEE, 2007, pp. 230–235.
[16] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” in Information Theory and Its Applications, 2008. ISITA 2008. International Symposium on. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–6.
[17] G. Lechner and J. Sayir, “On the convergence of log-likelihood values in iterative decoding,” in Mini-Workshop on Topics in Information Theory, 2002, pp. 12–13.
[18] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[19] V. Savin, “Self-corrected Min-Sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2008, pp. 146–150.

126
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

