Fifty-Fifth Annual Allerton Conference Allerton House, UIUC, Illinois, USA October 3-6, 2017
Lower Bounds for Quantized LDPC Min-Sum Decoders Based on Absorbing Sets
Homayoon Hatami∗, David G. M. Mitchell†, Daniel J. Costello, Jr∗, and Thomas Fuja∗ ∗Dept. of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA Email: {hhatami,dcostel1,tfuja}@nd.edu
† Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003 Email: dgmm@nmsu.edu

Abstract—Previously published lower bounds on the errorfloor performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with quantized sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoders need modification to apply to min-sum algorithm (MSA) decoders. In this paper we show that, due to the sub-optimality of MSA decoders, certain assumptions that apply to SPA decoders are not valid for MSA decoders. Based on appropriately modified assumptions, an improved technique is then proposed to evaluate lower bounds on the error floor performance of LDPC codes for an additive white Gaussian noise channel and a quantized MSA decoder. This new technique not only results in error floor bounds for MSA decoders, but also for SPA decoders. The obtained bound is based on an absorbing set, and a good error floor approximation can be obtained when the multiplicity of the absorbing set is known.

assumption that all variable nodes outside the absorbing set receive channel LLRs which take on their maximal possible values.
This paper makes the observation that, for min-sum algorithm (MSA) decoders, there exist some absorbing set channel LLRs that can be decoded successfully if the channel LLRs of the variable nodes outside of the absorbing set are not maximal, but for which the decoder fails when the channel LLRs of these nodes are maximal. The number of such absorbing set channel LLRs can be very small; however, they often have a high probability of occurrence. The focus of this paper is to find all absorbing set channel LLRs that cannot be decoded under any circumstances, so that the

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are a class of error correcting codes that offer asymptotic performance approaching the Shannon limit. However, implementing LDPC decoders requires finite precision quantization, which can introduce an error floor that prevents them from reaching very low error probabilities at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). Problematic structures called trapping sets were identified in [2] as the primary cause of the error floor, and in [3] a class of particularly harmful trapping sets on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel were called absorbing sets.

probability of occurrence of these channel LLRs can be used to form a lower bound on the frame error rate (FER).
The paper extends [4] to provide approximate lower bounds based on absorbing sets for MSA decoders with both uniform and non-uniform quantizers. This has significant practical implications, since such decoders can achieve much lower FERs than conventional quantized SPA decoders [8].2 Our approach is simple, in that the bound is based only on harmful absorbing sets, and an accurate performance approximation can be obtained given the multiplicity of the absorbing set within the code.
II. BACKGROUND

Several methods have been proposed to evaluate the error floor performance of LDPC codes based on trapping sets, e.g., [4]–[7]. In [5], a code-dependent error floor approximation is introduced and compared to importance sampling.1 In [6], the contributions of the smallest cycles in the code graph are added to approximate the performance of a given code. Analytical code-dependent bounds were derived in [7] in the case that unquantized log-likelihood-ratios (LLRs) are constrained to some maximum value.
Our previous work [4] focused on providing lower bounds based on absorbing sets for the error floor of LDPC codes when sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoding is employed with a uniform quantizer - a scenario with performance that is degraded compared to unquantized SPA decoding, especially

A. Trapping Sets & Absorbing Sets
Let the sets V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} and C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} represent the variable nodes and check nodes, respectively, of a bipartite Tanner graph representation of an LDPC code. Also let A = {v1, v2, . . . , va} denote a subset of V of cardinality a. Let E(A) and O(A) represent the subsets of check nodes connected to variable nodes in A with even and odd degrees, respectively, where |O(A)| = b. Here, A is called an (a, b) trapping set. Also, A is defined to be an (a, b) absorbing set if each variable node in A is connected to fewer check nodes in O(A) than E(A). As an illustration, Fig. 1 shows a (4, 2) absorbing set with b = 2 degree-one check nodes in O(A), and each of the a = 4

for coarse quantization. A bound was obtained based on the
1Code-dependent means that the result depends on the structure of the code containing the absorbing set.

2We derive a lower bound on the FER based on an absorbing set under certain assumptions and then approximate the performance using the multiplicity of the absorbing set. We call the result an approximate lower bound.

978-1-5386-3266-6/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

694

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

C. Quasi-Uniform Quantizer

Fig. 1: An illustration of a (4, 2) absorbing set with girth 6.

variable nodes in A is connected to fewer elements of O(A) than E(A). This is a common structure in (3, K)-regular LDPC codes, for example, and we see that it contains a cycle of length six (the highlighted edges in the figure). The girth of an absorbing set is the length of its shortest cycle, and it can be readily observed that the girth of the absorbing set in Fig. 1 is six.
An absorbing set induces a combinatorial sub-graph structure in a code’s Tanner graph, and the variable nodes contained in an absorbing set represent the bit locations where an iterative decoder is likely to get “trapped.”

B. LDPC Decoders

Message Passing (MP) decoding involves iteratively pass-

ing LLRs between variable nodes and check nodes and

verifying if the estimated bits after each iteration satisfy the

parity-check constraints of the code. Decoding continues until

some maximum number of iterations is reached, or until the

parity-check constraints are all satisfied.

L(vi → cj) represents the LLR passed from vi to cj. Similarly, L(cj → vi) represents the LLR passed from cj to vi. The check nodes that are neighbors to vi are denoted N (vi), and the variable nodes that are neighbors to cj are denoted N (cj).

In practice, several variants of the check node computation

are used.

1) Sum-Product Implementation: The check node opera-

tion is

⎛

⎞

L(cj → vi) = ⎝

sign (L(vi → cj))⎠

i ∈N⎛(cj )\i

⎞ (1)

· Φ−1 ⎝

Φ (|L(vi → cj)|)⎠ ,

i ∈N (cj )\i

where Φ(x) = log

ex +1 ex −1

. In (1), the function Φ(x) and its

inverse are realized using look-up tables, which makes the

implementation of the decoder possible.

In [4] and [8], it was shown that quantized versions of this

implementation suffer from a significant error floor, i.e., at

high SNR there is little additional improvement in the FER

for additional increases in channel quality.

2) Min-Sum Implementation: In the MSA algorithm, the

check node computation is simplified as

⎛

⎞

L(cj → vi) = ⎝

sign (L(vi → cj))⎠

i ∈N (cj )\i

(2)

· min |L(vi → cj)| ,
i ∈N (cj )\i

so that it is no longer necessary to compute the function Φ(x).

One important advantage of the MSA compared to the conventional SPA is that their LLR values can grow quite large, and as a result absorbing sets tend to not get “stuck” in incorrect values as easily as they do when the LLR values are limited. To exploit this advantage, a quantizer with a very large range must be employed.3 A uniform quantizer would thus require a large number of bits and wouldn’t be practical. Therefore, in [8] the authors proposed a non-uniform quantizer, denoted “quasi-uniform” due to its structure, which uses q bits for uniform quantization, thus maintaining precision, plus an extra bit used to increase the range of the quantizer.

III. SYSTEM MODEL

In this section we set up the system model. Let ˜r be
the vector of channel LLRs at the variable nodes of the
decoder over a binary input AWGN channel with mean 0 and standard deviation σ. Each element of ˜r, denoted as r˜i, has a Gaussian distribution with mean 2/σ2 or −2/σ2, depending on whether the received corresponding bit is 0 or 1, respectively. The standard deviation of each r˜i is 2/σ. With the assumption of the all-zero codeword,

r˜i ∼ N

2 σ2

,

4 σ2

, i = 1, 2, . . . , n.

(3)

Let r = (r1, r2, . . . , rn) denote the quantized ˜r corresponding to the variable nodes in V . Each element of r, denoted rm for 1 ≤ m ≤ n, can take one of t = 2q values for a q-bit quantizer. These values are labeled 1 to
t, from smallest to largest. The quantizer boundaries are represented by e1 to et−1. The probability that rm takes on the value k, 1 ≤ k ≤ t, is equivalent to the probability that ek−1 < r˜i < ek, which is given by

Pr⎧(rm = ⎨⎪⎪⎪
= ⎪⎪⎩⎪ Q

k)

Q et−1

−

2 σ2

2

ek−1

−

2 σ2

2

σ
−Q

σ
1−Q

e1

−

2 σ2

2

ek

−

2 σ2

2

σ

σ

if k = t if 1 < k < t (4) if k = 1

The vector r can take on tn different values, representing various combinations of quantizer levels zk = ( k1 , k2 , . . . , kn ), 1 ≤ k1, k2, . . . , kn ≤ t, 1 ≤ k ≤ tn.
For an absorbing set A, let s and o be the parts of r corresponding to the variable nodes in A and V \ A, respectively. Therefore, r can be represented by the pair (s, o), which we denote as r = (s, o). In a similar fashion, the vector s can take on ta different values, representing combinations of the quantizer levels xi = ( i1 , i2 , . . . , ia ), 1 ≤ i1, i2, . . . , ia ≤ t, 1 ≤ i ≤ ta. The set of these vectors

3In the SPA, the effective quantization of Φ(x) requires both high precision and a large range, requirements that run counter to the goal of limiting implementation complexity [8].

695

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

is denoted X, and the probability that s takes on the value This assumption is based on the fact that most pairs of

xi ∈ X is given by

a

Pr(s = xi) = Pr(sm = im ).

(5)

m=1

Also, similar to r and s, we denote the possible values of o by yj, and the set of all yj, for 1 ≤ j ≤ tn−a, is denoted Y .

IV. FER LOWER BOUND FORMULATION
Assuming that there are N absorbing sets Ai, i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, of a particular type in a given code, the

absorbing sets are disjoint, in the sense that they do not have any nodes in common.
Under these assumptions, (9) can be approximated as

γ ≈ N Pr EA −

N 2

Pr E A 2 .

(11)

Since our primary interest is in evaluating performance at very low FERs, where in (11) the term N Pr EA is
dominant, we can further approximate the bound as:

γ ≈ N Pr EA .

(12)

contribution to the FER associated with absorbing set Ai Therefore, the focus of this paper turns to evaluating Pr EA

can be written as

to obtain an approximation to the lower bound γ. To this end,

tn

(6) can be rewritten as

Pr EAi = Pr EAi |r = zk · Pr (r = zk) , (6)

ta t(n−a)

k=1
where EAi represents the event that there is at least one error

Pr(EA) =

Pr(EA|s = xi, o = yj) (13)

i=1 j=1

in the variable nodes of Ai after decoding r. The contribution of all N absorbing sets, on the other hand, is given by

Pr

N i=1

E Ai

and, since these absorbing sets are not the

only cause of decoding errors, they give a lower bound on

the FER, i.e.,

N

FER ≥ Pr

E Ai .

(7)

i=1

Furthermore, since

N

N

Pr

E Ai ≥ Pr E Ai −

Pr E Ai ∩ E Aj ,

i=1

i=1

1≤i<j≤N

(8)

(8) and (7) can be combined to give the following lower

bound:

FER ≥ γ

N
Pr E Ai −

Pr E Ai ∩ E Aj . (9)

i=1

1≤i<j≤N

· Pr (s = xi) · Pr (o = yj) .

Now, we continue with some notation.

• Let ω represent the set of all (xi, yj) that cannot be decoded in (13). In other words, ω =

(xi, yj) : Pr(EA|s = xi, o = yj) = 1 . • Let ymax be the vector with elements equal to the largest
quantizer output, i.e., ymax ( t, . . . , t). • For a given yj, denote the set of all xi that
cannot be decoded as Ω (yj). In other words, Ω (yj) = xi : Pr(EA|s = xi, o = yj) = 1 . Specifically, when o = ymax, the set of all xi that cannot be decoded is Ω (ymax) = xi : Pr(EA|s = xi, o = ymax) = 1 . • Let Ω(Y ) be the set of all xi such that (xi, yj) ∈ ω, ∀yj ∈ Y . In other words, Ω(Y ) = {xi : (xi, yj) ∈ ω, ∀yj ∈ Y }.

We note that

t(n−a)

Ω(Y ) =

Ω (yj) .

(14)

j=1

The calculation of γ using (9) is very time consuming. Hence, in [4], γ was approximated using certain assumptions, and approximate lower bounds for a given absorbing set were derived. The rest of this section reviews the approximate bounds of [4] and introduces the system model used in this paper.
Two assumptions are made to simplify the calculation of the lower bound in (9).

• Let Υ (yj) denote the set of all vectors yj whose Euclidean distance to ymax is larger than the Euclidean distance between ymax and yj, i.e., Υ (yj) = {(yj ) : ||ymax − yj || > ||ymax − yj||}. In the following, we derive a lower bound for Pr(EA) that
is valid for any decoder. Later, we use some assumptions to
approximate this lower bound. Equation (13) can be rewritten
as follows:

Assumption 1: All N absorbing sets have the same Pr EAi , denoted Pr EA .
This assumption is based on the symmetry of the channel.

Pr(EA) =

Pr (s = xi) · Pr (o = yj)

(xi,yj )∈ω

Our results show that it is a good assumption, although we have observed cases where the same (a, b) absorbing set can have slightly different probabilities of error, due to the fact that the structure of the code outside the absorbing set depends on where it is located in the graph.

≥

Pr (s = xi)

Pr (o = yj) (15)

xi∈Ω(Y )

yj ∈Y

=

Pr (s = xi) .

xi∈Ω(Y )

Assumption 2: The probability of error for each absorbing Equation (15) demonstrates that

set is independent of other absorbing sets, i.e., for i = j,

Pr E Ai ∩ E Aj = Pr E Ai · Pr E Aj .

(10) 696

Pr(EA) ≥ δ

Pr (s = xi) .

(16)

xi∈Ω(Y )

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

It is worth noting that calculating δ depends on finding Ω(Y ), which requires exploring all yj ∈ Y . For the sake of simplicity, instead of finding Ω(Y ) we look for a set Ωˆ (Y ) that is less complex to calculate and whose probability approximates the probability of Ω(Y ), i.e., Pr(Ωˆ (Y )) ≈ Pr(Ω(Y )), so that

δ≈δ

Pr (s = xi) .

(17)

xi∈Ωˆ (Y )

Putting together (9), (12), (15), and (17), it follows that

Fig. 2: An illustration of a (6, 0) absorbing set with girth 8.

FER ≥ γ ≈ N Pr(EA) ≥ N δ ≈ N δ ,

(18)

so the probability of frame error for the absorbing set A can be approximately lowered bounded by

FER N Pr EA N

Pr (s = xi) , (19)

xi∈Ωˆ (Y )

following assumption, which holds for ML decoders, to aid
in finding fake xi. Assumption 3: For any vector xi such that (xi, yj) ∈ ω,
i.e., (xi, yj) cannot be decoded, any vector (xi, yj ) such that yj ∈ Υ (yj) also cannot be decoded. In other words,

where the multiplicities of absorbing sets for certain classes of codes can be found in the literature [3], [9]. Also, in [10], a method for counting a specific class of trapping sets in any code is proposed.
V. LOWER BOUNDS FOR MSA DECODERS
In [4], based on an extension of ML decoding assumptions to SPA decoders, the approximation Ωˆ (Y ) = Ω(ymax) was utilized, which we denote as the max-LLR assumption: if

Ω (yj) ⊆ Ω (yj ) for yj ∈ Υ (yj) .

(20)

Assumption 3 is a generalization of the one used in [4]
(they are the same when yj = ymax). For an ML decoder, since Ω (ymax) ⊆ Ω (yj) for all yj = ymax, it follows that Ω (Y ) = Ω (ymax) in (14). However, for MP decoders there are some cases for which xi ∈ Ω (ymax) but xi ∈/ Ω (Y ), i.e, there exists a yj for which xi ∈/ Ω (yj), so xi is fake. This observation is important, since it leads to a procedure

xi ∈ Ω (ymax) and yj ∈ Υ (ymax), then (xi, yj) ∈ ω. The results of [8] indicate that the MSA decoder with
a quasi-uniform quantizer can have error floor performance very close to that of an unquantized SPA decoder. As an example, for (3, K) array codes [11] decoded using the MSA with a 5-bit quasi-uniform quantizer, we find that the dominant error patterns are (6, 0) absorbing sets with girth 8, as shown in Fig. 2. This absorbing set is the support of

for identifying fake xi.

We start by choosing M + 1 arbitrary yjm = ymax, m =

0, 1, . . . , for each

M, yjm

and setting . Finally, a

yj0 set

= ymax. Then we find Ω Ωˆ (Y ) can be defined as

(yjm

)

M

Ωˆ (Y )

Ω (yjm ) .

(21)

m=0

a codeword and represents the minimum distance of these Equation (21) yields a δ that is significantly less complex

codes (which illustrates the efficiency of the quasi-uniform to calculate than δ, since it only requires the computation of

quantizer for MSA decoding). When we apply the max-LLR assumption to the (6, 0)
absorbing set with different quasi-uniform quantizers and use the multiplicity of the (6, 0) absorbing set from [9], however, we find that the approximations to the lower bounds

M + 1 different Ω(yj)’s, while δ requires the computation

of t(n−a) different Ω(yj)’s. Relative to computing δ, the

complexity of computing δ

is

only

, M +1
tn−a

which

is

a

small

fraction for moderate values of M . (Ω (ymax) is included in

the calculation of (21) since at high SNR the most likely set

are, in fact, larger than the associated simulation results for the MSA decoder. In other words, our results for the MSA decoder point to the fact that there exists vectors (xi, yj), xi ∈ Ω (ymax) , yj ∈ Υ (ymax), for which (xi, yj) ∈/ ω, i.e., the decoder can correctly decode (xi, yj). Therefore, we conclude that our assumptions, which hold true for an ML decoder, are not always valid for all MP decoders. We now show that we can find a better approximate error floor lower bound that is applicable to a wide range of codes, decoders, and quantizers, in particular, to MSA decoders.
Our goal is to find a small set Ωˆ (Y ), with approximately the same probability as Ω(Y ), that gives a good approx-

of LLRs from the channel is o = ymax.)
Although there are many possible choices for yjm , m = 0, . . . , M , for the sake of simplicity we propose the M + 1

vectors

yjm = ( t−m, . . . , t−m)(1×(n−a)) ,

(22)

where

M

≤

t−1.

So

the

relative

complexity

is

at

most

. t
t(n−a)

Due to the fact that, for an ML decoder, Ω(yjm ) ⊆ Ω (yjm)

for m < m, we initialize Ωˆ (Y ) = Ω(ymax) and then, starting

from m = 1 for each xi identify it as

f∈taokemΩˆa(nY=d).MexIcf,l,uwfdeoercithaefnrcyokmmtoΩˆ, s(xeYei )i.∈/fTxhΩiis(∈pyrjΩomc()ey,djuwmree)

imate lower bound for MSA decoding. For this purpose, is described in Algorithm 1. The results presented here

we start from Ω (ymax) and try to identify some additional illustrate that this algorithm is effective in obtaining a good incorrectly decoded xi ∈ Ω (ymax) − Ω(Y ). We denote these approximate lower bound for MSA decoders with quasixi ∈ Ω (ymax) − Ω (Y ) as fake. To this end, we use the uniform quantizers.

697

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 Calculate δ

xi∈Ωˆ (Y ) Pr (s = xi)

1: Ωˆ (Y ) ← Φ (the empty set)

2: for all xi ∈ X do

3: m = 0

4: while m ≤ M do

5:

yjm ← ( t−m, . . . , t−m)(1×(n−a))

6:

The decoder tries to decode (xi, yjm ).

7:

if the decoder fails then

8:

m ← m + 1.

9:

end if

10: end while

11: if m = M then

12:

xi is not fake

13:

Ωˆ (Y ) = Ωˆ (Y ) ∪ xi.

14: end if

15: end for

16:

δ=

Pr (s = xi)

xi∈Ωˆ (Y )

(a) Ω (ymax) ∩ Ω (yj3 )

(b) Ω (ymax) ∩ Ω (yj3 ) ∩ Ω (yj6 )

Fig. 3: Venn Diagrams of Ωˆ (Y )

100

10-5

10-10

Fig. 3 shows Venn diagrams for two different Ωˆ (Y ) for the (6, 0) absorbing set in a (3, 61) array code with a 5bit quasi-uniform quantizer and the MSA decoder. (The size
of the Venn diagrams is proportional to the cardinalities
of the sets and does not reflect the probabilities of the vectors in the sets.) In Fig. 3(a), Ω (yj3 ) and Ω (ymax) are depicted. The yellow (largest) area shows the intersection of these two sets, which is smaller than either Ω (ymax) or Ω (yj3 ). The red area shows Ω (ymax) − Ω (yj3 ), which would be the empty set for ML decoders, but it is not
empty for MP decoders. This set represents a subset of the set of all fake xi. In Fig. 3(b), Ω (yj6 ) is also depicted, which helps to identify more fake xi, the area highlighted in blue. (Recall that these sets are independent of the channel
SNR, but their probability is a function of the SNR.) In
Fig. 4, the probabilities of three sets are depicted, along with the simulated performance of the (3, 61) code with length n = 3721 and rate 0.95. The green curve represents the probability of Ω (ymax) ∩ Ω (yj3 ) ∩ Ω (yj6 ), which yields a good approximate lower bound. However, the blue and red curves, representing Ω (yj6 ) and Ω (ymax), respectively, do not yield good approximate lower bounds, since they include some fake xi with non-negligible probabilities at high and low SNRs, respectively. This suggests that larger values of M will give better approximations. However, although larger M yields smaller sets Ωˆ (Y ), this does not necessarily mean that the probability of the set decreases significantly, since larger M identifies more xi with negligible probability. Since larger M also increases complexity, M should be kept as small as needed to give a good approximation.
To illustrate the versatility of the proposed bound, we now consider the (6, 0) absorbing set for a (3, 5) array based code with length n = 25 and rate 0.48, significantly different parameters than those considered for the (3, 61)

10-15

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Fig. 4: Proposed approximate lower bound, along with N Pr(Ω (ymax)) and N Pr(Ω (yj3 )), based on a (6, 0) absorbing set in a (3, 61) array code with a 5-bit quasi-uniform
quantizer and an MSA decoder.

code. Fig. 5 shows the proposed bound for the (3, 5) code with a 5-bit quasi-uniform quantizer and an MSA decoder, along with the simulated performance, where the red curve shows the bound computed using only Ω(ymax), while the green curve shows the bound computed using the modified set Ω(ymax) ∩ Ω(yj3). Comparing these curves, we see that the proposed bound (the green curve) corrects the problem of considering only Ω(ymax) for MSA decoders, which overestimates the simulation result.
This approximate lower bound is useful in predicting the high SNR performance of quantized LDPC codes when applied to the most harmful absorbing set. Here, we present a summary of the bound characteristics:

• Application: The bound indicates that a given code con-

taining an absorbing set of multiplicity N cannot achieve

an FER lower than N δ;

• Complexity: To evaluate the bound, ta frames are simu-

lated. If a Monte Carlo simulation at a specific SNR were

performed this number of times, accurate results (assuming

100 error frames are collected) could be obtained for

any FER

≥

100 ta

.

As

an

illustration,

for

a

=

6 and

q = 5, accurate FERs as low as 10−7 could be achieved

using Monte Carlo methods with the same simulation

complexity as the bound. For any FER below this, the

698

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100

bounds for MSA decoders for a specific code. The complexity

of evaluating the bound is lower than for Monte Carlo

10-2

simulations at high SNR values. The proposed bounds apply

to different decoding algorithms, including the MSA and the

SPA, with either uniform or non-uniform quantized channel

10-4

LLRs. However, their derivation and evaluation depends on

the structure of the code outside the absorbing set. In ongoing

10-6

work, a new method is being developed to evaluate the

MSA bound for an absorbing set that applies to any code

10-8

containing it, thus extending the ”code-independent” SPA

bound proposed in [4].

10-10

10-12

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Fig. 5: Proposed approximate lower bound, along with N Pr(Ω (ymax)), based on a (6, 0) absorbing set in a (3, 5) array code with a 5-bit quasi-uniform quantizer and an MSA decoder.

bound simulation at that SNR runs faster; • Dependence on SNR: In the evaluation of the bound, set
Ωˆ (Y ) is deterministic and does not depend on the channel SNR. (Only the probabilities of the members of Ωˆ (Y ) depend on the SNR.) Therefore, simulations to find the set Ωˆ (Y ) must be performed only once. On the other hand, in Monte Carlo simulations of a code, each SNR must be simulated separately.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, approximate lower bounds on the error-floor performance of quantized LDPC decoders were presented, allowing us to extend the results of [4] to MSA decoders. It was shown that, based on the sub-optimality of the MSA, care must be taken in extending the assumptions of ML decoders to MSA decoders. Considering this fact, a new technique was proposed, resulting in good approximate lower

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, Jan. 1962.
[2] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” 2003 Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, pp. 1426– 1435, Nov. 2003.
[3] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[4] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. Fuja, “Performance bounds for quantized LDPC decoders based on absorbing sets,” in 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), July 2016, pp. 2539–2543.
[5] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wainwright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: deterministic bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. on Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908–917, August 2009.
[6] H. Xiao, A. Banihashemi, and M. Karimi, “Error rate estimation of low-density parity-check codes decoded by quantized soft-decision iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 474– 484, Feb. 2013.
[7] S. Zhang and C. Schlegel, “Controlling the error floor in LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 3566–3575, Sept. 2013.
[8] X. Zhang and P. Siegel, “Quantized iterative message passing decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2014.
[9] H. Liu, L. Ma, and J. Chen, “On the number of minimum stopping sets and minimum codewords of array ldpc codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 670–672, July 2010.
[10] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec 2016.
[11] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, 2000, pp. 545–546.

699
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:49:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

