2122

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2017

Two-Side State-Aided Bit-Flipping Decoding of Generalized Low Density Parity Check Codes
Sherif Elsanadily, Ashraf Mahran, and Osama Elghandour

Abstract— A modified bit-flipping (BF) decoding algorithm is proposed for hard-decoding of generalized low- density paritycheck codes over binary channels. This approach introduces an extra bit between the variable nodes and constraint nodes representing the decision reliability of each node. The local decoding failure is also analyzed to provide a reasonable treatment for the most of its causes. The approach is not in the direction of constructing codes with minimum trapping sets, but to reduce their effect in the decoder at a cost of little increase in the resources. The algorithm, which is called two-side state-aided BF, is shown by simulations to outperform previous BF algorithms in terms of error performance.
Index Terms— Bit-flipping, generalized LDPC codes, iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
G ENERALIZED LDPC (GLDPC) codes were first introduced by Tanner [1] in 1981 as a generalization of Gallager LDPC codes [2]. The long LDPC codes are shown to outperform the Turbo codes [3] at rates close to capacity on various channels by using a large random and sparse parity check matrix H. The H matrix is represented by a bipartite graph which contains two groups of nodes, the symbol nodes (variable nodes) and constraint single parity check nodes (SPC). Tanner generalized the LDPC codes by replacing the SPC constraint nodes with error-correcting block codes (subcodes) [1]. The GLDPC codes were found to compare well with different capacity-approach codes. GLDPC codes with Hamming subcodes were investigated in [4] and [5].
They showed that Hamming-based GLDPC codes have very large minimum Hamming distance and good performance that is close to ShannonâŁ™s limit. The selection of code length and rate of constituent codes (such as extended-Hamming) gives the GLDPC an additional advantage as a lengthcompatible code with flexible rates. Therefore it can be used in many applications such as digital audio and TV broadcasting, high speed transmission and deep space communications.
Although applying the Soft-Decision Decoding (SDD) to GLDPC, such as Belief Propagation (BP) algorithms, provides very good performance, the amount of real calculations can result in improper implementation complexity. In contrast, the Hard-Decision Decoding (HDD), such as Bit Flipping (BF)

algorithm, has a lower complexity but poorer performance. The BF algorithm is first introduced by Gallager for LDPC codes [2], then modified and hybrid versions were proposed over AWGN channel based on exploiting the soft input information which exhibits a little increase in implementation complexity [6]–[8]. These algorithms have lacked the fast convergence where only a single bit flipping occurs in each iteration. The Parallel WBF [9] was presented which enabled multiple bits flipping in the same iteration.
Another research approach for improving the performance of LDPC using the BF algorithm is by introducing an additional bit that represents the state of the check nodes and passes this information to the variable node [10]. In [11], a multi-threshold BF algorithm was proposed as it classifies the received symbols, based on their reliabilities, into multiple groups by using multiple thresholds.
The literature reveals that while the concept of using additional information in BF algorithms has been used extensively for LDPC decoding; only limited number of researches has applied it in GLDPC.
Among these researches was the Weighted BF Voting (WBFV) algorithm that finds the maximum vote (weight) at each iteration [12]. Although the simple Hamming subcodes are employed, searching the maximum weight in a long received codeword can result in considerable latency for large number of iterations. In [13], the BCH-based GLDPC was decoded by a simple and compact rule which allows multiplebit flipping in the same iteration. The algorithm exhibits a good performance with lesser number of iterations but at the cost of added algebraic decoding complexity of BCH subcodes.
In this work, a novel HDD algorithm based on BF algorithm is proposed. The principle idea is based on exploiting the various decoding states of the subcode. As a result, an additional information, that interprets the decoding state into a reliability to be used for further iterations, is calculated. The additional information, represented by an extra bit, is added in both sides (variable nodes and check nodes).
II. WBF DECODING OF GLDPC

Manuscript received May 1, 2017; accepted June 11, 2017. Date of publication June 27, 2017; date of current version October 7, 2017. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was B. Smida. (Corresponding author: Sherif Elsanadily.)
S. Elsanadily and O. Elghandour are with the Department of Communications Engineering, Helwan University, Cairo 11795, Egypt.
A. Mahran is with the Avionics Department, Military Technical College, Cairo 11331, Egypt (e-mail: a.mahran@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2017.2720165

Consider the GLDPC with 1B-construction [12], let us

define the (N, J, n) GLDPC code constructed from M by

N sparse matrix with row weight n and column weight J.

Using the ext-Hamming subcode (n, k, 4), the GLDPC is rep-

resented by bipartite graph with N symbol nodes (VNs) and M

Hamming generalized check nodes (GCNs) as

M

=

N·J n

as illustrated in Fig. 1. The code overall rate R is calculated

1558-2558 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:48:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELSANADILY et al.: TSSA-BF DECODING OF GLDPC CODES

2123

Fig. 1. GLDPC bipartite graph example.

the decoding process succeeded or failed. At GCN failure case, it cannot obviously determine the error positions. When GCN decoding success occurs, the decoding errors may result from undetected errors (when a received sequence decoded to nontransmitted valid ones, i.e. e ≥ 4) or wrong correction (when e > 2). Therefore, the errors at a given GCN can be classified with the following denotations:
1) Plain single-error (element P): single error and right correction by decoder occurs.
2) Unknown set (U-set): set of errors (e > 1) causing decoder fails, i.e. it detects errors but unable to mark them.
3) Ambiguous set (A- set): set of errors (e > 2) causing decoder to flip an assumed-correct bit (wrong correction).
4) Dark set (D- set): set of errors (e ≥ 4) not seen by decoder which outputs zero-syndrome check.

Fig. 2. Incoming and outgoing messages between GCNs and VNs.

by

R

≥ 1 − J (1 − rc)

where rc

=

k n

is

the

subcode

rate

where

J must be small to have higher overall code rates.

When the transmitted sequence is received, the WBFV

decoding algorithm [12] generates votes from subcodes HDDs.

From Fig. 2a, a satisfied GCN (subcode-1 with zerosyndrome)

generates the vote V to all n VNs connected to it. Unsatisfied

GCN (subcode-2 decoding with single bit correction) gener-

ates vote E to the errored VN and vote e to the remaining (n-1)

connected VNs. According to rule B of WBFV algorithm,

the decision parameters are: (V = 0, e = 1, E = 2). As a

result, in the mentioned example in the above figure, the VN

collects a weight of 1. The symbol node with maximum

weight is flipped before the next iteration. The algorithm

terminates the process if syndrome-check is satisfied or a

preset a maximum number of iterations is reached.

III. THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
In general, the target in literature for best performance is to eliminate all possible generated trapping sets, which cause uncorrected errors, from the code construction. Currently, this solution is still not available, mainly due to processing speed limitations and implementation complexity. Instead, we introduce a procedure achieving a high percentage of that target with the current possible processing speed by adding additional resources which are only employed in certain conditions when such trapping sets occur. Without loss of generality and due to its simplicity and fast decoding, we consider the extended Hamming codes as constituent codes for the GLDPC code.

A. Failure Analysis
When ext-Hamming code is used as a subcode with dmin = 4, the local decoders may produce errors whether

B. Algorithm Procedure

An extra bit is proposed to be added beside the original

bit transferring between the VN and GCN. As for VNs,

it represents the reliability of its bit value (bit 1 if suspect

or bit 0 if assumed correct) and it sends this extra information

to be used by GCNs. As for GCN, the extra bit represents

the strength of its decision by increasing the reliability grades

to 4. The GCN decodes the received word, sends flip or keep

signal (bit 1or 0) and attaches such extra bit representing the

strength of this signal (in ascending reliability grade order: 1+(11), 1−(10), 0−(00) and 0+(01) corresponding strong flip,

weak flip, weak keep and strong keep respectively).

1) Horizontal Processing: We define the 3 states of the ext-

Hamming decoder at a given GCN as state ‘0’ at case of zero-

syndrome check, state ‘1’ at case of single-error correction and

state ‘2’ when the decoder fails (errors detected but unable to

correct them).

For any GCN c, c=1,2,..,M, let dc(l) be the c-th GCN decoder state at the l-th iteration. If dc(l) = 0, the decoder sends a message (0−) to all set elements of its connected

VNs, W (c) = {w1, w2, .., wi , .., wn}. The message (0−) with

reliability grade 3 is sent assuming W (c) may contain a

dark set (D-set as defined above). If dc(l) = 1, the decoder sends (1+) with grade 1 on the assumed-error position w∗

and (0−) to the remaining set elements W (c). Elements of

W (c) are given 0− (not 0+ ) assuming that they may contain

A-set. Finally, If dc(l) = 2, it sends (1−) with grade 2 to all

elements of W (c) which contains a U-set.

As illustrated in Fig. 2b, let Uc(,lw) i = [Uc(,lw) i (1), Uc(,lw) i (2)]

the two bits representing the outgoing flip message and its

reliability [Vc(,lw) i (1),

respectively Vc(,lw) i (2)] be

from GCN c to VN wi . the two bits representing

Let Vc(,lw) i incoming

= bit

value and its reliability respectively at GCN c from VN wi .

For any all wi ∈

GCN c, let initial reliability bit W (c). As previously mentioned,

VVcc((,,0lww))ii

(2) (2)

= =

0 for 1 if a

suspect bit and 0 if assumed correct one.

Now we will introduce a local GCN counter to compare

the present GCN state with the one of previous iteration. Let αc(l) be the number of consecutive previous repetitions of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:48:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2124

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2017

TABLE I
ACTIONS OF HORIZONTAL PROCESS (GCN OUTGOING MESSAGES) BASED ON GCN STATES UNDER SPECIFIED CONSTRAINTS

TABLE II
ACTIONS OF VERTICAL (VN) PROCESS (OUTGOING MESSAGES) BASED ON VN STATES UNDER SPECIFIED CONSTRAINTS

state dc(l) and let βc(l) be the number of incoming suspects among the n bits connected to GCN c. According to αc(l), βc(l) values and the additional information Vc(,lw) i (2), the proposed algorithm can improve its decision and the horizontal process
iteratively continues as illustrated in Table I. For dc(l) = 0, the counter function is to upgrade the relia-
bility from 0− to 0+ if the state remains for two subsequent iterations. For any GCN c and dc(l) = 2, if the message Vc(,lw) i (2) from the bit wi indicates a suspected bit and the decoder state (dc(l) = 2) remains for three subsequent iterations. The decoder recalculates the syndrome after flipping this suspect.
If the syndrome check is satisfied (i.e. valid codeword),
the decoder estimates that bit as errored and downgrade its reliability from 1− to 1+ .
2) Vertical Processing: With J = 2 and 4 reliability
grades, we have a set of 10 possible combinations of incoming messages at VN w, w = 1, 2, .., N. this set can
be divided, according to the failure analysis, into 3 subsets {si , i = 1, 2, 3}. For any VN w, its reliability state rw(l) is determined based on its incoming messages (from GCNs c j , with j = {1, 2} ) to which subset it belongs. s1 = {(1+, 1+), (1+, 1−), (1+, 0−)}, s2 = {(1−, 1−), (1−, 0−), (0+, 1+)}, s3 = {(0−, 0−), (0+, 1−), (0+, 0−), (0+, 0+)}

TABLE III PSEUDOCODE OF TSSA-BF DECODING ALGORITHM

⎧ ⎪⎨0 rw(l) = ⎪⎩21

if {Uc(lj)w, j = 1, 2} ∈ s1 if {Uc(lj)w, j = 1, 2} ∈ s2 if {Uc(lj)w, j = 1, 2} ∈ s3

The VN w with least reliable grade, rw(l) = 0, need to be flipped. For rw(l) = 1, we propose to employ VN state-

counter to compare the VN present reliability state with the

one of the previous iteration. let γw(l) number of consecutive previous repetitions of the state rw(l). With rw(l) = 1 and according to γw(l) values, the VN will not be flipped but con-

sidered as a suspected bit. It sends such reliability information

(Vc(jl)w(2) = 1, j = 1, 2) to GCNs to be taken into account.

For rw(l) = 2, the VN is considered a reliable bit and kept

with

Vc(jl

) w

(2)

=

0, j

=

1, 2

(i.e.

assumed

correct

bit).

The

vertical (VN) process behavior is illustrated in Table II. The

TSSA-BF algorithm is described in Table III.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The Finite-length 1B-construction-GLDPC codes of block length N = 4096 with (32, 26) and (16, 11) ext-Hamming codes as constituent codes (over BSC) are used in the simulations. The maximum number of iterations (Imax ) is set to 20. Fig. 3 presents the bit error rate performance using the (32, 26) ext-Hamming subcode (overall rate R = 0.625) with the proposed (TSSA-BF) algorithm compared to the HDD BF algorithms used in [12] and [13] and SDD Chase-based algorithm (number of LRPs p = 2). It is noted that the proposed algorithm outperforms the other HDD ones along various values of Eb/No with gain not less than 0.5 dB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:48:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELSANADILY et al.: TSSA-BF DECODING OF GLDPC CODES

2125

the block length of the GLDPC increases, the error performance steadily improves. We stress that the proposed decoding latency due to additional operations employed by the algorithm can be neglected as they are not permanent all the time but occur under certain conditions according to the trapping sets that are arisen in the received sequences. Fig. 5 depicts the convergence rate of the different algorithms used in the simulations with Eb/No = 3dB, N = 2048 and n = 16. It shows that all algorithms approximately converge after 15-20 iterations. It is noted that the TSSA-BF algorithm presents good error rate with an observed difference after few iterations.

Fig. 3. Performance of GLDPC with (32, 26) ext-Hamming subcodes.

V. CONCLUSION
The algorithm exploits the simplicity and fast decoding of the ext-Hamming to be employed with additional processes at both sides (VNs and GCNs) and shows by simulations a superior performance over BF algorithms in decoding GLDPC over binary channels. The algorithm can be generalized to handle more powerful subcodes with higher error-correction capability by inserting more additional resources to improve the performance.

Fig. 4. Performance of GLDPC with (16, 11) ext-Hamming subcodes.
Fig. 5. Convergence rate of GLDPC of N = 2048, n = 16, at Eb No = 3dB.
at the expense of a little increase in resources used by the algorithm.
Fig. 4 shows a higher gain achieved by the TSSA-BF algorithm over the other algorithms when (16, 11) ext-Hamming subcode (overall rate R = 0.375) is used. It is noted that as

REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[4] J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Zemor, “Generalized low density (Tanner) codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 1. Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 1999, pp. 441–445.
[5] M. Lentmaier and K. S. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density paritycheck codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[8] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[9] X. Wu, C. Zhao, and X. You, “Parallel weighted bit-flipping decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 671–673, Aug. 2007.
[10] D. V. Nguyen and B. Vasic´, “Two-bit bit flipping algorithms for LDPC codes and collective error correction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1153–1163, Apr. 2014.
[11] Y. H. Liu, X. L. Niu, and M. L. Zhang, “Multi-threshold bit flipping algorithm for decoding structured LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 127–130, Feb. 2015.
[12] S. Hirst and B. Honary, “Decoding of generalised low-density paritycheck codes using weighted bit-flip voting,” IEE Proc.-Commun., vol. 149, no. 1, pp. 1–5, Feb. 2002.
[13] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Generalized LDPC codes with Reed–Solomon and BCH codes as component codes for binary channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2005, pp. 1239–1244.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:48:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

