Finite-length EXIT Analyses for Protograph LDPC Codes over Underwater
Acoustic Channels

Zhenhua Chen1,2
1. The Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Underwater Acoustic Communication and Marine
Information Technology, School of Information Science and Engineering,
Xiamen University Xiamen 361005, China 2. Department of Teaching and Practice, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China

Xiaomei Xu, and Yougan Chen
The Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Underwater Acoustic Communication and Marine Information Technology, College of Ocean and Earth Sciences, Xiamen 361005, China xmxu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract— The conventional infinite-length extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts would not be accurate for short-length coded systems, because short-length coded sequences do not possess ergodicity as infinite- or very-long length coded sequences. In this paper, we concern with the finite-length EXIT analysis, which is developed for protograph low-density parity-check (PGLDPC) codes over underwater acoustic (UWA) channels. The finite-length EXIT analysis is thus exploited for analyzing the practical instead of asymptotic performance of short-length coded UWA communication systems limited by bandwidth and power. Due to the poor performance of the conventional PG-LDPC codes, a rate 1/2 protograph-based construction of LDPC code for the UWA channel is proposed. The finite-length EXIT analysis show that the proposed codes are superior to the conventional PGLDPC codes and the (3, 6) regular LDPC code with the same code length, agreeing well with the bit-error-rate (BER) simulation results.
Index Terms—Protograph LDPC Codes; Underwater Acoustic (UWA) Communication; Finite-length EXIT.
I. INTRODUCTION
UWA channels are characterized by rapid time-varying, long multipath delay spreading, and severe frequency-selectivity attenuation. Moreover, the available bandwidth and power are extremely limited by acoustic propagation loss which relates to the increases of both frequency and distance. A proper selection and design of error-correction coding is one of the prerequisites for reliable and real-time UWA communication system. Our focus, is on protograph low-density parity-check (PG-LDPC) codes that provide numerous benefits in encoding and decoding linear complexity while also achieving excellent performance. PG-LDPC codes were firstly proposed as a subclass of LDPC codes constructed from protographs or projected graphs by J.Thorpe in Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in 2003 [1]. Due to
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants No. 41676024, 41376040, and 41476026, and the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2016YFC1400200.

the advantages of simple structure, low iterative decoding threshold, and easy extension over conventional LDPC codes, PG-LDPC codes have received more and more researcher’s attentions. However, only few applications of PG-LDPC codes for UWA communication systems can be found. Recently, we have investigated the construction of PG-LPDC codes for UWA channels in [2, 3], which shows the positive effect of PG-LDPC codes on real-time UWA communication systems.
EXIT algorithms are commonly used to analyze the convergence performance of iterative decoding and optimize the degree distributions of LDPC codes [4] over AWGN channels. An EXIT analysis for PG-LDPC codes (PEXIT) was presented in [5] to predict the iterative decoding threshold in a straightforward way to optimize the degree distribution of protographs. The codes designed by EXIT and PEXIT exhibit excellent performance for very large code lengths. Nevertheless, the asymptotic performance of such large code lengths is not appropriate for many practical bandwidth-limited communication applications (such as UWA communication systems). This is because the channel ergodicity and the concentration rule of these systems can’t be retained. Therefore, the finite-length EXIT algorithm is introduced to analyze the ensemble convergence behavior of certain finite-length coded and pre-coded system [6].
In this paper, we conduct an in-depth investigation on the finite-length EXIT analysis of PG-LDPC codes in the challenging UWA communication systems, which are generally limited to blocks of a few hundred to a few thousand bits. Our objective is to gain exacting study of the convergence behavior of PG-LDPC codes over the UWA channels, and to verify whether and how well finite-length EXIT analysis agrees with practical BER performance. Due to the poor performance of the conventional PG-LDPC codes [3], such as the accumulaterepeatby-4-jagged-accumulate (AR4JA) codes and the accumulate-repeat-by-3-accumulate (AR3A) codes, we firstly propose a protograph-based construction of LDPC for the UWA

978-1-5386-3142-3/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

channel modelled in the record data of the experiment in May 8, 2014, in Wuyuan Bay, Xiamen, China. We further introduce a finite-length EXIT analysis for PG-LDPC codes over the UWA channels. The analytical results, which correspond with the BER simulation results, show that the proposed code outperforms the AR4JA, AR3A and (3,6) regular LDPC codes in low as well as high SNR regions.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes an UWA channel modeled by the record data of the experiment in Wuyuan Bay. In section III, the procedure of the proposed finite-length PG-LDPC codes are presented. In section IV, the finite-length EXIT algorithms are described. In section V, the EXIT analysis and simulation results are shown. Finally, section VI concludes the paper.
II. UNDERWATER ACOUSTIC CHANNEL MODEL
In general, there is no standard model for the actual UWA channels, due to the space-time-frequency-varying features. In this paper, we mainly consider the performances of PG-LDPC codes under the effects of multipath and long-delay in coherence time of UWA communications. Therefore, it can be assumed that the multipath structure is stable in the subsequent analysis and simulation. Then the received symbol at discrete time n can be expressed as

L

¦ yn = hk xn − k + wn

(1)

k =1

where xn is the n -th symbol of sent sequence, hk , (k = 1%L) is the discrete-time impulse response coefficient of channels, wn is the Gaussian noise sequence, and L is the maximum number of multipath. Note that multipath is mainly produced by two factors: sound reflection at the surface, bottom or any objects in the ocean, and sound refraction in the water.
In this case, the UWA channels can be regarded as an ascertainable linear time-invariant finite impulse response (FIR) filter during the coherence time. Therefore the filter transmission function can be written as:

L

¦ H (z) = Ai × z «¬−Ĳi /T »¼

(2)

i =1

where H ( z ) is the Z transform of the filter transmission
function, Ai and τ i denote respectively the relative amplitude and relative time delay for each path, T represents the sampling
period, and ¢ ± illuminates the mathematical expression of the
rounding operation. The multipath channel model adopted in this paper is
established by the record data collected from the acoustic communications experiment, which was conducted in May 8, 2014, in Wuyuan Bay, lying in the northern of Xiamen Island, Fujian province of China. The Wuyuan Bay UWA channel transmission function can be derived as follow [3]:

H (z) = 1 + 0.2641z−68 + 0.2036z−125 + 0.1171z−195 + 0.1063z−282

(3)

+ 0.1156z−563 + 0.1810z −851 + 0.1144z−1005

III. FINITE-LENGTH EXIT CHARTS ANALYSIS ALGORITHMS
Compared with density evolution algorithms, which are commonly used to compute the decoding threshold of LDPC codes [7] but computationally cumbersome, EXIT charts analyses have gained large attention thanks to the simplicity and accuracy in convergence performance prediction. It is a tool of visualizing the convergence behavior by means of the mutual information transfer in iterative processors for a variety of communication problems, including iterative decoding of errorcorrection codes. In this section, we will extend the finite-length EXIT charts to analyze the performance of PG-LDPC codes in UWA channels.
According to limited bandwidth, long-length errorcorrection codes are not be propitious to the practical UWA channels. We are interested in the investigation of finite-length PG-LDPC codes. Hence, the finite-length EXIT charts algorithm is a good candidate for the PG-LDPC codes in UWA communication system. Different from its infinite-length counterpart, the finite-length EXIT analysis uses an ensemble of EXIT curves (termed an EXIT band), each of that is obtained through Monte Carlo simulation of iterative decoding, i.e. belief propagation (BP) algorithm [6].
Sink

Ich inner decoder

+ IE,inner

IA,outer outer decoder

Fig. 1.

IA,inner

+ IE,outer

The block diagram of the finite-length EXIT charts analysis.

The finite-length EXIT analysis for iterative decoding of PG-LDPC codes over UWA channels is based on the block diagram shown in Fig.1. The inner decoder (or variable node decoder) converts the channel output LLRs and the a priori LLRs into the a posteriori LLRs, the outer decoder (or check node decoder) converts the a priori LLRs into a posteriori LLRs, too. The a posteriori LLRs minus the a priori LLRs are the extrinsic LLRs. IE,inner or IE,outer represents the average
mutual information (AMI) between the coded bits and the inner decoder or outer decoder output extrinsic LLRs, respectively. The extrinsic information ( IE,inner , IE,outer ) are passed through
the edge deinterleaver or interleaver to become the a priori information ( I A,outer , I A,inner ) of the subsequent decoder.
Iterative decoding will be successful when the a posteriori information I APP is convergent to 1 (for BPSK).
The procedure of the finite-length EXIT charts algorithm is summarized as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Initialization
For all the channel observations yn and a given SNR, the corresponding channel output LLRs are calculated as

Lch

( yn )



log

p( yn p( yn

| |

xn xn

= =

+1, xn−1,%, xn−L ) −1, xn−1,%, xn−L )

(4)

where xn is the BPSK mapping ( xn = 1− 2vn ) of vn . Then the average mutual information (AMI) of channel output Ich can been derived from the definition of

Ich = I ( X; Lch ( Y)) = H (X) − H ( X | Lch (Y))

¦ ³ =

1 2

x∈±1 ξ ∈Lch ( Y )

p (ξ

|

x ) log2

§ ©¨

p (ξ

|

x

2 p (ξ = +1) +

| x) p (ξ

|

x

=

−1) ·¹¸dξ

(5)

where H (X) is the entropy of sent sequence X and

H (X | Lch (Y)) is the entropy of X conditioned on Lch (Y) .

Because the Wuyuan Bay channel output LLR has been verified

to agree symmetric Gaussian distribution[3], (5) becomes

Ich = J (σ ch )

(( ) ) ( ) = 1−

³

exp ª«¬−

ξ − σ ch2 / 2

2 / 2σ ch2

º »¼ log2

1 + e−ξ

(6) dξ

ξ ∈Lch (Y )

2πσ ch2

where ıch represents the corresponding variance of the channel output LLR values Lch (Y) obtained through Monte Carlo simulations and the fitting expression of J (ıch ) can be found in the appendix in [4].

B. For the inner decoder:
a) Calculate the channel output LLRs {Lch,i} based on the received symbol sequence from the Wuyuan Bay channel using (4) for a fixed Eb / N0 .

b) For a given I A,inner ∈[0,1] , compute ı = A,inner J−1(IA,inner ) and randomly generate an LLR sequence L = {L(i)} following

the

symmetric

Gaussian

distribution

N(ıA2,inner

/

2,

ı2 A,inner

)

.

Then

an a priori LLR sequence

L A,inner

=

{L(i) A,inner

}

can

be

obtained

where

L(i) A,inner

= (1−2vi )⋅ L(i)

.

c) Sending the channel LLRs {Lch,i} and the a priori LLRs

{L(i) A,inner

}

into

the

inner

decoder

(the

part

of

BP

decoder

for

variable nodes), the extrinsic LLR of each variable node is

computed by means of

L(i) E,inner

=

Tinner

(Lch,i

,

L(i) A,inner

)

(7)

where Tinner (⋅) describes the operations in the inner decoder.

d) Compute the extrinsic AMI IE,inner = H (X; LE,inner ) , like (5).

e) For a fixed I A,inner , repeat steps b)-d) to N A times achieve a set of IE,inner = {IE,inner (k ) | k = 1,", N A} .
f) When the above steps a)-e) have been executed for different I A,inner , an EXIT band can be obtained for the inner decoder by depicting IE,inner = T (I A,inner ) . The EXIT band consists of three curves: the central curve (I A,inner , E[IE,inner ]) , the upper bound (I A,inner , E[IE,inner ] + 3 var[IE,inner ]) and the
lower bound (I A,inner , E[IE,inner ] − 3 var[IE,inner ]) . The band contains all individual EXIT curves of the same length code frames with a high probability[6, 8].

C. For the outer decoder

Similarly, randomly generate an LLR sequence L = {L( j) }

following the Gaussian distribution based on the given

I A,outer ∈[0,1] . Accordingly, an a priori LLR sequence

LA,outer = {L(Aj,)outer } can be obtained. After the behavior of

Touter (⋅) , the extrinsic LLR of each check node is as

L(Ej,)outer = Touter (L(Aj,)outer )

(8)

Repeating the above simulations a sufficient number of times (in our case, we repeated N A = 10000 times), the EXIT band for the outer decoder can also be formed by the central,

upper bound and lower bound curves, i.e., (I A,outer , E[IE,outer ]) ,

(I A,outer , E[IE,outer ] + 3 var[IE,outer ]) and (I A,outer , E[IE,outer ]

−3 var[IE,outer ]) .
It’s not beneficial to the fast prediction of convergence performance that the Finite-length EXIT analysis need collect enormous amounts of simulation data to form the EXIT band. But the Finite-length EXIT analysis can more really reflect the performance of LDPC codes in the certain code length.

IV. PG-LDPC CODES FOR UWA CHANNELS
PG-LDPC codes are constructed based on their protographs. A protograph is a Tanner graph constructed with a much small size, and formed by a set of variable nodes V , a set of check nodes C , as well as a set of edges E . Each edge ei, j ∈ E
connects a variable node Vi ∈V and a check node Cj ∈C . The
value of ei, j is not only 0 or 1, but also greater than 1, namely,
multi parallel edges is allowed. Furthermore, the adjacency matrix corresponding to a protograph is denoted as a protomatrix. After “copy-and-permute” operation, often referred to as “lifting”, a large Tanner graph known as derived graph can be obtain and the appropriate LDPC code is called PG-LDPC code. So PG-LDPC codes have the advantages of simple structure, low iterative decoding threshold, easy extension and linear encoding/decoding complexity over conventional LDPC codes.
Divsala et.al have investigated the design methodologies of PG-LPDC codes for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

channel [9-13] and binary erasure channel (BEC)[14]. Furthermore, PG-LDPC codes have also been applied for UWB communication [15], space communication [16] and partial response (PR) channels encountered in magnetic recording system [8, 10, 17]. These works have shown that the presented PG-LDPC codes combined with the feature of different channels can provide outstanding error-correcting performance. We observed empirically that PG-LDPC codes designed for AWGN channels may not yield good performance when applied to UWA channels [2]. Therefore, it infers that optimizing a new class of PG-LDPC codes which is easily adaptable to UWA communication systems is required. We propose a protograph-based construction of LDPC code for the UWA channel. A procedure to construct rate-1/2 PG-LDPC code for the UWA channel is˖
z Construct a rate-1/2 protograph with four check nodes and eight non punctured variable nodes.
z Set all variable nodes of the protograph to be 2 or higher degrees for good decoding threshold.
z Set the maximum number of degree-2 variable nodes in the protograph to be total number of check nodes minus 1, and there should be neither parallel edges nor cycles among these degree-2 nodes, for preserving the corresponding PG-LDPC codes holding linear minimum distance growth property[6, 7], i.e., the Hamming distance linearly growing as the code length increasing. For our 4×8 protomatrix size, the protograph has 3 degree-2 variable nodes at most.
z The maximum number of parallel edges also need constraint, since after “lifting” operation increased the number of parallel edges for the fixed code length will amplify the possibility of short cycles (the girth of Tanner graph is less than 6), which are directly detrimental to the BER performance.
z Use the infinite EXIT charts analysis[3] to promptly search for the good protograph codes, due to the searching protograph without degree-1 and punctured variable nodes[5].
z Lift the resulting protograph with the permutation algorithm in the literature[18] to match the desired codelength.

After searching in the Wuyuan Bay channel, the protograph having better performance is obtained:

§3 2 0 0 0 0 1 1·

HUWA

=

¨ ¨

2

¨1

1 2

2 1

0 1

0 0 0 1¸¸ 1 1 0 0¸

(9)

¨

¸

© 3 1 2 2 2 1 1 0 ¹4×8

V.ANALYSES AND SIMULATION RESULTS
The derived protograph code of the proposed protograph HUWA is simply called the HUWA code. In this section, we compare and analyze the performance of the HUWA code, and the conventional PG-LDPC codes. The channel adopted is the Wuyuan Bay UWA channel.

A. Conventional PG-LDPC codes We consider two conventional PG-LDPC codes, which are
the AR3A code and the AR4JA[10] code with a code rate of
R = 1/ 2 and 2048 code length, in the Wuyuan Bay UWA
channel. Fig.2 (a) and Fig.2 (b) depict the finite-length EXIT characteristic bands IE = T (I A ) of the AR3A and AR4JA codes, which have shown outstanding BER performance on AWGN channels. For the inner decoder, the a priori input is on IA,inner the abscissa, its extrinsic output IE,inner on the ordinate. But, the axes are swapped for the transfer characteristics of the outer decoder. The central curves are represented by solid lines and the lower/upper boundary curves by dash dot lines.
(a)
(b) Fig. 2. EXIT characteristic bands of the inner and outer decoder for the rate 1/2 AR3A code (a), AR4JA code (b) in the Wuyuan Bay SWA channel,
Eb / N0 = 4dB and code length=2048.
The region between the two EXIT bands of the inner decoder and the outer decoder is defined as decoding convergence tunnel, whose opening size determines the convergent speed of decoder, namely the BER performance. The AR3A and AR4JA codes have no open tunnel at Eb / N0 = 4dB , due to the intersection of both characteristic bands before reaching (I A, IE ) ≈ (1,1) . In other words, the BP decoding of the two PG-LDPC codes with 2048 length can’t be convergent at Eb / N0 = 4dB in despite of the large iterative times. The corresponding BER performances are also shown Fig.3. Unless otherwise stated, all BERs are achieved by 1000 Monte Carlo simulations in which the maximum number of BP

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoding iteration is set to 20. The AR3A code has the worst decoding performance which is caused by a high floor region when Eb / N 0 is more than 3dB. As Eb / N0 < 4dB , the (3, 6) regular codes visibly outperforms the AR4JA codes.

UWA channel, where no cliff region can be observed when

Eb / N0 is less than 6dB. Nevertheless, the performance of the

HUWA code in low

Eb

/

N 0

region

(about

Eb

/

N 0

< 3dB )

are

almost the same as that of the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and

distinctly better than those of the rate-1/2 AR4JA and AR3A

codes (see Fig.3). The HUWA code in the cliff region, namely, in

high

E b

/

N 0

region,

is

superior

to

the

(3,

6)

LPDC

codes

and

no

floors are observed up to BER = 10−5 , where the proposed HUWA

code accomplishes gains of 0.6 dB over the (3, 6) codes. These

results that the proposed HUWA codes outperforms the two

conventional codes are consistent with the conclusion of the

finite-length EXIT chart analysis in part A.

Fig. 3. BER performances of the rate-1/2 AR3A, AR4JA and (3, 6) regular LDPC codes in the Wuyuan Bay channel, code length=2048, max
iteration=20.
B. Proposed PG-LDPC codes Fig.4 mainly illustrates the convergence performance instead
of the practice performance of short-or-medium-length PGLDPC codes constrained by limited bandwidth, which is a momentous feature of UWA communications. We need globally analyze actual performance of each code using finite-length EXIT charts. For our proposed code derived by the 256 replicas of protomatrix HUWA , there are no intersection existing in the two central curves, only, the lower boundary curve of outer decoder intersect that of inner decoder as I A,outer > 0.9 . Hence, a majority of the HUWA code words with 2048 code length can achieve very low even zero BER decoding. The following BER simulation results (as shown in Fig.5) will support our finitelength EXIT analysis conclusions.
Fig. 4. EXIT characteristic bands of the inner and outer decoder the HUWA code in the Wuyuan Bay UWA channel, Eb / N0 = 4dB .
In Fig.5, two rate-1/2 LDPC codes are simulated, where the proposed HUWA codes and the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes have 2048 bits block length. The rhombus marked black curve denotes the BER versus Eb / N0 of the uncoded system for the

Fig. 5.

BER performances of the proposed H code and the (3, 6) UWA regular codes in the Wuyuan UWA channel.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
The finte-length EXIT chart algorthms are proposed to actually analyze the convergence behavior of PG-LDPC codes in UWA channels. We find that conventional PG-LDPC codes, such as the AR3A codes and AR4JA codes, have poor performances in the UWA channel that is modelled by the record data from the sea experiment in Wuyuan Bay. Thus, we presents a simple method of designing capacity approaching PG-LDPC codes for UWA channels, which is based on the protograph instead of its derived large graph. The finite-length EXIT charts analysis demonstrated that the proposed codes outperform the (3, 6) regular LDPC codes and the two conventional PG-LDPC codes, agreeing well with the results of the BER performance simulation. Therefore, the finite-length EXIT charts algorithm should be a good assistant tool to analyze the PG-LDPC codes over practical UWA channels.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Thorpe, "Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs," IPN progress report, vol. 42, pp. 42-154, 2003.
[2] Z. Chen, X. Xu, and Y. Chen, "Application of protograph-based LDPC codes in underwater acoustic channels," in IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing, Communications and Computing (ICSPCC), pp. 923-927, 2014,.
[3] Z. Chen, X. Xu Y. Chen, and S. U. Haitao, "Design and Analysis of Protograph-based LDPC Codes in Shallow Water Acoustic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Channels," Journal of Electronics & Information Technology, vol. 38, pp. 153-159,2016.
[4] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, "Design of lowdensity parity-check codes for modulation and detection," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, pp. 670-678, 2004.
[5] G. Liva and M. Chiani, "Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis," in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, GLOBECOM'07. pp. 3250-3254, 2007.
[6] T. Van Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, "The design of rate-compatible protograph LDPC codes," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 60, pp. 2841-2850, 2012.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, "The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618, 2001.
[8] Y. Fang, P. Chen, L. Wang, and F. C. Lau, "Design of protograph LDPC codes for partial response channels," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 60, pp. 2809-2819, 2012.
[9] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, "Accumulate-RepeatAccumulate Codes," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 55, pp. 692-702, 2007.
[10] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. R. Jones, K. Andrews, "Capacityapproaching protograph codes," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 27, pp. 876-888, August 2009.
[11] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, "Construction of protograph LDPC codes with linear minimum distance," in 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 664-668, 2006.

[12] S. Abu-Surra, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, "On the existence of typical minimum distance for protograph-based LDPC codes," in Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), pp. 1-7, 2010.
[13] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, "Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size," in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, GLOBECOM'05., p. 5 pp, 2005.
[14] S. Ten Brink, "Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 49, pp. 1727-1737, 2001.
[15] P. Grosa, A. Fonseca dos Santos, M. Lentmaier, W. Rave, and G. Fettweis, "Application of protograph-based LDPC codes for UWB short range communication," in 2010 IEEE International Conference on Ultra-Wideband (ICUWB), pp. 1-4, 2010.
[16] L. Costantini, B. Matuz, G. Liva, E. Paolini, and M. Chiani, "Nonϋbinary protograph lowϋdensity parityϋcheck codes for space communications," International Journal of Satellite Communications and Networking, vol. 30, pp. 43-51, 2012.
[17] T. Van Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, "Protographbased LDPC codes for partial response channels," in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 21662170, 2012.
[18] CCSDS, "Low Density Parity Check Codes For Use In Near-earth And Deep Space Applications Experimental Specification Ccsds 131.1-O-2," Orange Book, September 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:44:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

