1312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

Adaptive Granularity Progressive LDPC Decoding for NAND Flash Memory
Binhao Bao , Qianhui Li, Wu Guan , Member, IEEE, Qi Wang, Liping Liang, and Xin Qiu

Abstract—Progressive low-density parity check (LDPC) code decoding has been widely used to correct increasing raw bit errors in NAND Flash memory. Once the decoding of a single logical page fails, the read-retry operation will reprocess at an increased read level with more accurate initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages. However, the traditional progressive LDPC decodings with inappropriate read-levelincrease granularities of read-retry operations introduce unnecessary flash read latency. By taking advantage of globally coupled LDPC (GC-LDPC) codes, an improved adaptive granularity progressive LDPC decoding (IAGPD) is proposed. This method can estimate the number of uncorrectable bit errors before each read-retry operation by detecting the unsatisfied local parity checks and general syndrome in the decoding failure. Then, it adaptively selects the optimal read-level-increase granularities for read-retry operations in the progressive LDPC decoding. Compared with the existing decoding methods, only by an extra 0.098% of the decoder area and two clock cycles, our method can reduce the flash read latency by up to 43%. And the solid-state drive (SSD) read response time on MQsim can be reduced by up to 32%.
Index Terms—Globally coupled-low-density parity check (GCLDPC) code, NAND flash memory, progressive decoding, read latency, read-retry.
I. INTRODUCTION
Both hard decoding and soft decoding are supported by the lowdensity parity check (LDPC) decoders in advanced NAND Flash controllers. Hard decoding based on one memory sensing operation is suitable for high-speed data reading at a low raw bit error rate (RBER). Soft decoding uses multiple memory sensing operations to correct more raw bit errors. Once the decoding of a single logical page fails, the read-retry operation will increase the number of memory sensing operations between the corresponding adjacent voltage distributions, also known as read levels, and then decode with more accurate initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages. Therefore, decoding logical pages with fewer read-retry operations and lower read levels is essential for reducing flash read latency in flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs).
Existing methods to reduce the flash read latency of progressive LDPC decoding fall into two main categories. To successfully decode at lower read levels, some researchers focus on improving the error correction capacity by optimizing the initial LLR messages
Manuscript received 15 February 2023; revised 29 June 2023 and 23 September 2023; accepted 11 November 2023. Date of publication 15 November 2023; date of current version 21 March 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62271069. This article was recommended by Associate Editor C. Yang. (Corresponding author: Wu Guan.)
Binhao Bao and Xin Qiu are with the Communication and Information Engineering Center, Institute of Microelectronics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China, and also with the School of Integrated Circuits, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: baobinhao@ime.ac.cn; qiuxin@ime.ac.cn).
Qianhui Li and Qi Wang are with the Memory Laboratory of New Technology Development Department, Institute of Microelectronics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail: liqianhui@ ime.ac.cn; wangqi1@ime.ac.cn).
Wu Guan and Liping Liang are with the School of Integrated Circuits, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: guanwu@bupt.edu.cn; liangliping@bupt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3332829

and the decoding algorithms [1], [2]. In contrast, optimizing each read-retry operation leads to a more significant flash read latency reduction. For instance, the NAND-assisted soft decision (NASD) method proposes to adjust the location of XOR operations to reduce the data-transferring latency of read-retry operations [3].
The other studies suggest that selecting more proper read-levelincrease granularities for the read-retry operations is equally essential. The typical fixed single granularity progressive decoding (FSGPD) method increases one extra read level in each read-retry operation [4]. But it leads to a great many unnecessary redecoding failures due to insufficient read-level increments, especially when the read level required for successful decoding is high. Compared to the FSGPD method, the fixed multigranularity progressive decoding (FMGPD) method with a greater fixed granularity can rapidly improve the error correction capacity [5]. However, it performs poorly when only a few read-level increments are really needed. Meanwhile, the related dynamic multigranularity progressive decoding (DMGPD) method can dynamically select a granularity according to the final read level of the adjacent logical page [6]. But it cannot meet the changing needs of read-retry operations in the current logical page either.
In this brief, we propose an improved adaptive granularity progressive LDPC decoding (IAGPD) based on the estimation of uncorrectable bit errors. Utilizing the coupled structure of globally coupled LDPC (GC-LDPC) codes, it estimates the number of uncorrectable bit errors in the decoding failure by detecting the unsatisfied local parity checks and general syndrome. Then, it adaptively selects the optimal read-level-increase granularity for each read-retry operation. It achieves a better balance between the improvement of error correction capacity and extra flash read latency in the progressive LDPC decoding. Experimental results illustrate that the proposed IAGPD method can remarkably reduce flash read latency and SSD read response time.

II. BACKGROUND

A. GC-LDPC Codes in NAND Flash Memory

The GC-LDPC codes, first proposed in 2016, meet the requirement

of large code length and high code rate in NAND Flash memories [7].

And it has been proved that the (21150,19050) GC-LDPC decoder

has the highest throughput-to-area ratio [8]. The parity check matrices

HGC are composed of the t local submatrices Hlocal that are orthogonally placed along the main diagonal and the t global submatrices

Hglobal that embody the global connection. After dividing the GCLDPC code C into t equal parts, the general syndrome S = HGC · CT consists of t local parity checks and a global parity check.

And the GC-LDPC codes can be decoded by the standard layered

belief propagation algorithm or the two-phase algorithm that takes

advantage of the coupled structure [8]

⎡ Hlocal

0

···

0⎤

HGC = ⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢

0 ...
0

Hlocal ... 0

··· ... ···

0 ...
Hlocal

⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥

(1)

Hglobal1 Hglobal2 · · · Hglobalt

C = c1 c2 · · · ct .

(2)

1937-4151 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

1313

Fig. 1. FMGPD method of a single logical page.

B. Threshold Voltage Distribution Model

As the TLC NAND Flash channel model p(x) shown in (3), the

ideal threshold voltage distribution pp(x) is simultaneously affected

by the data retention noise ptr(x) and the random telegraph noise

pr(x) [9], [10]

⎧ ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪ ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪

p(x) pp(x)
ptr (x) μtr σtr pr (x) σr

= =
= = = = =

pp(x) ⊗ ptr(x) ⊗ pr(x)

1 Vpp

,

Vp ≤ x ≤ Vp +

0,

else

√1

−
e

(x−μtr )2 2σtr 2

2π σtr
Vp − x0

·

AtNPαEi + BtNPαEo

0.3|μtr |

√1

−
e

x2 2σr 2

0.02π00σ2r 7NP0.E62.

Vpp · ln(1

+

T)

(3)

Here, Vp denotes the mean threshold voltages of the storage states. Vpp is the incremental program step voltage. Meanwhile, the noises ptr(x) and pr(x) are assumed to be the Gaussian distribution. NPE denotes the number of program/erase (P/E) cycles. T is the retention time and the other parameters {x0, At, Bt, αi, αo} are constants. Then, according to (3), the practical storage channel models can be fitted by
the sufficient threshold voltages collected from the NAND Flash chip
made by Yangtze Memory Technologies Company Ltd. (YMTC).

Fig. 2. (a) L and U. (b) Satisfied local parity checks and the probability of satisfying the global parity check.
Fig. 3. L, U, and the probability of successful redecoding with various read-level-increase granularities.

C. Fixed Multigranularity Progressive LDPC Decoding
Taking the low page dL in Fig. 1 as an example, at the initial read level 1, the hard decision uses one read voltage to distinguish between adjacent storage states P in the corresponding overlap regions R1 and R5. If the hard decoding fails, it executes the read-retry operation and switches to the soft decoding mode. In the latest FMGPD method, the read-retry operation will add m read levels for each corresponding overlap region according to the optimal read voltages. And the optimal voltages of each read level need to be precalculated under the maximum mutual information criterion [11]. Then, it decodes with the more accurate initial LLR messages until the decoding succeeds or the read level reaches its limit.
III. PROPOSED ADAPTIVE GRANULARITY PROGRESSIVE LDPC DECODING
A. Adaptive Granularity Progressive LDPC Decoding
The key to reducing flash read latency is to select appropriate read-level-increase granularities for all the read-retry operations. For selecting the optimal granularities that can exactly correct existing errors, it is necessary to estimate U, which represents the number of bit errors of the information sequence in the current decoding

result. Considering that U may correspond to the satisfaction of the general syndrome S = 0, detailed simulations are carried out. Taking soft decoding as an example, two essential features are found in the iterative decoding of the GC-LDPC codes. First, according to Fig. 2(a), the less is the number of unsatisfied local parity checks L, the less is the number of bit errors U. Second, when all the t local parity checks in general S are satisfied, the remaining global parity check is also satisfied in Fig. 2(b). Thus, because of the exactly similar trends in Fig. 2(b), the successful decoding is basically equivalent to the process of satisfying the t local parity checks.
To verify that the correlation between L and U facilitates adaptive selection of the optimal read-level-increase granularities, we carry out the simulation in the practical storage channel when RBER equals 0.014. In the simulation, the (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC codes with three local submatrices in [8] are decoded by the FSGPD method. The L, U, and the probability of successful redecoding with various read-level-increase granularities are extracted from the decoding failures. As shown in Fig. 3, when L equals 1, there is a 97% chance of correcting the existing seven uncorrectable bit errors, on average, by doubling the number of iterations without having to increase the read levels. When L equals 2, the probability of successful redecoding is nearly 80%, with the read-level-increase granularity equals 1. When

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

Algorithm 1 AGPD

1: Initialize {PGL, 1 ≤ L ≤ t}, max number of iterations Ihard, Isoft and read level i

2: while i ≤ 7 do

3: if i = 1 then

4:

Perform hard decoding with Ihard;

5: else

6:

Perform soft decoding with Isoft;

7: end if

8: Calculate S and L using (1) and (2)

9: if (S = 0) or (i = 7) then

10: Go forward to line 22

11: else

12:

if PGL = 0 then

13:

Go back to line 3

14:

else

15:

i = i + PGL

16:

end if

17:

if i > 7 then

18:

i=7

19:

end if

20: end if

21: end while

22: Generate and output the codeword C to user data

Fig. 5. P, U, and the probability of successful redecoding with various progressive granularity when L equals 3.
TABLE I EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS

Fig. 4. P, U, and the minimum granularity PG required for redecoding.
L equals 3, the probability of correcting significantly more errors with the read-level-increase granularity equals 4 is close to 70%.
Based on the strong correlation between L and the optimal granularity PGL, the adaptive granularity progressive LDPC decoding (AGPD) method that can adaptively select optimal PGL rather than fixed m before the read-retry operation is proposed. PGL represents the granularity with the smallest expected flash read latency for successful redecoding.
B. Improved Adaptive Granularity Progressive LDPC Decoding
As shown in Fig. 3, increasing the granularity PGL=3 results in a similar increase in the probability of successful redecoding, which is different from PGL=1 and PGL=2. We consider the significantly larger variance of U in Fig. 4 that makes it challenging to select the optimal PGL=3 from seven possible granularities using only L. So it is necessary to add another parameter for accurately estimating the number of uncorrectable bit errors when L is larger than 2. Through in-depth analysis of the above decoding failures, we find that there is also a strong and positive correspondence between U and P that denotes the number of nonzero elements in the general

syndrome S. In Fig. 4, a single P corresponds to 3–5 possible PGs that represent the minimum granularities required to successfully redecode the failed case. It makes P suitable to assist L in predicting the optimal granularities instead of independent prediction.
Fig. 5 shows the relationships between P, U, and the probability of successful redecoding with various read-level-increase granularities when L equals 3. Considering that excessive granularity leads to unnecessary flash read latency, there is a need to set an appropriate general expectation E at first. And then, the granularity, which corresponds to the probability of successful redecoding slightly greater than E, is recognized as the optimal granularity PGL,P. If the probability of successful redecoding is small, even if the readlevel-increase granularity equals 6, the expectation needs to be locally decreased.
Hence, by using P to assist L in selecting some of the optimal readlevel-increase granularities PGL,P, we proposed an improved AGPD method, as shown in Algorithm 2.
IV. EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS
A. Experimental Setup
To evaluate the flash read latency reduction and SSD read response time reduction of the proposed IAGPD method, experiments were carried out in the practical storage channel models and the memory system simulator MQsim [12]. As shown in Table I, the experimental parameters included the total storage capacity, the seven punctured LDPC codes in each logical page, and the specifications of NAND Flash chip YMN08TB1C1HU1B made by YMTC Company Ltd. Furthermore, we picked out the typical five workloads with significantly different read/write ratios from [6] for the sensitivity study.
All the existing methods mentioned in the introduction and two proposed methods were implemented. And the proposed optimal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

1315

Algorithm 2 IAGPD

1: Initialize {PGL, 1 ≤ L ≤ 2}, {PGL,P, 3 ≤ L ≤ t, 1 ≤ P ≤
Pmax}, max number of iterations Ihard, Isoft and read level i 2: while i ≤ 7 do

3: if i = 1 then

4:

Perform hard decoding with Ihard;

5: else

6:

Perform soft decoding with Isoft;

7: end if

8: Calculate S, L, and P using (1) and (2)

9: if (S = 0) or (i = 7) then

10: Go forward to line 30

11: else

12:

if L ≤ 2 then

13:

if PGL = 0 then

14:

Go back to line 3

15:

else

16:

i = i + PGL

17:

end if

18:

else

19:

if PGL,P = 0 then

20:

Go back to line 3

21:

else

22:

i = i + PGL,P

23:

end if

24:

end if

25:

if i > 7 then

26:

i=7

27:

end if

28: end if

29: end while

30: Generate and output the codeword C to user data

Fig. 6. Flash read latency reduction at different RBERs. (a) Normalized flash read latency of seven progressive LDPC decodings. (b) Percentage reduction of flash read latency caused by the IAGPD method.
Fig. 7. SSD read response time reduction for different workloads.

TABLE II OPTIMAL GRANULARITIES OF (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC CODES

Fig. 8. SSD read response time reduction at different RBERs.

granularities PGL, PGL,P of (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC codes are shown in Table II. Meanwhile, seven RBERs ranging from 0.003 to 0.017 are chosen for comparison.
B. Flash Read Latency Reduction
Flash read latency is the cumulative latency of page reading, data transferring, and LDPC decoding before successful decoding. The flash read latencies of seven progressive LDPC decodings are shown in Fig. 6(a). When RBER is less than 0.01, only one readretry operation and a read level less than or equal to three are needed for successful decoding. Therefore, with the initial read level 1, the FSGPD method corresponds to the lower latency. And the FMGPD (m=4) method causes the maximum latency due to the too-strong error correction capacity. In contrast, when RBER is greater than 0.01, the FMGPD methods with larger fixed granularities correspond to fewer unnecessary decoding failures before successful decoding. Meanwhile, different from the four traditional decodings with fixed granularities, the DMGPD method and the proposed AGPD method, which can dynamically select a granularity from multiple preset granularities, have substantially lower flash read latency. However, the proposed IAGPD method with more appropriate adaptive granularities has the lowest flash read latency at each RBER.

The percentage reduction of flash read latency caused by the IAGPD method is shown in Fig. 6(b). Compared with the FSGPD method and three FMGPD methods, the proposed IAGPD method reduces the flash read latency by 43%, 21%, 13%, and 15% on average of RBER, respectively. Meanwhile, in comparison to the DMGPD method and AGPD method, the IAGPD method can reduce the flash read latency by up to 15% and 16% with the most appropriate granularities.
C. SSD Read Response Time Reduction
Fig. 7 shows the average SSD read response time under seven RBERs for typical workloads. It illustrates that, compared with the six decodings from left to right, the IAGPD method reduces the SSD read response time by 28%, 16%, 10%, 11%, 8%, and 5% on average of workloads, respectively, which is less than the reduction of flash read latency. Because besides the optimized flash read latency, the SSD read response time also includes other delays, such as the queuing time. Meanwhile, the SSD read response time reductions are closely related to the read–write ratios of typical workloads.
The average SSD read response time for five workloads at different RBERs is shown in Fig. 8. It illustrates that the IAGPD method has the lowest SSD read response time at each RBER. Compared with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1316

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

the other six decodings from left to right, it reduces the SSD read response time by 32%, 17%, 11%, 13%, 10%, and 6% on average of RBER, respectively. However, due to the lower requirement of read levels and error corrections, the IAGPD method does not significantly improve read performance when the RBER is low.
D. Overhead
The IAGPD method mainly includes the computation of L and P. L can be simply extracted from the already calculated S. Thus, its overhead of the LDPC decoder area is negligible. P requires many adders with different bit widths and two 9-bit comparators. Its overhead is about 0.098% of the decoder area in [8]. And both L and P cost only one extra clock cycle.
V. CONCLUSION
To reduce the flash read latency of progressive LDPC decodings, this brief proposes the IAGPD method. By detecting the unsatisfied local parity checks and general syndrome, it estimates the number of uncorrectable bit errors. Then, it adaptively selects the optimal readlevel-increase granularity before each read-retry operation. Hence, with a few decoder area overhead and clock cycles, the IAGPD method achieves a better balance between flash read latency and error correction capability. Compared with the existing progressive LDPC decodings, the experimental results show that it significantly improves the read performance of NAND Flash memories.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.

[2] K. Wei, J. Li, L. Kong, F. Shu, and Y. Li, “Read-voltage optimization for finite code length in MLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), 2018, pp. 1–5.
[3] L. Zuolo, C. Zambelli, A. Marelli, R. Micheloni, and P. Olivo, “LDPC soft decoding with improved performance in 1X-2X MLC and TLC NAND flash-based solid state drives,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Com., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 507–515, Jul.–Sep. 2019.
[4] K Zhao et al., “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2013, pp. 243–256.
[5] Y. Du, Y. Zhou, M. Zhang, W. Liu, and S. Xiong, “Adapting layer RBERs variations of 3D Flash memories via multi-granularity progressive LDPC Reading,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE Des. Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[6] Y. Du, S. Huang, Y. Zhou, and Q. Li, “Towards LDPC read performance of 3D Flash memories with layer-induced error characteristics,” ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1–25, May 2023.
[7] J. Li, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, W. E. Ryan, and D. J. Costello, “Globally coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), 2016, pp. 1–10.
[8] Y. Liao, C. Lin, H. Chang, and S. Lin, “A (21150, 19050) GC-LDPC decoder for NAND Flash applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 1219–1230, Mar. 2019.
[9] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[10] Z. Mei, K. Cai, and X. He, “Deep learning-aided dynamic read thresholds design for multi-level-cell flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 2850–2862, May 2020.
[11] J. Wang et al., “Enhanced precision through multiple reads for LDPC decoding in flash memories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, May 2014.
[12] A. Tavakkol, J. Gómez-Luna, M. Sadrosadati, S. Ghose, and O. Mutlu, “MQSim: A framework for enabling realistic studies of modern multiqueue SSD devices,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2018, pp. 49–66.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

