An FPGA-based QC-LDPC decoder design 
Nan Li* 
College of Electronic Science  
National University of Defense Technology 
Changsha, China 
*linan@nudt.edu.cn
Yunling Yang 
College of Electronic Science 
National University of Defense Technology 
Changsha, China 
ylyang@nudt.edu.cn 
Abstract—LDPC codes have been widely used to deal with 
noise interference and improve the reliability of the system due to 
their excellent error correction performance. At the same time, 
with the increase of storage density in digital storage devices, 
LDPC codes are also applied to the error check and correction 
(ECC) module in the storage device controller to solve the random 
flipping of stored data bits. In this paper, the PEG algorithm is 
used to construct a QC-LDPC code with high code rate in the ECC 
module, and the design simulation of the decoder based on the 
FPGA platform is carried out with reference to the layered 
minimum sum algorithm. Finally, the decoding results are 
analyzed under the condition that several bits of data are 
randomly flipped in the storage device. The decoder in this study 
can achieve a throughput of 8.49Mbps at a 50MHz clock. 
Keywords-quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) 
decoder, error check and correction, layered min-sum algorithm, 
parallel row architecture. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Information in digital systems is represented as sequences of 
"0" and "1" of different bit lengths, which are stored, transmitted, 
and processed. With the development and popularization of 
digital information systems, more and more environments with 
strong noise and strong interference also need to be equipped 
with corresponding digital equipment. The influence of noise 
may cause any bit of the internal signal of the system to be 
confused, and 0 will be recognized as 1 or 1 as 0, which will 
affect the accuracy of information reception. Based on 
Shannon's law, coding error correction technology can 
significantly enhance the anti-interference ability of digital 
information in the system and improve the reliability of the 
system. As one of the forward error correction codes, the low-
density parity-check (LDPC) code has been widely concerned 
for its excellent error correction characteristics since it was first 
proposed by Dr. Gallager in 1963[1]. It is an important research 
trend in the application of LDPC codes to design a fast and 
reliable decoder to decode the sequence and accurately restore 
its original information.. 
II. OVERVIEW OF QC-LDPC
A. Structure of QC-LDPC
Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) code[3] is a type of
structured LDPC code. Different from random LDPC codes, 
QC-LDPC codes are widely used because their quasi-cyclic 
characteristics can reduce the hardware resource overhead in the 
coding process. The sparse parity-check matrix of the QC-LDPC 
code contains a circular square matrix. In these squares, the 
elements in each row are the result of the previous row of 
elements being shifted one place to the right in a cycle, and the 
first row is the last row to be shifted one place to the right to 
obtain. Due to the right-shift characteristic of the cyclic square, 
after obtaining the elements in the first row and the 
dimensionality of the square, the entire cyclic matrix can be 
recovered by continuously circulating the right shift. The first 
row of the circular square is also called the generative vector. 
The Hqc in (1) is a sparse parity-check matrix of QC-LDPC 
codes containing a × b submatrices, which dimensionality is Z. 
The sub-matrix hij can be a Z × Z cyclic square matrix, or an all-
zero matrix. The code length of the QC-LDPC code defined by 
the Hqc is n=bZ, and the number of check equations is m=aZ. 
For a set of code c={c0,c1,c2,…,cn-2,cn-1}, the condition of (1) 
needs to be satisfied. 
HcT=0 
(1) 
Hqc= ൥
h11
⋯
h1b
⋮
⋱
⋮
ha1
⋯
hab
൩ 
(2) 
B. Construction of QC-LDPC
There are three common methods for the construction of QC-
LDPC codes: the parity-check matrix with a large minimum 
code distance based on finite geometry, the LDPC codes based 
on the principle of balanced incomplete block design, and the 
parity-check matrix based on the permutation matrix. The 
method selected in this paper is based on the quasi-cyclic 
expansion of the Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm, 
which belongs to the permutation matrix construction method, 
and the construction process is divided into several steps[7]: 
Step 1: The basic information such as the code length, code 
rate and dimension of the cyclic permutation matrix of the 
constructed QC-LDPC code are selected. The QC-LDPC code 
length constructed in this paper is 9216, the code rate is 8/9, and 
the dimension of the cyclic permutation matrix is 256.  
Step 2: Under the degree distribution of nodes, the basis 
matrix of QC-LDPC codes is constructed by using PEG 
algorithm. 
Step 3: The displacement value in the cyclic displacement 
matrix is selected to eliminate the short loops that still exist in 
the base matrix as much as possible.  
Step 4: The cyclic displacement matrix and the basis matrix 
are used to construct a complete parity-check matrix. In this 
paper, a set of regular QC-LDPC codes is constructed according 
to the preceding steps, and the parity-check matrix is shown in 
Fig. 1. 
Fig. 1. The parity-check matrix of the QC-LDPC in this paper. 
2024 9th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing (ICSP)
979-8-3503-7654-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
1451
2024 9th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing (ICSP) | 979-8-3503-7654-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICSP62122.2024.10743319
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:26:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
C. Principles of decoding
In the LDPC decoding process, the connection information
between nodes in the sparse parity-check matrix is usually 
represented in the form of Tanner graph[2], as shown in Fig. 2. A 
Tanner graph has two layers, representing check nodes and 
variable nodes, and the number of lines connected to each node 
is called the degree of the node. During the decoding process, 
the posterior probability message is passed and updated between 
the variable nodes and the check nodes along the path in the 
Tanner graph. In the process of iterative update, the reliability of 
decoding is improved. 
Fig. 2. A Tanner graph in a small matrix. 
The traditional decoding algorithm is the sum product 
algorithm (SPA). On the basis of the message passing algorithm, 
the SPA transforms the previous direct use of posterior 
probability information into logarithmic likelihood ratio 
information using posterior probability, which can transform the 
original large number of multiplication operations into addition 
operations on the logarithmic field, reduce the amount of 
computation of iterative decoding, and improve the decoding 
speed. The decoding process and symbols are shown in TABLE 
I.  
TABLE I. 
SYMBOLS IN DECODING 
Symbols 
Meaning 
cj 
The j-bit data of the ground truth 
yj 
The j-bit data of the receiving code 
Nc(i)/Nv(j) 
A set of variable nodes (check nodes) connected 
to the check node i (variable node j) 
l 
Iteration 
Nc(i)\j 
Excluding the variable node j, the set of variable 
nodes connected to the check node i 
Nv(j)\i 
Excluding the check node i, the set of check 
nodes connected to the variable node j 
Lj
(l) 
The logarithmic likelihood ratio information of 
the variable node j in the l iteration 
Qji
(l) 
The information that the variable node j transmits 
to the check node i in the l iteration 
Rij
(l) 
The information that the check node i transmits 
to the variable node j in the l iteration 
Step 1: Initialize node information. Before initializing a 
variable node, you need to calculate logarithmic soft information 
based on the received bits. Unlike the message passing algorithm, 
which directly uses the posterior probability information in (3), 
the SPA allows Lj
(0) to represent the log-likelihood ratio 
information in the channel, as shown in (4). 
P൫cj=1หyj൯ or P൫cj=0หyj൯ 
(3) 
Lj
൫0൯=ln
P൫cj=0หyj൯
P൫cj=1หyj൯
(4) 
Step 2: Update the node information. Update the information 
to be sent by the check node and the variable node according to 
(5) and (6) in turn.
Rij
(l)=2 tanh-1 ቎ෑ
tanh ൬1
2 Qj'i
(l-1)൰
j'∈Nc(i)\j
቏ 
(5) 
Qji
(l)=Lj
(0)+
෍
Ri'j
(l)
i'∈Nv(j)\i
 
(6) 
Step 3: Obtain the logarithmic information of all variable 
nodes and make a hard decision. According to (7), when solving 
for the logarithmic information of the variable node j, all the 
check nodes connected to it. 
Lj
(l)=Lj
(0)+ ෍Rij
(l)
i∈Nv(j)
 
(7) 
Then make a hard decision, and obtain the intermediate 
decoding result s(l). 
s൫l൯= ቐ
1,Lj
൫l൯<0
0,Lj
൫l൯≥0
(8) 
Instead of the SPA, the decoder designed in this paper is 
based on a minimum sum algorithm (MSA) with layered 
scheduling. Based on the traditional SPA, MSA simplifies the 
original multiplication operation into the minimum operation on 
the absolute value, which simplifies the design process of the 
decoder at the cost of losing a small amount of accuracy[6]. The 
process of layered minimum sum algorithm is as follows: 
Step 1: Initialize node information. The number in the 
subscript indicates that it is currently the first layer. 
൝
Qji，1
(0)=Lj
(0)
Rij，1
(0)=0
(9) 
Step 2: Update the node information. Suppose the number of 
iterations is l and the number of layers is k. First, update the 
information passed by the variable node to the check node. 
Qji，k
(l)=Lj
(l-1)-Rij，k
(l-1)
(10) 
Then, according to the MSA, update the information passed 
by the check node to the variable node. 
Rij
(l)≈ቌෑ
sign ቀQj'i，k
(l)ቁ
j'∈Nc(i)\j
ቍ∙min ቚQj'i，k
(l)ቚ 
(11)
Step 3: Decoding hard verdicts. According to (12), the log-
likelihood ratio information of all variable nodes is calculated 
and are used to generate the decoding sequence. If the solved 
intermediate decoding sequence satisfies the check equations, it 
1452
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:26:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
is output as the correct result. If the number of iterations exceeds 
the maximum limit and the decoding sequence does still not 
satisfy the parity-check matrix, the decoder failed to find a valid 
decoding result and performs detectable errors. When neither of 
the above occurs, the number of iterations increase, and steps 2 
and 3 are repeated. 
 
Lj
(l)=Qji，k
(l)+Rij，k
(l) 
(12) 
The advantage of layered scheduling is that the node 
information of one layer is updated in one iteration, and if the 
same variable node appears in the next iteration cycle, the latest 
updated information of the previous layer can be used for 
decoding. In scenarios where decoding performance and 
hardware resources need to be trade-off, this feature of layered 
scheduling can reduce the number of iterations compared with 
flooding decoding, thereby improving the decoding convergence 
speed with limited hardware consumption. Non-uniform 
message quantization techniques such as reconstruction-
computation-quantization (RCQ) can further improve the error-
correction performance of the layered min-sum decoder[8]. 
III. THE DESIGN OF THE DECODER 
A. Overall structure of decoder 
Traditional decoder architectures include serial architecture, 
fully parallel architecture, and partially parallel architecture. The 
implementation of the serial architecture only updates the 
information of one check node and one variable node at a time. 
Using the least hardware resources, it can be applied to many 
different kinds and structures of the parity-check matrix, but the 
excessive delay caused by the long code length is generally 
unacceptable. The fully parallel architecture processes the 
horizontal information of all check nodes and the vertical 
information of variable nodes in parallel every time it is updated. 
But its consumption of hardware resources increases 
significantly with the increase of the size of the parity-check 
matrix. 
The decoder structure adapted to the layered scheduling 
algorithm is a row-parallel architecture, which belongs to the 
partially parallel architecture. With variable offset and inter-
layer network, the row-parallel architecture can be more flexible 
than the full[9]. The row-parallel architecture updates the check 
nodes of n rows at the same time with a custom parallelism, and 
so on until all check nodes are updated once. The overall 
structure of the row-parallel decoder designed in this paper is 
shown in Fig. 3. 
Control_decode
decode
data_out
data_load
ms_control
judge
q_unit
(for variable 
nodes memory)
ms_decode
(Update the node 
information by MSA)
H_matrix
process
r_unit
(for check 
nodes memory)
d_in
d_out
 
Fig. 3. The overall structure of the row-parallel decoder designed in this paper. 
According to the transmission direction of the data, it can be 
seen that the serial encoded data of continuous input first enters 
the data_load, and converts the likelihood ratio, if the node 
information is "1", the likelihood ratio information is -8, 
otherwise, it is +8. Then the information will be cached into the 
q_RAM, and transmitted to the decoding module in the mode of 
parallelism of 32. In the decoding module, the ms_decode 
module first obtains the information of the check node and the 
variable node, then updates it according to the index extracted 
from the matrix processing module, and finally returns it to the 
r_unit and q_unit for storage. After traversing all the check nodes, 
the variable node information is hard verdicted and verified in 
the judge_unit. If the check equation is not satisfied, it is re-
iterated, otherwise, the decoding result is passed to the output 
module, and then the serial output is performed. 
B. Control modules in decoder 
There are two control modules in the decoder, namely the 
control_decode module and the ms_control module. The 
control_decode module mainly contains a state machine, which 
completes the logical manipulation from data input to decoding 
and finally to data output. Its state transition diagram Fig. 4 
shows. When the ready signal is received, the data is cached. The 
high pulse of the ACK signal indicates that 9216 bits are 
received, and then the decoding stage is entered. When the 
finish_ms signal equals to 1, the decoding process has ended, 
and consequently enters the output stage. 
S_out
S_idle
S_encode
read_parity=1
en_din=1
en_start=1
parity_out_done=1
!parity_out_done=1
 
Fig. 4. The state machine in top control module. 
Ms_control module is instantiated inside the decoding 
module and describes the logical transformation of the minimum 
sum decoding process. Write its state machine into a flowchart, 
as shown in Fig. 5. In the decoding process, the check matrix 
data stored in HROM is extracted from the H_unit, and then the 
coordinates corresponding to the q_RAM are obtained by 
shifting and expanding according to the degree of parallelism. 
The second step is to extract the LLRq value of the 
corresponding position according to the coordinates of the 
expansion, and extract the LLRr of the correct position through 
the count value. Then, according to (10) and (11), the check node 
and the variable node are updated in turn to complete the core 
calculation part of decoding. Finally, the counter value is used to 
determine whether the layered decoding is over. If all layers have 
been traversed once, the judge_unit will determine whether the 
verification conditions are met, and if the result is true, the 
decoder bits will be output. Conversely, the iteration will start 
again. 
1453
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:26:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Extract information from the H_matrix
Shift extend by 32 rows
Extract the LLRq_in and LLRr_in of the 
corresponding position
Calculate (LLRq_in - LLRr_in) and 
obtain the LLRr_out
Calculate LLRq_out= (LLRq_in -
LLRr_in) + LLRr_out
Whether the decoding of 
all check nodes is completed
Whether the results in the 
judge_unit satisfy the H_ matrix
Output the decoding bits
No
No
Deposit LLRr_out into the r_unit
Deposit LLRq_out into the q_unit
Yes
Yes
Iterative updates
 
Fig. 5. Flowchart of the decoding process. 
C. Process of partiy-check matrix 
In the H_unit module, an HROM with a depth of 4 and a 
width of 8×35 is instantiated to store values about all the shifts 
of the parity-check matrix. According to the external input 
storage signal, the counter count_index and count_num are 
cyclically accumulated, as shown in Fig. 6. And the parity-check 
matrix values of the corresponding layer is output in real time. 
The stored relative shift values will be converted into absolute 
coordinate positions before transmitting to the calculation unit. 
𝐻1,36
⋯
𝐻1,2
𝐻1,1
𝐻2,36
⋯
𝐻2,2
𝐻2,1
𝐻3,36
⋯
𝐻3,2
H3,1
𝐻4,36
⋯
𝐻4,2
H4,1
4 × 36
0
1
8
count_num
count_index
0
1
2
3
⋮
0
1
8
⋮
0
1
8
⋮
0
1
8
⋮
 
Fig. 6. Matrix mapping strategy in memory. 
The extracted shift value expands from 8 bits to 14 bits, as 
shown in Fig. 7. Index[13:0] represents the absolute position of 
the "1" in the first row element in column 9216 of the 32 rows 
processed in parallel. Where Index[13:8] represents the relative 
position of the submatrix in which the current value of the "1" 
element is located in all submatrices, and the value of Index[7:0] 
is equal to (shift value + 32 × continuum), which represents the 
relative position of the element "1" in the submatrix of size 256 
× 256. Finally, according to the extended coordinates, the 
variable nodes information of the corresponding position is 
extracted in the q_unit. 
6bit
8bit
0-63
0-256
 
Fig. 7. Extended index of non-zero element. 
D. Computing unit in decoder 
The computing unit adopts the calculation mode with a 
parallelism of 32 and updates the 32-line check nodes at the same 
time, as shown in Fig. 8. The result after passing through the 
limiter is first separated into signs and absolute values, and then 
the sign bits are operated according to the processing in (11). The 
cumulative XOR operation is used in the implementation instead 
of the multiplication operation in signs, reducing the use of 
arithmetic units. For comparison of absolute values, the most 
common serial comparator is used in [5] to complete the 
comparison task, and the former and the latter are compared with 
the count of CLK, and the input node information is compared 
in pairs in [4], and the comparison results are entered into the 
next level for pairwise comparison. 
In this paper, the minimum and sub-minimum values are 
calculated as Fig. 9. Due to the large row weight of the parity 
check matrix used, the first stage adopts serial comparison, and 
the subsequent comparator adopts combinatorial logic to 
complete the parallel comparison of least and less, and update 
the loc value at the same time. The least represents the minimum 
value, less represents the sub-minimum value, and loc represents 
the relative position where the minimum value is located. 
limit
LLRq_in
LLRr_in
LLRq_in
LLRr_in
⋮
⋮
⋮
sign
abs
xor
compare
distribute
D
D
⋮
LLRq_out
LLRq_out
r_unit
LLRr_out
compress
D
limit
⋮
 
Fig. 8. Processing for the nodes. 
compare
compare
compare
compare
final_least
llrq2
llrq7
⋮
⋮
⋮
llrq25
llrq26
llrq27
compare
compare
compare
llrq1
least
less
loc
least
less
loc
least
less
loc
least
less
loc
least
less
loc
least
less
loc
final_less
final_loc
 
Fig. 9. The compare unit for minimum and sub-minimum value. 
To reduce the storage resources occupied by the check nodes 
information in the r_unit, the information composition of the 
LLRr (LLRr is the message transmitted by the check node to the 
variable node) is compressed as shown in Fig. 10. The sign_all 
represents the final sign of each variable node, and its number of 
digits is equal to the row weight. The value of loc, less, and least 
is the same as above, and is used to extend the likelihood ratio 
information passed to each variable node during subsequent calls. 
In r_unit, LLRr information is stored in row order, and when it 
is extracted, it is also in sequence. The distribute function 
expands the compressed LLRr information to the same bit width 
as the LLRq (LLRq is the message transmitted by the variable 
node to the check node), and then adds and limits it to obtain the 
final LLRq_out. 
sign_all
least
[7:0]
less
loc
[15:8]
[20:16]
[47:21]
 
Fig. 10. The compressed check node data. 
1454
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:26:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IV. ANALYSIS OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The decoder designed in this paper is based on Xilinx's Zynq 
UltraScale+ MPSoC family development platform, with the chip 
number XCZU7EV-2FFVC1156I. Under the co-simulation 
verification of FPGA and Modelsim, the encoded sequence is 
randomly flipped over the digital data to simulate the bit flipping 
of the data in the storage device in a strong interference 
environment. Then, the deformed sequence of bits is sent to the 
LDPC_decode module and the decoding algorithm written on 
MATLAB at the same time. The output data of the two methods 
is checked to be the same and equal to the encoded data after the 
decoding is completed. The timing diagram is shown in Fig. 11 
and resource consumption of the decoder is shown in TABLE II. 
If the error signal is 0, the data of the current comparison is the 
same. 
Throughput≈N×fclk×R
Nclk×Niter
(13) 
The formula for the throughput rate of the decoder is in (13). 
The fclk is the clock frequency, R is the bit rate, Nclk represents 
the clock periods required for an iterative decoding, and Niter is 
the number of iterations. The QC-LDPC code used in this paper 
has a code length of 9216 and a code rate of 8/9. At 50MHz, set 
the maximum number of iterations to 15. The time for one 
iteration of decoding is 64340ns, which is 3217 clock cycles. 
The calculated throughput rate is 8.49Mbps. 
Fig. 11. Timing diagram for decoder. 
TABLE II. 
RESOURCE CONSUMPTION 
Resource 
Utilization 
Available 
LUT 
241380 
522720 
LUTRAM 
24408 
161280 
FF 
89160 
1045440 
BRAM 
22.5 
984 
IO 
27 
644 
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, the decoder of QC-LDPC code constructed by 
the PEG algorithm is designed. The layered scheduling 
minimum sum algorithm is deployed on it, and the decoding 
effect is performed well when simulating the wrong flip of data 
in the storage device. Compared to other general-purpose 
processors, the use of a dedicated unit with integrated LDPC 
decoding can speed up the completion of the decoding process 
and facilitate the correction of error bits in real time. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
R. Gallager.Low-density parity-check codes[J].IRE Trans. Inform.
Theory,1962,Vol.8(1): 21-28 
[2]
R. Tanner.A recursive approach to low complexity codes[J].Information 
Theory, IEEE Transactions on,1981,Vol.27(5): 533-547. 
[3]
Fossorier M P C．Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from
circulant permutationmatrices[J] ．IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory,2004，50(8)：1788-1793. 
[4]
Jeremy Nadal;Amer Baghdadi.FPGA based design and prototyping of
efficient 5G QC-LDPC channel decoding[A].2020 International
Workshop on Rapid System Prototyping (RSP)[C],2020. 
[5]
Mao-Ruei Li;Hsueh-Chih Chou;Yeong-Luh Ueng;Yun Chen.A Low-
complexity LDPC Decoder for NAND Flash Applications[A].2014 IEEE 
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS)[C],2014. 
[6]
Henry Lopez;Hsun-Wei Chan;Kang-Lun Chiu;Pei-Yun Tsai;Shyh-Jye 
Jerry Jou.A 75-Gb/s/mm2 and Energy-Efficient LDPC Decoder Based on 
a Reduced Complexity Second Minimum Approximation Min-Sum 
Algorithm[J].IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) 
Systems,2020,Vol.28(4): 926-939. 
[7]
He, X (He, Xuan);Zhou, L (Zhou, Liang);Du, JY (Du, Junyi).PEG-Like 
Design of Binary QC-LDPC Codes Based on Detecting and Avoiding
Generating 
Small 
Cycles[J].IEEE 
Transactions 
on
Communications,2018,Vol.66(5): 1845-1858. 
[8]
Caleb 
Terrill;Linfang 
Wang;Sean 
Chen;Chester 
Hulse;Calvin
Kuo;Richard Wesel;Dariush Divsalar.FPGA Implementations of Layered 
MinSum LDPC Decoders Using RCQ Message Passing[A].2021 IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM)[C],2021 
[9]
Alexandr 
Katyushnyj;Aleksei 
Krylov;Andrey 
Rashich;Chao
Zhang;Kewu Peng.FPGA implementation of LDPC decoder for 5G NR
with parallel layered architecture and adaptive normalization[A].2020
IEEE International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Photonics 
(EExPolytech)[C],2020 
1455
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:26:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
