IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

823

A UnetNND-BP Architecture for Channel Decoding Under Correlated Noise
Huiying Chen , Pengchao Zhao , and Chengju Li

Abstract— In this letter, we introduce a Unet-based neural network denoiser-belief propagation (UnetNND-BP) architecture with two training modes to improve the decoding performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. In the supervised learning mode, UnetNND-BP achieves better performance than benchmark schemes, while in the self-supervised learning mode, it achieves comparable performance.
Index Terms— Channel decoding, correlated noise, selfsupervised learning, LDPC.
I. INTRODUCTION
CHANNEL coding and decoding are two fundamental techniques to ensure reliable transmission in modern communication systems. In recent years, due to the excellent performance of the deep learning method in various tasks, many researchers have applied it to assist in channel decoding [1], [2], [3].
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) [4] codes, a type of linear block codes, exhibit high performance close to Shannon capacity under the belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [5]. However, in practical communication scenarios, the potential of LDPC codes is constrained due to the complexity of the communication environment. Noise correlation [6] is a crucial factor affecting the decoding performance of LDPC codes. It is typically caused by filtering and oversampling [7]. For instance, filtering schemes in 10GBASE-T Ethernet can cause the coloration of noise.
In conventional methods, solutions based on pilot signals and filters are effective in denoising, but they depend on the specific model assumptions. If the statistical characteristics of the noise are difficult to model, the performance of these solutions is also affected [8]. Deep learning-based methods do not rely on specific models and have better adaptive capabilities in complex communication environments.
Pioneering work was given in [9]. Liang et al. suggested that neural networks could remove the correlation of noise in communication and enhance the quality of input provided to the decoder. They cascaded the BP decoder and the CNN-based denoiser as an iterative structure to estimate and

eliminate the correlated noise. In [10], Lee et al. proposed a noise learning-based denoising autoencoder (nlDAE). It can learn different noise distributions with fewer parameters and a smaller training dataset. A residual learning-aided convolutional neural network (ResCNN) was proposed in [11]. It can effectively suppress the correlated noise based on residual neural networks without altering the noise distribution characteristics, thereby enhancing the decoding performance.
The aforementioned schemes can achieve satisfactory performance but are all based on static datasets. This means that these models need to be retrained when the data distribution changes. Our motivation is to design a decoding architecture that is robust to correlated noise and can be trained online as the noise distribution changes.
Briefly, we carry out the following tasks: 1) We construct a decoding architecture named UnetNND-
BP. The denoising part of this architecture is based on the Unet structure, which demonstrates its feature extraction capability in the computer vision field. 2) We propose two training modes for the UnetNND-BP and analyze its performance under these two modes. In the supervised learning mode, UnetNND-BP shows better performance than benchmarks in most cases. In the self-supervised learning mode, UnetNND-BP can learn online and achieves a comparable performance to that of the supervised learning mode.
II. THE UNETNND-BP WITH TWO TRAINING MODES
In this section, we present the structure of UnetNND-BP and propose two training modes for it.
A. Communication System Model Assisted by UnetNND-BP
The system model is illustrated in Fig. 1. Denote the uniformly distributed bits by u and the codeword by x, we can get the modulated symbols s by BPSK modulation. When s is transmitted through a channel, it is disturbed by noise, which is denoted by n. Then the received symbol vector y can be represented as
y = s + n.

Manuscript received 2 January 2024; revised 30 January 2024; accepted 1 February 2024. Date of publication 5 February 2024; date of current version 11 April 2024. The work of Huiying Chen, Pengchao Zhao, and Chengju Li was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. T2322007, 12071138), Shanghai Rising-Star Program (No. 22QA1403200), Shanghai Natural Science Foundation (No. 22ZR1419600), and “Digital Silk Road” Shanghai International Joint Lab of Trustworthy Intelligent Software (No. 22510750100). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was A. Balatsoukas-Stimming. (Corresponding author: Chengju Li.)
The authors are with the MoE Engineering Research Center of Software/Hardware Codesign Technology and Application, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China (e-mail: 51255902062@stu.ecnu.edu.cn; 51255902083@stu.ecnu.edu.cn; cjli@sei.ecnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2024.3362509

We adopt the noise correlation model as that in [7], and the correlated noise n can be expressed as
1
n = Θ 2 nw,
where nw is a Gaussian random vector with zero mean, and Θ is the correlation matrix. As the system model is real-valued, the matrix is given as
ηj−i, i ≤ j, Θi,j = ηi−j , i > j,
where Θi,j represents the (i, j)th element of Θ, η is the correlation coefficient with |η| ≤ 1.

1558-2558 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

824
Fig. 1. The proposed decoding architecture consists of a Unet-based neural network denoiser (UnetNND) and a belief propagation (BP) decoder.
TABLE I STRUCTURE PARAMETERS OF DENOISER

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, APRIL 2024
TABLE II DETAILS OF BLOCKS IN THE UNETNND

At the receiver, the UNetNND is trained to estimate the noise nˆ rather than estimate the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) or recover the clean codewords since the distribution of the LLRs and clean codewords are much more complex than the noise [10]. Subtracting nˆ from y, we obtain the estimation of s denoted by ˆs. It will be used to calculate the LLRs as the input of the BP decoder. For simplicity, we merge the computation process into the BP module. The LLRs can be expressed as

LLRi

=

log

P r(si P r(si

= =

+1|sˆi) −1|sˆi)

=

2sˆi σ2

,

where si, sˆi is the i-th element of s, ˆs, and σ2 is the power of the noise. Ultimately, the output of the decoder is represented

as uˆ.

Fig. 2. Overview of the self-supervised training mode for UnetNND.

B. Structure of Unet-Based Neural Network Denoiser
The correlation of noise can be considered as a feature that can be learned by neural network denoiser. Unet is a network structure with excellent feature extraction capability on two-dimensional data, which has been proved in computer vision. As we will see, this structure can show the same excellent performance in extracting the features of onedimensional data. We design the UnetNND, which is based on one-dimensional convolution and the Unet structure, as Table I shows. The Encoder and Decoder represent the downsampling part and upsampling part of the U-shaped structure. The Encoder includes a convolutional block (ConvBlock) as the input block, four downsampling blocks (DownBlock), and a ConvBlock as the middle block. The Decoder includes four upsampling blocks (UpBlock), an output convolutional block (OutConvBlock), and a fully connected layer (Dense). By concatenating the output of each DownBlock and the input of each UpBlock via skip connections [12], UnetNND can extract features more effectively. Table II provides details of these blocks, and the layers in these blocks are implemented in TensorFlow [13]. As a special note, the input of ResBlock will be sent to ConvBlock 1 and ConvBlock 2. There is a linear connection between ConvBlock 1 and Conv1D, and the output of Conv1D will be combined with the output of ConvBlock 2 as the output of ResBlock.

Fig. 3. Details of the mask process and the combination process. Take l = 4 as an example. In the mask process, binary masks zero the i-th bit of each fragment to generate My as the input of the denoising network. The output of the denoising network is denoted by fθ(My). In the combination process, the values of positions, which are masked in the mask process, are extracted and combined as the C(fθ(My)).
C. Supervised and Self-Supervised Learning Mode for UnetNND-BP
In the supervised learning mode, UnetNND takes noisy codewords as input and learns to estimate the real noise as output. However, when the noise distribution changes, it is necessary to generate data based on the new distribution to retrain UnetNND. In short, UnetNND-BP may experience a performance decline when trained and tested under mismatched SNR in supervised learning mode.
Inspired by [14] and [15], we develop a self-supervised training mode to achieve online learning. The overview of this mode is shown in Fig. 2. In particular, we provide an elaborate description of the mask and combiner modules. As depicted in Fig. 3, in the mask process, the noisy codeword

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: UnetNND-BP ARCHITECTURE FOR CHANNEL DECODING UNDER CORRELATED NOISE

825

Fig. 4. Performance comparison of UnetNND-BP with different schemes. For the BP decoder, we execute 50 iterations.

y is divided into ⌊N/l⌋ segments with a length of l. The value of l can be adjusted according to the code length. For simplicity, we set l = 4. For each fragment, a binary mask is used to mask their i-th bit, where i ∈ {0, . . . , l − 1}. In this way, we generate l masked codewords and feed them into the denoising network. Due to the noise correlation, the neural network can infer the value of the masked position. In the combination process, the combiner obtains the output of the denoising network and extracts the values of the positions masked in the mask process. Then, it combines them as the estimated noise.
The loss function contains a mean square error (MSE) loss term, which is comprised of the invisible part |C(fθ(My))−y| and the visible part β · |fθ(y) − y|, and a regularization loss term. The invisible part prevents the neural network from learning identity mappings, while the visible part compensates for the missing information caused by the invisible part. We disable the gradient updating when processing the visible part. Furthermore, to prevent the accumulation of errors in the invisible part from exacerbating the instability of training, we use a regularization term to correct it. The loss function is expressed in the following form:
L = Lmse + α · Lreg,
where Lmse and Lreg represent the MSE and regularization loss terms, α is a variable hyperparameter. Specifically, Lmse and Lreg are defined as
Lmse = ∥|C(fθ(My)) − y| + β · |fθ(y) − y|∥22, Lreg = ∥C(fθ(My)) − y∥22,
where My denotes the masked codeword, fθ(·) denotes the denoising network, C(·) denotes the combination process, and fθ(·) denotes the neural network with gradient update disabled. β is a variable hyperparameter.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we carry out simulations to evaluate the bit error rate (BER) of the UnetNND-BP under the supervised learning mode and the self-supervised learning mode.
A. BER Performance Under Supervised Learning Mode
LDPC code with a code block length of 576 and a code rate of 3/4 is employed to conduct the simulation experiments.

TABLE III SUMMARY OF PARAMETER SETTING AT TRAINING STAGE
The parity check matrix is from [16]. The SNR is defined as 1
SN R = 10 log( σ2 ), where σ2 is the power of the noise. Parameter settings for the simulation are shown in Table III. In the experiment, we use η to represent the correlation strength of noise.
We take the BP decoder without denoiser, the Wiener filterbased solution, the iterate BP-CNN [9], the nlDAE [10], and the ResCNN [11] as benchmarks. It is worth noting that the Wiener filter-based solution requires ideal prior knowledge of transmitted symbols and noises. The results of the simulation are shown in Fig. 4.
Under the strong correlation (η = 0.8), UNetNND-BP exhibits a performance improvement of about 1.1dB and 0.48dB at the BER of 1E-5, as compared to solutions with iterate BP-CNN and ResCNN. In comparison to the solutions employing nlDAE, Wiener filter, and the BP decoder, UNetNND-BP achieves a performance gain of about 3.28dB, 3.62dB, and 3.85dB at the BER of 1E-3. When η = 0.5, UNetNND-BP exhibits comparable BER to that of ResCNNBP and is significantly superior to other schemes. For the special case where η = 0, the performance of UnetNND-BP is similar to that of benchmarks. This is because, under this condition, the noise has no correlation, and solutions based on neural networks cannot extract the correlation as a feature. We notice that as η increases, the performance gain becomes larger compared to the BP decoder. This is because a larger correlation of noise provides more features for the denoising neural network to extract.
B. Performance Comparison of Supervised Learning Mode and Self-Supervised Learning Mode
We generate the data under multiple SNRs: {−2, −1.5, −1, −0.5, 0, 0.5, 1} dB. The model is trained and tested at each SNR, and the simulation results are then combined to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

826

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

complex real-world noise is still sorely needed. Furthermore, the architecture proposed in this letter is based on synthetic data during training due to the lack of a common standard dataset. It would be interesting to verify the performance of this denoiser with real-world data.

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of UnetNND-BP under supervised training mode and self-supervised training mode.
obtain the curve in Fig. 5. Under our experimental conditions, models trained in supervised learning mode do not experience performance decline caused by mismatched SNR since it is trained and tested under the same SNR. We consider the performance curve obtained in this way as the optimal performance achievable by our model under this training mode and experiment condition.
As shown in Fig. 5, the performance under the self-supervised learning mode is slightly lower than the performance under the supervised learning mode, but the gap is small and the trend is similar. This is because, in the supervised learning mode, the UnetNND gets noisy codewords and corresponding noise values for training, whereas in the self-supervised learning mode, it only gets noisy codewords. That is, the amount of information acquired for learning in the self-supervised learning mode is less than in the supervised learning mode. However, in the self-supervised mode, UnetNND-BP still achieves similar performance to that in the supervised learning mode.
IV. CONCLUSION
We proposed a denoiser based on Unet and designed two training modes for it. Simulation experiments were conducted to analyze the performance of the architecture under these two modes and it operates exceptionally well in both modes. There are some intriguing research directions worth exploring for the UnetNND-BP. First, analyzing the computational complexity and resource consumption to refine the model is an important future work. Second, our proposed self-supervised framework is based on correlated noise and relies on the noise zero-mean assumption. A general architecture that can eliminate the

REFERENCES
[1] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. T. Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in Proc. 51st Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[2] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2016, pp. 341–346.
[3] Q. Wang, S. Wang, H. Fang, L. Chen, L. Chen, and Y. Guo, “A modeldriven deep learning method for normalized min-sum LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[4] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[5] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] Y. Zeng and Y.-C. Liang, “Eigenvalue-based spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1784–1793, Jun. 2009.
[7] S. K. Sharma, S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “SNR estimation for multi-dimensional cognitive receiver under correlated channel/noise,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 6392–6405, Dec. 2013.
[8] J. Chen, J. Benesty, Y. Huang, and S. Doclo, “New insights into the noise reduction Wiener filter,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang., Process., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1218–1234, Jul. 2006.
[9] F. Liang, C. Shen, and F. Wu, “An iterative BP-CNN architecture for channel decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 144–159, Feb. 2018.
[10] W.-H. Lee, M. Ozger, U. Challita, and K. W. Sung, “Noise learningbased denoising autoencoder,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 2983–2987, Sep. 2021.
[11] X. Yang, L. Zhang, and Y. Jiang, “Intelligent and reliable coded bit stream recovery over correlated fast fading channels,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Inf., Commun. Netw. (ICICN). Zhangye, China: IEEE, Aug. 2022, pp. 320–325.
[12] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[13] M. Abadi et al., “TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning,” in Proc. 12th USENIX Symp. Oper. Syst. Design Implement., 2016, pp. 265–283.
[14] A. Krull, T.-O. Buchholz, and F. Jug, “Noise2void-learning denoising from single noisy images,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Nov. 2019, pp. 2129–2137.
[15] Z. Wang, J. Liu, G. Li, and H. Han, “Blind2Unblind: Self-supervised image denoising with visible blind spots,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans, LA, USA, Jun. 2022, pp. 2017–2026.
[16] M. Helmling, S. Scholl, F. Gensheimer, and T. Dietz. (2019). Database of Channel Codes and ML Simulation Results. [Online]. Available: https://rptu.de/channel-codes/channel-codes-database

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:29:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

