IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

763

PD-GLDPC Codes With Degree-1 Variable Nodes and Multi-Types of Component Codes
Jae-Won Kim , Member, IEEE, Jaewha Kim , Member, IEEE, Hee-Youl Kwak , Member, IEEE, and Jong-Seon No , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— In this letter, we propose a new design method for protograph-based partially doped generalized low-density paritycheck (PD-GLDPC) codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC). By extending the block-error threshold condition proposed by A. K. Pradhan et al. for conventional GLDPC codes, we optimize medium to high-rate PD-GLDPC codes with degree-1 variable nodes and multi-types of component codes (MCC). It is shown that the optimized PD-GLDPC codes outperform the conventional LDPC and GLDPC codes at the frame error rate 10−4 over the BEC while having comparable decoding complexity.
Index Terms— Block-error threshold, degree-1 variable node, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, multi-types of component codes (MCC), partially doped generalized LDPC (PD-GLDPC) code.
I. INTRODUCTION
GENERALIZED low-density parity-check (GLDPC) codes [1] are designed from LDPC codes by converting single parity-check (SPC) nodes into generalized constraint (GC) nodes. In GLDPC codes, variable nodes (VNs) connected to GC nodes satisfy the condition of an arbitrary linear code called the component code. It has been found that GLDPC codes have several desired properties such as the larger minimum distance and faster decoding convergence speed compared to LDPC codes [2], [3]. Despite of these good properties, competitive GLDPC codes that outperform LDPC codes have not been proposed in the literature within the medium to high-rate region because the conventional construction method induces a high rate-loss [4]. Recently, partially-doped GLDPC (PD-GLDPC) codes give a new
Manuscript received 19 September 2023; revised 16 November 2023 and 27 December 2023; accepted 23 January 2024. Date of publication 26 January 2024; date of current version 11 April 2024. This research was supported by the Pioneer Research Center Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (NRF-2022M3C1A3081366) and in part by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea Government (MSIT) (No. 2021R1G1A1091583). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Y. Fang. (Corresponding author: Hee-Youl Kwak.)
Jae-Won Kim is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Engineering Research Institute (ERI), Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, South Korea (e-mail: jaewon07.kim@gnu.ac.kr).
Jaewha Kim is with the Spatial Wireless Transmission Research Section, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Daejeon 34129, South Korea (e-mail: woghk9307@etri.re.kr).
Hee-Youl Kwak is with the Department of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 44610, South Korea (e-mail: hykwak@ulsan.ac.kr).
Jong-Seon No is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Institute of New Media and Communications (INMC), Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea (e-mail: jsno@snu.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2024.3359155

way to construct competitive GLDPC codes with the higher code-rate [5]. However, they are unable to outperform the conventional LDPC codes [6] in terms of decoding performance although they have reduced average VN degrees.
In fact, authors in [5] did not consider degree-1 VNs and only employed a single-type of component codes (SCC). However, it was shown that degree-1 VNs are effective in improving decoding thresholds [7]. In addition, multi-types of component codes (MCC) can expand the code design space. Inspired by them, in this letter, we generalize the PD-GLDPC codes to have degree-1 VNs and MCC. We first extend the equality condition [7], which ensures block and bit-error thresholds are identical, to be applicable to PD-GLDPC codes with degree-1 VNs. Using the differential evolution algorithm [6] together with the extended equality condition, we optimize PD-GLDPC codes and show that they have the superior decoding thresholds and frame error rate (FER) performances compared to the conventional LDPC and GLDPC codes. Furthermore, the optimized PD-GLDPC codes have reduced average VN degrees, resulting in comparable decoding complexity.

II. BACKGROUND

A. Protograph-Based GLDPC Codes

A protograph is represented by a bipartite graph G =

(V, C, E), where V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} is a set of VNs, C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} is a set of check nodes (CNs), and E is a set of edges between VNs and CNs. An m × n matrix B is

called a base matrix, where each entry [B]i,j is the number of edges between ci and vj. Then, protograph-based LDPC codes

are constructed by lifting a given protograph and permuting

lifted edges [8]. Similarly, protograph-based GLDPC codes

are constructed based on a given protograph [4]. However,

some SPC nodes are replaced with GC nodes and we call

this procedure doping. For a GC node cg with an (ng, kg, dg) component code, ng should be equal to the degree of cg for

doping to be possible. Since GC nodes actually correspond

to multiple SPC nodes, which are determined by parity-check

matrices of component codes, the number of SPC nodes in a

given protograph is increased as mt = m + Σg(ng − kg − 1).

Then, the design rate R for protograph-based GLDPC codes

is

1−

mt n

,

which

is

lower

than

1

−

m n

.

An

example

for

protograph-based GLDPC codes is given in Fig. 1(a). Due

to the doping strategy that SPC nodes are replaced with GC

nodes in a given protograph, the rate-loss is severe and thus

it is very difficult to design high-rate GLDPC codes using the

conventional doping technique.

1558-2558 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:28:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

764

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

Fig. 1. Comparison between (a): conventional protograph-based GLDPC codes and (b): PD-GLDPC codes, where z = 7q.

B. PD-GLDPC Codes [5]

1) Doping Method and Code Construction: Unlike the

conventional doping technique that replaces SPC nodes with

GC nodes in a protograph, GC nodes are added after lifting the

protograph in PD-GLDPC codes. A comparison between two

methods using the (7, 4) Hamming component code is shown

in Fig. 1. Lifted VNs from a single protograph VN (e.g., v1 in Fig. 1(b)) are randomly connected to GC nodes associated

with the same component code, where each lifted VN should

be connected to one GC node. Thus, a lifting factor z should

be divisible by the codelength of the component codes. Since

GC nodes are introduced after lifting the protograph, a GC

node cg (e.g., the red dotted GC node in Fig. 1(b)) is not included in C (the set of protograph CNs). However, GC nodes

affect the protograph extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT)

analysis and equality condition in Section III-A because they

exist in the Tanner graph. Thus, we have to carefully consider

GC nodes although they are not involved in the protograph

and base matrix. In PD-GLDPC codes, VNs connected to GC

nodes (e.g., v1 in Fig. 1(b)) are said to be partially doped. Let X denote an index set of partially doped VNs.

For a GC node cg, the effective number of SPC nodes

in the perspective of the protograph is (ng − kg)/ng. This

is

because

in

the

Tanner

graph

after

lifting,

there

are

z ng

GC nodes, which correspond to z(ng − kg)/ng SPC nodes.

Thus, the effective number of SPC nodes in the protograph is

mtP D = m + Σg(ng − kg)/ng, resulting in the design rate R = 1 − mPt D/n. Then, the rate-loss induced by doping

is much more reduced compared to that of the conventional

protograph-based GLDPC codes as shown in Fig. 1. Consider-

ing the design rates of two methods, PD-GLDPC codes have

an advantage in the code-rate compared to the conventional

GLDPC codes for small n.

2) Rate Matching Using Puncturing: Since GC nodes

induce a rate-loss, random puncturing is employed to achieve

the desired doped VNs

code-rate R∗ = 1 − are punctured with

m
n
a

. Specifically, ratio ρd = ρ

only

×

n |X

partially | , where

ρ

=

1

−

R R∗

.

This

is

because

partially

doped

VNs

are

robust

to puncturing as they receive more reliable messages from the

connected GC nodes. Using the rate matching in optimization

and FER simulations, we provide a fair comparison between

LDPC codes and PD-GLDPC codes. 3) PEXIT Analysis: In order to carry out the PEXIT anal-
ysis for PD-GLDPC codes, the effect of GC nodes should be considered although they cannot be represented in a form of protographs. Since partially doped VNs are randomly connected to the corresponding GC nodes after lifting, it is natural to consider information transfer between partially doped VNs

and GC nodes in the sense of random ensembles [9]. Based

on this intuition, the PEXIT analysis for PD-GLDPC codes

is introduced in [5] using EXIT functions of GC nodes and

duality properties [9] over the binary erasure channel (BEC).

In specific, the main difference from the well-known PEXIT

analysis of protograph-based LDPC codes [10] is information
transfer of GC nodes. Let IEV (ci, vj) (IEC (ci, vj)) denote extrinsic mutual information (MI) from vj (ci) to ci (vj). For a GC node cg and the corresponding partially doped VN vg, IEV (cg, vg) = 1 − ϵΠci∈N(vg)(1 − IEC (ci, vg)), where ϵ is the channel erasure probability and N (vg) is the set of neighboring CNs in a protograph. Using this IEV (cg, vg) as a priori MI IAC (cg), IEC (cg, vg) is defined as follows [9]:

IEC (cg, vg)

=

1 ng

Σnh=g 1

(1

−

IAC

(cg

))h−1

(IAC

(cg

))ng

−h

× (he˜h − (ng − h + 1)e˜h−1),

(1)

where e˜h is an information function of h positions in the dual code of the component code of cg. In addition, the channel MI of partially doped VNs is 1 − (ρd + (1 − ρd)ϵ) due to puncturing.

C. Equality Condition of Protograph-Based GLDPC Codes for Error Thresholds
For protograph-based doubly-GLDPC (DGLDPC) codes with degree-1 VNs, the equality condition was proposed in [7], where the bit-error threshold is equal to the blockerror threshold. The main idea is finding a subgraph denoted by RED(G), where edges fall double exponentially in terms of erasure probabilities. It was proved that the equal thresholds can be achieved if the number of VNs in RED(G) (denoted by |RED(G)|) is larger than or equal to the number of information nodes n − m. For LDPC codes, RED(G) can be obtained by iteratively removing 1) cycles induced by degree-2 VNs and 2) degree-1 VNs together with related CNs and edges in G. For DGLDPC codes, the procedure is the same while edges are removed instead of VNs and CNs in consideration of EXIT functions of GC nodes.
III. OPTIMIZATION
A. Extension of the Equality Condition for PD-GLDPC Codes
Although GC nodes in PD-GLDPC codes are not represented in a protograph, the remaining VNs, CNs, and edges in the protograph can be mapped to those of LDPC codes. Thus, the procedure finding RED(G) is similar to that of LDPC codes [7]. Specifically, it is sufficient to modify the procedure finding RED(G) while carefully considering the EXIT function of GC nodes in (1) for the double exponentially

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:28:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: PD-GLDPC CODES WITH DEGREE-1 VARIABLE NODES AND MULTI-TYPES

765

Algorithm 1 Modified Algorithm to Find RED(G) in
PD-GLDPC Codes Input: G and X
Output: RED(G) Initialization: Gˆ = G
1: while ∃ 1) cycles induced by undoped degree-2 VNs or 2) undoped degree-1 VNs in Gˆ do
2: Undoped cycle elimination: Remove cycles induced by
undoped degree-2 VNs together with edges connected to CNs of those cycles in Gˆ. Update this subgraph as Gˆ.
3: Undoped degree-1 VN elimination: Remove undoped
degree-1 VNs together with connected CNs and edges of them in Gˆ. Update this subgraph as Gˆ.
4: Doped VN elimination: If all edges of partially doped VNs are removed, eliminate those doped VNs in Gˆ. Update this subgraph as Gˆ.
5: end while 6: Output Gˆ as RED(G).

Fig. 2. An example for finding RED(G) in PD-GLDPC codes, where m = 4, n = 6, and X = {1, 2}.
n − m = 2, this PD-GLDPC code satisfies the equality condition of thresholds.

fall property. The modified procedure finding RED(G) in PD-GLDPC codes is described in Alg. 1 and the extended equality condition for error thresholds is given in Theorem 1. For Theorem 1, we assume that the codelength of component codes is at least 3.
Theorem 1: If |RED(G)| ≥ n − m from Alg. 1, the bit-error threshold is equal to the block-error threshold for PD-GLDPC codes.
Proof: Following the proof in [7], we only need to prove that edges in RED(G) from Alg. 1 fall double exponentially. In fact, the procedure finding RED(G) can be interpreted as iteratively removing edges of which erasure probabilities are not expressed as at least quadratic products of the other erasure probabilities except ϵ. Since PD-GLDPC codes are different from protograph-based LDPC codes in that GC nodes exist, it is sufficient to show the following cases.
1) Cycles induced by degree-2 VNs: In protograph-based LDPC codes, edges in these cycles do not affect the double exponentially fall property because a VN vj with two adjacent CNs ci1 , ci2 in the cycle transfers IEV (ci1 , vj) = 1 − ϵ(1 − IEC (ci2 , vj )) and IEV (ci2 , vj ) = 1 − ϵ(1 − IEC (ci1 , vj )). However, degree-2 partially doped VNs behave as VNs of at least degree-3 because these VNs receive MI from GC nodes.
2) Degree-1 VNs: Since undoped degree-1 VNs always transfer 1 − ϵ to SPC nodes, they are removed by Alg. 1. However, a partially doped degree-1 VN vg with a GC node cg transfers 1−ϵ(1−IEC (cg, vg)) to the connected SPC node. Although it seems to be the same as the above case of undoped degree-2 VNs, it was proved in [11] that the minimum degree of (1 − IEC (cg, vg)) in terms of 1 − IAC (cg) is dg − 1, where dg ≥ 3 is the minimum distance of the component code of cg.
3) Doped VNs: If all edges connected to partially doped VNs are eliminated from the previous steps, these VNs are subsequently removed because the EXIT function (1) is only dependent on ϵ in the remaining protograph.
Fig. 2 shows an example of finding RED(G), where m = 4, n = 6, and X = {1, 2}. Since |RED(G)| = 2 ≥

B. Optimization by Differential Evolution

Using the differential evolution algorithm [6], we optimize PD-GLDPC protographs with degree-1 VNs and MCC for three sizes of base matrices: 1) 4 × 8, 2) 8 × 16, and 3) 3 × 12. We set the following parameters and constraints for optimization.

• The number of generation G = 10000. • The number of candidates S = 10mn. • The maximum entry e = 5. • The average VN degree is less than or equal to 6. • |RED(G)| ≥ n − m. • X = {1, 2}. • Five-types of component codes are considered together
with ρd for puncturing: 1) (7,4) Hamming, 2) (15,11) Hamming, 3) (8,4) extended Hamming, 4) (16,11) extended Hamming, and 5) (24,12) extended Golay codes.

For the PD-GLDPC optimization, we explore all combina-

tions of five component codes

5 2

+5

=

15 cases

for |X | = 2

partially doped VN positions. We then select the base matrix

with the best decoding threshold (denoted by PD-GLDPC

(dv1, MCC)). To provide a comparison, we consider LDPC

protographs without degree-1 VNs in [6] (denoted by LDPC

w.o. dv1). For LDPC protographs with degree-1 VNs, we can-

not find medium to high-rate LDPC protographs with the

same base sizes in the literature and thus we optimize them

by following the design method in [7] (denoted by LDPC

with dv1). For the 8 × 16 base size, we also compare the

conventional PD-GLDPC code (without degree-1 VNs and

with SCC) in [5].

In addition to the protographs with the same base sizes,

we also compare the accumulate-repeat-accumulate (ARA)

codes (AR4JA [12] and AR3A [13] codes with the base sizes

3 × 5 and 3 × 9) and protograph-based raptor-like (PBRL)

code [14] with the base size 9 × 17. For the PBRL code,

we employ the PBRL code family for the long blocklength

((17) and (18) in [14]). The main features including erasure

thresholds, average VN degrees, and types of component

codes selected for the optimized base matrices are summarized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:28:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

766

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

TABLE I MAIN FEATURES OF THE OPTIMIZED PD-GLDPC CODES AND CONVENTIONAL LDPC/PD-GLDPC CODES

in Table I. It shows that the optimized PD-GLDPC codes have
superior decoding thresholds as well as lower VN degrees compared to their counterparts under the same base sizes.1

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF DECODING COMPLEXITY (×105): COMPARISON (c), ADDITION (a), AND TOTAL COMPLEXITY (c + 2a)

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. FER Results Over the BEC
We compare FER performances of the LDPC and PD-GLDPC codes over the BEC in Fig. 3, where maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding is used for GC nodes and the conventional belief propagation (BP) decoding is used for VNs and SPC nodes with 400 decoding iterations. For a fair comparison, all codes in each sub-figure of Fig. 3 have the same codelength (i.e., the number of transmitted bits) and code-rate. For PD-GLDPC codes, random puncturing is employed as explained in Section II-B. For AR4JA, AR3A, and PBRL codes, one protograph VN is punctured. For example, in Fig. 3(b), the PD-GLDPC (dv1, MCC) code is lifted by z = 2880 resulting in the codelength 2880 · 16 − 2 · 2880 · ρd = 41664 while the PBRL code is lifted by z = 2604 to have the same codelength 2604 · (17 − 1) = 41664. The circulant progressive edge growth (CPEG) algorithm [15] is employed to avoid cycles-4.2 Since parallel edges exist in protographs, 2-step lifting is employed for the minimum distance of lifted codes.
We observe that the trend in the FER performances aligns with that of the thresholds in Table I. The PD-GLDPC (dv1, MCC) codes exhibit the best performance across all base sizes at the FER 10−4. Since AR4JA and AR3A codes are not optimized for the BEC, their decoding thresholds are inferior as shown in Table I and thus their FER performances are largely degraded in Figs. 3(a) and 3(c). While the conventional
1All data about base matrices, lifted graphs, and component codes is available at https://github.com/jaewon07kim/PD-GLDPC-Codes-with-Degree1-Variable-Nodes-and-Multi-Types-of-Component-Codes
2Since GC nodes are not represented in protographs, we first apply the CPEG algorithm to base matrices and then randomly connect lifted partially doped VNs to their corresponding GC nodes. While this random connection may lead cycles-4 in GC nodes, it has a marginal effect in the most cases due to the high reliability of MAP decoding. However, the PD-GLDPC (dv1, MCC) code with the base size 8 × 16 shows the better decoding performance using the random lifting method. Except this code, we employ the CPEG algorithm for lifting all the other base matrices.

PD-GLDPC code [5] shows relatively degraded performance in Fig. 3(b), the PD-GLDPC (dv1, MCC) code achieves a significant performance improvement by employing degree-1 VNs and MCC, thereby outperforming the conventional LDPC codes.
B. Individual Effects of Degree-1 VNs and MCC
In order to verify how two main techniques (i.e., degree-1 VNs and MCC) contribute individually to the performance improvement, we additionally compare two cases: 1) with degree-1 VNs and SCC and 2) without degree-1 VNs and with MCC. The comparison is shown in Fig. 4 for the 8 × 16 base size with the same codelength 41664 and coderate 0.5, which shows that two main techniques both contribute to the performance improvement for PD-GLDPC codes.
C. Decoding Complexity Analysis
Although the PD-GLDPC (dv1, MCC) codes show the lower VN degrees as in Table I, we cannot conclude that the decoding complexity of the proposed PD-GLDPC codes is superior due to the Gaussian elimination operation for GC nodes. In order to fairly compare the decoding complexity,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:28:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: PD-GLDPC CODES WITH DEGREE-1 VARIABLE NODES AND MULTI-TYPES

767

Fig. 3. FER performances of the LDPC and PD-GLDPC codes in Table I. (a): 3 × 5 and 4 × 8 base sizes with the codelength 33312 and code-rate 0.5. (b): 8 × 16 and 9 × 17 base sizes with the codelength 41664 and code-rate 0.5. (c): 3 × 9 and 3 × 12 base sizes with the codelength 35568 and code-rate 0.75.

Fig. 4. Individual effects of two main techniques in improving FER performances of PD-GLDPC codes.
we count the number of comparison and addition operations involved in one decoding iteration.
• Comparison: 1) VNs: checking whether erasure exists in the received symbol and incoming edges, 2) GC nodes: checking whether erasure exists in component codewords, 3) GC nodes in MAP decoding: finding rows involved in elementary row operations and checking whether only one erased VN is connected to each CN in the reduced row echelon form (evaluated by the simulation).
• Addition: 1) SPC nodes: summing incoming messages and subtracting each message from the sum, 2) GC nodes in MAP decoding: conducting elementary row operations and recovering erased messages by summation (evaluated by the simulation).
Table II shows the counts of each operation and total complexity [16] in one decoding iteration. Note that each number of comparison and addition operations for MAP decoding of GC nodes is evaluated by the maximum of simulated values in Fig. 3, in order to estimate the worst-case scenario. Although the decoding complexity of the AR4JA and AR3A codes is low, their decoding performances are very inferior. Except them, the PD-GLDPC (dv1, MCC) codes show the comparable decoding complexity.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, a new design method was proposed for PD-GLDPC codes with degree-1 VNs and MCC. Optimized by the differential evolution algorithm using the extended equality condition for block and bit-error thresholds, PD-GLDPC (dv1, MCC) codes showed the improved decoding

performances as well as comparable decoding complexity.
As a follow-up study, optimization over the additive white
Gaussian noise channel can be considered. Although this letter
focused on the BEC, the design method can be generalized by
introducing the PEXIT analysis in the additive white Gaussian
noise channel.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[2] S. Abu-Surra, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Enumerators for protograph-based ensembles of LDPC and generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 858–886, Feb. 2011.
[3] I. P. Mulholland, E. Paolini, and M. F. Flanagan, “Design of LDPC code ensembles with fast convergence properties,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Black Sea Conf. Commun. Netw. (BlackSeaCom), May 2015, pp. 53–57.
[4] G. Liva, W. E. Ryan, and M. Chiani, “Quasi-cyclic generalized LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 49–57, Jan. 2008.
[5] J. Kim, J.-W. Kim, H.-Y. Kwak, and J.-S. No, “Construction of protograph-based partially doped generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 95462–95478, 2022.
[6] A. K. Pradhan, A. Thangaraj, and A. Subramanian, “Construction of near-capacity protograph LDPC code sequences with block-error thresholds,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 27–37, Jan. 2016.
[7] A. K. Pradhan and A. Thangaraj, “Protograph LDPC codes with block thresholds: Extension to degree-one and generalized nodes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 5876–5887, Dec. 2018.
[8] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, USA, INP Progress Rep. 42–154, 2003.
[9] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[10] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[12] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2005, p. 5.
[13] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, “Accumulate repeat accumulate codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jan. 2004, p. 505.
[14] K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protograph-based raptorlike LDPC codes for the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), Feb. 2015, pp. 240–246.
[15] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[16] H. Gamage, N. Rajatheva, and M. Latva-Aho, “Channel coding for enhanced mobile broadband communication in 5G systems,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Netw. Commun. (EuCNC), Jun. 2017, pp. 1–6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:28:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

