IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2008

517

On the Error Correction of Regular LDPC Codes Using the Flipping Algorithm
David Burshtein, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The iterative bit flipping algorithm is applied to the standard regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) code ensemble. In the past, it was shown, for a typical code in the ensemble with left degree at least five and block length sufficiently large, that this algorithm can correct a linear (in the block length) number of worst case errors. In this paper, this result is extended to the case where the left degree is at least four. For the case where the left degree is larger than four, an improvement, compared to existing results, of several orders of magnitude is obtained on the fraction of worst case errors that can be corrected. It is also shown how the results can be further improved when random errors produced by the channel (as opposed to worst case errors) are considered.
Index Terms—Expander graph, flipping algorithm, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

GALLAGER [1] suggested an iterative hard decoding algorithm, as a simpler alternative to his soft decoding (belief

propagation) algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC)

codes. The proposed algorithm flips in sequence each variable

bit which has more unsatisfied parity-check bits compared to its

satisfied ones.1 The bit flipping algorithm was used by Zyablov

and Pinsker [2] to analyze the performance of LDPC codes

under practical iterative decoding. They proved that asymptot-

ically, almost all codes in the regular code ensemble with left

degree at least five, can correct a linear number of worst case er-

rors. That is, a typical code can correct an arbitrary error pattern,

whose error rate is smaller than some fixed positive number, in

any transmitted codeword. This can be done in

par-

allel iterations where is the block length. Sipser and Spielman

[3] analyzed the performance of LDPC codes using expander

graph arguments and showed that the flipping algorithm can be

conveniently analyzed using these arguments. In [4], we have

shown that expander graph arguments can also be applied to

message passing algorithms. For the linear programming de-

coder [5], it was also shown [6], [7] that a linear number of

errors can be corrected, however, although the computational

complexity is polynomial in the block length, it may be larger

Manuscript received January 12, 2007; revised October 29, 2007. This work was supported by the Israel Science Foundation under Grant 927/05. The material in this paper was presented at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, June 2007.
The author is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Ramat-Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: burstyn@eng.tau.ac.il).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.913261
1In fact, Gallager proposed a generalization of this rule, in which one flips each bit whose fraction of unsatisfied parity-check bits is larger than some threshold.

than that of the flipping algorithm. In [8], it was shown, for any

and block length sufficiently large, that there exist

LDPC codes with left degree and right degree whose block

error rate approaches zero asymptotically, whenever we operate

below the asymptotic belief propagation threshold.

In this paper, we apply the bit flipping algorithm to the stan-

dard regular LDPC code ensemble, and obtain the following re-

sults. First, we extend the results of [2] and [3] to the case where

the left degree is at least four, thus showing that asymptotically

almost all codes in the standard regular LDPC code ensemble

with left degree at least four can correct a linear number of worst

case errors in complexity of

. Second, for the case where

the left degree is larger than four, we obtain an improvement of

several orders of magnitude on the fraction of worst case errors

that can be corrected, compared to the existing results. Third,

we show how our results can be improved when we consider

random errors (as opposed to worst case errors) produced by

the channel. This paper is organized as follows. In Section II,

we analyze the error correction of the -regular ensemble

when

. In Section III, we extend the analysis to the case

where . Section IV concludes the paper.

II. THE ERROR CORRECTION OF

-REGULAR CODES

Consider the standard -regular LDPC bipartite graph-

based ensemble with block length [9], [10]. We denote

by

the design rate of the ensemble in bits per

channel use. The ensemble is defined as follows in terms of the

Tanner graph representation of the code. There are variable

nodes and

check nodes. For each variable (check,

respectively) node we assign

variable (check) sockets.

The total number of variable sockets, and the total number of

check sockets are both . We then choose a permutation with

uniform probability from the space of all permutations of size

, and use this permutation to match the variable and check

sockets. Note that in this way, multiple edges may link a pair

of nodes.

In this paper, we analyze the bit flipping decoding algorithm,

applied to a random code in the ensemble. The algorithm is de-

fined as follows.

Algorithm 1: Sipser and Spielman, parallel bit flipping decoding algorithm [3]. Iterate the following: For each variable node, count the number of unsatisfied check nodes among its neighbors. Then set all variable nodes in parallel using the following rules. Flip each variable node with more than unsatisfied parity check neighbors. Set the value of each variable

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2008

node with exactly unsatisfied parity-check neighbors to ( ) with probability .

Notes:

1) When the output of the channel over which we transmit

is not binary, we assume that the output is quantized to a

single bit prior to the application of the bit flipping algo-

rithm.

2) When parallel edges connect some pair of variable and

check nodes, we count the vote of the parity-check node

(satisfied or not) according to the multiplicity of the par-

allel edges (each edge has one vote).

3) We have slightly changed the original definition of the

flipping algorithm when there are exactly unsatisfied

parity-check neighbors. This case is possible only if is

even. In fact, this modification will only be needed for our

analysis of the case when

.

Following [3] we say that a variable node is bad if its value

is different from the true codeword bit value. Otherwise, we say

that the variable node is good.

We now analyze the error correction capability of the algo-

rithm. Consider some iteration of the algorithm. We partition

the set of variable nodes to the sets and , i.e.,

,

where and are the sets of bad and good variable nodes

at the beginning of the iteration. We further partition into

, where

and are defined as fol-

lows. is the set of variables that are bad before the iteration

and have less than unsatisfied parity-check neighbors (be-

fore the iteration), thus they remain bad after the iteration.

is the set of variables that are bad before the iteration and have

exactly unsatisfied parity-check neighbors. We say that the

variables in are erasures or erased. Note that about half the

elements in will be set to bad in the end of the iteration,

the others will be set to good. is the set of variables that

are bad before the iteration and have more than unsatisfied

parity-check neighbors. Thus, they are set to good after the iter-

ation. We also define the set of variables

. Sim-

ilarly, we partition into

. is the set of

variables that are good before the iteration and have more than

unsatisfied parity-check neighbors, thus they will be set to

bad after the iteration. is the set of variables that are good be-

fore the iteration and have exactly unsatisfied parity-check

neighbors. Elements of are also called erasures. About half

the elements in will be set to bad in the end of the itera-

tion, the others will be set to good. is the set of variables that

are good before the iteration and have less than unsatisfied

parity-check neighbors, thus they will remain good after the it-

eration. We also define the set of variables

. We

denote by the set that comprises each check node with an odd

number of connections (edges) to . Thus, is the set of un-

satisfied parity-check nodes. Similarly, we denote by the set

that comprises each check node with an even number of con-

nections to . Thus, is the set of satisfied parity-check nodes.

The sets and form a partition of the set of check nodes. By

the definitions above, each element of and each element of

are connected by less than edges to . In addition, each

element of and each element of are connected by exactly

Fig. 1. The relation between the various sets. Each element of J (K) has an odd (even) number of connections to B. Each element of B and each element of G are connected to J by less than c=2 edges. Each element of B and each element of G are connected to J by exactly c=2 edges. Each element of B and each element of G are connected to J by more than c=2 edges.
edges to . Finally, each element of and each element of are connected by more than edges to .
We denote the cardinalities of the various sets by the following:

(1) (2)

(3)

(4)

Note that when is odd,

. We further denote

by

the number of connections (edges) between and

. Then there are

connections between and

connections between and , and

connections between and . The relation between the

various sets is depicted in Fig. 1.

Definition 1: The -tuple of sets defined above (e.g., and are the sets of bad and good variable

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ON THE ERROR CORRECTION OF REGULAR LDPC CODES USING THE FLIPPING ALGORITHM

519

nodes at the beginning of the iteration), with cardinalities that

are given in (1)–(4) and with

connections between and

, is said to be a

tuple.

Thus, a

tuple is the

-tuple of sets

that satisfy the rela-

tions depicted in Fig. 1. Note that Definition 1 assumes some

given values of , and which define the ensemble. Also

note that the maximal number of errors after the iteration is

, while the actual number of errors can be smaller,

due to the fact that the state of erased variable nodes (those with

exactly satisfied parity-check neighbors) is determined at

random. If

(5)

where is the largest even number which is less than or equal to . These polynomials will be used to formulate various generating functions.
We also define

where and

(16) is the entropy function defined in (80) in Appendix I,
(17)

(18) (19)

then the configuration (i.e., the -tuple) is possibly bad, since

the number of errors after the iteration may be larger than or

equal to the number of errors before the iteration. Otherwise, it

is a good configuration.

We denote by the largest integer less than , by the

largest integer less than or equal to , by the smallest in-

teger greater than or equal to , and by the smallest integer

greater than . Hence,

.

Note that by the definitions above, the parameters

and satisfy the following relations:

(20)

Note that the base of all the logarithms in this paper is . Our main result in this section is the following.

Theorem 1: Consider the ensemble of -regular LDPC

codes with

and block length . Let

be the

smallest positive root (we show that such root does exist) of the

function which is defined by

(21)

(6) where this maximization is over values of

and

(7) that satisfy (5)–(9). For any

, if is sufficiently large,

then except for a negligible fraction of codes, almost all codes

in this ensemble can correct all combinations of errors or (8) less in any transmitted codeword by using Algorithm 1.

where is the largest odd number which is less than or equal to , and
(9)
(the second inequality in (7) follows from the fact that each node of has at least one edge that connects it to ).
To formulate our first theorem we define the following polynomials:

The theorem will be proved by showing that, for almost all

codes in the ensemble and for all

, the flipping algorithm

will reduce the number of errors, regardless of their location,

in each iteration if the number of errors is at most . This

is shown by considering all possible tuples that satisfy (5)

(i.e., they define a possibly bad configuration) and using the

union bound to show that if is sufficiently large then with high

probability there are no possibly bad -tuples in a randomly

chosen graph.

Proof: We denote by

the probability over our

(10) ensemble that there exists a possibly bad configuration with

for some

. That is,

is the frac-

tion of bad codes in the -regular ensemble that cannot cor-

(11) rect all combinations of errors or less. We will show that

as

, thus proving the theorem.

By the union bound (12)

(13)
(14) where
(15)

where

such that (5) holds (22)
(23)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2008

The term is the number of ways to partition the set of variable

nodes into sets of cardinalities

and

, and to partition the set of parity-check nodes

into sets of cardinalities

and

,

and is given by (note our notation (78) in Appendix I)

where

denotes the coefficient of in the polyno-

mial

(we use similar notation for multivariate polyno-

mials, e.g.,

), and

(29)

(24)
The term is the number of possible graphs in which a given partition is a tuple, i.e.,

where the polynomials

and

are defined in (10)–(15).

By the saddle-point inequality (see, e.g., [11] and references

therein)

(30)

where and are defined in (17) and (18). Similarly

(31)

The total unrestricted number of possible graphs in the ensemble

is

. Thus,

is the probability that a given partition

is a -tuple.

The summation in (22) is over integer values of such that

. The summation in (23) is over integer values of

and

that satisfy the following.

First they satisfy (5)–(9) (since (5) holds, we enumerate only

possibly bad configurations). In addition,

is even

(since each check node in is connected by an even number of

edges to ), and

and

have the same parity,

that is, both are odd or both are even (since each check node in

is connected by an odd number of edges to ).

Now, can be bounded either by using (85) in Appendix I,

yielding

(25)

where and are defined in (19) and (20). By (27), (30), (31), and (82) we obtain
(32)
(33)
(34) where the third inequality follows by (7).
Equations (7) and (9) imply that

where the entropy function is defined in (80), or by using

(86), yielding the following looser bound, that will be more con-

venient to use for small values of

(35)

Hence, by (23), (6), (7), and (35)

(26)

We now turn to the other term, . First note that

(36)

where the maximization is over

and

that satisfy (5)–(9).

Combining (36), (25), and (34) yields (27)

where is the number of ways to choose

and

left sockets in and , respectively, that connect to

. Similarly, is the number of ways to choose

and

right sockets in and , respectively, that connect

to .

Now, and can be expressed using generating functions

as follows:

where the maximization is over values of that satisfy (5)–(9)
and is defined in (16). By the definition of can write (37) as

(37) and
in (21), we

(28)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(38)

BURSHTEIN: ON THE ERROR CORRECTION OF REGULAR LDPC CODES USING THE FLIPPING ALGORITHM

521

Instead of (37) we can obtain a looser bound, that is more convenient to use for small values of , by combining (36), (26), and (34), yielding
(39)
where

so that

(49)

In addition, if is some fixed positive integer, then by (47), (48),

and the fact that

is a monotonically decreasing function

for

, we have

(50)

By (6),(7), and (35) Thus

for all sufficiently small and

. Now let

be a

sufficiently small number. By (49) and (50) we obtain

(40)

(41)

To bound , we set

in (17). To bound , we set

in (18). To bound , we set

in (19). To bound , we set

in (20). Using (40) we thus obtain

(42) (43) (44)

By selecting sufficiently large and recalling that

we

see that the right-hand side of the last inequality, and thus the

left hand-side as well, approach as

. Combining this

result with (22) and (38) we thus obtain

(45)

Combining (41)–(45) and collecting terms we conclude that

(46)

By applying first the second inequality in (7), then the second

inequality in (8), and finally the inequalities

and

to (46), we obtain

Now, both sums on the right-hand side approach as

(each term in the second sum is dominated by a negative

exponential in ). This shows that

as

as claimed.

Finally, note that since

is defined as the maximum

of a continuous function (

and are continuous in

and , as was noted in [11]) over a polyhedral

domain, then

is a continuous function. For

and

sufficiently small

Now using (5) and the fact that proceed to obtain

for

we can

Thus, by (39)

The number , which we defined as the smallest positive root of , must obviously exist, since otherwise by the result that we just proved, we would be able to correct arbitrary error patterns with an arbitrary number of errors.
It is easy to see that the same proof also holds if we replace (47) the definition (5) of a possibly bad event by

Note that if is sufficiently small then since

, the term

is negative and dominates the term

,

thus

for some fixed

sufficiently small (in fact, is set as a func-

tion of ). Thus, under the conditions of Theorem 1, almost all (48) codes in the ensemble will, in fact, correct all combinations of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

522

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2008

errors or less in

iterations (since in each iter-

ation the fraction of errors reduces by at least

). By [3,

Remark 13], the computational complexity is

(since at

each iteration, we need to examine for possible flipping only

variables connected to unsatisfied parity checks).

For a given block length, , we can use (22), (23), (25), and

(33) to obtain an upper bound on

. Instead of (25), a

better bound on can be obtained by applying (79) and (81) to

(24).

Example 1: Consider the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes. By calculating the smallest positive root of

and

using Theorem 1, we obtained that for a sufficiently large block

length, almost all codes in the ensemble can correct an arbi-

trary error pattern with an error rate of

or less

using the flipping algorithm. As a comparison, using the ex-

pander graph arguments in [3, Theorems 10 and 11], and the

result in [4, Lemma 1] and its modification in [12, Theorem

8.6 ] on the expansion capabilities of random graphs, we ob-

tained that almost all codes in the ensemble can correct an arbi-

trary error pattern with an error rate of

or less. In

Lemma 4 in Appendix II we obtain an improved result on the

expansion capabilities of random graphs, that combined with

the above mentioned expander graph arguments [3] yields that

almost all codes in the ensemble can correct an arbitrary error

pattern with an error rate of

or less. Thus, our

new Theorem 1 provides a significant improvement compared

to expander graph arguments. As was noted above, the proof of

Theorem 1 can also be used to obtain finite-length bounds. For

a block length of

, a fraction of at least

of the codes in the ensemble can correct an arbitrary pattern of

at most 13 errors. A fraction of at least

of the codes can

correct 17 worst case errors or less.

unsatisfied parity-check neighbors is set to the channel

observation corresponding to this variable. Therefore, in the

end of the first iteration, the set of bad variable nodes is given

by

.

Definition 2: Given and , the -tuple of sets

defined above (e.g., is the set of variables

that remained bad after the iteration), with cardinalities that are

given in (1)–(4) and with

connections between and ,

is said to be a

tuple.

In addition, let

denote the probability that after

the first iteration there are at least errors, i.e.,

(51)

Then, similar to (22)

such that (51) holds (52)

where the summation is over and
(6)–(8) and
In addition, and are given by

integer values of that satisfy (51),
(53)

(54)

(55)

Example 2: Consider the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes. By calculating the smallest positive root of

and

using Theorem 1, we obtained that for a sufficiently large block

length, almost all codes in the ensemble can correct an arbitrary

error pattern with an error rate of

or less using the flip-

ping algorithm.

When we consider random errors, these results can be improved as follows. Suppose that we start with random channel errors. The key idea is that when we start the iterations, the set with these errors is located in a random position and not in a worst case position. We also modify Algorithm 1 in the first iteration, such that a variable node with exactly

and is given in (29). By the saddle point inequality (56)
where is defined in (17) and is defined by
Similarly, is upper-bounded in (31). Combining (54)–(56), (31), and (79)–(82) we obtain the
bounds at the bottom of the page. These bounds assume that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ON THE ERROR CORRECTION OF REGULAR LDPC CODES USING THE FLIPPING ALGORITHM

523

and

. Similar bounds

can be written when some of these values are zeros (we also

assume

and

since

and

are typically small). The last bound can be combined with (52)

to obtain an upper bound on

.

This bound on

can be combined with our upper

bound on

above as follows. We know that a fraction

of

of the codes in the -regular ensemble are

-good in the sense that they can correct any pattern of

errors or less, i.e., if is a randomly chosen code (graph) from

the ensemble then

is -good code

(57)

Definition 3: The -tuple of sets

defined above, with cardinalities that are

given in (1)–(4) and with

connections between and ,

is said to be a

tuple.

The polynomials

and

are still defined by (10)–(15). However, in the present

case

and

.

The parameters

and satisfy the following

relations:

(59) (60)

In addition, suppose that we start with errors, and denote

by the number of errors after the first iteration. Then

(61)

and

(58)

(62)

Now, suppose that we know that the code that we have chosen We also define is -good where is an integer. Then

is -good code and is -good code

(63)

Setting will correct

, we conclude that an -good code where random errors with probability greater than

and are defined by

(64)

Example 3: For a block length of

, a frac-

(65)

tion of at least

of the codes in the

code ensemble can correct an arbitrary single error. For a given

(66)

code, we can enumerate over all sets in Fig. 1 in order to

(67)

examine whether there exists a single error that cannot be corrected. By repeatedly picking codes at random from this en- (note that and are defined as in (19)–(20)). semble and checking whether they are good or not, eventually The following theorem considers the events

we will obtain a code that can correct any single error. Since , then a code that can correct any pat-

(68)

tern of one error can correct 10 random errors with probability and

greater than

. Since

,

then a code that can correct any pattern of one error can correct

and

(69)

20 random errors with probability greater than

.

III. THE ERROR CORRECTION OF

-REGULAR CODES

In this section, we extend the results of the previous section to the case where the left degree is four, thus showing that almost all codes in the regular LDPC code ensemble with left degree at least four can correct a linear number of worst case errors. This case is important, since under a fixed-rate constraint (which implies some fixed ratio of the left and right degrees), the performance of regular LDPC codes under iterative decoding typically improves when the right and left degrees decrease [13]. Note that under maximum-likelihood decoding, the opposite is true.
We redefine some of the objects that were defined earlier. We start by redefining .

for

that satisfy

(70)

Theorem 2: Consider the ensemble of -regular LDPC

codes with

and block length . Let

be the

smallest positive root (we show that such root does exist) of the

function

which is defined by

(71)

where this maximization is over values of

and

that satisfy (68) and (59)–(62). We define

sim-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

524

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2008

ilarly, with the function

which is defined as in (71) but that satisfies

. If is sufficiently large, then

now the maximization is subject to (69) and (59)–(62). Finally, except for a negligible fraction of codes, there are no

we define

and -tuple of sets

(72)

where the supremum is computed over (70). For any

,

if is sufficiently large, then except for a negligible fraction of

codes, almost all codes in the ensemble will satisfy the following

for all combinations of

errors or less in any transmitted

codeword. Algorithm 1 will correct all the errors, for almost all

sequences of random bits that the algorithm uses to determine

whether in the end of each iteration an erased bit should be set

to or .

As in Theorem 1 (see the note after the end of the proof),

the typical number of iterations that are required to correct all

the errors is

and the total computational complexity

is

. Unlike Theorem 1, Theorem 2 does not assert success

for any sequence of random bits that the algorithm uses to deter-

mine the state ( or ) of bits that are erased in the end of the iter-

ation. However, it asserts success for almost all these sequences

(i.e., asymptotically success is guaranteed with probability that

approaches one). Thus, for a code drawn at random from the

-regular LDPC code ensemble with

, we can

assert the following (similar to [9] that made this assertion for

). Once some algorithm (e.g., belief propagation) has

been used to reduce the bit-error rate under some threshold, we

can switch to the flipping algorithm and correct all the remaining

errors with probability that approaches one asymptotically.

In the proof of Theorem 2, we consider two phases in the

operation of the algorithm. In the first one, the number of errors

is larger than

(any

can be used here). In this phase,

we prove that, with high probability, in

consecutive

iterations the algorithm will correct at least some fixed fraction

of the errors in each iteration. In the second phase, the number

of errors is less than

(here

needs to be sufficiently

small), and as shown, for almost all codes, in each iteration the

number of errors cannot increase, and with probability at least

it decreases, until all the errors have been corrected.

To formally prove Theorem 2 we need the following lemmas.

Lemma 1: Consider the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes with

and block length . Let

be de-

fined in Theorem 2, and let be some positive number that sat-

isfies

. If is sufficiently large, then except for

a negligible fraction of codes, there are no

and -tuple

of sets

such that (69) holds.

We prove Lemma 2 in Appendix III.

The last lemma considers the case where we are interested

in

for some fixed

which is chosen

sufficiently small, and in the two events

(73) and
and (74)

Lemma 3: Consider the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes with

and block length . Let

be some fixed

number which is chosen sufficiently small. If is sufficiently

large, then except for a negligible fraction of codes, there are no

and -tuple of sets

such that either (73) or (74) hold.
We prove Lemma 3 in Appendix III. We are now ready to prove Theorem 2.
Proof of Theorem 2: Consider any set of parameters that satisfy (70). Define

Consider some that satisfies

and some

where

is sufficiently small, cor-

responding to the requirement in Lemma 3. Suppose that there

are errors at the beginning of some iteration and errors

at the end of this iteration, where

and where

is the number of erased variables that

were set to the wrong value by Algorithm 1, out of

erased variables. Then by Lemmas 1 and 2 we know that for

almost all codes and all

, either

(75)

such that (68) holds.

or

We prove Lemma 1 in Appendix III. The proof technique is

similar to that of Theorem 1.

and

(76)

Lemma 2: Consider the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes with

and block length . Let

Define the set of typical codes, , as the set of codes that

be defined in Theorem 2, and let be some positive number satisfy either (75) or (76) for all

. By

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ON THE ERROR CORRECTION OF REGULAR LDPC CODES USING THE FLIPPING ALGORITHM

525

Lemmas 1 and 2, if is a code (graph) that is drawn at random (recall that from the ensemble then

is an integer). On the other hand, if

as But if (76) holds then

then either

or

, so that

with

probability at least .

To conclude the proof, we let

be the maximizing

values in (72) (or, if maximizing

do not exist, they are

set so that the resulting is an arbitrarily close approximation

to in (72)).

Hence (recall that is the set of bad variables at the beginning of the iteration)

(77)

for some

which is a function of

and . The

last transition is due to the facts that

and (recalling (70))

.

Now consider

iterations of Algorithm 1 where

for some

. We start with

errors. We have shown (77), for a typical code (i.e., for almost

all codes in the ensemble), that as long as the number of errors

is greater than

, after each iteration the number of

errors will decrease by a factor of at least

with proba-

bility at least

. Hence, by the union bound, after

iterations, the number of errors will decrease by a factor of at

least

with probability at least

Note: In fact, it can be seen that the maximal value of

in Lemma 1 is obtained for as large as possible.

Hence, given and we select

in order to

maximize (72).

When the left degree is three, it is not true any longer that

the bit flipping algorithm can asymptotically correct a linear

number of worst case errors in almost all codes in the ensemble.

To see that, we first use techniques similar to those presented

e.g., in [14, Proof of Lemma 9] to show that a nonnegligible

fraction of the codes in the ensemble will have at least one cycle

of size two (i.e., two parallel edges between some pair of vari-

able and parity-check nodes) as follows. Let

be a

-tuple of integers, where and represent left sockets in

the graph that are associated with the same variable node, and

and represent right sockets in the graph that are associ-

ated with the same parity-check node. Thus,

rep-

resents a cycle of size two. Let

be a binary

random variable such that

if and only if the

cycle

is present in the graph (i.e., is connected

to and is connected to ). The total number of cycles in

the graph is

(the factor ac-

counts for the fact that each cycle is counted twice, in the two

possible directions). The total number of possible valid -tu-

ples is

, and

for any valid -tuple (

is the proba-

bility to match to and then

is the probability

to match to ). Thus

as

. Repeating the calculation for

shown that

it can be

as

for any

. Setting

we con-

clude that eventually we will reach fewer than

errors.

Now Lemma 3 shows that as soon as this occurs the number

of errors will eventually decrease monotonically to zero (for al-

most all codes in the ensemble). This assertion can be verified as as

(the first term is contributed by two -tuples,

follows. On the one hand, at the end of the iteration there cannot

and

with different variable nodes and

be more errors than in the beginning since

different check nodes. The second term is contributed by two

cycles which are identical up to the possibility that they may

be in reversed order). Thus, the variance of , denoted by ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

526

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2008

satisfies that

as

, so We use the following notation. For nonnegative integers

. Now by Chebyshev’s inequality we have

such that

coefficients as follows:

we define the multinomial

(78)

Thus, in the standard ensemble, asymptotically, a nonnegligible

fraction of the codes will have at least one pair of parallel edges.

Suppose then, that the bad set consists of a single variable node,

which is connected by two parallel edges to some parity-check

node. The bit flipping algorithm will not be able to correct this

error since two out of the three edges that are connected to

the bad variable are connected to a satisfied parity-check node.

Thus, when the left degree is three, the flipping algorithm will

not be able to correct even a single worst case error in a nonneg-

ligible fraction of the codes. In fact, this observation for

was recently extended in [15]. Using the concept of a trapping

set [16], it was shown in [15] that for any

and suf-

ficiently large, no code in the -regular ensemble can cor-

rect all error patterns with at most errors when using ei-

ther the Gallager A (hard decoding) [1] or bit flipping decoding

algorithms.

For

such that

we define

and

and

,

for

, such that

.

We use Stirling’s formula to derive the first pair of upper and

lower bounds. Stirling’s formula asserts that for

where

. Hence

IV. CONCLUSION

We showed that the simple iterative bit flipping algorithm can

correct a linear number of worst case errors in almost all codes

of the -regular LDPC code ensemble with

. For the

case where , this fact was known before, but we obtained

an improvement of several orders of magnitude in the fraction

of errors that can be corrected. The improvement compared to

previous analysis techniques [2], [3] was realized by considering simultaneously the set of variables that are bad both before where

and after the iteration, and those that are good before and bad

after the iteration (i.e., analyzing simultaneously the two cor-

responding graphical events). We have also shown that when

we consider random errors, we can obtain better bounds for the and where

. Hence

first iteration compared to the other iterations. It is interesting

to note that there is some similarity between the analysis of the

error correction of LDPC codes and that of the Hopfield asso-

ciate memory (see [17] and references therein).

(79)

In the past, we have shown that expander graph arguments can

be extended to message passing algorithms [4]. One of the possi- where

bilities for further research is the extension of the results in this

paper to message passing algorithms, e.g., to Gallager’s hard

decoding algorithm [1], or to more general quantized message

passing algorithms [10]. Similarly, it would be interesting to ex-

(80)

tend the results to the case where the channel output is quantized

to more than one bit as in the bit flipping algorithm case. These

extensions have the potential to further improve the bounds on is the entropy function, and

the fraction of errors that can be corrected.

(81)

APPENDIX I SOME BOUNDS ON MULTINOMIAL COEFFICIENTS

In particular, we obtain

In this appendix, we provide some known bounds on the multinomial coefficients.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(82)

BURSHTEIN: ON THE ERROR CORRECTION OF REGULAR LDPC CODES USING THE FLIPPING ALGORITHM

527

We derive additional bounds on the multinomial coefficients by using the saddle-point inequality (see, e.g., [11] and references therein) as follows:
(83)

an upper bound on the value of such that asymptotically al-

most all codes in the -regular ensemble are

-ex-

panders for some given value of [12, Theorem 8.6]. In this

appendix, we provide another upper bound on the value of

using asymptotic enumeration techniques. In various examples

that we examined, the new bound on was much better (higher)

than the previous one (e.g., for the

ensemble, the bound

in [12, Theorem 8.6] asserts that an expansion of

is

achieved asymptotically whenever

, while

the new bound asserts

).

Setting

Lemma 4: Consider the length and let

-regular ensemble with block

(87) (84)
where

yields

(85)

In fact, it can be verified that (84) yields the minimum in (83)

(setting

, the logarithm of the function that needs to be

minimized in (83) is a log-sum-exp function which is concave in

. Setting the derivative of this function to zero yields

(84)).

Setting

in (83) we obtain another bound on the multi-

nomial coefficients

(88)

Suppose that

(i.e.,

)

(89)

and that is sufficiently large. Then almost all codes in the

ensemble are

-expanders. Furthermore, when ,

(89) can be satisfied for some

and

.

Proof: Let

denote the probability that a random

code (graph) in the ensemble is not a

-expander. By

the union bound

(90) (86)

where denotes a binary

random variable, such that

Even though (85) is tighter than (86), the later bound is conve-

if the fixed set of variables

in a

nient to use for small values of

and .

random graph in the ensemble satisfies

. Oth-

erwise

. The summation in (90) is over integer values

of in the specified domain. Now,

can be ex-

APPENDIX II THE EXPANSION OF RANDOM GRAPHS
We define an expander graph as follows [3].

pressed using generating functions as follows. The total number

of possibilities to allocate parity-check sockets to the

variable sockets of is

. The total number of possibili-

ties to allocate parity-check sockets to the variable sockets

Definition 4: We say that a

-regular bipartite Tanner of such that

is given by

graph is a

-expander if for all sets of variable nodes ,

such that

, the set of neighbors of denoted by

satisfies

. Sipser and Spielman [3] proved that

a

-expander with

that uses Algorithm 1 can

correct an arbitrary pattern of

errors or less in any

transmitted codeword where

. Combining this result

with the fact that almost all codes in the -regular ensemble

where

have an expansion larger than , it was con-

cluded in [3] that almost all codes in the -regular ensemble

with

can correct an arbitrary pattern of

errors or less with

. In [4, Lemma 1], we where

denotes the coefficient of in the poly-

gave a proof of the above mentioned expansion property of the nomial

. In the expression above, counts the number of

-regular ensemble. This proof can also be used to provide neighboring parity-check sockets, and counts the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

528

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2008

neighboring parity-check nodes. Each parity-check node is either not a neighbor of , or if it is, then there are different ways how it can contribute neighboring sockets. The summation is over integer values of in the specified domain. Hence

codes in the ensemble will be

-expanders with prob-

ability that approaches one as

.

Finally, note that when

and

for

sufficiently small, the condition

holds. Thus, there

exists some

and

such that (89) holds.

By using first the saddle-point inequality (see, e.g., [11]) and then (82)

APPENDIX III PROOFS FOR SECTION III
Proof of Lemma 1: The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 1. By the union bound

for some constant , where

(91)

where

such that (68) holds

(96)

(92)

It can be verified that the objective function in (92) is a log-

sum-exp function in defined by

and

, which

is convex. Setting its derivative with respect to to zero yields

(93)

Substituting (93) into (92) and rearranging terms shows that

is also given in (88).

Since we are only interested in

then

and

in (93) is positive. In addition, it can be verified, by upper-

bounding the term that needs to be minimized in (88) by

,

that for sufficiently small, (88) implies

(94)

where (97)

The term is the number of ways to partition the set of vari-

able nodes into sets of cardinalities

and

, and to partition the set of

parity-check nodes into sets of cardinalities

and

, and is given by

The term is the number of possible graphs in which a given partition is a tuple, i.e.,

Now, combining (90) and (91) yields

where

is defined in (87). Let

small number. Then

be a sufficiently

The summation in (96) is over integer values of

. The summation in (97) is over integer values of

and

that satisfy

(68) and (59)–(62).

The bounds (59)–(62) imply that

(98)

(95) and similarly
(99) Using (94) and the definition (87) yields
Hence

It follows that for any

and sufficiently

small,

. Using the same arguments that we used in

Theorem 1 (starting from (47)) we also obtain that the first sum

(100)

in (95) approaches zero as

.

Now, suppose that for some given

for

where the maximization is over

. Then

as

. That is, almost all

and

that satisfy (59)–(62) and (68).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ON THE ERROR CORRECTION OF REGULAR LDPC CODES USING THE FLIPPING ALGORITHM

Now, can be bounded either using (85) in Appendix I, yielding

Combining (100), (102), and (105) yields

(101) where or using (86), yielding the following looser bound, that will be more convenient to use for small values of :

(102) We now turn to the other term . As in the Proof of Theorem 1

(103)

where is the number of ways to choose

and

left sockets in and , respectively, that connect to

. Similarly, is the number of ways to choose

and

right sockets in and , respectively, that connect

to .

Now, and can be expressed using generating functions

as follows:

By (59)–(60) and (98)–(99) Thus, if is sufficiently small, then

529
(106)
(107)

and is given as in (29) By the saddle-point inequality

(108)

To bound , we set

in (64). To bound , we set

in (65). To bound , we set

in (66) (i.e., in (19)). To

bound , we set

in (67) (i.e., in (20)). Using (107) we

thus obtain

(109) (110) (111)
(112)

(104) Combining (108)–(112) and collecting terms we conclude that

where and are defined in (64)–(65). To bound we use (31). By (103), (104), (31), (82), and (60)
we obtain

(105)

(113)

Combining (100), (101), and (105) yields where

where in the second inequality we used the second inequality in

(60), and in the third inequality we used the second inequality

in (61). In the last equality, we set

and

.

Combining (113) and (68) we obtain

(114)

We now proceed exactly as in the end of the proof of Theorem 1

and

is defined in (63).

(starting from (47)) and obtain the desired result.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

530

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2008

Proof of Lemma 2: The proof is identical to the proof of this proof for each of the events (73) and (74) separately, with the

Lemma 1, except that instead of (68) we consider (69). The con- union bound, we conclude that in this case too,

clusion (113) is still valid. Combining (113) and (69) we obtain as

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We now proceed exactly as in the end of the proof of Theorem 1 (starting from (47)) and obtain the desired result.
Proof of Lemma 3: First consider the event (73). In this case

The author would like to thank the Associate Editor, Dr. Tom Richardson, for pointing out an inaccuracy in one of the definitions in a previous version of the paper, and for his other helpful comments. He would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments that improved the presentation of the paper.
REFERENCES

where

such that (73) holds (115)

We continue along the proof of Lemma 1, and conclude that (113) is still valid. Combining (113) and (73) we obtain

Combining this with (115) and (106) yields

(116)

as

provided that we set sufficiently small.

Now consider the event (74), and define

similar

to (115), except that now (74) replaces (73). Thus

and the required result for the event (74) follows similarly to

(116) (note that

and since is an integer,

).

Finally, we consider both events, (73) and (74), and define

similar to (115), except that now we require that

either (73) or (74) hold. Then combining our previous results in

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity for Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28, May 1976.
[3] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[4] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for message passing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 782–790, Feb. 2001.
[5] M. J. Wainwright, J. Feldman, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[6] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2004), Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 69.
[7] C. Daskalakis, A. G. Dimakis, R. M. Karp, and M. J. Wainwright, “Probabilistic analysis of linear programming decoding,” in Proc. 18th Annu. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, New Orleans, LA, Jan. 2007, pp. 385–394.
[8] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “An analysis of the block error probability performance of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3834–3855, Nov. 2005.
[9] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Speilman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[11] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115–1131, Jun. 2004.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, preliminary version available at http:// lthcwww.epfl.ch/mct/index.php.
[13] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Bounds on the performance of belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 112–122, Jan. 2002.
[14] D. Burshtein, M. Krivelevich, S. Litsyn, and G. Miller, “Upper bounds on the rate of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 2437–2449, Sep. 2002.
[15] S. K. Chilappagari and B. Vasic´, “Error correction capability of column-weight-three LDPC codes,” submitted for publication, arXiv:0710.3427v1.
[16] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[17] D. Burshtein, “Nondirect convergence radius and number of iterations of the hopfield associative memory,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 838–847, May 1994.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:41:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

