This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

Decoding on Graphs: LDPC-Coded MISO Systems and Belief Propagation

Amir H. Djahanshahi, Paul H. Siegel, and Larry B. Milstein
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of California, San Diego
Email: (adjahans, psiegel, and lmilstein)@ucsd.edu

AbstractβÄî This paper proposes a new approach for decoding LDPC codes over MISO channels. Since in an nT Ο½ 1 MISO system with a modulation of alphabet size 2M, nT transmitted symbols are combined and produce one received symbol at the receiver, we propose considering the LDPC-coded MISO system as an LDPC code over 2MnT -ary alphabet. Consequently, we propose a modified Tanner graph to introduce belief propagation for decoding MISO-LDPC systems. As a result, the MISO symbol detection and binary LDPC decoding steps are merged into a single message passing decoding. We also propose an efficient method that significantly reduces the complexity of belief propagation decoding in MISO-LDPC systems. Furthermore, we show that our proposed decoder outperforms the conventional decoder for short length LDPC codes in unknown channel scenarios.
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to the increasing demand for multimedia data transmission in wireless mobile systems, there is an evident need for increasing the spectral efficiency of cellular systems. With their high spectral efficiency, MISO (multiple-input singleoutput) systems appear to be a crucial part of future cellular systems. Moreover, spatial diversity obtained by multiple transmit antennas is often indispensable for mitigation of the effects of the fading in wireless channels [1].
LDPC (low-density parity-check) codes are known for their superb error correction performance [2], [3]. With their near capacity performance [4], LDPC codes are among the most promising forward error correction schemes for wireless systems.
In this research, we propose a new scheme for joint detection and decoding of LDPC-coded MISO systems. Joint detection and decoding in MIMO-LDPC1 systems, using a turbo architecture, has been studied in several papers (such as [5], [6]). They considered the MIMO symbol detector as the first decoder component of the turbo architecture and the LDPC decoder as the second decoder component. We consider this scheme as a reference for our comparisons and refer to it as the turbo-type receiver.
For the purpose of improving performance, we propose a new scheme for joint detection and decoding, which is
Acknowledgement: This research was partially supported by the Center for Wireless Communications at UCSD, and by the U.C. Discovery program.
1Note that MISO-LDPC is a special case of MIMO-LDPC.

based on considering the MISO-LDPC system as a 2MnT ary LDPC code, an LDPC code over 2MnT -ary alphabet. We treat the received bits as a single symbol, then consider the whole system as a 2MnT -ary LDPC code. We also introduce a modified Tanner graph that represents the MISO-LDPC system. It will be shown that BP (belief propagation) over the modified graph outperforms the traditional scheme in short length codes.
Considering the fact that straightforward implementation of BP (over the modified graph) is computationally intensive, we also propose a novel edge-based message passing (EBMP) algorithm that considerably reduces the decoding complexity.
In most practical scenarios, channel state information is not available at the receiver. Therefore, we also explore the unknown channel scenario. In particular, we examine the EM algorithm as a technique to iteratively estimate the channel and data. It will be shown that, in this case, the proposed scheme outperforms the existing scheme for short length codes.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II outlines the system model. In Section III a three-layer Tanner graph is introduced to exploit the BP algorithm for decoding in turbo-type receivers. To eliminate the positive feedback due to length-4 loops in the three-layer Tanner graphs, Section IV proposes a novel graph-based representation and a BP algorithm for decoding MISO-LDPC systems. Section V establishes a low-complexity implementation of the BP decoding over the modified graphs. Performance analysis and numerical comparisons are presented in Sections VI and VII, and Section VIII concludes the paper.

II. PROBLEM FORMULATION A. System Model
We consider the standard MISO-LDPC system model, i.e.,

y(k) = Es C(k)x(k) + n(k),

(1)

nT

where nT is the number of transmit antennas and Es represents the transmitted energy. Here, y(k) is the received symbol, C(k) is the 1 Ο½ nT channel vector at the kth time instant, n(k) is a sample of Gaussian noise with zero mean and variance ΈΘn, and x(k) is an nT Ο½ 1 vector of transmitted symbols at the

94 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ1. D52ow5-n3lo5a1d1e/d0o8n/$J2u5ne.0204,¬©2022060a8t 0IE4:E49E:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

kth time instant, that contains nT consecutive symbols of the LDPC codeword, i.e.,

Functional Nodes

Variable Nodes

Permutation

Check Nodes

x(k) = [x1(k) x(2k) . . . x(nkT)]T .

(2)

In (2), x(jk) (for 1 βâΛ j βâΛ nT) is a member of the alphabet X, and corresponds to M consecutive LDPC bits, i.e.,

x(jk) = F x(kβà£1)MnT+( jβà£1)M+1, . . . , x(kβà£1)MnT+ jM , (3)

where xl (for 1 βâΛ l βâΛ N) is the lth bit of an (N, K) LDPC codeword, and F represents the modulation.
We consider a quasi-static Rayleigh flat fading channel model, where the channel remains constant during each fading block and changes independently from block to block (the block length is equal to the coherence time of the channel). Two different cases are considered for the channel: channel known at the receiver and channel unknown at the receiver.
1) Channel Known at the Receiver: Data detection when the channel is known at the receiver is straightforward. Since the channel is known, we can calculate the apriori probabilities and initialize the BP algorithm.
2) Channel Unknown at the Receiver: When the channel is not known at the receiver, it should first be estimated before data detection can take place. This is the idea behind pilot symbol assisted modulation. A set of pilot symbols, p, is transmitted at the beginning of each block, the receiver estimates the channel based on the known pilot symbols, and then it decodes the received codeword using the estimated channel.
To unify the equations in the unknown channel case, (similar to [7]) we define:

Fig. 1. A three-layer Tanner graph

B. EM Algorithm

After some manipulations, the EM update equations can be written as follows (similar to [5]):

Cil = Yl UlH Rβà£l 1,

(6)

where Cil is the ith estimation of Cl. Here Rl = EXl|Cil,Yl Xl XlH and Ul = EXl|Cil,Yl [Xl ]. Note that Rl and Ul are computed using the soft output of the LDPC decoder.
The EM algorithm always converges, but not necessarily to the global maximum. To avoid the possibility of converging to a local maximum, the initial conditions should be chosen with care to ensure that the global maximum is reached. Hence we use the output of the PSAM (Pilot Symbol Assisted Modulation) estimator to estimate the channel.

Xl = [p

x(lnD+1) . . . x((l+1)nD)]

Yl = [y(pl) y(lnD+1) . . . y((l+1)nD)]

(4)

Nl = [n(pl) n(lnD+1) . . . n((l+1)nD)],

where p is an nT Ο½ nP matrix containing the pilot symbols and Xl is the nT Ο½ (nP + nD) matrix of transmitted (pilot and data) symbols at the lth block (each block contains nP + nD MISO symbols). Yl and Nl are 1 Ο½ (nP + nD) vectors of received symbols and noise samples at the lth block, respectively. Furthermore, y(pl) and n(pl) are 1 Ο½ nP vectors containing
the received signals due to the pilot symbols and Gaussian noise samples at the first nP time instants of the lth block,
respectively. One can easily show that

Yl =

Es nT

Cl

Xl

+

Nl

,

(5)

where Cl is the 1 Ο½ nT channel vector at the lth block. It has been shown that a turbo-EM estimator with the
ability to use the soft output of the decoder outperforms the conventional MMSE-based channel estimator [8], [9]. So, we will use the EM algorithm for joint estimation and detection in the unknown channel case.

III. GRAPH BASED REPRESENTATION OF TURBO-TYPE RECEIVER
To exploit message passing algorithms for decoding in βÄ€turbo typeβÄù receivers, (similar to [10]) we construct a threelayer Tanner graph (see Fig. 1), where the second and third layers are, respectively, variable and check nodes of the LDPC code. The first layer consists of some βÄ€generalized nodesβÄù which we call functional nodes and represent by triangles in the Tanner graph. Functional nodes represent the MISO symbol detectors in the turbo-type receiver. Each functional node is connected to MnT consecutive LDPC variable nodes from the second layer of the graph.
It can be shown that decoding with turbo-type receiver, is formally identical to BP over a three-layer Tanner graph (see [11], [12] for the proof). Furthermore one can easily see that appending the functional nodes to the bipartite graph of the LDPC code (with high probability) introduces a number of length-4 loops. Thus, BP over the three-layer Tanner graph (or turbo-type receiver) would suffer from positive feedback. To address this problem, a modified Tanner graph would be introduced to represent MISO-LDPC systems. It can be shown that BP over the modified graph eliminates the length-4 loops problem [11], [12].

95
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:49:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

IV. MODIFIED TANNER GRAPHS

Similar to binary LDPC codes, a modified parity check matrix and a Tanner graph can be defined for 2MnT -ary

LDPC codes. As in the binary LDPC graph, each column

of the modified parity check matrix represents a modified variable node. Since variable nodes in a 2MnT -ary LDPC

code correspond to MnT consecutive variable nodes in the original graph, each column of the modified parity check

matrix represents MnT consecutive columns of the original parity check matrix. To derive the modified parity check

matrix, we consider each MnT consecutive components in each row of the original parity check matrix as a binary word of length MnT, then calculate the equivalent 2MnT -ary value to determine the corresponding component in the modified

matrix.

The modified parity check matrix can be used to define the

modified Tanner graph. Each Tanner graph has three parts:

variable nodes, check nodes, and the edges connecting the

variable nodes to the check nodes. In order to derive the

modified Tanner graph, we define how each of the three above

mentioned parts are affected.

Variable nodes in the modified Tanner graph correspond to

MnT consecutive variable nodes in the original Tanner graph,

hence the number of variable nodes is

1 MnT

times the number

of the variable nodes in the original graph.

Given that each check node represents one constraint in the

LDPC code, the number of check nodes is not affected by

modifying the graph. However, check nodes in the modified graph are connected to 2MnT -ary variable nodes instead of

binary variable nodes.

If any of the MnT binary constituent variable nodes of a 2MnT -ary modified variable node are connected to a check

node (in the original graph), there would be an edge connecting the 2MnT -ary variable node to the corresponding modified

check node (in the modified graph).

In the modified Tanner graph, the edges are not all identical.

To differentiate the edges in the modified Tanner graph, we

label them with the corresponding component in the modified

parity check matrix. Example 1 sheds light on the procedure

of deriving the modified parity check matrix and Tanner graph.

Example 1: Deriving the modified parity check matrix and

Tanner graph from the binary parity check matrix when

MnT = 2:

Consider the following binary parity check matrix:

οΘΪ

οΘΕ

10011010

H

=

οΘ§οΘ≠οΘ§

1 0

1 0

0 1

0 0

0 1

1 0

0 0

0 1

οΘΖοΘΖοΘΗ .

(7)

00110100

To derive the modified parity check matrix (when MnT = 2), we combine every two consecutive columns in the original parity check matrix and consider them as a column in the modified parity check matrix. For example, the first two columns of the first row of the binary parity check matrix are 10, so there should be a value of 2 in the first row and first column of the modified parity check matrix.

VΥÜ1 { (v1, v2 ) VΥÜ2 { (v3, v4 ) VΥÜ3 { (v5, v6 ) VΥÜ4 { (v7, v8 )

2
3
1 32 21
2 1
2 1

(a)

v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7 v8

CΥÜ1 { c1 CΥÜ2 { c2 CΥÜ3 { c3 CΥÜ4 { c4
c1 c2 c3 c4

(b)
Fig. 2. (a) The modified Tanner graph of matrix HΥÜ (8), (b) The binary Tanner graph corresponding to H (7).

Following the same procedure, the rest of the quaternary

parity check matrix can be obtained.

οΘΪ

οΘΕ

2122

HΥÜ

=

οΘ§οΘ§οΘ≠

3 0

0 2

1 2

0 1

οΘΖοΘΖοΘΗ .

(8)

0310

Fig. 2.(a) represents the modified Tanner graph corresponding to HΥÜ . Each quaternary variable node in this graph represents

two consecutive variable nodes in the original Tanner graph. For example, VΥÜ1 corresponds to v1 and v2 in the original
binary graph (Fig. 2.(b)).

Check nodes in the modified graph represent the same

constraints as in the orginal graph. To determine the constraint

imposed by a check node, we write the corresponding values

for the variable nodes and edges as a binary vector of length

two, then we use the inner product and summation over GF(2) to determine the constraint. For example, CΥÜ1 implies

< 2, x(1) > + < 1, x(2) > + < 2, x(3) > + < 2, x(4) >= 0 modulo 2,

(9)

where < ., . > represents the inner-product operator over GF(2). Equation (9) can be rewritten as

[1 0].

x1 x2

+ [0 1].

x3 x4

[1 0].

x7 x8

=0

Or, equivalently,

+ [1 0].

x5 x6

modulo 2,

+ (10)

x1 + x4 + x5 + x7 = 0 modulo 2,

(11)

which is the same as the constraint imposed by the first row of H, (7).

96
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:49:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

A. BP over Modified Tanner Graphs

BP over modified Tanner graphs is similar to BP over binary

graphs. The only difference is that in the modified graph nodes compute the probability of 2MnT possible cases instead of just

one log-likelihood ratio (LLR) value. To be more specific, in a

modified Tanner graph, each node at each iteration computes 2MnT messages regarding the probability of each possible case.

Similar to [13], we define the following parameters which

we will use in BP: Definition 1: fs(k) denotes the conditional probability that
the kth modified variable node is s βàà {0, 1}MnT , given y(k). Definition 2: q(snm) denotes the message sent from the nth
modified variable node to the mth modified check node, and
represents an estimate of the probability that the nth modified

variable node is s. Definition 3: r(smn) denotes the message sent from the mth
modified check node to the nth modified variable node, and represents an estimate of the probability that the nth modified

variable node is s.

Definition 4: N(m) denotes the subset of the modified variable nodes participating in the mth check equation.

Definition 5: M(n) denotes the subset of the check nodes

depending on the nth modified variable node.

Definition 6: Sm denotes the mth check-node local-

codewords, where mth check-node local-codewords, in a mod-

ified (
N MnT

N MnT

,

K MnT

) LDPC code, are the 2MnT -ary length-

vectors that satisfy the mth check equation.

Definition 7: Sms n denotes the subset of the mth check-node

local-codewords, whose nth element is s.

The derivation of the BP equations over modified Tanner

graphs is similar to the derivation of the BP equations of LDPC

codes over GF(Q) [13], and due to the lack of space is omitted

(see [11], [12] for details).

B. Initialization
Similar to LDPC codes over GF(Q) [13], the probability of each possible case given the received codeword is used to initialize the BP algorithm. It can be shown that [11], [12]

fs(k)

=

βàöΈ±(k) eβà£ 2œÄ ΈΘn

(y(k)βà£C(k)G(s))βà½ΈΘβà£n 1(y(k)βà£C(k)G(s))

,

(12)

where

Έ±(k)

is

chosen

to

ensure

βàës

f

(k) s

=

1,

βà½

is

the

complex

conjugate operator, and G(s), an nT Ο½ 1 vector, is given by

G(s) = [F (s1, . . . , sM) . . . F (sM(nTβà£1)+1, . . . , sMnT )]T,

where sl (for 1 βâΛ l βâΛ MnT) is the lth element of vector s βàà {0, 1}MnT .

C. Variable-to-Check Node Messages
The variable-to-check message, qs(nm), for BP can be computed using [11], [12]:

βàè qs(nm) = Έ≤(nm) fs(n)

rs( jn),

(13)

jβààM(n)\m

where Έ≤(nm) is a normalization factor chosen to ensure that βàës qs(nm) = 1.
Tentative decoding for the nth bit can be done as follows:

xΥÜl = arg max

βàë

βàè (
fs

l MnT

)

( j,
rs

l MnT

)
,

d sβààDd(mod(lβà£1,MnT )+1)

jβààM(l)

(14)

where d βàà {0, 1}, and D(di) is the set of all length-MnT binary

vectors whose ith bit is d, and mod(l βà£ 1, MnT) represents

the reminder of the division of l βà£ 1 by MnT.

D. Check-to-Variable Node Messages
The check-to-variable message, r(smn), can be calculated as follows [11], [12]:

βàë rs(mn) = Έ≥(mn) X βààSms n

βàè jβààN(m)\n qx( jjm),

(15)

where x j is the jth element of X , and Έ≥(mn) is a constant that ensures βàës r(smn) = 1.

V. EDGE-BASED MESSAGE PASSING FOR MODIFIED TANNER GRAPHS
A straightforward implementation of the BP is computationally extensive. Using the LLR of the edges as messages, we propose an alternative algorithm for implementation of BP that considerably reduces the complexity of the decoding.
Consider the following definitions of parameters that we will use in the EBMP algorithm:
Definition 8: Zs denotes the subset of 2MnT -ary symbols u βàà {0, 1}MnT , such that < s, u >= 0, i.e.,

Zs {u| < s, u >= 0}.

(16)

Definition 9: Os denotes the subset of 2MnT -ary symbols

u βàà {0, 1}MnT , such that < s, u >= 1, i.e.,

Os {u| < s, u >= 1}.

(17)

Definition 10: l(e) denotes the LLR of edge e, and is given

by

l(e)

ln

βàësβààZΈΜ βàësβààOΈΜ

P(VΥÜ n P(VΥÜ n

= =

s) s)

,

(18)

where VΥÜn is the modified variable node connected to e, and ΈΜ is the label of e in the modified Tanner graph.
With some algebraic manipulations, one can show that:
Theorem 1: The LLRs of the edges are sufficient for calculation of the variable-to-check messages in the BP algorithm
Theorem 2: The LLRs of the edges are sufficient for calculation of the check-to-variable messages in the BP algorithm
(see [11], [12] for the proof).
From Theorems 1 and 2, we deduce that the LLRs of the edges are sufficient for implementation of the update equations. Therefore we make the following definitions:
Definition 11: q(nm) denotes the message sent from the nth modified variable node to the mth modified check node, and

97
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:49:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

represents an estimate of the LLR of the edge connecting these

nodes. i.e.,

Definition

12:

q(nm) r(mn)

ln

βàësβààZHΥÜ mn βàësβààOHΥÜ mn

q(snm) qs(nm)

.

denotes the message sent

from

(19) the mth

modified check node to the nth modified variable node, and

represents an estimate of the LLR of the edge connecting VΥÜn

to CΥÜm. i.e.,

r(mn)
Since rs(mn) is the same s βàà OHΥÜ mn , r(mn) can be

ln βàësβààZHΥÜ mn βàësβààOHΥÜ mn
for all s βàà
reformulated

rs(mn) rs(mn) .
ZHΥÜ mn as

and

also

(20) for all

r(mn)

=

ln

r(sm1 n) r(sm2 n)

,

for s1 βàà ZHΥÜ mn and s2 βàà OHΥÜ mn . (21)

According to Theorems 1 and 2, check and variable nodes can compute check-to-variable messages (rs(mn)) and variableto-check messages (q(snm)) with LLR messages(r(mn) and q(nm)) of the edges connected to them. Consequently, we

introduce the EBMP algorithm where each node just passes the

LLR messages. As a result the nodes just send one message for each edge, as opposed to the 2MnT messages passed in the BP

algorithm. The EBMP update equations can be formulated as

follows. Due to the limited space, the derivations are omitted

(see [11], [12] for details).

οΘ°

οΘΙ

= q(nm)

ln βàësβààZHΥÜ mn fs(n) exp οΘΑβàë
οΘ°

j jβààM(n)\m,<HΥÜ jn ,s>=0

r( jn) οΘΜ οΘΙ

βàësβààOHΥÜ mn fs(n) exp οΘΑβàë j jβààM(n)\m,<HΥÜ jn,s>=0

r(mn) = ln 1+βàèjβààN(m)\n tanh
1βà£βàèjβààN(m)\n tanh

q( jm) 2
q( jm) 2

.

r( jn) οΘΜ
(22)

And the initialization can be done using

q(nm) = ln βàësβààZHΥÜ mn PX|Y βàësβààOHΥÜ mn PX|Y

x(n) = s|y(n) x(n) = s|y(n)

.

(23)

VI. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

When the modified LDPC graph is acyclic, the EBMP is equivalent to MAP [11], [12], and performs the same as or better than any other decoding scheme, such as the turbo-type decoder. To compare the performance of receivers over graphs with cycles (e.g. finite length LDPC codes), we consider two different scenarios:

S1: Any pair of variable nodes that are connected to a SISOMISO (Soft-in Soft-out MISO) symbol detector, are not
connected to the same check node. S2: There exists at least one pair of variable nodes that are
connected to a given SISO-MISO detector and a given
check node.

It can be shown that both systems perform the same in the first scenario [11], [12]. However, it is a hard task to make a rigorous comparison between performance of algorithms in the second scenario. It is not hard to see that the pair of variable nodes, the check node, and the SISO-MISO detector connected to both variable nodes form a length-4 loop in the turbo-type decoder. However this loop does not appear in the modified graph. To be more specific, the length-4 loop would be transformed to an edge in the modified graph. Furthermore, one can easily see that each loop in the modified graph corresponds to a loop in the turbo-type architecture. Therefore conversion from a three-layer graph to the modified graph not only does not generate any new loops, but also eliminates the length-4 loops generated due to the turbo-type decoder. Therefore, due to the positive feedback, we expect the EBMP to outperform the turbo type scheme. We further expect the performance difference to depend on the ratio of the number of length-4 loops to the total number of loops in the turbo-type decoder.

VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS

We simulated our proposed algorithm for joint detection and decoding in a 2 Ο½ 1 MISO-LDPC system for both known

and unknown channel cases. We analyzed a random (3,4)-

regular LDPC code (with 4-cycles removed) of length N =

252.

In

all

cases,

we

plot

the

bit

error

rate

in

terms

of

the

Eb N0

.

Each plot compares the performance of the proposed (EBMP)

algorithm with the turbo-type receiver. The comparisons all

correspond to quasi-static Rayleigh fading channels. Unless explicitly mentioned, Tc = 8T (Tc is the coherence time of the channel and T represents the symbol time), the modulation is 8-ary QAM with Gray labeling, i.e. M = 3, also the pilot

symbols power is assumed to be 4 times the data symbols

power.

Figure 3 illustrates the performance of receivers for both

known and unknown channels. One can easily see that the

proposed scheme outperforms the traditional scheme, turbo

type receiver, in both scenarios. Moreover the performance

difference in the unknown channel case is larger than the

difference in the known channel scenario. The reason for

this observation is that in the unknown channels, the MISO-

SISO detectors are βÄ€weakerβÄù, i.e. get less information from

the received symbols, and consequently generate more positive

feedback, as opposed to the known channel scenario.

Figure 4 represents the effect of the coherence time of the

channel on the performance of both systems over unknown

channels. One can see that increasing the coherence time

increases the performance difference of the systems. This

might be due to the fact that channel estimation errors can be

a more significant contributor to erroneous detection in fast

fading channels.

Figure 5 investigates the effects of the pilot symbols power

on the performance of the systems in the unknown channel

cases. By increasing the pilot symbols power, the performance

difference becomes closer to the known channel case.

98
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:49:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

(252,63) LDPC code over 2 by 1 MISO channel 10βà£1
Turbo Type Decoder βà£ Unknown channel Proposed Decoder βà£ Unknown channel Turbo Type Decoder βà£ known channel Proposed Decoder βà£ known channel
10βà£2
10βà£3

BER

(252,63) LDPC code over 2 by 1 MISO channel 100

Turbo Type Decoder βà£ Pilot Pow. = Symbol Pow.

Proposed Decoder βà£ Pilot Pow. = Symbol Pow.

Turbo Type Decoder βà£ Pilot Pow. = 4 * Sym. Pow.

Proposed Decoder βà£ Pilot Pow. = 4 * Sym. Pow.

10βà£1

Turbo Type Decoder βà£ Pilot Pow. = 10 * Sym. Pow.

Proposed Decoder βà£ Pilot Pow. = 10 * Sym. Pow.

Turbo Type Decoder βà£ Known Channel

Proposed Decoder βà£ Known Channel

10βà£2

10βà£3

BER

Fig. 3.

10βà£4

3

4

5

6

7

8

Eb / N0

BER vs. Eb/N0 for known and unknown channel scenarios

(252,63) LDPC code over 2 by 1 MISO channel 10βà£1

10βà£2

10βà£4

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Eb / N0

Fig. 5. BER vs. Eb/N0 for different pilot symbols powers

(252,63) LDPC code over 2 by 1 MISO channel 10βà£1
Turbo Type Decoder βà£ 8βà£ary QAM Proposed Decoder βà£ 8βà£ary QAM Turbo Type Decoder βà£ QPSK Proposed Decoder βà£ QPSK

10βà£2

BER

Turbo Type Decoder βà£ Tc = 44 T

Proposed Decoder βà£ T = 44 T c

Turbo Type Decoder βà£ T = 16 T

c

10βà£3

Proposed Decoder βà£ T = 16 T

c

Turbo Type Decoder βà£ Tc = 8 T

Proposed Decoder βà£ Tc = 8 T

Turbo Type Decoder βà£ T = 5 T c

Proposed Decoder βà£ Tc = 5 T

10βà£4

4

6

8

10

12

14

Eb / N0

Fig. 4. BER vs. Eb/N0 for various channel coherent times

Finally, Figure 6 demonstrates the effects of the modulation size on the performance of systems over unknown slow fading channels. One can see that increasing the modulation size increases the performance gap between both systems. This is due to the fact that by increasing the modulation size, the number of length-4 loops in the turbo-type structure increases.
Additional simulation results (not shown here) indicate that more significant performance gains can be obtained with irregular LDPC codes, which is due to the fact that the threelayer graphs of (finite length) irregular LDPC codes contain more length-4 loops than those of regular LDPC codes.

VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper, we introduced a new graph-based representation of MISO-LDPC systems which can be used for joint MISO-symbol detection and decoding using message passing algorithms. We presented a novel edge-based message passing algorithm for implementation of BP that considerably decreases the computational complexity of the BP algorithm. To characterize the performance of the turbo-type receiver, we introduced a three-layer Tanner graph. We noted that on acyclic modified graphs, our algorithm is equivalent to MAP decoding. Moreover, in graphs with cycles, we identified scenarios where both algorithms perform the same. Our simulation results show that for short length LDPC codes the proposed algorithm outperforms the traditional one in the unknown channel scenarios.

REFERENCES
[1] T. Wang, Y. Yao, and G. B. Giannakis, βÄ€Non-coherent distributed spacetime processing for multiuser cooperative transmissions,βÄù IEEE Trans-

BER

10βà£3

10βà£4

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Eb / N0

Fig. 6. BER vs. Eb/N0 for 8-ary QAM and QPSK modulations

actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 5, pp. 3339βÄ™43, December 2006. [2] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, Monograph, M.I.T. Press, 1963. [3] D. J. C. MacKay, βÄ€Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,βÄù IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399431, 1999. [4] D. J. C. MacKay and R.M.Neal, βÄ€Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,βÄù Electronic Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645βÄ™46, 1996. [5] J. Zheng, B. D. Rao, βÄ€LDPC-coded MIMO systems with unknown block fading channels: soft MIMO detector design, channel estimation, and code optimization,βÄù IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1504βÄ™18, 2006. [6] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, βÄ€Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,βÄù IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, pp. 670βÄ™78, 2004. [7] M. Fozunbal, S. W. McLaughlin, R. W. Schafer, and J. M. Landsberg, βÄ€On space-time coding in the presence of spatio-temporal correlation,βÄù IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, 2004. [8] M. Gonzalez-Lopez, J. Miguez, and L. Castedo, βÄ€Turbo aided maximum likelihood channel estimation for space time systems,βÄù proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Spread Spectrum Techniques and Applications, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 123βÄ™126, 2000. [9] H. Wymeersch, F. Simoens, and M. Moeneclaey, βÄ€Code-aided joint channel estimation and frame synchronization for MIMO systems,βÄù Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC04), 2004. [10] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, βÄ€Joint messagepassing decoding of LDPC Codes and partial-response channels,βÄù IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410βÄ™22, 2002. [11] A. H. Djahanshahi, Joint equalization and decoding of graph-based codes in multiple-antenna systems, PhD Thesis, University of California - San Diego, in preparation. [12] http://ieng9.ucsd.edu/βàΦadjahans/publications/MIMOLDPC.pdf. [13] Davey, MacKay, βÄ€Low density parity check codes over GF(Q),βÄù IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165βÄ™167, 1998.

99
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:49:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

