This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

A Hybrid ARQ Scheme Based on Shortened Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Toshihiko Okamura Common Platform Software Research Laboratories
NEC Corporation Shimonumabe, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 211-8666, Japan
Email: t-okamura@da.jp.nec.com

Abstract—This paper presents a Hybrid ARQ (HARQ) scheme based on shortened low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Although conventional incremental Redundancy HARQ (IRHARQ) schemes based on punctured LDPC codes can achieve high throughput, puncturing slows the convergence of iterative decoding, and moreover, LDPC codes originally designed to be high-rate generally have lower decoding complexity for each iteration than low-rate codes. This makes computational complexity at high rates a problem for conventional IR-HARQ schemes. The proposed HARQ scheme uses a high-rate mother code: for a retransmission request, information bits are divided into smaller sub-blocks, and additional parity bits are generated for one of the sub-blocks to be used as a shortened form of the mother code. In order to achieve high throughput with the proposed HARQ scheme, it is necessary for the shortened codes of all the sub-blocks to perform well. A multi-edge type code-design is employed to construct irregular LDPC codes that meet this requirement. Simulation results show that the proposed HARQ scheme can achieve throughput comparable to that of a conventional IR-HAQR scheme over a wide range of signal-tonoise ratios and with lower computational complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
A Hybrid Automatic Repeat reQuest (HARQ) scheme is an error control protocol based on combining forward error correction and error detection with retransmission requests. Throughput is a standard measure of the efficiency of a HARQ scheme, and many studies have attempted to achieve HARQ schemes with high throughput over a wide range of signalto-noise ratios (SNRs). Incremental Redundancy HARQ (IRHARQ) is a high-throughput scheme, in which a punctured low-rate mother code is first transmitted, and when a retransmission request is received, a sender transmits some of the remaining parity bits incrementally. If a mother code can achieve large coding gain by puncturing for a wide range of coding rates, high-throughput IR-HARQ schemes might be attained. Recent high-performance error correcting codes, such as turbo codes and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, have been candidates for error correcting codes in highthroughput IR-HARQ.
Another important measure for a HARQ scheme is computational complexity. For a quasi-static channel, coding rate and modulation should first be adapted to the channel’s current condition, after which retransmission is applied. This means that low computational complexity in the first transmission will be an important issue in HARQ. One disadvantage of

IR-HARQ schemes based on a punctured low-rate mother code is their computational complexity of decoding at high rates. In both turbo codes and LDPC codes, the more parity bits punctured, the slower the convergence speed of iterative decoding. Hence, a high-rate LDPC/Turbo code constructed from a low-rate mother code tends to need more iterations than a code originally designed to be high-rate. Moreover, the latter is generally superior to the former in computational complexity for each iteration.
Considering both computational complexity and performance at high rates for IR-HARQ schemes based on LDPC codes, Li and Narayanan [1] proposed a method of combining puncturing and extension, in which lower-rate codes are generated by extending the parity-check matrix incrementally. For a high-rate mother code, however, the parity-check matrices of low-rate codes obtained with extension will tend to be complex, and performance loss will not be negligible. Hence, a hybrid approach such as that in [1] would appear effective. Related work is also seen in [2], [3].
In this paper, we propose another approach to the design of HARQ schemes for lower computational complexity at high rates. In this approach, an LDPC code originally designed to be high-rate is used as a mother code. For a retransmission request, a sender generates parity bits of a “shortened code” of the mother code and transmits them to a receiver. If the receiver decodes the shortened code successfully, then, by fixing the information bits that have been already decoded, it will be possible to obtain another shortened code using the originally transmitted parity bits and to decode the remaining information bits using the shortened code structure. For a subsequent retransmission request, information bits are divided into smaller sub-blocks, and additional parity bits are generated for one of the sub-blocks in the form of a shortened code of the mother code. Larger coding gain can be expected with lower-rate shortened codes. At the K-th retransmission, where K = 0 corresponds to the transmission of a mother code, the number of the shortened codes will be K + 1. When all shortened codes have been decoded successfully in order, the transmission process is complete.
In order to achieve high throughput with the proposed HARQ scheme, LDPC codes have to be designed so that not only the mother code but also the shortened codes have good threshold. Irregular LDPC codes have potential to achieve

82 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ1. D52ow5-n3lo5a1d1e/d0o8n/$J2u5ne.0204,©2022060a8t 0IE4:E48E:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

a better threshold than regular LDPC codes. Proposals to 802.16e [7] and CCSDS [8] have shown good high-rate LDPC codes whose shortened codes also have good thresholds. In the proposed HARQ scheme, all the (K + 1) shortened codes at the K-th retransmission need to be decoded and to perform well. For this requirement, I employ the multi-edge type codedesign of Richardson and Urbanke [4] and construct quasicyclic irregular LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices have regular degree distributions with respect to information bits. In the design, I use a combination of degree-1 parity bits and high-degree punctured parity-bits for better thresholds with smaller highest-degrees.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, a HARQ scheme based on shortened codes is presented. In Section III, I show the base-matrix of an irregular LDPC code of multi-edge type suitable for the proposed HARQ scheme and compare it with a conventional repeat-accumulate (RA) code [6]. In Section IV, I show simulation results for throughput and computational complexity both for the proposed HARQ scheme and for an IR-HARQ scheme based on LDPC codes in [12].
II. A HARQ SCHEME BASED ON SHORTENED CODES
Consider the situation in which we transmit an informationbit sequence U of length N completely. Here, U corresponds to the information bits in a high-rate mother code. Let K = 0, 1, 2, ... be the indices of retransmissions. K = 0 corresponds to the first transmission, in which the mother code is transmitted. Let U (p) be the p-th bit of U for 0 ≤ p < N . For I ⊆ {0, 1, ..., N − 1}, let UI be a bit sequence of length N , where UI (p) = U (p) for p ∈ I and UI (p) = 0 otherwise. By encoding UI with an encoder of the mother code, we can generate parity bits of the shortened code corresponding to I.
Let I(0, 0) be {0, 1, ..., N − 1}. In the proposed HARQ scheme, for the (K + 1)-th retransmission, we determine I(j, K + 1) ⊂ {0, 1, ..., N − 1}, which corresponds to an information-bit sub-block, for j = 0 to K + 1 so that I(0, K + 1) is a union of parts of I(j, K) for j = 0 to K, letting I(j + 1, K + 1) be I(j, K)\I(0, K + 1), which denotes a complementary set. The structure of I(j, K) is shared by a sender and a receiver.
Here is the procedure for a sender in the proposed HARQ scheme:
Sender’s procedure S1: Let K be 0 and transmit the information bits U . S2: Generate parity bits P (K) by encoding UI(0,K) with an encoder of the mother code and transmit P (K). S3: If the feedback is an acknowledgment (ACK), then finish the current transmission; otherwise K ← K + 1 and go to S2.
Let U˜I(j,K) and P˜(K) be the received values of UI(j,K) and P (K), respectively. At the K-th retransmission, the receiver can use the U˜I(j,k) for any j and k (here, U˜I(j,K) is a part of U˜I(0,0)), and also P˜(j) from j = 0 to K. Note that P (K − j) is determined by UI(0,K), · · ·, UI(j,K). If UI(0,K),

U, P(0)

P(1)

start

I(0, 0), P(0)

P(2) I(0, 1), P(1)

P(3) I(0, 2), P(2)

I(1, 1), P(0)

I(1, 2), P(1) I(2, 2), P(0)

end
Fig. 1. Receiver’s decoding procedure in the proposed HARQ scheme. Solid lines and dashed-lines correspond to successful and failed decoding, respectively.
..., UI(j−1,K) have been already decoded, then the receiver can decode UI(j,K) as a shortened code of UI(0,K−j) and P (K−j) with the received values U˜I(j,K) and P˜(K − j) by fixing the decoded bits of UI(0,K), ..., UI(j−1,K). The following is the decoding procedure for a receiver in the proposed HARQ scheme.
Receiver’s decoding procedure R1: Let K be 0 and set U˜I(0,0) to the decoder. R2: Set P˜(K) to the decoder. R3: Let the index of information-bit sub-blocks j be 0. R4: Decode UI(j,K) with the received values U˜I(j,K) and P˜(K − j) as a shortened code of the code which consists of I(0, K − j) and P (K − j). R5: If R4 results in success, then go to R6; otherwise go to R9. R6: If j = K, then transmit an ACK and terminate the current decoding process; otherwise go to R7. R7: Fix the decoded bits on I(j, k). R8: j ← j + 1, and go to R4. R9: K ← K + 1, transmit a request, and go to R2.
In R5, the success of decoding is determined by either the parity-check evaluation or the use of an outer-code such as cyclic redundancy check. Figure 1 is a state-diagram illustrating the above receiver’s decoding procedure, in which we denote a box “I(j, K), P (K −j)” as a state such for which the shortened code corresponding to UI(j,K) and P (K −j) will be decoded. Transitions denoted as solid lines and dashed lines corresponds to successful and failed decoding, respectively.
Issues of the proposed HARQ scheme include: (a) Constraint on Throughput Let the information length and the parity length of the mother code be N and M , respectively. At the K-th retransmission, throughput in the proposed scheme will be N/(N + (K + 1)M ). This step-wise throughput is a disadvantage of the scheme. When K is small and the rate of the mother code is relatively low, difference in throughput between steps will be large.

83
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

(b) Construction of I(0, K) The success rate at the K-th retransmission will be dominated by the worst decoding-failure probability of UI(j,K) among j = 0, 1, · · · , K. That is, the throughput will be best when all of UI(j,K) result in the same decoding-failure probability. To satisfy this condition, we may determine I(0, K +1) so that the resulting (K + 1) shortened codes have the same rate. This means they will have the same length, and the rate of the shortened code will be (N/(K + 1))/(N/(K + 1) + M ) = N/(N + (K + 1)M ), which is equal to the throughput in (a). (c) Performance In the proposed scheme, as retransmission requests are repeated, code lengths become smaller. This would result in lower throughput because of the loss of coding gain caused by smaller code length. But throughput in HARQ is determined by the coding gain at high error rates, and code length has a crucial impact on coding gain, especially at low error rates. Therefore, we may expect that the short-length codes in the proposed scheme will have little effects on the throughput in the retransmission stages. After many retransmissions, however, very small low-rate shortened codes must be decoded, and both the throughput and the decoding complexity may become significantly worse. In this case, it would be better to apply other ARQ methods, such as extension and packetcombing. (d) Computational Complexity If all the shortened codes perform similarly and the channel is quasi-static, the typical decoding process in the proposed HARQ scheme in Figure 1 will be the following:

I(0, 0), P (0) → failure: request P (1). I(0, 1), P (1) → failure: request P (2).
··· I(0, K − 1), P (K − 1) → failure: request P (K).
I(0, K), P (K) → success. I(1, K), P (K − 1) → success.
··· I(K, K), P (0) → success: finish.

Note that although k + 1 shortened codes must be considered at the k-th retransmission in the proposed scheme, only the first code will actually be decoded in the intermediate retransmission stages. When the process finishes at the Kth retransmission, the average computational complexity CK of the proposed HARQ scheme can be roughly represented as

K −1

CK = Imax ck + (K + 1)IK cK ,

(1)

k=0

where ck is the computational complexity for each iteration of a shortened code at the k-th retransmission, Imax is the maximum number of iterations, and IK is the average number of iterations used in the last retransmissions. When the min-
sum algorithm is applied, ck can be evaluated in terms of the number of additions and comparisons.

The computational complexity CK(IR) of a IR-HARQ scheme based on punctured LDPC codes can be represented

as

CK(IR) = (KImax + IK )c(0IR),

(2)

where c0(IR) is the computational complexity for decoding the mother code in the IR-HARQ scheme. From (1) and (2), when
Imax and IK are the same in both methods, we have

K −1
CK(IR) − CK = Imax( (c(0IR) − ck)
k=0
− ((K + 1)cK − c(0IR))IK /Imax). (3)

Hence, when ck is smaller than c0(IR), and the overhead ((K + 1)cK − c(0IR))IK /Imax at the last retransmission is relatively small, we can expect that the use of the proposed
HARQ scheme will decrease the computational complexity. Both CK and CK(IR) are evaluated in Section IV.

III. LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR THE PROPOSED HARQ SCHEME

In order to achieve high throughput with the HARQ scheme presented in Section II, code design must result in good performance not only for the high-rate mother code but also for the shortened codes from UI(0,K),..., UI(K,K). Because throughput of an HARQ scheme is determined by the coding gain at a high frame-error rate around 10−2, threshold is the most important measure in the design of LDPC codes for HARQ. Threshold is determined by the degree distributions in a parity-check matrix, and for the proposed HARQ scheme, the performance requirement of the shortened codes suggests that the information block in an LDPC code should have a regular degree distribution. Regular LDPC codes or RA codes [6] might satisfy this condition, but the multi-edge type code design [4], [5] with irregular structure would obtain a better threshold.
A parity-check matrix H of an irregular LDPC code suitable for the proposed HARQ scheme is shown in (4)(5)(6).

H = (H1|H2) .

 (4)

A0,0 A0,1 · · · A0,n−2 A0,n−1

H1

=



A1,0 A2,0

A1,1 A2,1

··· ···

A1,n−2 A2,n−2

A1,n−1 A2,n−1

 .

(5)

0 0 ··· 0 

0 

A0,n

0

0

0

H2

=



A1,n A2,n

A1,n+1 A2,n+1

A1,n+2 A2,n+2

0 0

 .

(6)

B

0

0

A3,n+3

H consists of H1 and H2, and for information bits U , parity bits P are generated so that H1U t + H2P t = 0. Each element in H1 and H2 is a square matrix of a certain same size: Aj,k has exactly one ’1’ in each row and column, ’0’ is a zero-
matrix, and B has exactly three ’1’s in each row and column. H1 has regular degree distributions of variable-degree 3 and check-degree n except the last all-0 row block. For the n-th column block in H, which is the first column block in H2, the corresponding parity bits have the maximum degree 6 and

84
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

they are punctured and not transmitted. This means that the coding rate is n/(n + 3) 1. Parity bits corresponding to the last column block have degree 1, and in the Tanner graph of H, they are connected only to parity bits of degree 6.
Some properties of the parity-check matrix H are noted: (A) Parity bits of degree 2 in H2 can be generated with the same encoding process as that of RA codes. The other parity bits can be calculated straightforwardly. Hence, encoding is very easy for H. (B) H has the maximum variable-degree 6 and the average variable-degree less than 3. They are smaller than those of conventional LDPC codes in [7], [8]. While the low-degree characteristic of H may achieve low computational complexity, it would also result in low-weight codewords, and an error floor would occur at a high error rate. For this problem, by determining Aj,k and B in H carefully with ProgressiveEdge Growth (PEG) algorithm [5], [9], we can construct codes which achieve frame error rates lower than 10−4. The error rate is sufficiently low for HARQ schemes.
(C) Since all the punctured parity bits have degree 6 in H, they will be corrected fast in iterative decoding, and the puncturing will not have a bad effect on the convergence speed of the decoding.
(D) With respect to (c) in Section II, threshold of H is not good for rate less than 1/2 (n < 3). Hence, other methods such as extension and packet-combing should be applied in such a case.
From the regular degree distributions of H1, if we apply the method in Section II (b) to determine bit positions I(j, K) for shortened codes, the resulting shortened codes might have similar degree distributions. Let B(j1, j2) be the set of bit positions corresponding to column blocks from the j1-th to the j2-th column in H1. For a rate-4/5 mother code of 12 column blocks (n = 12) in H1, I(j, K) can be determined by the following manners,

K = 0 : I(0, 0) = B(0, 11),

K = 1 : I(0, 1) = B(0, 5), I(1, 1) = B(6, 11).

K = 2 : I(0, 2) = B(4, 7), I(1, 2) = B(0, 3),

I(2, 2) = B(8, 11).

K = 3 : I(0, 3) = B(3, 3) ∪ B(7, 7) ∪ B(11, 11),

I(1, 3) = B(4, 6), I(2, 3) = B(0, 2),

I(3, 3) = B(8, 10).

(7)

For each K in (7), all the shortened codes of I(j, K) for j = 0 to K have the same degree distributions. Figure
2 shows the parity-check matrix structure of the shortened
codes determined by (7). In Figure 2, a small box represents a column in H1, and the colored boxes I(0, k) is used to generate parity-bits P (k) for the k-th retransmission.
Table I shows thresholds of H and an RA code with variable-degree 4 for all information bits. Using the notations

1The exact rate will actually be a little higher because the rank of H is not full.

B: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

K=0

I(0,0)

P(0)

K=1

I(0,1)

I(1,1)

K=2

I(1,2)

K=3 I(2,3)

I(0,2) I(1,2) I(0,3)
I(1,3) I(3,3)

P(1) P(2) P(3)

Fig. 2. Parity-check matrix structure of the shortened codes determined by (7). The rate of the mother code is 4/5 (n = 12). At the k-th retransmission, parity bits are generated for I(0, k).

of (5) and (6), the parity-check matrix of the RA code is

expressed as the following,





A0,0 · · · A0,n A0,n+1

0

0

HRA = 

A1,0 A2,0

··· ···

0 0

A1,n+1 0

A1,n+2 A2,n+2

0 A2,n+3

 .

A3,0 · · · A3,n

0

0

A3,n+3

(8)

Thresholds are calculated with discrete density evolution [10] on the basis of normalized min-sum algorithm with multicoefficients [11], where the coefficient ’1’ is applied to parity bits of degree-2 and degree-1. The thresholds in Table 8 are a little worse than those obtained on the basis of sum-product algorithm.
In Table I, we see that H achieves better threshold than HRA at all rates, and especially at low rates .

TABLE I THRESHOLD OF H AND HRA (Eb/N0 (DB)) CALCULATED WITH DISCRETE DENSITY EVOLUTION ON THE BASIS OF NORMALIZED MIN-SUM
ALGORITHM.

rate H HRA difference

4/5 2.60 2.78

0.18

3/4 2.18 2.45

0.27

2/3 1.60 1.90

0.30

1/2 0.77 1.10

0.33

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In the simulation of the proposed HARQ scheme with H in (4), we used the rate-4/5 mother code of information length 2160. Retransmission packet size M = 540, which is equal to the parity length of the mother code. I(j, K)’s for n = 12 at the mohter-code rate 4/5 are determined according to (7). The maximum retransmissions K = 3, and the lowest rate of the shortened codes is 1/2. If failed decoding occurs at the lowest rate, soft packet-combining is applied. The actual parity-check matrix for H was constructed with circulant PEG algorithm [5] through 2 stages: cyclic shift matrices of size 5 were used for Aj,k’s and B at the first stage, and the resulting H of size 20 × 80 was used as the base matrix at the second stage,

85
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7
Throughput 0.6

0.5

Shannon Limit

0.4

H: T hreshold

RA: T hreshold

0.3

H: Simulat ion

RA: Simulat ion 0.2

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

SNR (dB)

0.7

Throughput 0.6

0.5

Shannon Limit

0.4

IR-HARQ (M)

0.3

IR-HARQ (M/2)

proposed (M)

0.2

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

SNR (dB)

Fig. 3. Throughput of the proposed HARQ scheme with H (“H”) and HRA (“RA”). Threshold curves are plotted using the values of Table I
where each element ’1’ in the base matrix was replaced with a cyclic-shift permutation matrix of size 36.
The figures in this section show the simulation results obtained in AWGN channel with BPSK modulation. With respect to decoding, a layered decoding schedule with normalized min-sum algorithm is applied. The maximum iteration Imax is 30, and the iteration is stopped when all parity-checks are satisfied.
A. Throughput
Figure 3 shows the throughput curves of the proposed HARQ scheme with H in (4) and HRA in (8). Here, dashedlines and solid lines are plotted with thresholds in Table I and simulation results, respectively. The restriction of the retransmission-packet size makes the curves of thresholds “staircase-like”, and the difference from the Shannon limit is the largest when the first retransmission occurs around SNR = 1.6dB. For the simulation results, as expected by the thresholds, H shows a little better throughput than HRA, and the difference becomes larger as an SNR becomes smaller. At throughput 0.5, the difference of coding gain is about 0.2dB.
Next, we compare the proposed HARQ scheme with a conventional IR-HARQ scheme based on LDPC codes in [12], in which the mother code is an quasi-cyclic irregular RA (IRA) code of rate-1/2 with the maximum variable-degree 16 and the regular check-degree 8. The average variable-degree is 4. Higher-rate codes are obtained through the block-wise puncturing on the basis of quasi-cyclic structure.
Figure 4 shows the simulation results of throughput obtained with the proposed HARQ scheme and the IR-HARQ scheme. For the IR-HARQ scheme, the results for the retransmissionpacket size M/2 are also shown. This smaller retransmissionpacket size of M/2 yields better throughput as we see in Figure 4, and the difference is the largest when the first retransmission occurs. But when the retransmission-packet size is M , the proposed HARQ scheme achieves better throughputs than the IR-HARQ scheme at high SNRs, and even at lower SNRs around -1dB, the difference of throughput is negligible. These

Fig. 4. Throughput of the proposed HARQ scheme with H and the IRHARQ scheme in [12]. “IR-HARQ (M)” and “IR-HARQ (M/2)” correspond to the retransmission-packet size M and M/2, respectively, where M is the number of parity bits transmitted at the 0-th transmission. M is now 540 for the information length = 2160 and the 0-th transmission-rate 4/5.

simulation results show that although the proposed HARQ scheme may lack the flexibility of the retransmission-packet size, it can achieve good throughput under the condition such that the retransmission-packet size is restricted.

B. Computational Complexity
In the iterative decoding of LDPC codes based on the minsum algorithm, computational complexity can be evaluated in the term of the number of additions and comparisons, and we assume that the normalized min-sum algorithm requires the computational complexity shown in Table II for each processing, where dv is a variable-degree and dc is a checkdecree.

TABLE II THE NUMBER OF ADDITIONS AND COMPARISONS IN EACH PROCESSING OF
THE NORMALIZED MIN-SUM ALGORITHM.

process addition comparison

variable node
2dv 0

check node 0
3dc

normalization 2 0

On the proposed HARQ scheme, two methods for decoding shortened codes can be considered:
dec1: Let the absolute values of fixed information bits be sufficiently large, and decode the mother code.
dec2: Calculate syndromes of fixed information bits and decode the shortened code tightly using the syndromes.
Although the latter could save the computational complexity, it may happen that the decoder architecture with parallelization does not fit the method. With the method of dec1, computational complexity ck of H in (1) for any k is the same as that of the mother code c0. In this case, from (1), the computational complexity of the proposed HARQ scheme can be roughly represented as

CK = (KImax + (K + 1)IK )c0.

(9)

86
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2008 proceedings.

We compare the proposed HARQ scheme with the IR-
HARQ scheme in [12] for the computational complexity. From Table II and the degree distributions, we can see that c0 for H with rate-4/5 and c(0IR) for the IRA code in [12] are estimated with 21.25 and 41, respectively, per information bit. Using
these values, we can roughly evaluate the ratio of computational complexity CK /CK(IR) from the equations (2) and (9). Table III shows the ratio for IK = 10, 20, 30(= Imax) under the assumption that Imax and the average iteration times IK at the last retransmission are the same in both methods. From
Table III, we can expect that the proposed scheme improves
computational complexity over all parameters in the table. Even if K = 3 and IK = 30(= Imax), the proposed scheme has 9% less computational complexity.

4500

4000 3500 3000

IR-HARQ (M ) proposed (M ): dec1 proposed (M ): dec2

Comp.

2500

complexity

2000

1500

1000

500

0

-3 -2 -1

0

1

2

3

4

Es/No (dB)

TABLE III
THE ROUGHLY-ESTIMATED COMPUTATIONAL-COMPLEXITY RATIO CK /CK(IR) FOR THE PROPOSED HARQ SCHEME TO THE IR-HARQ SCHEME UNDER THE ASSUMPTION THAT BOTH Imax (= 30) AND THE AVERAGE ITERATION TIMES IK AT THE LAST RETRANSMISSIONS ARE THE
SAME IN BOTH SCHEMES.

K IK = 10 IK = 20 IK = 30

0

0.53

0.53

0.53

1

0.65

0.73

0.78

2

0.67

0.78

0.86

3

0.67

0.80

0.91

Figure 5 shows the average computational complexity per information bit obtained by simulation. At first, we see that the two decoding method dec1 and dec2 do not have significant difference at early retransmissions. Hence, if retransmissions rarely occur in a quasi-static channel, dec1 seems sufficient for a decoding method in the proposed HARQ scheme. On the comparison of the proposed scheme and the IR-HARQ scheme, at SNR = 2dB, we see that the computational complexity of the proposed HARQ scheme and the IR-HARQ scheme is about 200 and 1100, respectively. The ratio of two values is less than 0.2, which is less than a half of the value for K = 0 in Table III because of the difference of the average iterations in decoding. Moreover, as expected from Table III, the proposed HARQ scheme shows better results even at low SNRs around -1dB.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a HARQ scheme based on shortened LDPC codes is proposed for lower computational complexity of decoding by a receiver. A parity-check matrix suitable for the proposed HARQ scheme is designed with multi-edge type code design. Although the HARQ scheme lacks the flexibility of the retransmission-packet size and the resulting throughput is “staircase-like”, it can achieve not only low computational complexity at high rates but also high throughput over a wide range of SNRs. Since the number of retransmissions should be small from the view of latency, the flexibility of the retransmission-packet size would be restricted in real applications, and the disadvantage of the proposed HARQ scheme would not be so crucial. Therefore, the proposed

Fig. 5. Computational complexity of the proposed HARQ scheme and the IRHARQ scheme in [12] for the average number of additions and comparisons per information bit.

HARQ scheme will be attractive to applications in which computational complexity for a receiver is an important issue.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Li and K. R. Narayanan, “Rate-Compatible Low Density Parity

Check Codes for Capacity-Approaching ARQ Schemes in Packet Data

Communications,” in Proc. International Conference on Communications,

Internet and Information Technology (CCITT), pp.201-206, Nov. 2002.

[2] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On Construction of Rate-

Compatible Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,

vol.8, No.3, pp.159-161, 2004.

[3] Y. Guosen, X. Wang, and M. Madihian, “Design of Rate-Compatible IRA

Codes for Capacity-Approaching with Hybrid ARQ,” in Proc. 2006 IEEE

Int. Symp. Information Theory, pp.2884-2888, 2006.

[4] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Multi-Edge Type LDPC Codes,”

http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/papers/multiedge.ps.

[5] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, D. Divalar, and J. Thorpe, “Design of Low-

Denstiy Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes for Deep-Space Applications,” IPN

Progress Report 42-159, Nov. 2004.

[6] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for ’turbo-

like’ codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control,

and Computing, pp. 201-210, Sept. 1998.

[7] “

LDPC

coding

for

OFDMA

PHY,”

http://ieee802.org/16/tge/contrib/C80216e-04 278r1.pdf, Aug. 2004.

[8] The Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS), “LOW

DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES FOR USE IN NEAR-EARTH AND

DEEP SPACE APPLICATIONS”, CCSDS 131.1-O-1, Aug. 2006.

[9] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Amold, “Progressive edge-growth

Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, pp.951-1001, 2001.

[10] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “On the

Design of low-density parity-check codes with 0.0045 dB of the Shannon

limit”, IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp.58-60, Feb. 2001.

[11] T. Maru, “High Performance LDPC Decoder Using a Simplified Robust

Algorithm in the Categorized Tanner Graph,” in Proc. 2007 Int. Symp.

Turbo Codes and Related Topics.

[12] “Structured

LDPC

coding

with

rate-matching”,

http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/tsg ran/WG1 RL1/TSGR1 44bis/Docs/R1-

061019.zip, March, 2006.

87
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:48:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

