1514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 4, APRIL 2008

An Efficient Pseudocodeword Search Algorithm for Linear Programming Decoding of LDPC Codes
Michael Chertkov, Member, IEEE, and Mikhail G. Stepanov

Abstract—In linear programming (LP) decoding of a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code one minimizes a linear functional, with coefficients related to log-likelihood ratios, over a relaxation of the polytope spanned by the codewords. In order to quantify LP decoding it is important to study vertexes of the relaxed polytope, so-called pseudocodewords. We propose a technique to heuristically create a list of pseudocodewords close to the zero codeword and their distances. Our pseudocodeword-search algorithm starts by randomly choosing configuration of the noise. The configuration is modified through a discrete number of steps. Each step consists of two substeps: one applies an LP decoder to the noise-configuration deriving a pseudocodeword, and then finds configuration of the noise equidistant from the pseudocodeword and the zero codeword. The resulting noise configuration is used as an entry for the next step. The iterations converge rapidly to a pseudocodeword neighboring the zero codeword. Repeated many times, this procedure is characterized by the distribution function of the pseudocodeword effective distance. The efficiency of the procedure is demonstrated on examples of the Tanner code and Margulis codes operating over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
Index Terms—Error-floor, linear programming decoding, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION LDPC CODES, BELIEF PROPAGATION, AND
LINEAR PROGRAMMING

(Notice that all the discussions and results of this paper can be easily generalized to other linear channel models.) Corruption of a codeword in the AWGN channel is described by the following transition probability:
(1)

where is the signal measured at the channel output and is

the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the code, that is traditionally

denoted as

. The maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding

corresponding to the restoration of the most probable pre-image

given the output signal

(2)

is not feasible in reality since its complexity grows exponentially with the system size.
LP decoding was introduced by Feldman, Wainwright, and Karger [1] as a computationally efficient approximation to the ML decoding. Following [1], let us first notice that (2) can be restated for the AWGN channel as calculating

(3)

WE consider an LDPC code (cf. Gallager [2]) defined by some sparse parity-check matrix,

, of size

. A codeword

satisfies all the check

constraints:

(mod ). We

discuss the practical case of finite and , as opposed to

the

(thermodynamic) limit for which Shannon

capacity theorems were formulated [3]. The codeword is sent

over a noisy channel. To make our consideration concrete, we

consider the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.

Manuscript received January 27, 2006; revised May 19, 2007. The work at LANL was carried out under the auspices of the National Nuclear Security Administration of the U.S. Department of Energy at Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-06NA25396, and, specifically, the LDRD Exploratory Research Grant on Novel Physics Inspired Approach to Error Correction.
M. Chertkov is with the Theoretical Division and the Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Lab (LANL), Los Alamos, NM 87545 USA (e-mail: chertkov@lanl.gov).
M. G. Stepanov is with the Department of Mathematics, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA and also with the Theoretical Division and the Center for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Lab (LANL), Los Alamos, NM 87545 USA (e-mail: stepanov@math.arizona.edu).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.917682

where is the polytope spanned by the codewords. Looking for

in terms of a linear combination of all possible codewords of

the code, :

, where

and

,

one finds that ML turns into a linear optimization problem. LP

decoding proposes to relax the polytope, expressing in terms

of a linear combination of the so-called local codewords, i.e.,

codewords of trivial codes, each associated with just one check

of the original code and all the variable nodes connected to it.

We will come to the formal definition of the LP decoding [1]–[9]

later after discussing the belief propagation (BP) decoding of

Gallager [2]–[6].

The BP, or sum–product, algorithm of Gallager [2] (see also

[4]–[6]) is a popular iterative scheme often used for decoding

of the LDPC codes. For an idealized code containing no loops

(i.e., there is a unique path connecting any two bits through a

sequence of other bits and their neighboring checks), the sum-

product algorithm (with sufficient number of iterations) is ex-

actly equivalent to the so-called maximum a posteriori proba-

bility (MAP) decoding, which is reduced to ML in the asymp-

totic limit of infinite SNR. For any realistic code (with loops),

the sum-product algorithm is approximate, and it should actu-

ally be considered as an algorithm for solving iteratively cer-

tain nonlinear equations, called BP equations. The BP equations

minimize the so-called Bethe free energy [10]. (The Bethe free

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:47:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHERTKOV AND STEPANOV: EFFICIENT PSEUDOCODEWORD SEARCH ALGORITHM

1515

energy approach originates from a variational methodology developed in statistical physics [11], [12].) Minimizing the Bethe free energy, that is a nonlinear function of the probabilities/beliefs, under the set of linear (compatibility and normalizability) constraints, is generally a difficult task.
BP decoding becomes LP decoding in the asymptotic limit of infinite SNR. Indeed in this special limit, the entropy terms in the Bethe free energy can be neglected and the problem becomes minimization of a linear function under a set of linear constraints. The similarity between LP and BP (the latter one being understood as minimizing the Bethe Free energy [10]) was first noticed in [1] and it was also discussed in [7]–[9]. Stated in terms of beliefs, i.e., trial marginal probabilities, LP decoding minimizes the Bethe self-energy
(4)

with respect to beliefs

and under certain equality and

inequality constraints. Here in (4) is the degree of connec-

tivity of the -th bit; is a local codeword,

, associated with the check . The

equality constraints are of two types, normalization constraints

(beliefs, as probabilities, should sum to one) and compatibility

constraints

(5)

(6)

respectively where

is the belief (trial marginal proba-

bility) to find bit in the state , and the check belief,

,

stands for the trial marginal probability of finding bits, which

are neighbors of the check , in the state . Also, all the be-

liefs, as probabilities, should be nonnegative and smaller than or

equal to unity. Thus, there is the additional set of the inequality

constraints

(7)

the so-called error-floor domain, splitting of the two (FER vs

SNR) curves, representing the ML decoding and an approximate

decoding (say LP decoding) is due to pseudocodewords [13].

The actual asymptotics of the two curves for the AWGN channel

are

and FER

, where is the so-called Hamming distance of the code

and the is the effective distance of the code, specific for the

LP decoding. The LP error-floor asymptotic is normally shal-

lower than the ML one,

. The error floor can start at

relatively low values of FER, unaccessible for Monte Carlo sim-

ulations. This emphasizes importance of the pseudocodewords

analysis.

For a generic linear code performed over a symmetric

channel, it is easy to show that the FER is invariant under

the change of the original codeword (sent into the channel).

Therefore, for the purpose of FER evaluation, it is sufficient to

analyze the statistic exclusively for the case of one codeword,

and the choice of zero codeword is natural. Then calculating the

effective distance of a code, one makes an assumption that there

exists a special configuration (or maybe a few special configu-

rations) of the noise, instantons according to the terminology of

[14], describing the large SNR error-floor asymptotic for FER.

Suppose a pseudocodeword

corresponding to the most damaging configuration of the

noise (instanton), , is found. Then finding the instanton

configuration itself (i.e., respective configuration of the noise)

is equivalent to maximizing the transition probability (1) with

respect to the noise field, , taken at

under the condition

that the self-energy calculated for the pseudocodeword in the

given noise field is zero (i.e., it is equal to the value of the

self energy for the zero code word). The resulting expression

for the optimal configuration of the noise (instanton) is

(8)

and the respective effective distance is

(9)

II. INTRODUCTION II PSEUDO CODEWORDS, FRAME ERROR RATE AND EFFECTIVE DISTANCE

This definition of the effective distance was first described in [15], with the first applications of this formula to the LP decoding discussed in [7] and [9]. Note also that (8), (9) are remi-

As it was shown in [1] the LP decoding has ML certificate, niscent of the formulas derived by Wiberg and coauthors in [16]

i.e., if the pseudocodeword obtained by the LP decoder has only and [17], in the context of the computational tree analysis ap-

integral entries then it must be a codeword, in fact it is the code- plied to iterative decoding with a finite number of iterations.

word given back by ML decoder. If LP decoding does not decode to a correct codeword then it usually yields a noncode-

III. SEARCHING FOR PSEUDOCODEWORDS

word pseudocodeword with some number of nonintegers among In this section, we turn directly to describing an algorithm

the beliefs and . These configurations can be interpreted as which allows one to find efficiently pseudocodewords of an

mixed state configurations consisting of a probabilistic mixture LDPC code performing over AWGN channel and decoded by

of local codewords.

LP. Once the algorithm is formulated, its relation to the intro-

An important characteristic of the decoding performance is ductory material, as well as partial justification and motivation

frame error rate (FER) calculating the probability of decoding will become clear.

failure. FER decreases as SNR increases. The form of this de- The Pseudocodeword Search Algorithm

pendence gives an ultimate description of the coding perfor- • Start: Initiate a starting configuration of the noise .

mance. Any decoding to a noncodeword pseudocodeword is a

Noise measures a deviation from the zero codeword and

failure. Decoding to a codeword can also be a failure, which

it should be sufficiently large to guarantee convergence of

counts as a failure under ML decoding. For large SNR, i.e., in

LP to a pseudocodeword different from the zero codeword.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:47:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 4, APRIL 2008

• Step 1: The LP decoder finds the closest pseudocodeword for the given configuration of the noise

satisfying (5)–(7)

where the self-energy is defined according to (4). In the case of degeneracy one picks any of the closest pseudocodewords. • Step 2: Find , the weighted median in the noise space between the pseudocodeword , and the zero codeword

Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of the pseudocodeword-search algorithm. This
example terminates at k = 3. The point 1=2 = (1; . . . ; 1)=2 is shown to illustrate that if one draws a straight line through 1=2, such that it is perpendicular to the straight line connecting 0 = (0; . . . ; 0) and  , then the straight line must go "-approximately through x . [We are thankful to Referee A for making this useful 1=2-related observation.]

• Step 3: If

, then

and the algorithm

terminates. Otherwise go to Step 2 assigning

for some very small ( prevents decoding into

the zero codeword, keeping the result of decoding within

the erroneous domain.)

is the output configuration of the noise that belongs to

the error-surface surrounding the zero codeword. (The error-sur-

face separates the domain of correct LP decisions from the do-

main of incorrect LP decisions.) Moreover, locally, i.e., for the

given part of the error-surface equidistant from the zero code-

word and the pseudocodeword

is the nearest point

of the error-surface to the zero codeword.

The algorithm is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. We re-

peat the algorithm many times picking the initial noise config-

uration randomly, however, guaranteeing that it would be suffi-

ciently far from the zero codeword so that the result of the LP

decoding (first step of the algorithm) is a pseudocodeword dis-

tinct from the zero codeword. Our simulations (see discussions

below) show that the algorithm converges, and it does so in a rel-

atively small number of iterations. The convergence of the algo-

rithm is translated into the statement that the effective distance

between and the zero codeword does not increase, but typ-

ically decreases, with iterations. Once the algorithm converges

the resulting pseudocodeword belongs to the error-surface. This

observation was tested by shifting the instanton configuration of

the noise correspondent to the pseudocodeword toward the zero

codeword and observing that the result of decoding is the zero

codeword. The effective distance of the coding scheme is ap-

proximated by

scheme) distance is found after multiple evaluations of the algorithm. Also, we do not have a formal proof of the fact that, beginning with a random , our algorithm explores the entire phase space of all pseudocodewords on the error-surface. However our working conjecture is that the right-hand side (RHS) of (10) gives a very tight (if the number of attempts is sufficient) upper bound on the actual effective distance of the coding scheme.

IV. EXAMPLES
In this section, we demonstrate the power of the simple procedure explained in the previous section by considering three popular examples of relatively long regular LDPC codes.

A. The Tanner

Code of [18]

For this code

and

. The Hamming distance

of the code is known to be

. The authors of [7]

reported a pseudo codeword with

. The lowest

effective distance configuration found as a result of our search

procedure is

. These two, and some number of

other lower lying (in the sense of their effective distance) con-

figurations, are shown in Fig. 2. The resulting frequency spectra

(derived from 3000 evaluations of the pseudocodeword-search

algorithm) is shown in Fig. 3. Notice that the pseudoweight

spectrum gap, defined as the difference between the pseu-

doweight of the noncodeword minimal pseudocodeword with

smallest pseudo-weight and the minimum distance [19], is

negative for the code

. Thus, the LP decoding per-

formance is strictly worse than the ML decoding performance

for SNR

.

B. The Margulis Code [20] With

(10) This code has

bits. The set of four

noise configurations with the lowest effective distance found

by the pseudocodeword-search algorithm for the code is shown

where the minimum is taken over multiple evaluations of the al- in Fig. 4. The lowest configuration decodes into a codeword

gorithm. It is not guaranteed that the noise configuration with the with the Hamming distance . A large gap separates this

lowest possible (of all the pseudocodewords within the decoding configuration from the next lowest configuration corresponding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:47:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHERTKOV AND STEPANOV: EFFICIENT PSEUDOCODEWORD SEARCH ALGORITHM

1517

4 Fig. 2. The eight lowest configurations found by the pseudocodeword-search algorithm for the [155; 64; 20] code. The typical number of evaluations required to
reach a stopping point is 5 15.

Fig. 3. The frequency spectrum (distribution function) of the effective distance constructed from 3000 attempts of our pseudocodeword search algorithm for the [155; 64; 20] code.

to a pseudocodeword that is not a codeword. Since the pseu- The frequency spectra, characterizing the performance of the

doweight spectrum gap is positive in this case, the LP decoding pseudocodeword-search algorithm for this code, is shown in

approaches the ML decoding performance for SNR

. Fig. 5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:47:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 4, APRIL 2008

Fig. 4. The four lowest noise configuration found by our pseudocodeword search algorithm for the Margulis p = 7 code of [20]. The typical number of evaluations required to reach a stopping point is in between 10 and 20.

Fig. 5. The frequency spectrum (distribution function) of the effective distance found through multiple attempts of the pseudocodeword-search algorithm for the Margulis p = 7 code. The figure is built on 250 evaluations of the pseudocodeword-search algorithm.

C. The Margulis Code [20] With

pseudocodeword spectra of the code. It approximates the pseu-

This code is

bits long. We have a rela-

tively small number of configurations (30) here because it takes

much longer to execute the LP decoding in this case. Some 30 to

60 steps of the pseudocodeword search are required for a typical

realization of the algorithm to reach a stopping point. The four

lowest configurations are shown in Fig. 6. Obviously, with lim-

ited statistics one cannot claim that the noise configuration with

the lowest possible effective length has been found. All stop-

ping point configurations found here correspond to pseudocode-

words. (The Hamming distance for this code is not known, while

the pessimistic upper bound mentioned in [21] is 220.)

docodeword and the respective noise configuration on the errorsurface surrounding the zero codeword, corresponding to the shortest effective distance of the code. Our test shows that the algorithm converges very rapidly. (Even for the 2640 bits code, the longest code we considered, it typically takes only 30 to 60 steps of the pseudocodeword search algorithm to converge.) As aaforementioned, this procedure applies to any linear channel. One only needs to make modifications in (8), (9), (10), and also in the basic equation of Step 2.
One would obviously be interested in extending the pseudocodeword search algorithm to other decodings, e.g., to find the effective minimal distance of the sum-product decoding.

V. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

We observed, however, that a naive extension of this procedure does not work. The very special feature of the LP-case is that

Let us discuss the utility of the pseudocodeword search al- the noise configuration found as a weighted median of the zero

gorithm proposed in this manuscript. The algorithm gives an codeword and a pseudocodeword ( , as in the Step 3 of the

efficient way of describing the LP decoding polytope and the pseudocodeword search algorithm) is not decoded into the zero

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:47:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHERTKOV AND STEPANOV: EFFICIENT PSEUDOCODEWORD SEARCH ALGORITHM

1519

Fig. 6. The four lowest noise configurations found by our pseudocodeword search algorithm for the Margulis p = 11 code of [20]. The typical number of the pseudocodeword-search iterations required to reach a stopping point is in between 30 and 60.

codeword. This allows us to proceed with the search algorithm

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

always decreasing the effective distance or at least keeping it constant. It is not yet clear if this key feature of the LP decoding is extendable (hopefully with some modification of the weighted median procedure) to iterative decoding. This question requires further investigation.

The authors acknowledge very useful, inspiring and fruitful discussions with V. Chernyak, R. Koetter, O. Milenkovich, and B. Vasic. We also thank the anonymous referees for their criticisms and suggestions.

Even though the direct attempt to extend the LP-based

REFERENCES

pseudocodewords-search algorithm to the sum-product decoding failed, we still found an indirect way of using these LP results to analyze the sum-product decoding. The most damaging configuration of the noise found within the pseudocodeword-search procedure becomes a very good entry point for the instanton-amoeba method of [14], designed for finding instanton configurations (most damaging configurations of the noise) for the case of the standard iterative decoding. This hybrid method works well, sometimes resulting in the discovery of pseudocodewords (of the respective iterative scheme) with impressively small effective distance. We attribute this fact to the close relation existing between the LP decoding and the BP decoding [1], [7]–[9]. Some preliminary results of this hybrid analysis are discussed in [22]. Summarizing, the LP-based pseudocodeword search algorithm, complemented and extended by the instanton-amoeba method of [14], provides an efficient practical tool for the analysis of effective distances, most damaging configurations of the noise (instantons) describing the error-floor, and their frequency spectra for an arbitrary LDPC code performing over a linear channel and decoded by LP decoding or iteratively.
After the original version of the manuscript was submitted for publication, we have learned about some important new results concerning reducing complexity of LP-decoding [23], [24]. It is also appropriate to mention here the most recent publications exploring possibilities of LP-decoding improvement [25], [26]. These new techniques and ideas combined with the pseudocodeword-search algorithm open interesting new opportunities for exploring and improving decoding schemes of even longer LDPC codes.

[1] J. Feldman, M. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode linear codes,” in 2003 Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., The John Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, MD, Mar. 12–14, 2003.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communications,” Bell. Syst. Tech. J. 27. 379, vol. 27, no. 623, 1948.
[4] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: Wiley, 1968.
[5] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Network of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA, Kaufmann, 1988.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, p. 399, 1999.
[7] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 1–5, 2003, pp. 75–82.
[8] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between LP decoding and min-sum algorithms decoding,” in Proc. ISITA, Parma, Italy, 2004.
[9] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, Graph-Cover Decoding and Finite-Length Analysis of Message-Passing Iterative Decoding of LDPC Codes arXiv:cs.IT/0512078..
[10] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, p. 2282, 2005.
[11] H. A. Bethe, “Statistical theories of superlattices,” in Proc. R. Soc. London A, 1935, vol. 150, p. 552.
[12] R. Kikuchi, “A theory of cooperative phenomena,” Phys. Rev., vol. 81, p. 988, 1951.
[13] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[14] M. G. Stepanov, V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, and B. Vasic, “Diagnosis of weakness in error correction codes: A physics approach to error floor analysis,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 95, p. 228701, 2005 [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/cond-mat/0506037
[15] G. D. Forney, R. Koetter Jr., F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Syst., Graphical Models of IMA Vol. Math. Appl., B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds., Minneapolis, MN, 1999/2001, vol. 1233, pp. 101–112, Springer-Verlag.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:47:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 4, APRIL 2008

[16] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Europ. Transaction Telecommunications, vol. 6, p. 513, 1995.
[17] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. thesis, Linköping Univ., Linköping , 1996.
[18] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISCTA, Ambleside, U.K., 2001.
[19] P. O. Vontobel, R. Smarandache, N. Kiyavash, J. Teutsch, and D. Vukobratovic, “On the minimal pseudo-codewords of codes from finite geometries,” in ISIT 2005, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 4–9, 2005, pp. 980–984 [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0508019
[20] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit construction of graphs without short circles and low-density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, p. 71, 1982.
[21] D. J. C. MacKay and M. J. Postol, “Weaknesses of margulis and ramanujan-margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. MFCSIT2002, Galway [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy. cam.ac.uk/mackay/abstracts/margulis.html

[22] M. G. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Instanton analysis of Low-DensityParity-Check codes in the error-floor regime,” in arXiv:cs.IT/0601070, Proc. ISIT 2006, Seattle, Jul. 2006.
[23] M. H. N. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive linear programming decoding,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Seattle, WA, 2006, arxiv:cs.IT/0601099.
[24] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Toward low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 3–7, 2006, arxiv:cs/0602088.
[25] A. G. Dimakis and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoder,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Seattle, WA, 2006 [Online]. Available: arxiv:cs/0608029
[26] M. Chertkov and V. Chernyak, “Loop calculus helps to improve belief propagation and linear programming decodings of low-density-paritycheck codes,” in Proc. 44th Allerton Conf., Sep. 2006 [Online]. Available: arXiv:cs.IT/0609154

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:47:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

