IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

4835

Iterative Approximate Linear Programming Decoding of LDPC Codes With Linear Complexity
David Burshtein, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The problem of low complexity linear programming (LP) decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is considered. An iterative algorithm, similar to min-sum and belief propagation, for efficient approximate solution of this problem was proposed by Vontobel and Koetter. In this paper, the convergence rate and computational complexity of this algorithm are studied using a scheduling scheme that we propose. In particular, we are interested in obtaining a feasible vector in the LP decoding problem that is close to optimal in the following sense. The distance, normalized by the block length, between the minimum and the objective function value of this approximate solution can be made arbitrarily small. It is shown that such a feasible vector can be obtained with a computational complexity which scales linearly with the block length. Combined with previous results that have shown that the LP decoder can correct some fixed fraction of errors we conclude that this error correction can be achieved with linear computational complexity. This is achieved by first applying the iterative LP decoder that decodes the correct transmitted codeword up to an arbitrarily small fraction of erroneous bits, and then correcting the remaining errors using some standard method. These conclusions are also extended to generalized LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Linear programming decoding, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE method of linear programming (LP) decoding of linear codes was proposed by Feldman et al. [1]. It was shown that there are some close connections between LP decoding and iterative (in particular min-sum) decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2]. However, the LP decoder has some unique attractive properties. One of these properties is the fact that its performance can be accurately described using pseudocodewords [1], [3], [4]. Another attractive property of the LP decoder is that one may improve the performance in various ways. These include using generic techniques to tighten the LP relaxations [1], using integer programming or mixed integer linear programming [1], [5], adding constraints to the Tanner graph [6] and guessing facets of the polytope [7]. In addition, the LP decoder has the maximum-likelihood (ML) certificate property [1] that asserts that if the LP decoder
Manuscript received April 01, 2008; revised January 02, 2009. Current version published October 21, 2998. This work was supported by the Israel Science Foundation under Grant 927/05. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Toronto, ON, Canada, July 2008 and at Turbo Coding 2008, Lausanne, Switzerland, September 2008.
The author is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Ramat–Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: burstyn@eng.tau.ac.il).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figures 1–5 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2030477

succeeds, i.e., if it produces an integral solution vector, then it is the ML solution.
However, one major disadvantage of LP decoding is the fact that the complexity of decoding can be larger than that of iterative decoding algorithms, such as belief propagation or min-sum decoding. For a sufficiently large block length, such that the tree assumption is satisfied, the following holds [8]–[10]. If one operates below the density evolution threshold then one can apply a constant (i.e., independent of the block length) number of iterations of belief propagation (using standard parallel scheduling), with complexity which scales linearly with the block length, in order to retrieve the transmitted codeword up to an arbitrarily small fraction of errors. On the other hand, when using a general-purpose LP solver for LP decoding of LDPC codes, the computational complexity, although polynomial in the block length, may not be linear in the block length. Several authors have proposed algorithms for low-complexity LP decoding (see [6] and [11]–[17]). Vontobel and Koetter [13] have proposed an iterative, Gauss–Seidel-type algorithm for approximate LP decoding. Using general properties of Gauss–Seidel-type algorithms for convex minimization, it was shown in [13] that the algorithm converges. In this paper, we study the approach of [13] under a new scheduling scheme, and analyze the convergence rate and computational complexity of this algorithm. In particular, we are interested in obtaining a feasible vector in the LP decoding problem that is close to optimal in the following sense. The distance, normalized by the block length, between the minimum and the objective function value of this approximate solution can be made arbitrarily small. It is shown that such a feasible vector can be obtained with a computational complexity which scales linearly with the block length. Combined with previous results that have shown that the LP decoder can correct some fixed fraction of errors [18], [19] (this is equivalent to the assertion that the minimum pseudocodeword weight on the binary symmetric channel (BSC) scales linearly with the block length), it is concluded that this fixed fraction of errors correction can be achieved with linear computational complexity. This is achieved by first applying the iterative LP decoder that decodes the correct transmitted codeword up to an arbitrarily small fraction of erroneous bits, and then correcting the remaining errors using standard methods. The results are also extended to generalized LDPC (GLDPC) codes.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides some background, a formulation of the LP decoding problem, and a description of the low-complexity decoding algorithm. The computational complexity of this algorithm is analyzed in Section III. The correction of a fixed fraction of errors in linear complexity is discussed in Section IV. Some further improvements

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4836

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

on the convergence rate analysis are provided in Section V. Extensions of the results to low-complexity LP decoding of GLDPC codes are presented in Section VI. Section VII presents some experimental results of the algorithm. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper.

II. APPROXIMATE ITERATIVE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LINEAR CODES

Consider a discrete binary-input memoryless channel (DMC)

described by the probability transition function

where

is the transmitted code-bit and is the channel output. Also

consider a binary linear code represented by a Tanner graph

[20] with variable nodes and

parity-check

nodes, where is the design rate, and the actual rate of the

code is at least . The code is used to transmit information

over the given DMC. Following the notation in [1], let and

be the sets of variable and parity-check nodes, respectively,

such that

and

. The variable node

is connected to the set of parity-check node neighbors. The

parity-check node

is connected to the set of vari-

able node neighbors. We assume, without loss of generality, that

there are no parallel edges in the Tanner graph, since any pair of

parallel edges can be removed from the graph without changing

the code.

The ML decoder is given by

This set is the collection of support sets of codewords associated

with check node (note that

, and corresponds to the zero

codeword associated with check node ). Also consider a vector

defined by

(5)

Then

(6)

subject to

is an integral vector

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

The vector satisfies

, and it

is equal to if the codeword satisfies parity-check using

configuration

[1].

Feldman et al. [1] proposed an LP relaxation to the integer

program (6)–(10) that describes the ML problem. The relaxation

is obtained by omitting the restriction (7) of an integer vector.

Thus, the LP decoder is defined as follows. The vector is ob-

tained by solving

where

(11)

subject to (8)–(10). We term the minimization problem (11)

subject to (8)–(10), Problem-P. It is feasible since we can set

and

.

In the sequel, it will be convenient to define

(12)

where all the logarithms in this paper are to the base and where and

(1)

(13)

is a codeword in the code

is the ML-estimated codeword

given the channel observations , and

(2)

We assume that there are no perfect measurements from the channel, i.e.,
(3)

The polytope is defined as follows [1]:

(sometimes

we will use the notation

, the meaning will be clear

from the context) if and only if there exists a vector such

that (8)–(10) hold for this value of . We further denote by

to be the intersection of the polytopes . Thus, is

feasible in (8)–(10) if and only if

. It was shown in [21]

(see also [1]) that

if and only if

Note that if we transmit over the binary erasure channel (BEC)

then this assumption does not hold. However, we can renor- and

malize the ’s, by replacing

with

and

odd (14)

with

. After this renormalization, the assumption (3)

holds, and we can then apply the decoding algorithm.

The ML decoder can also be described as follows. Given

some

, denote by the set

An alternative simple proof of (14) based on Farkas’ lemma is

provided in Appendix A. Thus,

if and only if (14) holds

for all

.

An important observation is that the LP decoder has the ML

is even

(4) certificate [1] in the sense that if the solution of Problem-P is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4837

integer (in fact an integer implies that is also integer by

(10)), then it is the ML decision since this solution obviously

also solves (6)–(10).

Let

be an indicator function such that

if

, and

otherwise. Now consider the following

problem, which we term Problem-D. The variables in this

problem are

and the problem is defined by

than infimum. Due to Lagrange duality, the maximum in Problem-D, which is also feasible, is finite. Furthermore, since Problem-D is equivalent to a linear program, then by [22, Proposition 2.3.4], the maximum is achieved and we can indeed use the term maximum rather then supremum.
Vontobel and Koetter [13] have proposed an algorithm which yields an approximated solution to Problem-P. The motivation to the algorithm is to obtain a smooth approximation to the objective function in (15) by using
(19)

subject to

(15) This is a good approximation for large values of inequalities

due to the

(16)

It will also be convenient to define (17)

Lemma 1: Problem-P and Problem-D are Lagrange dual problems. The minimum of Problem-P is equal to the maximum of Problem-D.

We prove the lemma in Appendix B.

Notes:

1) Consider the following Problem- which is the same as

Problem-D, except that the equality in the constraint (16) is

replaced by an inequality, i.e., we maximize

defined

in (15) subject to

which hold for any real numbers

and

. It

is thus seen that the gap between the right- and left-hand sides in

(19) is at most

so that the approximation can become

arbitrarily accurate by increasing .

Using a different parametrization compared to [13], their al-

gorithm can be described as follows. Instead of Problem-D, it

was proposed to consider the following soft version, which we

term Problem-DS:

where

(20)

(18)

Then Lemma 1 is also valid for Problem-P together with

Problem-D (the proof of Lemma 1 in Appendix B is es-

sentially the same in this case as well). Thus, Problem-D

has the same maximum as Problem-D. This can also be

seen from the fact that

is monotonically increasing

in each . Thus, if (18) holds with strict inequality for

some , then any can be increased without decreasing

until (18) holds with equality.

2) Problem-D (Problem-D ) can also be expressed as the fol-

lowing linear program [18]:

subject to (16). Note that the objective function in (20) is obtained from (15) by using the approximation (19). Also note that
is concave since the log-sum-exp function is convex [23, Sec. 3.1.5, p. 72].
Now consider the following Problem-PS

where

(21)

(recalling the definitions (1), (5), and (12) of and ) subject to (8)–(10), where is the entropy function, defined by

subject to (16) ((18), respectively) and to

for a probability vector

, i.e.,

and

.

Lemma 2: Problem-PS and Problem-DS are Lagrange dual

3) In Problem-P we minimize a linear function over a compact and nonempty domain. Hence, the minimum is

problems. The minimum of Problem-PS is equal to the maximum of Problem-DS.

achieved and we can indeed use the term minimum rather We prove the lemma in Appendix C.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4838

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

In order to solve Problem-DS it was proposed in [13] to use

the following Gauss–Seidel-type algorithm. At each iteration,

the algorithm fixes some . Then it maximizes the objective

function (20) with respect to the variables

subject

to the constraint (16) for , while keeping all the other vari-

ables (corresponding to other values of ) fixed. This process is

repeated for varying values of

. By using general prop-

erties of Gauss–Seidel-type algorithms applied to continuous

convex functions, it was shown that, under an appropriate sched-

uling scheme (e.g., setting

), this

iterative algorithm converges to the solution of Problem-DS.

The iteration equations for

are obtained by solving

time , determined by the scheduling scheme. Then the iterative update is given by

if

and

if

and

(26)

We initialize the algorithm by some feasible vector paper, we set

. In this (27)

The ’s can be computed efficiently as follows. It is easy to verify the following relations between formal polynomials:

subject to

and (22)

The solution to this convex program can be obtained using the Lagrange multipliers approach, which is the same here as applying the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions. Setting the derivative of

Setting

in these two equations and incorporating

them in (24) yields (28), shown at the bottom of the page, where1

(29)

( is the Lagrange multiplier) with respect to where and
Using (22) in (23) further yields

to zero yields (23)

As noted in [13], the operations are very similar to belief prop-

agation, especially when

.

We propose the following scheduling rule. Given a vector

of feasible variables to Problem-DS, we define

(30)

and

(31) (24)

Note that

and

. Our first scheduling rule is

(25) where

. Recall that at time (32) (33)

Denote by time , for

, the vector of variables of Problem-DS at

, and let

be the value of at

The motivation for this scheduling rule is the following. By ap-

plying the KKT conditions it is easy to verify that the solution

to Problem-DS must satisfy

. Hence,

1In this paper, l without subscripts is used to denote an index.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(28)

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4839

at each iteration we pick that variable

, which has the

largest deviation from the convergence condition.

We also define

(34)

After we have concluded iterating, the solution vector, , is

defined in terms of the final vector

as follows.

Suppose that we conclude iterating when is sufficiently small,

and in particular

. Then we define

(35) and
(36)

Note that the condition

ensures that

(since

). The solution vector can be interpreted as

a convex combination of and the vector

which is feasible in Problem-P (see the note after (11)). Later

we will show that the condition

must eventually hold,

and that

. Finally, the decoded word

is

determined as follows:

Fig. 1. The relation between the indices, k;j 2 N ; and i 2 N n k
with respect to the Tanner graph of the code, and the associated variables u ;v ; ; ; and  used in the algorithm.

Algorithm 1: Given a code, channel observations and some

fixed parameters

and

do:

1) Initialization:

where is defined in (29)

if

(37)

if

(if

then we can determine arbitrarily, e.g., by set-

ting it to ( ) with probability (w.p.) ). Thus, the algorithm

produces both a vector , which is feasible in Problem-P, and

an integer decoded word (which is not necessarily feasible in

Problem-P). If all variable and check node degrees are bounded by some
constant, then the update equations (26), (28), and (29), that

2) Iteration: Pick an arbitrary element following updates:

and make the

need to be implemented in each iteration, require only a con-

stant (i.e., independent of ) number of operations. However,

our scheduling rule (32) requires searching the maximum of the

elements for

. This can be done by keeping a sorted

list of and updating this list in each iteration. However, the

number of operations in each iteration would then depend on

where is defined in (29)

. To avoid this, we suggest the following modification in the

algorithm. Let

be some predetermined constant. We

keep a list, , which comprises of

with

. The

next variable

that we pick for update at iteration is

an arbitrary element from , as long as that list is not empty.

In each iteration, we first update

. Then we up-

date

. This is requred due to the

change in the vector . Following that we update

and

. Finally, we update the list . The relation

If

and

then

If

and

then

between the indices

and

with respect to

the Tanner graph of the code is shown in Fig. 1. Note that each

edge in the graph connecting the variable node and the check

node is associated with the variables

and . Each

variable node

is associated with the variables and .

3) Loop Control: If

then repeat step 2. Otherwise

proceed to step 4.

4) Produce the final solution and Exit:

: Compute

using (35), and using (37).

These variables are also shown in Fig. 1.

Recall that in a message-passing algorithm, an outgoing mes-

The algorithm is summarized in the following. Note that in sage transmitted by a node over an edge must be a function of

this description there is no need to note the explicit dependence only incoming messages over the other edges connected to that

of the variables on the iteration index .

node. Hence Algorithm 1 is not a message-passing algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4840

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

In the next section, we analyze Algorithm 1 and show that,

for any fixed

and

, it exits after

iter-

ations. Furthermore, by setting sufficiently large and suf-

ficiently small, we can make

arbitrarily small,

where is the minimum value of Problem-P.

The analysis in the remainder of this paper motivates the fol-

lowing possible practical improvement in the algorithm. Rather

than choosing an arbitrary element

in step 2, it is better

in practice to choose

for which is relatively large.

However, we wish to avoid the maximization in (32). Thus, for

some fixed constants

, we

keep lists. The th list

, comprises of all

for which

. When choosing the next variable

for update, we first examine the list . If this list is not empty

then we select an arbitrary element

. Otherwise , we

examine the lists

in that order until either

we have found an element for update, or we have verified that

all lists are empty so that we can stop the iterations and pro-

duce the final solution. It is clear that if all variable and check

node degrees are bounded then the update step of the modified

algorithm also requires only a constant (i.e., independent of the

block length) number of operations. By setting sufficiently

large, we approach the actual performance of the algorithm that

implements (32).

III. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the computational complexity of Algorithm 1.
We make the following assumptions. 1) We assume

(38)

for some positive constant . Note that practical chan-

nels with nonperfect measurements, that satisfy (3), also

satisfy (38), since their output is quantized to some finite

set.

2) As was indicated earlier, we can assume without loss of

generality that there are no parallel edges in the Tanner

graph.

3) We assume, as in [13], that

. In fact,

if this assumption does not hold then any pair of variable

nodes connected to a parity-check node with

are

equal. Thus, we can merge each such pair of variable nodes

into one variable node, with an appropriate new value for

, and apply our algorithm to the merged graph. It is clear

that the LP solution of the merged Tanner graph is the same

as the LP solution of the original problem.

Lemma 3: Consider a linear code and a vector of dual feasible

variables

that satisfies (16) and

(39)

where (40)

We prove the lemma in Appendix D. Corollary 1: Consider Algorithm 1. At each iteration, satisfies
(41)

where is defined by (40) and (42)

In addition, we have

(43)

where

is the minimum left degree of a vari-

able node,

is the average left degree (total

number of edges in the Tanner graph normalized by the number

of variable nodes), is defined in (38), and is the design

rate of the code.

Proof: At the beginning

we know, by the initializa-

tion rule (27), that (39) holds with equality for defined by (42).

Since the algorithm monotonically decreases the left-hand side

of (39), it follows that (39) holds for any vector produced by

the iterative algorithm. In addition, satisfies (16). Thus, (41)

follows immediately from Lemma 3.

To verify the bound (43), we first note that

In addition

and

. We conclude that

(44)

Thus, (43) follows from the last inequality together with inequality (40).

Given a vector of feasible variables in Problem-DS, recall

our definitions of

and in (30), (31), (35) and (36),

which are used in the following lemma.

Lemma 4: Consider a vector produced by Algorithm 1.

Suppose that

. Let be the minimum value of

Problem-P. Then

and

Then the following holds:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(45)

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4841

for some

defined below, where is defined by (40) Hence

and (42), and where is defined in (43).

Thus, under the conditions of the lemma, is feasible in

Problem-P, and

is at distance at most

from the minimum for some constants and .

Note that (45) provides an estimate to the quality of the solu-

tion produced by Algorithm 1.

Proof: We first claim that

. Define

(50)

Then more, for all

(46) We now obtain an upper bound on the right-hand side of (50). Rewriting the definition (46) we have
obviously satisfies (8)–(9). Furtherand

(47) Multiplying both sides by

and

yields

where the second equality follows from the definitions (24) and

(30). Thus,

by definition (recall the note on

notation after (13)) as claimed.

Next, we claim that is feasible, i.e.,

for each

.

This can be seen as follows. For each

odd, we have

(recall that

)

Now

and then summing over (51)

(52)

(48)

where the equality follows from (35), the first inequality follows

from (34), and the second inequality follows from the fact that

and (14). The last inequality follows from the

assumption that

for all

. Thus,

, so that

there exists

such that (8)–(10) (with

instead of ) hold.

Denote the minimum value of (21) subject to (8)–(10) by

. Since

and are primal and dual feasible vectors in

Problem-PS and Problem-DS, respectively, then by Lagrange

duality we know that

where the first equality is obtained by changing the order of summation of and ( and enumerate all the pairs of nodes in the graph that are connected by an edge), the second equality follows from (47), the first inequality follows from (34), and the last inequality is due to Corollary 1 and the fact that is dual feasible (i.e., it satisfies (16)). In addition, by the definition (35),
. Hence
(53)
Combining (51)–(53) yields

(49)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(54)

4842
Now, combining (50) and (54) yields

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009
From the first inequality in (57) we obtain

(58)

Similarly, from the second inequality in (57) we obtain

Finally,

since

for all and and

the constraints in Problem-P and in Problem-PS are the same.

Hence

(59)

This yields the first inequality in (45). The second inequality follows from (43), (38), and the bound
.

Now, by (55) we know that

and/or

.

This fact and (58)–(59) yield our claim (56).

We now define a new vector

as in (60),

shown at the bottom of the page. By this definition and the def-

inition of in (30) it follows that

,

and since satisfies (16) so does , i.e., both vectors are feasible

in Problem-DS. Now

Lemma 5: Consider Algorithm 1. Suppose that at time

, and the corresponding

and , defined in (30) and

(31), satisfy

(55)

for

defined in (32) and some

. Then

Note that by the definitions (31) and (33) we have

(otherwise,

which contradicts (55)).

Proof: We first claim that there exist

and

such that

To prove (56) we define . By definition (31) we have
Thus

(56)

(61)

where the first inequality is due to the fact that maximizes

and

among all feasible vectors

for which

for all

and

, the first equality is due

to the definitions of

in (20) and of in (60) (by which

if

and

), the second equality is due to

the definitions of and in (25), and the third equality is

due to the definition of in (24).

Now, by the definition (30)

Hence

and by the definition (60), for

we have

(57)

if

and

or

otherwise.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(60)

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4843

Using the last two equations in (61) yields

Proof: Fix iterations

sufficiently large. When we start the

(62)

Now, from (56) it follows that we can write

for some

. Substituting this

in (62) yields

where is defined in (42) and 5 we know that as long as

is defined in (44). By Lemma (65)

for

and some

then

where

(63)
Now, suppose that (65) is valid for . Then

iterations with

The first- and second-order derivatives of are

(the first inequality follows from the Lagrange duality). Thus

Also note that iterations we have

. Hence, after at most

Thus,

is strictly concave and so is . In addition

for

That is, the algorithm exits after at most

iterations.

Furthermore, by Lemma 4, the final , defined by (35) and (36),

satisfies

and

Thus, the maximum in (63) is obtained at always in the range of the maximization since
), so that

(which is

Since is bounded by some constant, then by (43) so is . Thus, by setting large enough and small enough (in particular
so that Lemma 4 is applicable), we obtain (64).

Note that although the sequence is not necessarily a mono-

tonically nonincreasing function of , the proof of Theorem 1

shows that

as

.

where the last inequality is due to (56). Using Lemmas 4 and 5 we now obtain the following theorem.

IV. CORRECTION OF A FIXED FRACTION OF ERRORS IN LINEAR COMPLEXITY

Theorem 1: Consider Algorithm 1 under the three assump- In this section, we show that the iterative LP decoder,

tions indicated at the beginning of the section. We also assume Algorithm 1, can correct a fixed fraction of errors in linear

that all node degrees are bounded by some constant (indepen- complexity.

dent of ). For any given

, we can set sufficiently We first show that the performance of Algorithm 1 is inde-

large and sufficiently small such that after

iterations, pendent of the transmitted codeword when transmitting over a

each with a constant number of operations, the algorithm yields memoryless binary-input output-symmetric (MBIOS) channel.

a vector, , which is feasible in Problem-P and satisfies

In this family of binary-input channels,

for all outputs (note that for the BSC the output alphabet that

(64) matches this output symmetry definition is

rather than

). The proof is similar to the proof that the performance

(recall that is the minimum value of Problem-P).

of the belief propagation algorithm (as well as other symmetric

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4844

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

message-passing algorithms) is independent of the transmitted given time, under the assumption that the transmitted codeword

codeword [10].

was .

Lemma 6: Suppose that we transmit a linear code over an

MBIOS channel, and consider Algorithm 1. Let

and

denote the values of

and , where the dependence on the received vector

and time (iteration) is explicitly mentioned (explicit

dependence on the received vector and time will also be used in

the sequel for and ). Let

be some codeword.

Then

(66)

(67)

if

if

(68)

if if

(69)

if

(70)

if

where

denotes a vector whose th element is

, and

denotes componentwise vector multiplication, i.e., the

th element is

.

Proof: The proof of (66) follows immediately from the def-

inition of in (2) and since the channel is MBIOS.

We prove (67) by induction on the iteration index as follows.

For , the claim is correct by (66) and the initialization rule

(27). Now suppose that the claim holds at time . We will prove

that it also holds at time

by first showing that

(71) (72)

To prove (71) first note that by the induction hypothesis

if

(73)

if

.

In addition, since is a codeword then if

then

is even, and if

then

is odd. Thus, (73) and (29) yield (71). The statement

(72) now follows immediately from (71) and (28). The proof of

the induction step follows from (72), (66), and (26).

The statement (68) follows from the definition (30), (67),

and (72). The statement (69) follows from the definition (31)

and (68). The statement (70) follows from the definition (35)

and (69).

Denote by

and

the th bit and

block error probabilities of the algorithm, respectively, at some

Lemma 7: Suppose that we transmit a linear code over an

MBIOS channel, and consider Algorithm 1. Then

and

are independent of .

Proof: We prove the lemma for

. The proof

for

is essentially the same.

Denote an error event as given in (74) at the bottom of the

page. Now consider two cases. In the first, we transmit the all-

zero codeword . In the second, we transmit the codeword .

To prove the lemma we show that the error probabilities in these

two cases are equal. We have

where the third equality follows from the facts that

(since we have assumed that the channel is

MBIOS) and

(due to the defini-

tions (74) and (70)).

Notes:

1) Denote by

the error probability averaged over

all possible codewords. By Lemma 7

for any codeword . When analyzing the performance of

the algorithm we can assume, without loss of generality,

that the all-zero codeword was transmitted.

2) Lemma 7 also provides an alternative proof to the fact that

the performance of the LP decoder is independent of the

transmitted codeword [1], since after sufficiently many it-

erations of Algorithm 1, with a sufficiently large , we can

approach the LP solution arbitrarily closely.

In the following, we consider transmission over the BSC. In

this case, by the definition of in (2),

if

and

if

, where is the

crossover probability of the channel. Hence, we may rescale the

’s such that

if

and

if

without

affecting the solution produced by the LP decoder.

In [18], the following result was proved. Consider a linear

code, represented by a bipartite Tanner graph, with regular left

degree , which is an

-expander for some

and

, and such that is an integer. Then the LP decoder

can correct any error pattern with at most

er-

rors. In addition, it is known [24], [25], [18] that typical regular

LDPC codes are good expanders. In particular, a code chosen

at random from the

-regular bipartite graph-based

if

and

or

and

if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Unoivth. Deorwwnilsoea.ded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(74)

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4845

ensemble is a

-expander, for some

and

, w.p.

(i.e., the probability approaches one

as approaches infinity). Thus, w.p.

, a code chosen

at random from the

-regular LDPC ensemble is able

to correct, using LP decoding, errors or less, where is

some function of and . We now show that similar assertions

can be made using Algorithm 1 in complexity of order

.

More precisely, we will show that if the LP decoder can cor-

rect any pattern of errors or less, then for any

and

for any

, which can be chosen arbitrarily small, the ap-

proximate LP decoder, Algorithm 1, will be able to reduce the

number of errors from to in complexity

. Since

can be chosen arbitrarily small, this means that the approximate

LP decoder will have a vanishing bit-error rate (BER) . There

are various standard possibilities how to correct the remaining

errors (i.e., how to augment the decoder so that it would have

a vanishing word-error rate). These standard methods are also

applied in various iterative decoding schemes that guarantee a

vanishing BER, but not a vanishing word-error rate. One possi-

bility is to use concatenated coding with an outer code, whose

rate can be arbitrarily close to one (since can be chosen ar-

bitrarily small). Thus, the rate loss caused by the inclusion of

the outer code can be made negligible. Another possibility [9]

is to switch to the bit flipping algorithm [8], [26], [24] after we

have concluded the iterations of the approximate LP decoder,

Algorithm 1. It is known [26], [24] that the flipping algorithm,

applied to a typical code in the

-regular ensemble,

will be able to correct the remaining errors in complexity of

order

. Our recent results [27] show that this conclusion

also holds for the

-regular ensemble. Formally, we as-

sert the following.

locations whose indices are in . Now we apply Algorithm 1.

We distinguish between the following two cases.

1) The algorithm produces a feasible vector (note that the

feasible vector produced by the LP decoder is denoted by

in the description of Algorithm 1) with

. Then

by (75) we have

(76)

In addition (77)

and since

,

(78) Combining (76)–(78) yields

Thus, if the algorithm produces a solution with

then there are at most

errors in the decoded word

(denoted by ; recall (37)).

2) Algorithm 1 produces a feasible vector with

.

In this case

Theorem 2: Consider some linear code with block length

, and some positive constant . Suppose that all node de-

grees are bounded by some constant (independent of ). Fur-

ther suppose that the linear programming decoder, applied to

, can correct any pattern of errors or less. Then for any

, Algorithm 1 can correct any set of errors or less in

any transmitted codeword of , thus producing a decoded word

with a vanishing BER in complexity of order

.

Proof: By Lemma 7, we can assume, without loss of gener-

ality, that the all-zero codeword was transmitted. We know that

all feasible vectors in Problem-P satisfy

where the second inequality is due to the fact that

for

, and the third inequality is due to (75). On

the other hand, by Theorem 1, for an arbitrary , after

iterations we have

(otherwise, the LP decoder would not be able to correct the errors in the bits whose indices are in the set ). Denote by
the sorted vector such that

(since

by the all-zero transmitted codeword as-

sumption and the fact that the LP decoder succeeds in this

case). Setting

we conclude that after

iter-

ations this case, where the algorithm produces a solution

. Then

with

, is impossible.

We have thus seen that starting with

errors, after

iterations there are at most

errors in the decoded

(75) word . Since this assertion holds for

arbitrarily small,

we can reduce the error rate as much as is required with com-

Fix

and

. Suppose that there plexity

.

are

errors (

after rescaling since the all- The results in [18] were recently improved in [19]. By re-

zero codeword was transmitted) in the received word, in the bit laxing the requirement that the code should be able to correct

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4846

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

any set of

errors to the requirement that it should only

need to correct almost all error patterns with

errors, im-

proved constants were derived. This relaxation is justified in a

typical communication scheme since the channel errors have a

random nature rather than an adverserial one. In the following,

we show that the improved error correction results in [19] can

also be achieved when using the approximate LP decoder, Al-

gorithm 1, in complexity of order

.

Both [18] and [19] consider Problem-D (see note 1 and note 2

after Lemma 1), which is equivalent to Problem-D. Now [18]

and [19] define a dual witness to a given code and vector

by a vector

that satisfies the fol-

lowing two conditions. First, for all

and distinct

. Second, the constraints (18) of Problem-D

are satisfied with strict inequality (i.e.,

). We define a weak dual witness as a vector that satisfies the

first condition above, and also satisfies (18) but not necessarily

with strict inequality. By Lagrange duality, it follows immedi-

ately (see [18, Sec. III]) that if a weak dual witness exists then

, together with the corresponding value of , is a (not nec-

essarily unique) minimum solution of Problem-P and

.

Furthermore, by [18, Proposition 2], a dual witness implies that

the unique optimum of Problem-P is

(together with the

corresponding unique vector ). Using these considerations we

can state and prove the following theorem.

Theorem 3: Theorem 1 in [18] (Theorem 1 in [19], respec-

tively) remain valid, when the approximate iterative LP decoder,

Algorithm 1, is applied, instead of the exact LP decoder, with

complexity of order

(except that, as noted

above, we modify the definition of successful decoding to a de-

coded word with a vanishing BER).

The complexity for Theorem 1 in [19] is

rather

than

only since the ensemble considered is such that the

right degrees of the code, which have a Poisson distribution, can

only be bounded by some number

(and not by a con-

stant independent of as in other standard LDPC ensembles).

A similar computational complexity problem occurs in this en-

semble when using iterative decoding.

Proof: As in the proofs of [18, Theorem 1] and [19, The-

orem 1] we assume, without loss of generality, that the all-zero

codeword was transmitted. In [18] and [19], the success of the

LP decoder is proved by showing that a dual witness exists.

In fact, it is shown that there exists some constant

(inde-

pendent of the block length) such that the dual witness satisfies

Now, suppose that (79)
Then

Thus (80)

We now set

. Then by (80)

(81)

Now consider the Lagrange dual problems, Problem-P and Problem-D , for the case where is replaced by . Since even in this case the primal vector and the dual witness defined above are feasible in Problem-P and Problem-D , respectively, then by weak Lagrange duality

(the first equality follows from the fact that is a weak dual

witness for the problem where is replaced by —see the

discussion before Theorem 3). This conclusion contradicts (81).

Thus, (79) cannot hold, and except for at most elements,

the components of the decoded word produced by Algorithm

1 after

iterations, satisfy

. This proves the theorem

since

can be chosen arbitrarily small.

V. IMPROVED CONVERGENCE RATE ANALYSIS

In this section, we refine the analysis in Section III and present

improved convergence rate results.

Consider the convergence rate of the iterations (26) of Algo-

rithm 1. Suppose that at time

with a corresponding set

of

and

defined by (30) and (31), and with

defined by (34). Further denote by

the distance between the current value of Problem-DS and its

maximum (which, by Lagrange duality, is equal to the minimum

of Problem-PS, ).

Suppose further that

for some

. Then by

Lemma 5 we have

Now, fix some

and

that will be specified later. By

Theorem 1, Algorithm 1 produces a feasible vector (denoted

by in the description of the algorithm) in complexity

such that

Further, suppose that

for

repeated application of (82) yields

(82) . Then

Hence

Hence

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(83)

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4847

On the other hand, by the proof of Lemma 4 we have, for We thus conclude that the total number of iterations of Algo-

rithm 1 required until we have

is at most

(84) (88)

(85)

( and are defined in the proof of Lemma 4), where the first

inequality follows from (49) and the second follows from (54).

Combining (83) and (85) we conclude the following. If at some

time we have

where

, then after at most

(86)

additional iterations, we must have .

The following bound considers the case where

in a

similar way. Suppose that

. Then similarly to (83) we

have

We then use the following bound on

.

First, we know that

( was defined in (42)).

Second, to upper-bound we can use the feasible vector in

Problem-PS given by

and

, thus obtaining

Example 1: Consider a code drawn at random with uniform

probability from the standard bipartite graph-based ensemble of

regular LDPC codes with block length , left degree

,

and right degree

[9], [10]. This ensemble is defined in

terms of the Tanner graph representation of the code. The design

rate of the ensemble is

. There are variable

nodes and

check nodes. For each variable (check,

respectively) node we assign variable (check) sockets. The

total number of variable sockets, and the total number of check

sockets are both . We then choose a permutation with uniform

probability from the space of all permutations of size , and

use this permutation to match the variable and check sockets. We

assume that transmission takes place over the BSC. By Lemmas

6 and 7 we can assume without loss of generality that the all-

zero codeword was transmitted. After normalization,

if the received channel output is (channel error) and

otherwise. In this example, we calculate the maximal number of

iterations required to obtain

and

when using

Algorithm 1 with

and

. Now,

w. p.

where

is the channel crossover probability. Hence,

for large , the sum

is concentrated at

.

Furthermore, we claim that for large

defined in (42) is

concentrated at

(89) Thus

where can be any parity-check node index, and for a given

value of

for (e.g., the first) elements of

,

and

for the other

elements. Equation (89) fol-

Hence, after at most

lows from the observation that the fraction of parity-check nodes

that are connected to exactly variables with

is con-

(87) centrated at

(this follows by evaluating the

expectation and variance of this fraction of parity-check nodes

and then using Chebyshev’s inequality). Using

iterations we must have .

and (89) in (87) we obtain that for sufficiently large and

The bounds (86) and (87) can be combined as follows. We

we need at most serial iterations until

and

divide the range of values into the cells

for

at most (i.e., additional) serial iterations until

.

where

and

. When

we need at most

serial iterations until

Now suppose that at iteration

and that

and at most

serial iterations until

. We

for

, where the ’s are chosen note that the bound (88) does not produce better results in this

maximally, i.e., the largest possible so that the statement is true. example. However, it does improve upon (87) when is required

We can upper-bound using (87) with

, and we can to get below sufficiently small levels. The actual number of it-

upper-bound for

using (86) with

and

. erations, as measured by simulations, seems to be much lower

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

than the predictions of the above bounds. In our example, for By [28, Lemma 2.7] we know that if

, the average number of iterations required until

for a code with block length

is only about 339, and

(90)

for a code with

it is only about 1185.

for some

then

The following lemma improves the estimate on the number

of iterations in Theorem 1.

Lemma 8: Given some

sufficiently small, let be the

number of iterations that are required to obtain a feasible vector Combining this with (84) yields the following, which improves

in Problem-P that satisfies

(85) (and thus can be used to improve (86)):

Then

(91)

where and are positive constants that may only depend on .

Note that we can assume, without loss of generality, that

(simply replace by

in the lemma).

We proceed by using the following lemma which determines in (91) as a function of . We first define the
matrix by

Proof: We define as the largest integer for which

. Hence

. We also set

and we define recursively as follows:

for

, and

. Hence

so that

. Now applying the bound on the

number of iterations (88) to our case, and using the inequality

for

yields the following. The

number of iterations, , that are required until we have

satisfies

(92)

where is the -dimensional identity matrix, is a row

vector of ones, and is a

binary matrix, whose

element

is defined by

(93)

(recall that

is the indicator function, i.e.,

if

, and

otherwise).

Now, by (43) and (44) we know that

and

for

some constants and that may only depend on (note

that

and

where is sufficiently small).

Hence, for sufficiently small we have for some constants

and (that may only depend on )

Lemma 9: The vector in Lemma 4 can be defined such that for each
(94)
where is defined by (34), and where

is an extreme point of

(95)

and

(96)

where the second inequality follows by using the relations

and

. Now, using (45) we obtain that

(

is the norm of ).

Notes: 1) Since then the value of in our improved bound (91)
is given by

(97)

after at most

iterations for some positive constants

and (that may only depend on ).

where the maximization is over all possible values of a

The bound (86) (and consequently also (88)) can be improved

by improving the bound (85) as follows. Denote by

the norm of

, i.e.,

parity-check degree in the Tanner graph.

2) Equations (91) and (97) (with replacing ) show that

can be bounded by a term which is proportional to

, and in particular

as

. By

the argument that was used to derive (86), it also shows, for

any fixed , that if at some iteration we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4849

where

, then after at most an additional number of (101). Specifically, the conclusion of the lemma, (94), follows

iterations proportional to

we must have from [30, Corollary 3.3] (with

and

) where the

.

Lipschitz bound of ,

, is given by (95)–(96).2

Proof: From the definition (35) we know that

Unfortunately, the computation of is difficult even for small values of .

using (95)–(96)

and by the definition (34)

VI. EXTENSIONS TO GLDPC CODES

Thus, we conclude that (98)
Let be the -dimensional column vector

In the proof of Lemma 4 it was shown that

, and that the

vector

, defined in (46), satisfies (8)–(9) and

(47). These relations can be expressed as the matrix inequality

(99)

In this equation, the matrix is defined in (92), and is the -dimensional column vector defined by

In this section, we extend the previous results to generalized

LDPC (GLDPC) codes.

GLDPC codes [20], [31]–[33] generalize standard LDPC

codes by replacing the single parity-check codes in the Tanner

graph by general linear constituent codes. The approximate

iterative LP decoding algorithm remains almost unchanged,

except that the set is not necessarily the set defined in (4),

and can be any linear code with block length

(e.g., a

Hamming code). Consequently, the property that

if and

only if (14) holds is not valid any more. The following changes

are required in Algorithm 1. First, needs to be calculated

according to the definitions in (24) and (25), and it cannot be

computed using the more efficient (28) (although it is possible

that efficient computation can be realized for specific struc-

tured codes, e.g., using a modified Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv

(BCJR) algorithm on the minimal trellis representations of the

constituent codes). Second, instead of (35) we have

(102)

where is a column vector of zeros. Similarly, we let be the -dimensional column vector

It was shown in Lemma 4 that

(recall again that to

simplify the notation we use both

, where was defined

in Lemma 4, and

). Thus, there exists a vector,

, that satisfies

(100)

where

where needs to be chosen sufficiently large, as explained

below. Finally, instead of assuming that

after we

have concluded iterating, we assume that

. Thus, the

algorithm is now described by (24)–(27), (30)–(34), (102) and

(36)–(37).

Denote the minimum dual distance of the constituent code

associated with the constraint node by . In this section, we

show that our main result, Theorem 1, remains valid for GLDPC

codes provided that the requirement

(third

assumption in the beginning of Section III; the first two as-

sumptions are left unchanged) is replaced by the assumption that

.

Let denote the

-dimensional matrix

(103)

where tion set

is a row vector of ones and the

element

of is defined by (93). Note that the equa-

(104)

and was defined in (92). From (98) we conclude that

expresses the constraints (9)–(10).

(101) Lemma 10:

if and only if, when viewed as a matrix

Now, the required bound follows by applying the theory of over

has full row rank.

= = approximate solutions to systems of linear inequalities, which 2We are using the facts that xj j xj j and xj j

xj j where the 3

was initiated by Hoffman [29], by applying it to (99), (100), and denotes the dual norm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

Note that when the constituent code corresponding to con- Hence,

straint node is a single parity-check code, this condition de-

generates to

.

is defined by

Proof: First note that has full row rank if and only if

has full row rank (since one column of is the all-zero

column).

First part—If has full row rank then

: If

then contains at least one all-zero row. If

then

contains at least two equal rows. In both cases, cannot have

full row rank. This proves this part of the lemma.

Second part—If

then has full row rank: Suppose

then that

and consider the matrix

. Since

the rank of is the same as the rank of , it is sufficient to

show that has full rank. By a result on orthogonal arrays

[34, Theorem 8, p. 139], we know that half the elements of any

row of are ones and the other half are zeros. We also know

that any pair of rows of contains each -tuple

times.

Hence, the th elements of are given by

if if

The matrix is therefore a circulant matrix, and so its eigenvalues are given by the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of the first row of . Denote by the th eigenvalue of . Then

where

satisfies (105). Furthermore, for sufficiently large (139) also

holds. We have thus shown that Lemma 3 and Corollary 1 still

hold (with a different constant ).

We proceed by showing, using similar arguments, that a mod-

ified Lemma 4 holds for GLDPC codes. In this case, the assump-

tion of the lemma is

(instead of

), and the as-

sertion is that

(instead of (45)) for a different constant . The constant needs

to be chosen sufficiently large as explained below. The proof is

very similar to the proof of Lemma 4 except that the argument

(48) used to show that

does not hold. Instead, we use

the following arguments to prove this fact. Define

and

. Then similar to (106)

From (46) and (47) we also know that

if if

Since all the eigenvalues of are strictly positive, is full rank. This concludes the proof of the second part of the lemma.

Under the assumption

, in addition to as-

sumptions 1 and 2 in the beginning of Section III, we first claim

that Lemma 3 and Corollary 1 still hold, but with a different

constant . In fact, the proof of Lemma 3 is unchanged until

(142), but (143) cannot be used (since in general (14) is not

valid for GLDPC codes). Instead, to conclude the proof, we find

and that satisfy (139)–(143) for all

. Equa-

tions (140)–(141) can be expressed alternatively as

where

and

. Hence, by

defining

(107)

where

, we obtain

(108)

where the components of were defined in (102). Furthermore, denote

(105) where is the

element of . Recalling that

and using (107) and (34) we obtain

where

. Define

and

. Now, in the linear code represented by ,

the number of codewords with a zero at the th bit

is

equal to the number of codewords with a one at this bit (the th bit cannot be identically zero since, by Lemma 10, has full row rank). Therefore

for sufficiently large. Combining this with (108) we obtain

by definition that

. The rest of the proof is essentially

unchanged.

Finally, Lemma 5 and its proof remain unchanged for GLDPC (106) codes. Thus we have obtained the following.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4851

Theorem 4: Consider the iterative algorithm defined by

(24)–(27), (30)–(34), (102) and (36)–(37), for a GLDPC code.

We assume (38), and that there are no parallel edges in the

Tanner graph. We also assume that

, and that all

node degrees are bounded by some constant (independent of

). For any given , after

iterations, each with a constant

number of operations, the algorithm yields a vector , which is

feasible in Problem-P and satisfies

length and minimum distance . It is shown [37, Theorem 2] that if is integer and
then the LP decoder can correct any pattern of

Belief propagation decoding is independent of the transmitted codeword in a general scenario, including GLDPC codes transmitted over an MBIOS channel as a special case, e.g., [35], [36, proof of Lemma 1] (which applies to GLDPC codes transmitted over an MBIOS channel as a special case). The iterative LP decoder of GLDPC codes is also independent of the transmitted codeword. In fact, Lemmas 6 and 7 still hold. The proof of Lemma 7 is unchanged. The proof by induction of Lemma 6 is similar for GLDPC codes, except that we need to modify our proof of (72) using the definition (24) directly. For that purpose, we define

, and

if otherwise

errors or less in any transmitted codeword. Thus, by Theorem 4

and the same arguments as in Theorem 2, we conclude that,

under the assumptions of Theorem 4, the following holds. For

any

, the iterative algorithm can correct any set of

errors or less in any transmitted codeword of , thus producing a

decoded word with a vanishing BER in complexity of order

.

VII. EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we discuss some implementation issues and

then present some simulation results and comparisons.

To implement (28)–(29) we used the following. Denote by

and

, where the sign function,

, is defined by

if

if

Also, define the function for

by

We will prove (72) by showing that

(i.e.,

), and

if

). First suppose that

. Then, since

Then (28)–(29) can be rewritten as follows: if
(i.e.,

(109) (110)
(111)

(the denotes an XOR operation (symmetric difference) be-

tween sets, i.e., ) and since
. Similarly, when

we conclude that we have

For small and large values of , the following approximations can be used. For

(112)

and for

(113)

When

are large, i.e.,

for some constant (in our implementation

), we used

the following approximation in order to avoid a numerical error

and thus for GLDPC codes.

in the computation of using (109)–(111). In this case, by . This proves (72) and Lemma 6 (112) and (113) we obtain

In [37], the following GLDPC code is considered. The

code comprises of an -regular bipartite graph, which is

a

-expander, and constituent linear codes with block

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

Fig. 2. The average BER of the BP and the iterative LP decoders. The iterative LP decoder with the new scheduling rule (32) was evaluated using all three operating modes, A, B, and C. The iterative LP decoder with the simple cyclic scheduling rule was evaluated using only operating mode A.

To assess the performance of the algorithm in practice we ap- A. Set

and

. Iterate until

( is

plied it over the BSC with crossover probabilities in the range

defined in (34)).

. The code was drawn at random from the

B. Set

and

. Iterate until

.

-regular LDPC ensemble with block length

. Par- C. Set

and

. Iterate until

. Then

allel edges were then eliminated by an appropriate edge swap-

multiply by , divide by , and iterate with the

ping, so that the resulting code remained

-regular.

new constants. This process of multiplying by ,

However, higher order (four or higher) cycles were not elimi-

dividing by , and iterating with the new constants

nated. The results were averaged over a large number of ran-

is repeated for a total of ten times. In the end,

domly chosen codes. For crossover probabilities less than ,

and

.

each experiment was repeated using 5000 codes. For crossover Note that in operating mode C we start with the constants of op-

probabilities larger than or equal to , each experiment was erating mode A and end with the constants of operating mode

repeated using 200 codes. In each experiment with the iterative B. The motivation for using operating mode C is the following.

LP algorithm we recorded the BER, the number of iterations, There is a tradeoff in the setting of the parameter . On the one

and an upper bound on the distance

, where is the so- hand, if is large then each iteration provides only a small im-

lution that the iterative LP decoder produces. We then averaged provement in

. On the other hand, if is small then the

these values over all the experiments. The upper bound on the corresponding optimum of Problem-DS (and Problem-PS) can

distance,

, can be computed using (45). However, by be far from the optimum of Problem-D (and Problem-P). As

the proof of Lemma 4 it follows that we can improve this bound a compromise, it may be advantageous to start with a smaller

by replacing the term

by

. value of and gradually increase it to a larger value as the iter-

Thus, we obtain

ations progress. Motivated by the bound (45) we set inversely

proportional to , i.e., as increases decreases by the same

fraction.

For each BSC crossover probability we also evaluated the av(114) erage BER of the belief propagation (BP) algorithm. To imple-

ment the BP algorithm we applied 100 parallel iterations (the

(In fact, further improvements to this bound are possible using complexity of each parallel iteration has an order of

the derivation in the proof of Lemma 4, but the resulting bound iterations of the iterative LP algorithm). The algorithm does not

is more difficult to compute).

allow the absolute value of the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) mes-

We used both the new scheduling scheme (32) and a simple sages to increase above some threshold (i.e., messages with ab-

scheduling scheme in which we update the variables one after solute value above this threshold are clipped).

the other cyclically (i.e.,

). As was already In Fig. 2, we compare the average BER of the iterative LP

noted at the end of Section II, a lower complexity approximation algorithm with that of the BP algorithm. As can be seen, the

to (32) can be realized by implementing the algorithm using BERs of all the variants of the iterative LP decoding algorithm

several lists. We examined the following three operating modes. are about the same, and, for crossover values larger than ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4853

Fig. 3. The average number of iterations when using the various variants of the iterative LP decoder.

0 Fig. 4. The average upper bound on the distance P(~) P .

they are higher than the BER of the BP algorithm. For crossover than simple cyclic scheduling. Operating mode C is indeed the

values smaller than about , the LP decoder is slightly better most efficient among the three modes since it yields about the

than BP. These results are in agreement with the results reported same bound on the distance

as operating mode B

in [1] for the LP algorithm. The performance of the iterative LP with about the same number of iterations as operating mode A.

algorithm remained essentially the same when we applied a very Although the BP algorithm is better for crossover probabilities

large number of iterations, so that

became extremely above , the iterative LP decoder has some advantages.

small.

1) In order to apply BP decoding, one needs to know the true

In Fig. 3 we compare the average number of iterations until

crossover probability of the channel, while the iterative LP

the algorithm terminates, when using the various variants of the

decoder does not require this information (the min-sum

iterative LP decoder. In Fig. 4, we compare the average upper

decoder also has this property).

bound on the distance

that was presented in (114), 2) The iterative LP decoder has the ML certificate property.

where is the solution that the iterative LP decoder produces.

In the next section, we discuss this property for the iterative

It can be seen that the new scheduling scheme is more efficient

LP decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

0 Fig. 5. The values of  and the upper bound (114) on the distance P(~) P (we plot the logarithm of this bound divided by 7) as a function of the iteration
index for one experiment with crossover probability of 0:07.

3) The performance of the iterative LP decoder is slightly drawn at random from the

-regular LDPC en-

better for crossover probabilities lower than about . semble with block length

. Parallel edges were then

4) For the iterative LP decoder we have an efficient sched- eliminated by appropriate edge swapping as described above.

uling rule, an efficient stopping criterion, and a bound on Both graphs are not monotonically decreasing but they do have

the distance

. It is difficult to compare the number a general tendency to decrease. Note that the upper and lower

of iterations of the iterative LP decoder to the number envelopes of both graphs seem to be constant in some regions

of iterations of the BP decoder, since BP requires some of the iteration index, but a finer resolution plot shows that they

heuristic stopping rule. For small crossover probabilities, are not really constant in these regions. Also note that for a large

Fig. 3 shows that the iterative LP algorithm requires only a portion of the experiment the upper envelope of the graph is

small number of iterations. For a crossover probability of about which is the maximum value that can attain for an

, the iterative LP algorithm, under operating modes LDPC code with left degree . Both graphs show a threshold

A and C and with the new scheduling rule, requires about effect at iteration index of about . In this experiment, the

4200 iterations on average. The average BER is about

codeword was correctly decoded by the algorithm.

. The parallel BP algorithm with five parallel iterations (i.e., computational cost on the order of 5000 itera-

VIII. DISCUSSION

tions of the serial LP decoder) produces an average BER

of

, with ten parallel iterations the average BER

is

, and with 15 parallel iterations the average

BER is

. It was indicated in the past [38]–[40],

that the serial BP algorithm is more efficient in terms of

the number of iterations required to achieve some required

performance level. The serial BP algorithm with 5000 iter-

ations produces an average BER of

, with 8000

iterations the average BER is

, and with 10000

iterations the average BER is

.

In addition to that, it may be possible to combine the computa-

tionally efficient iterative LP decoder with improved LP-based

decoders that were proposed in the literature. In addition, the

fact that the performance of the LP algorithm can be accu-

rately described using pseudocodewords may prove useful for

improved finite length bounds.

Finally, in Fig. 5 we plot both the values of and the upper

bound (114) on

(we plot the logarithm of this bound

divided by in order to fit both curves into the same graph) as a

function of the iteration index for one experiment with crossover

In this paper, we were interested in obtaining a vector, which

is feasible in the LP decoding problem, and has an objective

function value, whose distance to the minimum, normalized by

the block length, can be made arbitrarily small. We have shown

that such a feasible vector can be obtained with a computational

complexity which scales linearly in the block length. We have

also shown that previous results on the ability of the LP decoder

to correct some fixed fraction of errors hold with linear com-

putational complexity. Finally, we have extended our results to

GLDPC codes.

The ML certificate property [1] of the LP decoder asserts that

any integer solution to the LP problem is also a solution to the

ML decoding problem. For the linear complexity approximated

LP decoder we can assert the following instead. Suppose for

simplicity that we transmit over the BSC so that we can assume,

without loss of generality,

. Consider the fea-

sible vector and the integer decoded word produced by the

algorithm. Suppose that is feasible in Problem-P (hence, is

a codeword), and that

probability of and under operating mode A. The code was

(115)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4855

for some small value of ping rule (45) asserts

. Further suppose that the stop-

(116)

for some small value of

, where is the minimum value

of Problem-P. In addition, by the definition of the LP and ML

problems (recalling that denotes the ML solution)

(117)

Hence we conclude

(118)

Given some

APPENDIX A SIMPLE PROOF OF (14)
and vector , we consider the event

such that (8)–(10) hold (for this

(121)

We show that (121) holds if and only if (14) holds. This was first

shown in [21] (see also [1]). Here we provide a simple alterna-

tive proof based on Farkas’ lemma.

First note that we can assume

since

otherwise both (121) and (14) do not hold. Let the matrix be

defined by (103) and (93). Then (104) expresses the constraints

(9)–(10) for the given . By Farkas’ lemma [23, p. 263], a strong

alternative to (121), i.e., to the existence of a vector such

that (104) and

hold, is the existence of a vector

such that

where the first inequality is due to the fact that is a codeword

and hence it satisfies the constraints (7)–(10) of the ML problem,

the second is due to (115), and the third is due to (116) and (117).

That is, the score of the decoded codeword is close to that of

the ML solution. Note that the above derivation holds for any

codeword that satisfies (115), and not only to the decoded word

given in (37) (when it is known to be a codeword). For example,

if the decoded word is not a codeword, but one can apply an

additional decoding algorithm (e.g., the bit-flipping algorithm)

that takes as input and outputs a codeword that satisfies (115)

(with instead of ) then the score of the codeword will be

close to that of the ML solution.

The usefulness of this conclusion can be demonstrated as fol-

lows. Denote by

the minimum distance of the code (note

that the minimum distance of almost all codes in the regular

LDPC code ensemble is proportional to the block

length, [8]), and by the number of errors produced by

the channel. We claim that if

(119)

then is the correct transmitted codeword. To verify this claim we can assume, without loss of generality by Lemmas 6 and 7, that the all-zero codeword was transmitted. Then for any codeword , which is not the all-zero codeword,

It is easy to verify that the last condition is equivalent to the

existence of

such that

Thus, (121) holds if and only if

(122)

Given

, denote by

(123)

(note that is a function of

). If is even then the

left-hand side of (122) is minimized by

. Hence, (122)

is satisfied for all

with even. Otherwise, is

odd and the left-hand side of (122) is minimized by

if otherwise

where

, thus yielding

(120)

Hence, (121) holds if and only if

where the first inequality is due to the fact that there are er-

rors

, and the second inequality is due to (119). On the

odd:

other hand, for the all-zero codeword, , we have

.

Hence,

, and by (118) and (120) we finally con-

(124)

clude that

. This shows the validity of our claim.

It would be interesting to explore further possible improve- where is defined in (123). Note that all terms in both sums

ments of the bounds on the convergence rate. In particular, an above are nonnegative. Hence, we can assume, without loss of

efficient computation of

(or tight bound) is needed generality, that

(if

then

in order to assess the improvement that can be realized by using (124) holds and if

then we can normalize by

(91). In Section VII, we have seen that it is advantageous to dividing all the ’s by

). Hence, we can further-

slowly increase the parameter of the algorithm, and at the more assume without loss of generality that

same time to slowly decrease the parameter . The analysis of (since

and therefore

. In

this strategy is also left for further research.

addition all terms in the sums in (124) are nonnegative. Hence,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

if

and

otherwise.

once (124) is proved for

, the proof of (124) Note that

is a function of defined in (13).

for the general case follows immediately). Thus, (124) is equiv- The Lagrange dual of the minimization (126) subject to (127)

alent to (14).

is given by (recall the definition (12))

APPENDIX B PROOF OF LEMMA 1
Note that both problems are convex. We will prove the lemma by computing the Lagrange dual of Problem-D. First we rewrite (15) as

where

is defined in the equation at the top of the page.We

conclude that

if s.t. (8)–(10) hold otherwise.

Hence (125)

Now, the Lagrange dual of (125) subject to (16) is given by (see, e.g., [23])
where

where the minimization on the right-hand side is subject to (8)–(10), and this is by definition Problem-P. Thus, Problem-P and Problem-D are Lagrange dual convex problems.
By strong Lagrange duality (the Slater regularity condition holds trivially in this case) [23], the minimum of Problem-P is equal to the maximum of Problem-D.

APPENDIX C PROOF OF LEMMA 2 Note that both problems are convex. We will prove the lemma by computing the Lagrange dual of Problem-DS. First we rewrite (20) as
(128)

where is defined in (17) and

Now, the Lagrange dual of (128) subject to (16) is given by
where (126)

subject to (127)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4857

subject to (39) and to (16). The Lagrange dual of this problem is given by
(136)

where

and

where is defined in (17) and

(129)

subject to
(130) where
By computing the Lagrange dual of (129)–(130), and then using strong duality, as in [23, Example 5.5, p. 254], we obtain

(137)

(131) ( is defined in (17)) subject to

subject to and

(138)

(132) (133)

Now, by computing the Lagrange dual of (137)–(138) and using strong duality as in [23, Example 5.5, p. 254] (similar to the application in (129)–(134)) we obtain

(134)

Hence

subject to

(139) (140)

where the minimization on the right-hand side is subject to (8)–(10), and this is by definition Problem-PS.
By strong Lagrange duality (the Slater regularity condition holds trivially in this case) [23], the minimum of Problem-PS is equal to the maximum of Problem-DS.

APPENDIX D PROOF OF LEMMA 3

Let Consider the following problem:

be some fixed numbers.

and (141)

Now, the problem (135) subject to (39) and (16), and the

problem (136) are Lagrange dual problems. Hence, by weak du-

ality, for any vector

and a vector that satisfies (39)

and (16), we have

(135)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

subject to the constraints (139)–(141), which need to hold for

all

. Thus, if we can find feasible

and , such that

for all

, (139)–(141) are satisfied, then

(142)

But by (14), we know that and are feasible if and only if and

Now, for

and

since in this case

odd (143) , the condition (143) holds

odd

The first inequality is due to the fact that

and the

second is due to the fact that

. Note that

other settings, of larger values of and , are also possible,

but these would result in a looser bound (i.e., they yield a larger

compared to (40)).

We conclude that

for all possible assignments of clusion of Lemma 3 follows immediately.

, and the con-

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and the Associate Editor, Igal Sason, for their very helpful comments. One of the reviewers has provided Lemma 10 and its proof, and has indicated that the scheduling rule (32) does not ensure a linear complexity algorithm (in the final version this problem was solved by modifying the algorithm).

REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[2] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory and Its Applications, ISITA 2004, Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 991–996.
[3] G. D. Forney Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models (Minneapolis, MN, 1999), IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, pp. 101–112.

[4] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory [Online]. Available: arXiv:cs/0512078v1, submitted for publication
[5] S. C. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixed-integer adaptive linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2007), Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1656–1660.
[6] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[7] A. G. Dimakis, A. A. Gohari, and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoding,” [Online]. Available: arXiv:cs.IT/0709.3915, submitted for publication
[8] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[9] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[11] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Linear programming-based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” in Proc. 40th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002, pp. 467–477.
[12] K. Yang, J. Feldman, and X. Wang, “Nonlinear programming approaches to decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2006.
[13] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006, pp. 1603–1613, [Online]. Available: arxiv:cs/0602088v1.
[14] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On low-complexity linear-programming decoding of LDPC codes,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 509–517, Aug. 2007.
[15] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming approach to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1061–1072, Mar. 2008.
[16] P. O. Vontobel, “Interior-point algorithms for linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. 2008 Information Theory and Applications Workshop, Univ. Calif. San Diego, La Jolla, CA, Jan. 2008, pp. 433–437.
[17] T. Wadayama, “Interior point decoding for linear vector channels based on convex optimization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.Information Theory (ISIT 2008), Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1493–1497.
[18] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 82–89, Jan. 2007.
[19] C. Daskalakis, A. G. Dimakis, R. M. Karp, and M. J. Wainwright, “Probabilistic analysis of linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3565–3578, Aug. 2008.
[20] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[21] R. G. Jeroslow, “On defining sets of vertices of the hypercube by linear inequalities,” Discr. Math., vol. 11, pp. 119–124, 1975.
[22] D. Bertsekas, Convex Analysis and Optimization. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 2003.
[23] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2004.
[24] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[25] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for message passing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 782–790, Feb. 2001.
[26] V. V. Zyablov and M. S. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity for Gallager low-density codes,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 18–28, May 1976.
[27] D. Burshtein, “On the error correction of regular LDPC codes using the flipping algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 517–530, Feb. 2008.
[28] I. Csiszár and J. Körner, Information Theory: Coding Theorems for Discrete Memoryless Systems, 2nd ed. Budapest, Hungary: Akadémiai Kiadó, Dec. 1997.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN: ITERATIVE APPROXIMATE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES WITH LINEAR COMPLEXITY

4859

[29] A. J. Hoffman, “On approximate solutions of systems of linear inequalities,” J. Res. Nat. Bur. Stand., vol. 49, pp. 263–265, 1952.
[30] O. Güler, A. J. Hoffman, and U. G. Rothblum, “Approximations to solutions to systems of linear inequalities,” SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 688–696, Apr. 1995.
[31] J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Zemor, “Generalized low-density (Tanner) codes,” in Proc. 1999 IEEE Int. Conf. Communication (ICC 1999), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 1999, pp. 441–445.
[32] M. Lentmaier and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density parity-check codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.
[33] T. Wadayama, “An extension of Gallager ensemble of low-density parity-check codes,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals of Electron., Commun. and Comput. Sci., vol. E85-A, no. 1, pp. 1161–1171, Jan. 2002.
[34] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[35] A. Bennatan, “On Generalized LDPC Codes,” M.Sc. thesis, Tel-Aviv Univ., Tel-Aviv, Israel, Apr. 2002.
[36] A. Bennatan and D. Burshtein, “Design and analysis of nonbinary LDPC codes for arbitrary discrete-memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 549–583, Feb. 2006.

[37] C. A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Eigenvalue bounds on the pseudocodeword weight of expander codes,” Adv. Math. of Commun., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 287–307, Aug. 2007.
[38] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2002, vol. 1, pp. 8–15.
[39] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding,” Physica A: Statist. Mech. Its Applic., vol. 330, no. 1–2, pp. 259–270, 2003.
[40] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, 2007.
David Burshtein (M’92–SM’99) received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering in 1982 and 1987, respectively, from Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
During 1988–1989, he was a Research Staff Member in the speech recognition group of IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY. In 1989 he joined the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, where he is presently a Professor. His research interests include information theory, codes on graphs and iterative decoding algorithms, and signal processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:34:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

