IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

39

Asymptotic Spectra of Trapping Sets in Regular and Irregular LDPC Code Ensembles
Olgica Milenkovic, Member, IEEE, Emina Soljanin, Senior Member, IEEE, and Philip Whiting, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We evaluate the asymptotic normalized average distributions of a class of combinatorial configurations in random, regular and irregular, binary low-density parity-check (LDPC) code ensembles. Among the configurations considered are trapping and stopping sets. These sets represent subsets of variable nodes in the Tanner graph of a code that play an important role in determining the height and point of onset of the error-floor in its performance curve. The techniques used for deriving the spectra include large deviations theory and statistical methods for enumerating binary matrices with prescribed row and column sums. These techniques can also be applied in a setting that involves more general structural entities such as subcodes and/or minimal codewords, that are known to characterize other important properties of soft-decision decoders of linear block codes.
Index Terms—Asymptotic enumeration, large deviations theory, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE performance and complexity of many well-known classes of decoding algorithms are influenced to a large extent by combinatorial properties of the underlying linear block codes. An example includes bounded-distance decoding, the performance of which is completely determined by the weight distribution of the code and the transition parameter of the binary symmetric channel (BSC). Similarly, the performance and complexity of certain soft-decision decoding algorithms for codes used over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel can be characterized in terms of the code’s minimal codewords (i.e., codewords with supports that do not contain the support of any other codeword) [1], [5] and the minimal codewords of their dual codes. Furthermore, for the binary erasure channel (BEC), iterative decoding techniques fail if
Manuscript received August 22, 2005; revised October 6, 2006. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF0514857 awarded to O. Milenkovic and by the DIMACS Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science. The material in this work was presented in part at the 43rd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, September 2005, and at the International Conference on Communications (ICC), Istanbul, Turkey, June 2006.
O. Milenkovic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309 USA. During the period of August 2006 to August 2007, she is on leave at the Center for Information Theory and Applications, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla CA 92093 USA (e-mail: olgica.milenkovic@colorado.edu).
E. Soljanin and P. Whiting are with Bell Labs, Lucent, Murray Hill, NJ 07974 USA (e-mail: emina@lucent.com; pawhiting@lucent.com).
Communicated by G. Zémor, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figs. 1–6 are available online at http://ieeeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2006.887060

the errors are confined to subsets of variable nodes forming

a stopping set [4], while for the AWGN channel, a similar

phenomena can be observed with respect to trapping sets [6],

[15].

The problem of enumerating and classifying all the aforemen-

tioned and other combinatorial entities in a given code is usu-

ally intractable. It is therefore of interest to find probabilistic

methods that would allow for computing the average of a chosen

set of parameters of a given code ensemble, which can then be

used to describe the average performance of the ensemble as

well as the performance of a randomly chosen code from the

given category.

We will be concerned with random LDPC code ensem-

bles and with combinatorial structures that bear an influence

on the error-floor characteristics of these codes. LDPC

codes are known for their excellent performance at moderate

signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). Nevertheless, for sufficiently

high SNRs, some of these codes tend to exhibit sudden changes

in the slope of the bit-error rate (henceforth, BER) curve. This

change in the slope of the BER curve is known as the error-floor

of the code. For a large class of codes, including those based

on Cayley graphs [17] or certain types of designs, error-floors

appear at relatively high BERs. This prohibits the use of such

codes in storage and deep-space communication systems that

require extremely reliable signaling techniques with BERs

below

. For many other codes, error-floors cannot be

observed directly, because they are out of reach of standard

simulation techniques [15], [20]. In order to assess the proper-

ties of such codes, one has to utilize error-floor approximation

techniques based on stopping- and trapping-set classification.

Stopping sets were introduced in [4], while the more general

notion of a trapping sets (sometimes referred to as a near-code-

word) was first described in the context of error-floor analysis

in [11]. The latter concept was further developed in the seminal

paper [15], in which trapping set configurations were shown to

influence the point of onset as well as the slope of the error-floor

curve of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The method

described in [15] relies on a computer-search strategy and may

not lead to the identification of all possible trapping sets in an

efficient manner.

This paper describes a novel and conceptually simple method

for analyzing the asymptotic behavior of the distribution of both

trapping and stopping sets, based on enumeration techniques de-

scribed in [9] and large deviations theory [3], [2]. The latter

problem was previously analyzed in [14], for a less general

class of code ensembles and by using involved combinatorial

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

methods. The techniques described in this work also provide a simple framework for evaluating the distributions of other, more complicated, combinatorial entities. The main contributions of the paper consist in identifying a universal method for analyzing such configurations in LDPC code ensembles and in deriving comprehensive results concerning trapping set distributions in random, regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles.
The paper is organized as follows. The terminology and definitions needed for subsequent derivations are given in Section II. Section III contains the main results: the asymptotic distribution of trapping sets of constant size and size linear in the length of the codes for regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles. Section IV provides an extension of the results in [14] related to stopping sets. Section V contains numerical results complementing the analytical formulas derived in Section IV, as well as a description of the expected error-floor properties of the investigated code ensembles.

II. DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY

A. Stopping and Trapping Sets

Let be the parity-check matrix of an

LDPC code,

and let

denote its corresponding bipartite Tanner graph.

The columns of are indexed by the variable (left-hand side)

nodes of

, while the rows of are indexed by the check

(right-hand side) nodes of

. We are concerned with the

following subsets of that play an important role in decoding

LDPC codes over the BEC and AWGN channel.

Definition 2.1: A stopping set

of a parity-check ma-

trix is a subset of nodes in , for which the subgraph of

induced by

and its neighbors contains no check

nodes of degree one.

error-floors in LDPC codes arise both due to the properties of the code graph and decoding algorithm, as well as to the realization of certain special channel-noise configurations.

At the first several iterations of belief propagation, due to the presence of certain low-probability noise samples, variable nodes internal to one particular trapping set experience a large increase in the reliability estimates for incorrect bit values. This information may also “propagate” to other variable nodes in the trapping set, some of which already have very low reliability or wrong channel values themselves. After this initial information exchange phase, variables outside the trapping set usually start adjusting the incorrect estimates toward the correct values. But by that time, the variable nodes in a trapping set may already have significantly biased their decisions toward the incorrect values. Since there are very few check nodes capable of detecting errors within the trapping set, this unreliable information remains “trapped” within this set of variables until the termination of the decoding process.
The exact relationship between the frame error probability and the distribution of trapping sets is still not well understood. It is conjectured [15] that the frame error rate (FER) of a code can be approximated by

FER

(1)

Definition 2.2: A general

trapping set

of a

parity-check matrix is a configuration of nodes from , for

which the subgraph in

induced by

and its neigh-

bors contains

odd-degree check nodes. An elementary

trapping set is a trapping set for which all check nodes

in the induced subgraph have either degree one or two, and there

are exactly degree-one check nodes. The sets of all

general and elementary trapping sets in a Tanner graph of a code

with parity-check matrix will be denoted by

and

, respectively. Of special interest are trapping sets for

which both and are relatively small.

where denotes the set of decoder inputs that lead to a de-

coding failure on the trapping set ; clearly, this set varies

with the channel parameters. Although, at this point, the prob-

abilities

cannot be characterized analytically, there

exist numerical methods for estimating their values [15]. There-

fore, conditioned on the knowledge of these probabilities, the

FER is completely determined by the distribution of the trap-

ping sets , for all relevant values of the parameters and .

Usually, the smaller the trapping set (i.e., the smaller the values

of and , with

), the stronger the influence of the set

Two examples of the incidence structures corresponding to on the FER. Nevertheless, there exist examples of trapping sets

elementary

and

trapping sets of a LDPC code which bear a strong influence on the error-floor, for which is

with constant column weight equal to three are shown below. relatively large, and exceeds the value [8]. Also, in some

The variables and represent the labels of the variable and instances of belief-propagation decoding, an

trapping

parity-check nodes in the induced subgraph of the trapping sets. set will provide a significant contribution to the FER, while an

The role of stopping sets in iterative decoding of codes used

trapping set with

will have almost no impact on

over the BEC channel is well-understood, and a detailed de- the code’s performance.

scription of the connection between stopping sets and both the As an illustration of the error trapping phenomena, three dif-

BER and frame error probability can be found in [4]. For more ferent types of trapping sets observed during belief propaga-

general classes of binary-input, symmetric-output channels, tion decoding of a Margulis-type LDPC code [8] are shown in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: ASYMPTOTIC SPECTRA OF TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

41

Fig. 1. Frames with trapping set errors, standard belief propagation.

Fig. 1.1 The number of erroneous variables in the code is

plotted with respect to the number of iterations of sum-product

decoding. Here, the decoding algorithm gets “trapped” in a

elementary trapping set (Fig. 1(top)), or in a

trapping set (Fig. 1(middle)). In the later case, errors spread

from the initial trapping set to a large number of variable nodes

within 10–15 iterations. Note that although the Margulis code

is a highly structured code, very similar “error-floor” behaviors

can be observed for randomly chosen codes [15]. In all these

cases, elementary trapping sets provide dominant contributions

to the probability of erroneous decoding.

The findings described above motivate the study of elemen-

tary and general

trapping sets, in which both and

are fixed (i.e., independent from ), as well as the study of the

asymptotic growth rate of the number of trapping sets with pa-

rameters and directly proportional to the code length. Such

an analysis allows one to deduce some important properties of

the combinatorial code structure with respect to the following.

• The influence of the column and row weight profiles on the

number of trapping sets.

• The critical values for the parameters and for which a

code in the ensemble is very likely to contain an exponen-

tial number of

trapping sets.

• The probability of a random code ensemble containing

trapping sets with small values of or .

distributions are given by the vectors

and

, respectively. Here,

and

can take

any positive integer values. The probability distributions over

these random ensembles are uniform. If

and

for

all , the underlying ensemble is denoted by

and termed a

regular ensemble. Otherwise, the ensemble is referred to as an

irregular ensemble. In the former case, we use

to

denote

and tacitly assume that . In our analysis, we also consider

a class of irregular matrix ensembles, denoted by

with the following property: the rows and columns of any given

matrix in

are ordered according to their type. This means

that the set of columns (rows) of a matrix in the ensemble are

partitioned according to their weight, so that in every subset of

the partition the vectors have the same weight. An example of a

parity-check matrix from an ensemble

with

and

is shown as

follows:

(2)

B. Code Ensembles

Throughout the paper, we use

to denote the ensemble

of binary parity-check matrices of dimension

and

to denote the ensemble of binary parity-check matrices

of dimension

for which the column and row weight

More formally, by following the setup in [10], we define two sets

of rational numbers in the interval , namely,

and

, with the following properties. The first is the

normalization property, implying

1The Margulis code is usually used as the “reference code” for analyzing error-floors and trapping sets.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

42

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

where

and

. The second property is

the enumerative property, which asserts that and have

to be integer valued. For such sets of numbers, we define two

classes of intervals

where

and

, and and are as given in

Definition 2.2. We alternatively refer to

and

as

the normalized average asymptotic distributions or normalized

average asymptotic spectra of elementary and general trapping

sets, respectively. Furthermore, we define the critical elemen-

tary trapping exponent as

(3)

The matrix ensemble

is then defined as the collection of

binary matrices

such that for every integer

, the value of

is fixed, and similarly,

such that for every integer

, the value of

is fixed. A matrix from the ensemble

can consequently

be partitioned into horizontal and vertical “strips” of size

and , respectively, such that the rows in strip have weight

, and columns in strip have weight . The principle of con-

servations of ones implies that the parameters

and

must satisfy

where denotes the total number of ones in a parity-check

matrix.

Note that both classes of ensemble

and

are iden-

tical to the ones considered in [9] and [10] for the purpose of

evaluating the underlying codes average weight enumerators.

For the example in (2),

and

and

and

and

and

.

Define next

This exponent describes the smallest value of (recall that

and

) for which the number of

elementary

trapping sets with fixed is exponential in the length of the code.

C. Large Deviation Theory and Random Matrix Enumeration
The task of computing the asymptotic normalized average trapping set spectra is greatly simplified by using techniques borrowed from the field of large deviations theory. For a detailed treatment of the subject of large deviations theory, the interested reader is referred to [3]. For reasons of clarity, we will describe next a set of results from this branch of probability, including Sanov’s theorem [18], [2, p. 292] and its extensions, as well as Varadhan’s lemma [3]. Before stating these two results, we need to define the following probabilistic notions. The terminology introduced below is assembled from the exposition in [2, Ch. 12].
Definition 2.3: The type (i.e., empirical distribution) of a sequence over an alphabet is the set of relative frequencies of symbols in contained in the sequence. The relative frequencies are rational numbers, and denotes the set of types for which the denominator of all the frequencies is .
Definition 2.4: The type class of an empirical distribution is defined as

(4) where

(5)

In the preceding expressions, it is assumed that and grow

linearly with , while

denotes either the ensemble

or the ensemble . Which one of the two ensembles is con-

sidered will be apparent from the context.

Two problems are addressed in the paper. The first is con-

cerned with finding the probability of trapping sets with param-

eters and (i.e., parameters and that do not grow with

) in a given code ensemble. The second problem is the central

theme of the paper, and it is concerned with finding asymptotic

expressions for

and

(7)

For a given subset of the set of probability mass func-

tions,

is used to denote

, where

. Observe that although is a type

class and is a subset of probability mass function, their inter-

section can be formally viewed as the intersection of sequences

generated by mass functions in and . Alternatively, it can

be viewed as the intersection of probability mass functions in

and empirical distributions with type class .

Theorem 2.1: (Sanov’s theorem) Let

be in-

dependent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random variables

with probability mass function

over a bounded alphabet

of elements. Let be a set of probability distributions. Then

(8) where

and
(6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: ASYMPTOTIC SPECTRA OF TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

43

denotes Shannon’s relative entropy. Furthermore, if is the closure of its interior, then

Intuitively, Sanov’s theorem describes the probability of a

distribution mass function being “far from” or “close to” the

empirical distribution of variables with mass func-

tion in terms of the information divergence between and

.

A straightforward corollary of the theorem is a set of rules

that allows one to find the asymptotic behavior of the normal-

ized logarithm of the probability of a union of events of the

form

, for a given set

of functions of i.i.d. random variables

.

This can be accomplished by defining a set of probability dis-

tributions

Another important component of the analysis of trapping sets is related to the structure of the random code ensemble. With respect to this issue, one is concerned with asymptotic enumeration techniques for matrices with prescribed row and column weight profiles. The following result on the number of zero–one matrices with such weight distribution properties will be used in several subsequent derivations [6]. It represents a strengthening of the theorems in [7] and [13] that allows the results of the main theorem to hold true for a large range of parameters.

Theorem 2.3: Let

denote the number of square

zero–one matrices of dimension , with rows of weight

, and columns of weight

.

Set

and

, and let

. If

and

, then

(9)

and then finding the distribution in that minimizes the relative

entropy

. The minimum of the relative entropy function

represents, according to Sanov’s theorem, the growth exponent

of the probability under investigation. This growth exponent is

usually referred to as the rate function of the given probability,

and is denoted by .

In the derivations pertaining to the asymptotic normalized av-

erage spectra of trapping sets in irregular codes, one encounters

certain summations for which the asymptotic expressions can be

found by invoking Varadhan’s lemma [3]. This important result

in large deviations theory can be stated as follows.

Theorem 2.2: (Varadhan’s lemma) Let

It can be easily shown that the same type of enumeration result

holds for matrices that are not necessarily square, but of dimen-

sion

, where is some constant.

Observe that the corresponding theorem in [13] used for finding the asymptotic normalized average weight distribution of LDPC codes pertains to a maximum column/row weight bounded from above by , rather than by (as given in Theorem 2.3).

III. TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR CODE ENSEMBLES

denote a sequence of probability distributions satisfying the large deviations principle with rate function , that is, a function such that

Here we find the asymptotic normalized average distribution of elementary and general trapping sets in the ensemble of matrices . Although the described approach represents a special instance of the derivations concerning irregular ensembles,

•

for

or

, where denotes a separate proof is provided in order to highlight the different

the mean of the variable ;

ways in which large deviations theory is utilized. The corre-

• for each closed subset of (the set of real numbers) sponding results are presented in Theorems 3.1 and 3.4, respec-

tively. The main components of the proof can be summarized

as follows. First, a set of combinatorial conditions is imposed

on the structure of random-like matrices containing a trapping

• for each open subset of

set with parameters

. Matrices of this form are enumer-

ated using Theorem 2.3. The result of this enumeration process

is recognized as a constrained sum which represents a proba-

bility mass function. This finding allows for a simple deduction

• the rate function is lower semi-continuous; • for each real number , the set
pact. Then, provided that is continuous and bounded

is com-

of the asymptotic behavior of the sum in terms of large deviations theory. The use of Sanov’s theorem mitigates the need for demonstrating the uniqueness of the underlying solutions and for proving other relevant properties of the sum, due to the fact that minimization is performed over relative entropy functions.

In the remainder of the paper, all logarithms will be taken with (10) respect to the natural base .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

44

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

A. Elementary Trapping Sets

The next theorem and corollary establish the asymptotic behavior of elementary trapping sets in regular LDPC code ensembles.

Theorem 3.1: Let

, and let

. The asymp-

totic normalized average distribution

of

elementary trapping sets of the ensemble

with

constant values is given by

Note that by going over all column orderings, it can be shown that

where the sum is taken over all triples

(14) such that
(15)

The probability

that the transpose of a parity-check ma-

trix takes the form (11) with condition (13) is given by

where

, with

, de-

notes Shannon’s (natural) entropy.

Proof: The proof represents a generalization of the argu-

ments used in [9] for evaluating average weight distributions of

code ensembles. For reasons of simplicity, we will work with

transposes of parity-check matrices, .

Let us write

(11)

where is an

and is an

zero–one

matrix. Let the column weights of be

, and let

denote the number of columns of weight in the matrix

(12)

If

, i.e., if all columns of have weight zero,

one, or two, then the rows of correspond to variables of an

elementary

trapping set.

Define

to be the set

(16) From Theorem 2.3 it follows that

for some

. Based on the same result, one can also show

that

equals the expression at the bottom of the page,

for some

. The last expression is obtained by using the

constraining relations (15) to rewrite the sum

specified in Theorem 2.3. Because of the relations (15), for a given value of , the sum in (14) contains only one term. This term is

where

and

and similarly, let

denote the set

where

, and exactly values of are

equal to , exactly values are equal to , and the remaining

values are equal to . Furthermore, define

(13)

(17)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: ASYMPTOTIC SPECTRA OF TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

45

Consequently, the probability of interest can be written as

or two only. With respect to the problem of trapping set enu-

meration, one is usually interested in the case

. By intro-

ducing

, one obtains the following result.

Corollary 3.1: For

and

one has

(18)

The asymptotic behavior of

can be determined in

two steps. First, it is straightforward to show that is asymptotically equal to

(19)

Second, the asymptotic expression for the probability above can be obtained by invoking Stirling’s approximation formula
and the binomial approximation for-

mula

, where

denotes

Shannon’s natural entropy.

Assume next that

. Based

on the previous results, one can obtain the following asymptotic

formula for

:

where both

and

be rewritten as

. The last expression can

which is independent of , and corresponds to the average ensemble distribution of codewords with induced check degrees equal to zero or two.

Based on the derivations presented in the previous theorem,

one can also establish the asymptotic behavior of

for the

case of constant parameters and

(both independent

of ), or for the case that one parameter is fixed and the other

allowed to grow linearly with .

Corollary 3.2: Let

and

so that

.

For a constant value for the size of an elementary trapping set

with a constant number of degree-one check nodes, one has

(20)

for some constant independent on , but which depends on

and . Furthermore, for

and fixed, the same

probability is of the form

, where

is inde-

pendent on and depends on and only.

Proof: The result follows from the observation that the

only term in (18) contributing to the negative exponent of is

. A straightforward application

of Stirling’s formula, asserting that

,

establishes the first claimed result. Assume next that is fixed

and consider (18) again. In addition to the contribution from the

term

, we have to take into ac-

count the additional term rewritten as

. This expression may be

where converges to a finite limit as

.

By using Stirling’s formula, the second expression in the

product above has the form

where

By adding the asymptotic formula for

to the terms

listed above, accounting for the possible choices of the

rows of result.

describing the trapping set, one obtains the claimed For

and is decreasing (strictly in a neigh-

borhood of the origin). The claimed result follows by setting

The derived expressions for the distribution of elementary

.

trapping sets are also valid for the case that either or , or

both, grow sublinearly with . As a result of this observation and

Theorem 2.3, analogue distribution results hold for dense ma-

trix (code) ensembles, where the maximum row and/or column

weights are

.

The result of Theorem 3.1 allows for evaluating the asymp-

Theorem 3.2: Let be the smallest for which a randomly

chosen code from a regular ensemble with column and row

weight and , respectively, contains an elementary trapping

set with parameters

. Then for all

, the

probability

totic normalized average distribution of a general class of con-

figurations involving induced check degrees of value zero, one, converges to zero when

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

46

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Proof: The result can be proved following the same where is the (unique) positive solution of the equation procedure outlined in [14], pertaining to stopping sets. From Markov’s inequality, it follows that

Based on the definition of pressed as

Proof: In this case, the proof begins in a similar manner as the proof of Theorem 3.1. The partition of the matrix , the second sum can be ex- remains of the same form, except for the constraints that

with . Since

, the above quantity tends to zero when and

. Observe next that

if

and is sufficiently small. This yields the following

upper bound:

where

and exactly values of the ’s are ,

exactly values of the ’s are , and so on, and exactly

values of the ’s are equal to . Furthermore, let

for obtain

(21) The probability of interest now takes the form
and a positive constant. Summing over , we

and by using the same type of argument as described in the pre-

vious theorem, one arrives at the following formula for

:

where

. However, since

, the bound

(21) converges to zero by definition of , and by inspection of

(18).

Theorem 3.2 guarantees that with probability going to with

(22)

a regular randomly chosen LDPC code that has an elementary

trapping set of size

must have

degree-one check where

nodes, where cannot be smaller than .

B. General Trapping Sets

The next theorem and corollary establish expression for the stands for

asymptotic normalized average distribution of general trapping

such that

sets in regular LDPC code ensembles.

, and where the sum is taken over all

Theorem 3.3: Let

, and let

totic normalized average distribution

trapping sets of the ensemble

and , is given by

. The asympof , for constant values

(23)
We introduce next a simple method for evaluating the sum in (22) based on a set of results from large deviations theory. 2 Let

(24)
2This type of analysis can also be used to significantly simplify/generalize the proofs in [9] and [14] related to weight and stopping set enumerators. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: ASYMPTOTIC SPECTRA OF TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

47

so that

represents a probability vector. Multiplying

both the numerator and denominator of the expression in (22)

by , one obtains the following formula for

:

Again, by adding the asymptotic value of

to the ex-

pression, accounting for the possible choices of the

variable nodes of the trapping set, one arrives at the claimed re-

sult.

Corollary 3.3: For constant values (25) one has

of a trapping set,

where the constraining equations (23) hold.

According to Sanov’s theorem, the problem of estimating the

probability in (34) reduces to finding a probability mass function

that minimizes

, such that

(26)

(31)
for some constants and independent on . Proof: Without loss of generality, assume that is even.
In order to prove the claimed result, we observe that the constraining relations (23) imply that

with probabilities defined according to (24). By using the Lagrangian multiplier method, with multiplier function
(27)

so that

i.e. (32)

one can show that the unique3 optimizing distribution for both Similarly, one can show that

.

even and odd is of the form

Based on the previous expressions, it is straightforward to see

that

for even values of (33)

for odd values of Here, we used the following straightforward identities:

(28) is bounded from above by a constant independent from . Therefore
(34)

where the sum contains only a constant number of terms. Inserting the upper and lower bounds of (32) into (34) yields the claimed result.

In all the above expressions, represents the (only) positive root of the equation

As for the case of elementary trapping sets, the same distribu-

tion results hold for dense matrix (code) ensembles, where the

maximum row and/or column weights are

.

IV. TRAPPING SETS IN IRREGULAR CODE ENSEMBLES

This shows that where

Here we find the asymptotic normalized average distribution

of elementary trapping sets, as well as general trapping sets, of

(29) the ensemble of matrices

. The corresponding results are

presented in Theorems 4.1 and 4.2, respectively. The main com-

ponents of the proof consist in establishing asymptotic expres-

sions for two “nested” sums. For the first sum, a straightforward

application of Sanov’s theorem is needed. For the second sum,

Varadhan’s lemma provides an expression which has to be eval-

uated numerically.

A. Elementary Trapping Sets (30)
The next theorem and corollary establish the asymptotic be-

3Uniqueness follows from the strict convexity of the relative entropy function havior of elementary trapping sets in regular LDPC code ensem-

with respect to the first argument, q

bles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

48

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Theorem 4.1: Let

, and let

.

The asymptotic normalized average distribution

of

elementary trapping sets of the ensemble

with column and row weights described by the dis-

tribution vectors

and

is given by the

supremum of

where the sum is taken over all triples

such that

where

(38) Above, we used to denote and used to denote the unique integer satisfying

As in the previous theorems, let

be the number of nonzero elements in . Then

and where

and represent the parameters over which

the supremum is evaluated. These parameters satisfy the fol-

lowing set of constraining equations:

where

By combining the above expressions, one obtains (35)

Proof: The proof represents a generalization of the arguments used in [10] for evaluating average weight distributions of code ensembles. Again, we will work with transposes of parity-check matrices .
Let
(36)

(39)
where the sum ranges over the same set of values of parameters as described in (38). Write

where is an

and is an

zero–one

matrix, with

. Furthermore, let be defined

as in III.A.

Define

and

in the same manner as in Theorem

3.1, except for adequately redefining the ensembles involved

and for changing

into

. In this setting, we seek an

expression for the probability

(40) The last expression in (39) reduces to
(41)

where the variables by

obey a binomial distribution given

(37)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(42)

MILENKOVIC et al.: ASYMPTOTIC SPECTRA OF TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

49

The formulas above imply that the asymptotic behavior of chooses from a strip of column weight so that

. We

the logarithm of the sum considered can be obtained by using are then interested in the sum

Sanov’s theorem. The problem then reduces to minimizing

(43)

(46)

subject to the constraints

where

(47)

By observing that

More generally, if we take rows with weight such that

then is replaced with

. By using

Lagrange multipliers one obtains the following expressions for

the probability mass function minimizing the relative entropy

function:

is a probability, we may apply Varadhan’s integral lemma to show that

(44)

where

, and

otherwise. Furthermore, and

satisfy the following set of fixed point equations which have

a unique solution:

For the case under consideration, the supremum is actually a

maximum that can be obtained by varying over the parameter .

Observe also that only one of the constraining equations found

so far involves , namely,

. Hence, since the entropy

terms in (48) involve only in an implicit way, one can perform

the optimization of these function by first fixing the value of .

Therefore, one starts by considering

with a constant independent on . Therefore, it follows that where

subject to the constraints

and

. The

Lagrangian multipliers for this optimization process are and ,

and the maximizing set of values for the parameters is given

by

Above, and denote the unique real numbers chosen to satisfy (45)

regarding as fixed.

The asymptotic behavior for

can be obtained by com-

bining the above expression with the asymptotic formula

Now, one has to perform optimization over the previously fixed

To complete the proof, one needs to estimate the spectrum parameter. This can be achieved by differentiating the terms

by using the previously evaluated probability: for the case in (48) with respect to and by setting this derivative to zero.

of regular ensembles, one simply had

ways of se- In fact, this derivative of the optimal objective function with

lecting the columns specifying the trapping set. Here, we set respect to the constraint variable will equal to the Lagrange

so that denotes the fraction of columns one multiplier of the overall optimization problem. Assuming that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

50

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

the optimum value of a point for which

is in the interior, it must be obtained at

B. General Trapping Sets
The next theorem and corollary establish the asymptotic behavior of the number of general trapping sets in irregular LDPC code ensembles.

The first term in the expression arises from the original multiplier, the second term from the expressions in the rate function explicitly involving , while the last two terms appear due to the entropy functions in (48). The equation above can be rewritten as

Theorem 4.2: Let

, and let

.

The asymptotic normalized average distribution

of

general trapping sets of the ensemble

with column and row weights described in terms of the

vectors

and

is given by the supremum of

(48)

and this completes the proof of the claimed result.
Remark 4.1: It is tedious, but straightforward to show that for regular LDPC ensembles, the parameters of Theorem 4.1 reduce to

where

equals

and and where

By substituting these expressions into the formula for the average trapping set ensemble spectrum, one recovers the results for the regular code ensemble, given in Theorem 3.1.

For many practical applications, one is interested in codes for

which the sets of parameters and are optimized in terms

of density evolution; optimization is, in this case, performed

with respect to the code’s gap to capacity [16]. Near-optimal de-

gree distributions (for a given SNR) usually exhibit a so-called

“concentration property,” which implies that the row-weights of

the parity-check matrix are drawn from a small set of different

values or that the row-weights are constant. In the latter case,

corresponding to row-regular ensembles (with

) one can

find closed-form expressions for and in terms of as

and where

and represent the parameters over which

the optimization is performed. These parameters satisfy the

system of equations at the top of the following page.

Proof: The derivations follow along the same line as the

one presented for elementary trapping sets, up to the point where

the following expression is encountered

(49)

Consequently, one only has to solve the system of equations

Here the sum ranges over the set of parameters by

(51) constrained

(50) Write
for and , since can be expressed in terms of only.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(52) (53)

MILENKOVIC et al.: ASYMPTOTIC SPECTRA OF TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

51

The logarithm of the last expression in (51) can be expressed as and the resulting pair of fixed point equations takes the form

(54)

where the variables given by

follow the binomial distribution (55)

The last three formulas imply that the asymptotic behavior of

the logarithm of the sum considered can be obtained by using

Sanov’s theorem. The problem reduces to minimizing

for

(56)

given as above. Consequently, the minimum exponent is

where

is given by

subject to

(60)

The rate function for the probability of interest is determined based on similar techniques as demonstrated for elementary trapping sets, so that the details are omitted. (57)

The analysis proceeds along the same lines as for the case of elementary trapping sets. We find that

even (58)
odd

where

is determined via the final constraint in (57).

Going to the more general case of taking rows with weight

where

, we thus obtain

V. STOPPING SETS

An analysis similar to the one performed for trapping sets

can be conducted for stopping sets as well. Although a similar

problem was already addressed in [14], there exist some inter-

esting differences in the problem settings. The ensemble used

in [14] corresponds to a random permutation model, which is

easier to analyze, but less accurate for modeling LDPC code

ensemble properties. Our analysis handles the more involved

case straightforwardly, producing results of the same form as

described in [19].4

Assume that the size of a stopping set

is linear in ,

i.e.,

. The probability of interest for analyzing stopping

set takes the form

i.e.

(59)

4In [19], while deriving the bounds on the tails of the spectrum of regular LDPC codes, the authors also showed how this method can be used to simplify the derivations of the weight distribution of this class of codes. This demonstrates that large deviations techniques, and in particular, Sanov’s theorem, can be used for a general class of enumeration methods pertaining to code ensembles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

52

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

where

Substituting for in Sanov’s bound, one obtains (67)

with are equal to

so that exactly values of . Next, let

and, consequently, the asymptotic normalized average number of stopping sets of size equals
(68)
This result agrees with the corresponding expressions derived in [14] for the random permutation ensemble.
Similarly, for the irregular case one obtains

By using the same type of argument as described in the previous two proofs, one arrives at the following formula for :

where the variables

where the sum ranges over the set of parameters satisfy the following constraints:
(61)

given by

These relations translate into the following expression for the

distribution minimizing the relative entropy in Sanov’s theorem:

(69)

(62) Consequently

with the probabilities given by (20). By using the Lagrangian

(70)

multiplier method, with multiplier function

(63) where, based on the fixed-point equations, one has

one obtains that the entropy minimizing probability function is

of the form

(71)

(64)

and

. The parameter in the preceding equation repre-

sents the unique positive root of the equation

Using Varadhan’s lemma as outlined in Section IV, one recovers the same results as presented in [14].
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS

The expressions in Section III describing the asymptotic nor-

(65) malized average distribution of elementary and general trapping

sets in regular LDPC code ensembles are most easily analyzed

trough numerical simulations. Results of this analysis are sum-

For the given distribution, the relative entropy is of the form

marized in Figs. 2–4. Fig. 2 provides a comparison of the spectra of three different ensembles with column weight three, and rates

and . It is interesting to observe that for a fixed size (66) of the parameter , the number of trapping sets with parameter

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: ASYMPTOTIC SPECTRA OF TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

53

Fig. 2. Elementary trapping set spectra for three regular ensembles,  = 0:001.

Fig. 3. Elementary trapping set spectra for ensembles of fixed rate R = 1=2;  = 0:001.

grows much faster for codes of higher than for codes of lower (i.e., the larger the number of trapping sets with the given param-

rate. For the code ensembles shown in Fig. 2, the critical ele- eters). The trapping coefficients for column weight three, four,

mentary trapping exponents are

and five codes are

and

.

and

. Consequently, the critical elementary trapping This finding may imply that the rate code ensembles which

exponent decreases with the increase of the row weight, for a are known to exhibit the best threshold characteristics, namely

fixed column weight.

the

ensemble, can have poor average error-floor proper-

A similar phenomena is observed with respect to the column ties. Finally, Fig. 4 demonstrates the intuitively expected fact

weight of the regular code ensembles. In Fig. 3, one can see that the critical trapping exponent depends on the value of , and

that for a fixed-code rate , the smaller the column weight increases as increases. Similar findings hold for generalized

of a code, the smaller the critical elementary trapping exponent trapping sets. Fig. 5 plots the generalized trapping set spectra

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

54

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 4. Trapping set spectra for (3; 6) regular ensembles and three different values of the parameter .

Fig. 5. General trapping set spectra for  = 0:001 and three code ensembles of rates 0:8, 0:5, and 0:4.

for three different ensembles and

. The interesting the subgraph induced by a trapping set and its neighbors usu-

observation is that for this case the spectra of general and ele- ally contains cycles. An illustrative example is the eight-cycle

mentary trappings sets are almost identical, i.e., the asymptotic present in the induced subgraph of a

trapping set and its

growth exponents of these two classes of sets are approximately neighbors in Section II-A. The edges of this cycle are given by

equal. Furthermore, the difference between the spectra of ele- the boldfaced ones in the subblock in Section II-A.

mentary and general trapping sets grows (although only slightly) The situation becomes quite different when one increases the

with the rate of the code. Observe that these findings may ex- value of to : a substantial difference between the distribu-

plain some of the numerical results presented in [15], regarding tions arises for the case of a

ensemble, as illustrated in

the error-floor of random-like codes in the regular

en- Fig. 6.

semble. The error floor of these codes is very high, and can be The expressions in Section IV describing the asymptotic dis-

decreased by eliminating cycles from the graphs of such codes. tribution of elementary trapping sets in irregular LDPC code can

The latter finding can be explained in terms of the fact that be evaluated only through numerical methods. We will present

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MILENKOVIC et al.: ASYMPTOTIC SPECTRA OF TRAPPING SETS IN REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

55

Fig. 6. Comparison of elementary and general trapping set spectra for  = 0:1 and regular (3; 5); (3; 6); and (3; 15) ensembles.
only one example pertaining to the solutions of the system of equations in Theorem 4.1. We consider a code ensemble of rate
for which

For

and

, the unique optimizing solutions for

the parameters of the elementary trapping set problem are

and
For other instances of the problem related to irregular ensembles, the roots of the fixed-point equations cannot be found for all conceivable values of and . This is especially apparent for the case when is nonzero for only two different values of the index .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to Stefan Laendner for generating the trapping set decoding examples shown in Fig. 1. They would also like to thank Dr. Gilles Zémor for handling the paper and the anonymous reviewers for providing useful comments for improving the presentation of the results.

REFERENCES
[1] P. Butovitsch, “The classification capability of multi-layer perceptrons and soft-decision decoding of error-correcting codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dep. Signals, Sensors and Systems, Royal Inst. Technol., Stockholm, Sweden, 1994.
[2] T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[3] A. Dembo and O. Zeitouini, Large Deviations Techniques and Applications. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[4] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[5] J. Gao, L. D. Rudolph, and C. R. P. Hartmann, “,” , “Iteratively maximum likelihood decodable spherical codes and a method for their construction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 480–485, May 1988.
[6] C. Greenhill, B. McKay, and X. Wang, “Asymptotic enumeration of sparse 0-1 matrices with irregular row and column sums,” J. Comb. Theory Ser. A, vol. 113, pp. 291–324, 2006.
[7] I. J. Good and J. F. Crook, “The enumeration of arrays and a generalization related to contingency tables,” Discr. Math., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 23–45, 1977.
[8] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2005 Int. Conf. Wireless Networks (WirelessComm2005), Maui, HI, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[9] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: Asymptotic distance distribution,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[10] ——, “Distance distributions in ensembles of irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 3140–3159, Dec. 2003.
[11] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Scie., vol. 74, 2003 [Online]. Available: http://www.elsevier.nl/locate/entcs/volume74.html
[12] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic enumeration of combinatorial configurations in random, regular LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. 43rd Anu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Jul. 2005, submitted for publication.
[13] P. E. O’Neil, “Asymptotics and random matrices with row-sum and column-sum restrictions,” Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 75, pp. 1276–1282, 1969.
[14] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[15] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sept. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[16] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[17] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of regular and irregular LDPC codes using ramanujan graphs and ideas from margulis,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory , Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 4.
[18] I. N. Sanov, “On the probability of large deviationss of random variables,” Mat. Sbornik, vol. 42, pp. 11–44, 1957.
[19] E. Soljanin, N. Varnica, and P. Whiting, “Incremental redundancy hybrid ARQ with LDPC and raptor codes,” preprint.
[20] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–597, Feb. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

