70

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Lazy Scheduling for LDPC Decoding
Daniel Levin, Eran Sharon, Student Member, IEEE, and Simon Litsyn, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— A complexity reducing method for iterative message passing decoding algorithms of Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes is described. It is based on lazy scheduling which involves a partial update of messages in the iterations. A Density Evolution (DE) approach is developed for optimization of the parameters for choice of the messages to be updated. Combined with an efficient serial scheduling, the resulting method reduces the decoding complexity by about 70-75% compared to the classical Belief Propagation (BP) scheme, while maintaining the same performance.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L DPC codes are finding their way into many emerging industry standards. As a result, there is a strong need in development of low-complexity decoding algorithms that will enable low-cost high throughput decoder implementations. There are three main approaches to reducing the complexity of LDPC decoding: simplification of computations performed by the decoder (e.g. min-sum algorithm [5], [9] replacing the costly sum-product check node computation by a simpler function); reducing the number of iterations needed to converge (e.g. various scheduling techniques, which, by altering the order of updating messages during the iteration, increase the convergence rate [8], [1], [10]); and reducing the complexity cost of an iteration (e.g. the forced convergence method [2], [3] and the bit-level stopping method for Turbo codes [6]). We describe here a lazy scheduling approach which can be considered as a hybrid of the two last approaches. It is based on a serial update of node’s messages. However, as opposed to the conventional serial scheduling, only a subset of the nodes is updated on each iteration, resulting in reduced iteration cost. We propose several approaches for deciding whether a node should be updated at a given iteration based on the node’s reliability and the history of its updates.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II includes background on LDPC codes. Section III describes two possible implementations of the lazy scheduling algorithm. Section IV presents a theoretical analysis and optimization of the proposed schemes. In Section V simulation results are presented.
II. BACKGROUND
LDPC codes are linear error correcting codes defined by highly sparse parity-check matrices. Alternatively, they can be defined by a sparse bipartite undirected graph consisting of variable and check nodes. We will denote the sets of variable

and check nodes by V and C, respectively. A variable node,

denoted by v, represents a bit in the transmitted codeword

and a check node, denoted by c, represents a parity check

constraint. Each check node is connected by an edge to the

variable nodes it checks. A regular (dv, dc)-LDPC code is defined by a regular bipartite graph, such that each variable

node is connected to dv check nodes and each check node is connected to dc variable nodes. An irregular LDPC code is represented by a bipartite graph, where the degree of variable

nodes and check nodes may differ. An ensemble of irregular

LDPC codes is defined by the variable nodes’ and check

nodes’ degree distributions. Let λ(x) =

dv i=2

λixi−1

and

ρ(x) =

dc i=2

ρixi−1

be

the

generating

functions

of

the

degree

distributions for the variable and check nodes respectively,

where λi’s and ρi’s are the fractions of edges belonging to the corresponding degree-i check and variable nodes.

LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded using iterative

message-passing algorithms. These algorithms operate on the

bipartite graph representation of the code by iteratively ex-

changing messages between the variable and check nodes

along the edges of the graph. Belief Propagation (BP) algo-

rithm [4] assumes an iterative exchange of log-likelihood-ratio

(LLR) messages. We denote the LLR channel message for a

variable node v by Pv, the message sent from a variable node v to a check node c by Qvc, and the LLR message sent from c to v by Rcv. The following computations are used in BP:

Qvc ← Pv +

Rc v,

(1)

c ∈N (c)\c

Rcv ← ϕ−1

ϕ(Qv c) ,

(2)

v ∈N (c)\v

Qv ← Pv +

Rcv ,

(3)

c∈N (c)

where N (c) denotes the set of neighbors of a node c, and

ϕ(x) =

sign(x), − log tanh

|x| 2

,

(4)

ϕ−1(sign, x) = (−1)sign

− log tanh

x 2

.

(5)

Note that ϕ(x) and its computations are defined on F2×[0, ∞]. To have symmetry we express the update rules as follows:

Tvc ← ϕ Pv +

Rc v ,

(6)

c ∈N (v)\c

Manuscript received Sept. 10, 2006. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. Marc Fossorier.

Rcv ← ϕ−1

Tv c ,

(7)

The authors are with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv

v ∈N (c)\v

University, 69978 Israel (e-mail: {levind, eransh, litsyn}@eng.tau.ac.il). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2007.061454.

where Tvc = ϕ(Qvc).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. D10o8w9n-l7o7ad9e8d/0o7n$2J0u.n0e023c,20220607atI1E9E:1E7:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEVIN et al.: LAZY SCHEDULING FOR LDPC DECODING

71

The order of passing the messages between the nodes is referred to as updating rule or schedule. The conventional message-passing schedule is the flooding schedule [4], where in each iteration all the variable nodes, and subsequently all the check nodes, pass new messages to their neighbors. A serial schedule in which an iteration is performed by serially traversing the variable nodes and for each one updating its incoming and outgoing messages was shown in [1] to converge approximately twice as fast compared to the flooding schedule. In this paper we describe a variant of the serial schedule, referred to as the lazy schedule (LS), which provides additional reduction in the decoding computational complexity by selectively updating only variable nodes which are more likely to be misperceived in an iteration.

TABLE I LS DECODING ALGORITHM

Initialization

for all c ∈ C, v ∈ V Tvc ← ϕ(Pv)

for all c ∈ C

Sc ← v∈N(c) Tvc

Iteration

for all v ∈ V

execute with probability β(iteration, |Qv| or |Pv|) Qv ← Pv + c∈Nv ϕ−1(Sc − Tvc) for all c ∈ N (v)

S ← Sc − Tvc Tvc ← ϕ(Qv − ϕ−1(S)) Sc ← S + Tvc

end of loop

end condition

end of loop

III. LAZY SCHEDULING

schedule is completely known when decoding starts. The LS decoding algorithm is presented in Table I.

The decoding process usually achieves high confidence in the estimation of most of the variable nodes after very few iterations. These nodes are not likely to change polarity in the consequent decoding iterations. LS exploits this phenomena, by decoding through partial iterations updating only less reliable messages. We measure the decoding complexity as the total number of messages that are computed up to conver-

Note that we can further generalize the LS algorithm by using updating probabilities β(l, rv, tv) which are also dependent on the number of iterations tv that has passed since variable node v has been updated the last time. For example, we may force an update of a node after, say, three iterations it has not been touched. We leave this generalization for future research.

gence. Hence, if LS does not increase the number of iterations needed for convergence by much, it has a potential to reduce

IV. ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION OF LS

the overall decoding complexity by reducing the complexity A standard tool for asymptotic analysis of message passing

per iteration. Clearly, it is also important that LS will not decoding is the Density Evolution (DE) algorithm [7]. It itera-

degrade the Bit Error Rate (BER) performance of the decoder tively calculates the expected densities of messages, assuming

or cause artificial error floor [3]. Indeed, as shown in Section that the channel is memoryless and the underlying bipartite

V, the carefully designed and optimized lazy schedule reduces graph is asymptotically locally cycle-free. These assumptions

the decoding complexity without performance degradation. can be used in order to show that, in certain scenarios, all

Next, we provide a detailed description of the lazy sched- incoming messages of a node are statistically independent,

uled decoding algorithm. At each iteration, the variable nodes simplifying the analysis tremendously. Unfortunately, for LS-

are serially traversed in a given order. For each variable 1 this is not the case since it introduces complex statistical

node v its incoming and outgoing messages are updated dependencies which make DE analysis intractable. These

with probability β(l, rv), where l is the iteration number and rv is some reliability measure of variable node v. Note that if the updating process is deterministic and independent of the iteration number, i.e. β(l, rv) = β(rv) = 0 or 1 depending on if rv exceeds some threshold, we obtain the

statistical dependencies are caused by the serial scheduling that is used, as well as by the dependency of the updating probability β(l, Qv) on the a-posteriori LLR message. We solve these problems by limiting the analysis to LS-2 in which the updating probability is a function of the a-priori LLR

forced convergence algorithm as in [2], [3].

message. Moreover, we assume that the LS is based on a

A straightforward choice for the reliability measure rv is semi-serial scheduling instead of the serial scheduling. In the the a-posteriori LLR message magnitude |Qv|. Indeed, this semi-serial scheduling, subsets of variable nodes are serially choice, referred to as LS-1, provides a significant complexity updated, while the messages of variable nodes in a subset

reduction. Unfortunately, theoretical analysis of LS-1 seems are updated in parallel. As shown in [1], properly defined

to be a hard problem. For that reason, we consider an semi-serial scheduling is amenable to DE analysis. We follow

alternative approach, referred to as LS-2, where we use the this definition. In order to generate a semi-serial schedule

a-priori LLR channel message magnitude |Pv| as rv. This we choose independently for each variable node a number choice, though rather non-optimal at the first sight, has several from {1, . . . , m} randomly with equal probability. This is the

important advantages. For example, a theoretical analysis of number of the subset to which the variable node belongs. The

LS-2 is possible. This enables optimization of the updating subsets are updated serially according to their subset number.

probabilities β(l, |Pv|) without resorting to simulations. As When the number of subsets m increases the semi-serial shown in Section V, LS-2 also provides a fair complexity schedule’s expected convergence rate becomes very close to

reduction. This is not surprising since basing the updating the expected convergence rate of the serial schedule.

decision on the value of Pv is not really that bad, after all one To derive the DE equations we use an approach similar to can estimate the expected value of the a-posteriori message [7], [1]. Let fP , fQ(l), fQ(li) and fR(li) stand correspondingly for E[Qv] at iteration l based on the channel message Pv. LS- the expected probability density functions (pdf) of a channel 2 also has aAnuthiomrizpeldelmiceennsteadtiuosenlimaditevdatnot:aYgoensesiinUcniev. tDhoewndloeacdoeddionngJunem23e,s2s0a26geat 1P9:v1,7:1a5 UvTaCrifarobmleI-EtEoE-cXhpelocrek. Rmeestsriscatiognes aQppvlyc. at the l’th

72

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Normalized decoding complexity

9

Lazy schedule − 1 simulation Lazy schedule − 2 simulation

where, PB(l)

1−

1 − Pb(l−1)

N
is an approximation of the

8 7

Serial schedule simulation Lazy schedule − 2 Density Evolution model Serial schedule Density Evolution model

expected fraction of codewords that reach decoding iteration l,

Pb(l) = iteration

an−0d∞Cf(Ql()l)=(q)d−∞q∞isfPt(hpe)βe(xlp,e|pct|e)ddpBisEtRhe

after the expected

l’th cost

of decoding iteration l.

In practice we used quantized updating probabilities
6
β(l, |p|) with 16 possible values equally dividing the channel

LLR message magnitude into equally spaced bins. Since

5

for LS-1 the DE analysis is intractable, we used instead

simulations to approximately model the expected behavior of

4

the decoder and then performed similar optimization for the

updating probabilities.

3

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

2

1.6

1.8

2

2.2

2.4

2.6

2.8

3

3.2

In our simulation we used regular (3, 6) LDPC codes

Eb/N0 value (dB)

of length 104. LS introduces no performance degradation

Fig. 1. Complexity comparison for BIAWGN channel.

compared to flood or serial scheduling when the maximal

number of iterations used is high. Even with limited number

iteration, a variable-to-check message Qvc sent from a variable node belonging to subset Bi at the l’th iteration and a checkto-variable message Rcv sent to a variable node belonging to subset Bi at the l’th iteration. All pdfs are conditioned on the assumption that the zero codeword is transmitted. The expectation is taken over all graph edges, all tree-like graphs from the ensemble, all semi-serial schedules and all decoder inputs. Then, the expected variable-to-check message pdf is given by:

of iterations, performance degradation is negligible (less than 0.1dB). Fig. 1 shows simulation and theoretical DE results for the BiAWGN channels. The curves show the normalized decoding complexity of various schemes as a function the channel’s SNR. Maximal number of decoding iterations is set to 50, hence all schemes provide the same BER performance. The complexity reduction of LS depends on the channel SNR conditions. LS-1 provides complexity reduction of 40-50% compared to the serial schedule and 70-75% complexity reduction compared to the flooding schedule. LS-2 provides com-

∞

fQ(li)(q) =

fP (p)
−∞

β(l, |p|)λ(fR(li))(q − p)

plexity reduction of 20-25% compared to the serial schedule and 60-62.5% complexity reduction compared to the flooding schedule. In comparison, the forced convergence decoder [3]

+(1 − β(l, |p|))fQ(l−1)(q) dp,

provides up to 35% complexity reduction compared to the flooding schedule without performance loss.

fQ(0i) = fP , i = 1, . . . , m;

fQ(l)

=

1 m

m

fQ(li),

i=1

REFERENCES
[1] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Effcient serial message-passing

where λ(f ) =

dv i=2

λi

i−1 f and

denotes convolution.

schedules for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. Turbo-Coding Conference 2006.

The expected check-to-variable message pdf is given by:

[2] G. Fettweis, E. Zimmermann, and W. Rave, “Forced convergence

⎛⎛ ⎛ ⎛

⎞⎞⎞⎞

decoding of LDPC codes: EXIT chart analysis and combination with

fR(li)

=

Γ−1

⎝ρ

⎝Γ

⎝1 m

i−1
⎝

fQ(lj)

+

m

fQ(lj−1)⎠⎠⎠⎠ ,

j=1

j=i

node complexity reduction techniques,” in Proc. 11th European Wireless Conference 2005. [3] P. K. Bora, E. Zimmermann, G. Fettweis, P. Pattisapu, “Reduced complexity LDPC decoding using forced convergence,” in Proc. 7th

where Γ is defined so that for a real random variable X

with density fX , the density of ϕ(X) is Γ(fX ) and ρ(f ) =

dc j=2

ρj

j−1 f . Note, that here the convolution is taken over

the group F2 × [0, ∞].

International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications 2004 (WPMC04). [4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. MIT Press, 1963. [5] M. P. C. Fossorier and J. Chen, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.

Using the DE analysis we can optimize the updating proba- [6] D. H. Kim and S. W. Kim, “Bit-level stopping of turbo decoding,” IEEE

bilities β(l, |p|) in order to minimize the decoding complexity function and ensure that no artificial inherent error floor is

Commun. Lett., vol. 10, pp. 183–185, 2006. [7] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-
check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

introduced by LS. While the DE analysis is asymptotic, the

vol. 47, pp. 599–618, 2001.

actual decoding complexity is affected by the code’s finite length N = |V |. Hence, we use the following approximate fi-

[8] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers 2002, vol. 1, pp. 8–15.

nite length Normalized Decoding Complexity (NDC) function [9] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu, and J. Zhang, “Two-dimensional correc-

for optimization of β(l, |p|):

tion for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, pp. 180-182, Mar. 2006.

∞

[10] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, and J. Yedidia, “Reduced latency

NDC =

PB(l) · C(l)

(8)

iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Global Telecom-

munications Conference.

l=1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:17:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

