104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Low-Complexity High-Speed Decoder Design for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Zhongfeng Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Zhiqiang Cui

Abstract—This paper studies low-complexity high-speed decoder architectures for quasi-cyclic low density parity check (QC-LDPC) codes. Algorithmic transformation and architectural level optimization are incorporated to reduce the critical path. Enhanced partially parallel decoding architectures are proposed to linearly increase the throughput of conventional partially parallel decoders through introducing a small percentage of extra hardware. Based on the proposed architectures, a (8176, 7154) Euclidian geometry-based QC-LDPC code decoder is implemented on Xilinx field programmable gate array (FPGA) Virtex-II 6000, where an efficient nonuniform quantization scheme is employed to reduce the size of memories storing soft messages. FPGA implementation results show that the proposed decoder can achieve a maximum (source data) decoding throughput of 172 Mb/s at 15 iterations.
Index Terms—Error correction codes, field programmable gate array (FPGA), low density parity check (LDPC), parallel processing, quasi-cyclic (QC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, a class of structured low density parity check (LDPC) codes, namely quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes [1]–[6], that can achieve comparable performance to computer generated random codes have been proposed. Further work includes Euclidian geometry-based QC-LDPC (EG-LDPC) codes [7]. EG-LDPC codes have shown even lower error floor than equivalent computer generated random LDPC codes in some cases. QC-LDPC codes are well suited for hardware implementation. The encoder of a QC-LDPC code can be easily built with shift-registers [8] while random codes usually entail complex encoding circuitry to perform complex matrix and vector multiplications [9], [10]. In addition, QC-LDPC codes also facilitate efficient high-speed decoding due to the regularity of their parity check matrices. On the other hand, randomly constructed LDPC codes require complex routing in the (hardware) decoders, which not only consumes a large amount of chip area, but also significantly increases the computation delay. For instance, a fully parallel decoder based on direct mapping presented in [21] for a rate-1/2 1024-bit LDPC code consumed 1.7-M gates with a maximum (source data) decoding throughput of 500 Mb/s.
A memory-based partially parallel decoding architecture was presented in [11] to obtain a good tradeoff between hardware
Manuscript received August 26, 2005; revised January 19, 2006 and June 6, 2006.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97330 USA (e-mail: zwang@eecs. oregonstate.edu; cuizh@eecs.oregonstate.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2007.891098

complexity and decoding speed. The proposed field pro-

grammable gate array (FPGA) implementation for a 9216-bit

rate-1/2 (3, 6)-regular code achieved a maximum (coded data)

decoding throughput of 54 Mb/s (equivalent to 27-Mb/s source

data rate) at 18 iterations, where (3, 6)-regular codes refer to

the LDPC codes whose parity check matrices have a constant

column weight of 3 and row weight of 6. The design pre-

sented in [23] achieved 30% higher decoding throughput than

the previous one for a much smaller size (

1038 b) of

QC-LDPC code. In [12], Chen et al. presented a highly parallel

FPGA implementation for a rate-1/2, 8088-bit irreg-

ular QC-LDPC code. The maximum (source data) decoding

throughput reached 40 Mb/s at 25 iterations. In [13], Karkooti

et al. presented a FPGA implementation for a (3, 6)-regular

1536-bit QC-LDPC code decoder. To enable a high-level (e.g.,

-level,

) parallelism, one additional constraint in which

the cyclic shift value of each circulant matrix needs to be

a multiple of was introduced. This proposed decoder can

run at 121 MHz to obtain 63.5-Mb/s (source data) decoding

throughput at 20 iterations. Such a high clock speed largely

benefited from significantly less routing complexity because of

the smaller codeword size compared to two other designs [11],

[12]. On the other hand, the added constraint to the parity check

matrix will inevitably circumvent the performance of LDPC

codes. In this paper, we will present a low complexity FPGA

implementation for a 8176-bit (4, 32)-regular EG-LDPC code

that can achieve a maximum (source data) decoding throughput

of 172 Mb/s at 15 iterations.

Contributions of this paper are as follows. First, we propose

a modified sum-product algorithm (SPA), which balances the

computation load between two decoding phases in order to

reduce the critical path. The new algorithm also facilitates the

merger of two types of node process units of a decoder, which

will lead to 100% hardware utilization efficiency [14]. Second,

we present architectural optimization techniques for general

node processing units to further reduce the computation delay in

the critical path; Third, we propose enhanced partially parallel

decoding architectures that can linearly increase the decoding

throughput of the conventional partially parallel decoder with

small extra hardware. We also discuss an efficient nonuniform

quantization scheme that can reduce the size of memories for

storage of soft-messages. At last, we present a detailed FPGA

implementation of the 8176-bit EG-LDPC code decoder, where

novel circuit design techniques are introduced to raise the clock

speed.

This paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a brief

review of the conventional SPA and discusses the modified ver-

sion based on algorithmic transformation. Section III presents

architectural optimizations for node processing units for gen-

1063-8210/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG AND CUI: LOW-COMPLEXITY HIGH-SPEED DECODER DESIGN FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

105

eral LDPC decoders. Section IV proposes enhanced partially parallel decoding architectures. Section V presents the detailed FPGA implementation of the 8176-bit EG-LDPC code decoder.
II. SPA AND MODIFICATION
The conventional SPA (also known as the belief propagation algorithm) is commonly used in LDPC decoding and is generally implemented in log domain. The SPA has the best decoding performance in practice. It consists of two phases of message passing, i.e., variable-to-check message passing and check-tovariable message passing. Let denotes the check-to-variable message conveyed from the check node to the variable node , and represents the variable-to-check message conveyed from the variable node to the check node , then is computed as follows:

(1) Fig. 1. Architecture of CPU with original SPA.

where

proposed a modified version based on algorithmic transformation in order to balance the computation load between the two decoding phases [14]. The new algorithm is expressed as fol(2) lows:

is the sign part of , and

denotes the set of

(5)

variable nodes connected to the check node excluding the vari-

able node . The nonlinear function

is generally implemented with a look-up table (LUT) in hard-

(6)

ware. The variable-to-check message is computed with the

following equation:

(7)

(3)

where

denotes the set of check nodes connected to the

variable node excluding the check node , and

is the intrinsic information related to the received soft symbol

and the estimated standard deviation of the additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel noise. The log likelihood ratio

for the variable node , denoted as , is computed as follows:

where is computed with (2),

. As

, it can be derived from (5) that

. Thus, (7) and (4) are identical. For simplicity, we will still

use to represent the new check-to-variable message in later

discussion. The major benefit of the modified algorithm is that

the computation complexity and, thus, computation delay are

balanced between two decoding phases. As shown in [14], this

modification not only helps reduce the clock cycle time, but also

facilitate 100% hardware utilization efficiency.

III. ARCHITECTURES FOR NODE PROCESSING

(4)

UNITS AND OPTIMIZATIONS

Let us consider a general (3, 5)-regular QC-LDPC code. The

The sign of is taken as the estimated information bit ( 1 architectures of VPU and CPU with the original SPA are shown

or 1).

in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. Similar architectures can be found

It can be observed that the conventional SPA has unbalanced in [25] and [26]. The input signal in Fig. 2 stands for the

computation complexity between the two decoding phases. This intrinsic information. As it can be seen from Fig. 1, two LUT

leads to unbalanced data-paths between two types of node pro- operations are contained in the critical path of each CPU.

cessing units. In fact, the critical path of a check node processing With the new algorithm, we move one LUT operation onto

unit (CPU) consists of one summation operation and two LUT the critical path of every VPU. We can further eliminate the

operations while that of a variable node processing unit (VPU) sign-magnitude to 2’s complement data format conversion

consists of only one summation operation. As the clock speed block [SM-2’s] and the 2’s complement to sign-magnitude

will be upper-bounded by the critical path, the throughput of an [2’s-SM] data conversion block in order to further shorten

LDPC decoder employing the SPA will be limited. Hence, we the critical path. To compensate for this change, we need two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 2. Architecture of VPU with original SPA.

Fig. 4. Optimized architecture for VPU.

Fig. 5. Structure of a partially parallel decoder for (3, 5) QC-LDPC codes.

Fig. 3. Optimized architecture for CPU.

intrinsic information and memory bank C’s are used to store

the decoded data bits.

different LUTs, i.e., LUT-A and LUT-B. The sign bit will be For QC-LDPC codes, the address generator for each memory

included in the input of either LUT. The output of LUT-A and bank can be realized with a simple counter, which not only sim-

LUT-B will be in unsigned format (5 bits in this example) and plifies the hardware design, but also improves the circuit speed.

2’s complement format (6 bits in the example), respectively. In In general, each node processing unit takes 1 clock cycle (as-

addition, we proposed to utilize architectural level optimization suming dual-port memories are used, otherwise two cycles are

techniques to further reduce the total computation delay for the needed) to complete message updating for one row (or column)

summation part [15]. The new architectures for VPU and CPU of the parity check matrix. Fig. 6(a) shows a small sub-matrix

are shown in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. The pipeline latches of a QC-LDPC parity-check matrix, where all 1-components

can be properly inserted into the data paths as explained in [16]. are numbered starting from the first row. With the conventional

Therefore, the critical path for either type of node processing partially parallel decoding approaches [11], [27], 14 memory

units can be reduced to approximately one-multi-bit (5 or 6-bit entries need to be allocated for the corresponding memory

in this example) addition operation with 3-satge pipelining, bank. All the soft messages corresponding to 14 1-components

which leads to multiple times speed-up for the node processing shown in Fig. 6(a) are stored sequentially in the memory. In the

units compared with the traditional designs [25], [26].

row decoding phase (i.e., the check-to-variable message passing

IV. PARTIALLY PARALLEL DECODING ARCHITECTURE AND ENHANCEMENT

phase), the memory address generator generates 0, 1, , 13. In the column decoding phase (i.e., the variable-to-check message passing phase), the address generator outputs 9, 10, , 13, 0,

Several papers have addressed partially parallel decoding 1, , 8. Hence, the address generator can be implemented as a

architectures for regular LDPC codes such as [11] and [12]. simple modulo-13 counter.

These architectures generally achieve a good tradeoff between To increase the parallelism, we can enable each node pro-

hardware complexity and decoding throughput. A partially cessing unit to process the data corresponding 1-components

parallel decoder architecture for generic (3, 5) QC-LDPC codes at multiple rows (or columns) of the parity check matrix at the

is shown in Fig. 5, where totally

memory banks same cycle. However, this will generally cause memory access

are used to store the soft message symbols conveyed at both conflicts since multiple data accesses per cycle are required for

decoding phases, memory bank ’s are used to store the each memory bank.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG AND CUI: LOW-COMPLEXITY HIGH-SPEED DECODER DESIGN FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

107

Fig. 6. Memory module corresponding to a submatrix: a) store one soft message symbol per entry and b) store two soft message symbols per entry.

Fig. 7. Memory partitioning schemes for one memory module.

As discussed in [14], all soft message symbols corresponding For EG-LDPC codes, each submatrix of the parity check ma-

to all the 1-components of a submatrix are stored in one memory trix consists of two superimposed cyclic-shifted identity ma-

bank. Thus, a straightforward approach to enable each process trices (see Fig. 11). A more general case is to have multiple

unit to process soft messages corresponding to 1-components at (e.g.,

) independently cyclic-shifted identity matrices su-

multiple rows (or columns) of the submatrix in each cycle is to perimposed in one submatrix. To efficiently decode this class

store multiple soft symbols in each memory entry. For instance, of codes, we proposed to have one separate memory bank for

we can store two soft symbols corresponding to 1-components each independently cyclic-shifted identity matrix [28]. Hence,

at two adjacent rows of a submatrix in one memory entry as we need two memory banks for each submatrix in decoding the

shown in Fig. 6(b), where two data stored in the same memory previously mentioned EG-LDPC codes.

entry are labeled with the same number. This design immedi- To increase the parallelism of a partially parallel decoder, we

ately resolves the problem of processing soft symbols corre- propose three of the following methods:

sponding to two rows of each submatrix at each cycle, if we 1) partition each memory bank into sub-banks (or called

sequentially process two adjacent rows starting from the top.

memory segments) where all the soft symbols cor-

However, this is generally not applicable to column processing.

responding to 1-components at adjacent rows of a

Assuming that we start column processing from the first column

submatrix are stored in different segments;

for this example, memory access conflicts will happen in the 2) store soft messages corresponding to adjacent rows of a

entire column processing phase because the soft symbols corre-

submatrix in one memory entry while utilizing extra buffers

sponding to two adjacent columns are always stored in different

to solve the memory access conflict;

memory entries. We could start column processing at a different 3) combine steps 1) and 2).

column to avoid this problem for this particular submatrix. How- In this paper, we will only discuss the first two methods. The

ever, memory access conflict is generally inevitable in decoding principle of the third method is evident given the details of the

an LDPC code since there are generally multiple submatrices in first two. We will use the same example as before for illustra-

one (block) column of a parity check matrix, e.g., there are three tion. Without loss of generality, we focus on the case of

.

submatrices in one block column for a (3, 5)-regular QC-LDPC In the first approach, we could employ a straightforward parti-

code. Using multiport memories is a possible solution, but not tion scheme as shown in Fig. 7(a), where the number (1, 2, 3, or

an efficient one, because the overall hardware will be linearly 4) associated with each 1-component in the submatrix indicates

increased. Adding additional constraint to the parity check ma- in which memory sub-bank the data is stored. Memory access

trix to avoid the memory access conflict as proposed in [13] is conflict will occur at the second processing cycle in the column

also not appreciated in practice.

decoding phase. During this cycle, it is supposed to process

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 8. Example of packaging multiple data into one memory entry: (a) a straightforward packaging scheme and (b) a better packaging scheme.

the soft messages corresponding to 1-components in the fifth

to eighth columns. However, the corresponding data are located

in memory segments 2, 1, 2, and 3. Thus, memory access con-

flict occurs because we can not load two data from Segment 2

in one cycle. In the previous analysis, we assume each memory

bank is a dual-port memory, i.e., one port for READ and the other

port for WRITE operation. Performing two READ operations at the Fig. 9. Block diagram for the switching network used in the column processing same cycle is not allowed. The memory access conflict will not phase when the straightforward packaging scheme is adopted.

exist if the number of rows of a submatrix is a multiple of or

the transition group ends at the datum corresponding to the last

row. Unfortunately, neither of the conditions is generally satis- same cycle in the row processing phase. However, data buffers

fied in practice. Here, the transition group refers to the group and switching networks must be introduced in the column pro-

that contains the data corresponding to the last row of a subma- cessing phase.

trix. In general, the transition group contains two subsets: one Fig. 8 shows an example of packaging four data in one

contains data corresponding to some bottom rows and the other memory entry. With a straightforward approach (i.e., sequen-

contains data corresponding to some top rows of a submatrix tially package four data in one memory entry) as shown in

(e.g., Fig. 7). The group partition starts from the first row and a Fig. 8(a), we need to load data from three different memory

complete group contains data corresponding to adjacent rows. entries (one for data { }, one for data { }, and one for {1}) in

To resolve the memory access conflict, we propose to rear- the second decoding cycle of the column processing phase. In

range the data in the first subset of the transition group (in the fact, this is the worstcase for any value of and any size of the

previous example, this subgroup only contains one data) into circulant matrix. To resolve this problem, two data buffers must

proper memory segments. For this example, we should store the be introduced since only one datum can be loaded at the current

last data into the fourth memory segment as shown in Fig. 7(b) cycle. In addition, switching networks must be added to select

instead of in the second segment. A general rule is to greedily the target group of data. To fill up the two buffers, two extra

store those data in the first subset into high index memory cycles will be needed, which leads to an extra latency of two

segments. If the first subset contains data corresponding to clock cycles. Fig. 9 shows the block diagram of the switching

memory segments 3, 4, and 1 with the straightforward parti- network. The details are not discussed in this paper, where the

tioning scheme, these data should be rearranged into memory multiplexer block is a combination of four 3:1 multiplexers.

segments 3, 4, and 2 based on the proposed rule. In this case, It should be pointed out that the output [1, , 4] may be

the transition group will contain data located in memory seg- composed of three parts: 1) some outputs from buffer D1; 2)

ments 3, 4, 2, and 1. Therefore, there will be no memory access some outputs from D2; and 3) some input data from [1, , 4]

conflicts in the column processing phase. There are quite a few at certain time instants.

possible combinations for the data in the first subset. Any other A modified packaging scheme is shown in Fig. 8(b). For con-

cases can be similarly handled. We will not elaborate on them venience in later discussion, we denote the set of data along the

in this paper.

upper right line as the -set, and the set of data along the lower

In the second approach, we package multiple data in one left line as the -set. We start packaging data in the -set from

memory entry and use simple data switching networks to resolve the data corresponding to the 1-component at the first row, and

memory access conflict. In general, we can package soft mes- start packaging data in the -set from the data corresponding to

sages corresponding to adjacent rows (or columns) of a sub- the 1-component at the first column. If the circulant matrix is an

matrix in one memory entry in order to achieve

times identity matrix, then the two starting points become one. With

speed-up over the conventional partially parallel decoding archi- this method, only one data buffer will be needed. Furthermore,

tecture [11], [27]. In this way, we can easily process rows at the the extra latency is no more than one clock cycle. The detailed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG AND CUI: LOW-COMPLEXITY HIGH-SPEED DECODER DESIGN FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

109

Fig. 10. Switching networks for: (a) row processing phase;(b) column decoding phase; and (c) for both decoding phases.

operations are as follows. In the first cycle of row processing 2 Fig. 11. 15 15 submatrix for EG-LDPC codes.
phase, we load the last group of data corresponding to the -set

into the data buffer. In column processing phase, we load the last

group of data corresponding to -set into the data buffer at the beginning. The switching networks are shown in Fig. 10, where (a) is for row processing, (b) is for column processing and (c) is for combined row/column processing. The enable signal “En” becomes valid when we start processing the last group of data in the -set (or -set) in the row (or column) processing phase. The “En” signal will be ANDed with the clock signal and connect to each register. In addition, signals , , , and stand for

A. (8176, 7154) EG-Based QC LDPC Code
The EG-LDPC codes are constructed based on the decomposition of finite Euclidean geometries. The (8176, 7154) code is a regular QC-LDPC code with a column weight of 4 and a row weight of 32 (originally designed for NASA) [7]. The parity-check matrix is a 2 16 array of 511 511 submatrices as shown in the following expression:

the loaded data from a memory bank at the current cycle, ,

, , and represent the output data to be sent to the cor-

responding row or column processing units.

(8)

There are two exceptional cases. 1) The last group in the

-set (or -set) may consist of exactly data. In this case, the data buffers as well as the first loading cycle are saved and the “En” signal will remain invalid during the entire row (or column) processing phase. 2) If the circulant matrix is an identity matrix, data buffers and the first loading cycle are not required for either decoding phase.
In summary, with the modified data packaging scheme and the proposed switching network architectures, we can efficiently achieve multiple times speed-up in LDPC decoding over the traditional partially parallel decoding architecture. It can be noted that either kind of enhanced partially parallel decoder architecture requires no extra memory storage. Hardware overhead is

Each submatrix is a circulant matrix with both a column and a row weight of 2. An example of a 15 15 submatrix is shown in Fig. 11. Observe that the inherent parallelism level with the code is 16 in the column processing phase, and 2 in the row processing phase of the partly parallel decoding. In other words, we can instantiate up to 16 variable node processing units and two check node processing units if we adopt the conventional partly parallel decoding architecture. In this design, we will employ a two-level enhanced partly parallel decoding architecture to raise the parallelism level, and thus further increase the decoding throughput.

only introduced in node processing units. As the memory part usually dominates the overall hardware
of an LDPC decoder, the proposed enhanced partially parallel LDPC architectures generally have small amount of hardware overhead over the traditional partially parallel decoding architecture.

B. Enhanced Partially Parallel Decoding Architecture

In principle, either kind of the proposed enhanced par-

tially parallel decoding architectures can linearly increase the

decoding throughput with small hardware overhead. In this

design, we arbitrarily chose the first approach with

. The

modified SPA is employed for decoding.

V. DESIGN EXAMPLE WITH FPGA

Fig. 12 shows the architecture of a CPU, which performs check-to-variable message computation. Each CPU has 32

In this section, we will present an FPGA design on Xilinx inputs and 32 outputs. The LUT-A is introduced to perform

Virtex II for a (8176, 7154) EG-LDPC code using the previously the function

. The magnitude of the

discussed techniques. It will be shown that the proposed FPGA output is the summation of 31 out of 32 numbers coming from

design not only achieves a very high clock speed (192 MHz), but LUT-A. The sign bit of the output is a product of 31 out of 32

also doubles the inherent parallelism level of the code in either sign bits which come from the inputs. In the last addition stage,

decoding phase of the partly parallel decoding.

each of the two addends is separated into high and low parts.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 12. Check node processing unit architecture.

Fig. 13. Variable node processing unit architecture.

Two partial additions are performed in parallel to reduce the ad- Fig. 14. Proposed enhanced partially parallel decoder architecture for the dition delay. In the CPU, pipeline latches are inserted as indi- EG-LDPC code. cated by the dashed lines to reduce the critical path. The data

representations for the inputs of CPU, the outputs of LUT-As,

and the final outputs of CPU are in 2’s complement, unsigned, intrinsic soft messages and the temporary decoded bits, respec-

and sign-magnitude, respectively.

tively. As it can be seen from the figure, the overall architecture

The architecture of a VPU is shown in Fig. 13, which per- has 16 2 32 VPUs and 2 2 4 CPUs.

forms variable-to-check message computation. Each VPU With 2-parallel enhancement, each memory bank is par-

has five inputs and five outputs. and stand for the intrinsic titioned into two segments, i.e., one contains all data corre-

message and the tentative decoded bit, respectively. The LUT-B sponding to even-addressed rows and the other contains data

performs the function

. All data are repre- corresponding to all odd-addressed rows of the corresponding

sented as 2’s complement in VPU computation, which includes submatrix. To illustrate the details of dataflow, the analyses

the intrinsic message , the outputs of LUT-Bs, and the out- are performed, respectively, for three different cases, which

puts of VPU. The inputs of LUT-Bs coming from the outputs of correspond to even, odd, and zero shift offsets (ranging from

CPUs are in sign-magnitude format.

0 to 510) of a cyclic-shift identity matrix. Fig. 15 shows an

The block diagram of the proposed decoder architecture is example of the memory partitioning and data switching scheme

shown in Fig. 14. Each memory block , which consists of applied to a 15 15 cyclic-shifted identity matrix with an even

two memory banks, is associated with a circulant submatrix

(excluding 0) shift offset of 6. In the check-to-variable message

of the parity check matrix . These memory blocks are used updating phase, the two data located in the even memory seg-

to store the extrinsic soft messages conveyed in two decoding ment MEM_E and the odd memory segment MEM_O with the

phases. The memory modules and are used to store the same index are sent to CPU_E and CUP_O in parallel, where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG AND CUI: LOW-COMPLEXITY HIGH-SPEED DECODER DESIGN FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

111

Fig. 15. Memory partitioning and data switching structure for even shifting offset case.

Fig. 16. Memory partitioning and data switching structure for odd shifting offset case.

CPU_O and CPU_E are CPU components for even row and odd

row message updating, respectively. In the variable-to-check

message updating phase, the two data connected by an arrow

are sent to corresponding VPU_0 and VPU_1 in the same clock

cycle. Here, VPU_0 and VPU_1 are respective VPU compo-

nents for even column and odd column data computation. A

soft message

stored in a memory segment corresponds

to the 1-component located at row and column of the

cyclic-shifted identity matrix. In this example, the data located

in the even columns 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14 of the submatrix are

stored in the even addressed memory segment. However, the

data located in the even columns 0, 2, and 4 are stored in the

odd addressed memory segment. Similar cases exist for the Fig. 17. Memory partitioning and data switching structure for identity matrix. data located in the odd columns. Therefore, switching units

are needed to route data between memories and VPUs in the

variable-to-check message updating phase. Because the size

of each circulant matrix associated with the EG-LDPC code

is an odd number, only the data corresponding to the last row

(or column) of these matrices are accessed in the last clock

cycle of the check-to-variable (or variable-to-check) message

updating phase. In Fig. 15, memory block and are used

to store intrinsic soft messages and temporary decoded bits,

respectively. Symbol represents a constant for initialization

procedure.

A similar example for a cyclic-shifted matrix with an odd shift

offset of 5 is shown in Fig. 16. If the memory is partitioned in

a straightforward way, the data corresponding to the last row of

this matrix should be stored in the last location of even memory

segment. Consequently, data access conflict will occur when the

two data from columns four and five are retrieved from the even memory segment in the same cycle as indicated by the dashed Fig. 18. State transition diagram of the controller.

arrow. In our design, the last datum in the even rows is stored in

the odd memory sub-bank to eliminate the data access conflict. Consequently, two multiplexers are needed to steer the displaced C. Architecture of the Controller

data between the odd memory sub-bank and CPU_E.

The controller, which generates the memory addresses and

For the third case, when the shift value is 0, the cyclic-shifted the control signals for data switching networks, is built as a

identity matrix becomes an identity matrix. The details of two-level finite state machine. Fig. 18 shows the state transition

memory partitioning and data switching schemes are shown in diagram of the finite state machine. In the initialization state, the

Fig. 17. This is in fact the simplest case.

intrinsic soft messages stored in the memory are transferred

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 19. Block diagram of the controller.

09( ) Fig. 20. 7:4 uniform quantization of x .

into the memory . The antioverlap state is introduced to avoid the data access conflict between the two decoding phases.
The block diagram of the controller is shown in Fig. 19. The memory WRITE addresses and the data switching control signals for writing are the delayed versions of the memory READ addresses and the control signals for reading, respectively. In order to increase the clock speed of the controller, the retiming technique [18] is employed to shorten the critical path of the controller. By introducing one delay unit, the critical path is significantly reduced.

TABLE I UNIFORM TO NONUNIFORM QUANTIZATION CONVERSION

D. Fixed-Point Implementation

The word length of the soft messages directly affects the

memory size, the node processing unit size and the decoding uniform quantization case with 1-bit longer ( -bit versus

performance of an LDPC code decoder. Unless the target data- -bit) word length.

rate is very high, e.g., over 4 Gb/s, the overall hardware of an In both decoding phases, the extrinsic soft messages

LDPC decoder is predominantly determined by the size of the are sent to LUTs, which perform the nonlinear function

memories holding intrinsic and extrinsic soft messages. There-

. For simplicity, we assume the input

fore, it is very important to find efficient quantization schemes is nonnegative. This assumption will be justified later. Fig. 20

for these soft messages.

shows the quantized numbers for the input and output of

Let

denote the uniform quantization scheme in which using the 7:4 uniform quantization scheme. A close study of

the finite word length is bits, of which bits are used for these quantization results reveals that no quantized values of

the fractional part of the value to be quantized [19]. For the

are lost if is nonlinearly quantized, as is shown in

considered EG-LDPC code, the target bit error rate (BER) is set the middle column of Table I. Based on this observation, the

as

based on the original requirement from NASA. With new nonuniform quantization scheme for this specific case is

extensive simulation, we found that at least 7 bits are needed to as follows: the soft messages in uniform quantization format

represent the magnitude of a soft message to achieve this goal if computed with (5) and (6) are converted into nonuniform

a uniform quantization scheme is adopted (see Fig. 21). In this quantization format as expressed in Table I and are then stored

case, both the input and output of a LUT-A (or LUT-B) are 8 in the corresponding memory blocks. The 6-bit input of the

bits, which is quite large.

LUT for

is in nonuniform quantization format, and the

A nonuniform quantization scheme which generally out per- numbers stored in the LUT (i.e., the output of the LUT) are in

forms uniform quantization schemes with the same word length uniform quantization format with 7 bits per symbol. Fig. 21

was proposed in [20]. However, in the original method, a -bit shows the simulation results for four different cases: 1) using

nonuniform quantization scheme generally performs worse than 7:4 uniform quantization scheme; 2) using 6:3 uniform quanti-

the uniform quantization case with

-bit word length since zation scheme; 3) using 6-bit nonuniform quantization scheme;

significantly less precision is maintained for large values. This and 4) with floating-point computation, where AWGN channel

paper presents a new nonuniform quantization scheme that can and BPSK modulation are assumed. We have simulated 90-G

achieve decoding performance almost identical to that of the random information bit for either 6-bit quantization scheme at

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG AND CUI: LOW-COMPLEXITY HIGH-SPEED DECODER DESIGN FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

113

Fig. 23. Variable node processing unit with nonuniform quantization.
TABLE II XILINX VIRTEXII-6000 FPGA UTILIZATION STATISTICS
Fig. 21. Performance comparison between fixed-point and double precision simulations.

The design was targeted on the Xilinx Virtex-II 6000 device

(speed grade -6). Based on the Xilinx TRACE report, the max-

imum clock frequencies of the uniform and nonuniform quanti-

zation implementation are 193.4 and 192.6 MHz, respectively.

Table II shows the FPGA utilization statistics of both implemen-

tations.

The maximum iteration number is set as 15. It takes a half

iteration to transfer the intrinsic soft messages from memory

into memory of the decoder. It takes

clock cycles to perform one iteration in which five clock cycles

Fig. 22. Check node processing unit with nonuniform quantization.

are allotted to the antioverlap state. Thus, the nonuniform quantization implementation can achieve a worst-case information

decoding throughput of

both

4.2 dB and

4.4 dB. At

172 Mb/s, which is significantly higher than the other published

4.1 dB or below, over 50 block errors were observed for each FPGA implementations [11]–[13], [23].

simulation case. It can be seen from the figure that there is no It should be mentioned that such a high decoding throughput

observable difference between the decoding performance of can be attributed to two factors: 1) very high clock speed re-

using a 7-bit uniform quantization scheme and that of using sulted from various architectural level and circuit level opti-

a 6-bit nonuniform quantization scheme. It is also clear that mizations and 2) enhanced parallelism in partly parallel deusing a 6-bit uniform quantization scheme can hardly meet the coding.

target BER requirement. The new architectures for CPU and VPU with the nonuni-

VI. CONCLUSION

form quantization scheme are shown in Figs. 22 and 23, respectively. The uniform to nonuniform quantization converters (U2NUs) are introduced as shown in the two figures. They are implemented with simple combinational logic. The LUTs for both CPU and VPU are the same.

In this paper, we have presented a modified SPA which balances the computation load between two LDPC decoding phases. We proposed architectural optimizations to reduce the clock period for LDPC decoders and developed enhanced partially parallel decoder architectures to linearly increase the

E. FPGA Implementation Results

decoding throughput with a small amount of extra hardware. We have also introduced an efficient nonuniform quantiza-

Based on the architectures described before, the (8176, 7154) tion scheme to reduce memory size of LDPC decoders. We

EG-based LDPC decoder was modeled in VHDL and simulated have demonstrated significant benefits of using the proposed

using ModelSim. We then synthesized and performed place and techniques with an FPGA implementation of a (8176, 7154)

route for the design using the Xilinx ISE 5.1i software package. EG-LDPC code decoder on Xilinx Virtex-II 6000 device.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

It has been shown that the presented FGPA implementation
can achieve a maximum source data decoding throughout of
172 Mb/s at 15 iterations.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Sridhara, T. Fuja, and R. M. Tanner, “Low density parity check codes from permutation matrices,” presented at the Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. Baltimore, MD, 2001.
[2] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, 2000, pp. 545–546.
[3] Y. Kou, J. Xu, H. Tang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On circulant low density parity check codes,” in Proc. ISIT, 2002, p. 200.
[4] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, 2003, pp. 2708–2712.
[5] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[6] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[7] L. Chen, J. Xun, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near Shannon limit quasicyclic low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[8] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[9] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[10] D.-U. Lee, W. Luk, C. Wang, and C. Jones, “A flexible hardware encoder for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. FCCM, 2004, pp. 101–111.
[11] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3,6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE SiPS, 2003, pp. 127–132.
[12] Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, “A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2003, pp. 113–117.
[13] M. Karkooti and J. R. Cavallaro, “Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding,” in Proc. ITCC, 2004, pp. 579–585.
[14] Z. Wang, Y. Chen, and K. Parhi, “Area-efficient quasi-cyclic LDPC code decoder architecture,” in Proc. ICASSP, 2004, pp. 49–52.
[15] Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. Parhi, “Efficient high-speed quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder architecture,” in Proc. 38th Asiloma Conf. Signal, Syst. Comput., 2004, pp. 540–544.
[16] Z. Wang and Q. Jia, “Low complexity, high speed decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISCAS, 2005, pp. 5786–5789.
[17] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[18] K. K. Parhi, VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems, Design and Implementation. New York: Wiley, 1999.
[19] Z. Wang, H. Suzuki, and K. Parhi, “VLSI implementation issues of turbo decoder design for wireless applications,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), 1999, pp. 503–512.
[20] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low density parity check codes decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2001, pp. 202–205.

[21] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, March 2002.
[22] K. Shimizu, T. Ishikawa, T. Ikenaga, S. Goto, and N. Togawa, “Partially-parallel LDPC decoder based on high-efficiency message-passing algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Design, 2005, pp. 503–510.
[23] P. Bhagawat, M. Uppal, and G. Choi, “FPGA based implementation of decoder for array low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. ICASSP, 2005, pp. v29–v32.
[24] S.-H. Kan and I.-C. Park, “Memory-based low density parity check code decoder architecture using loosely coupled two data-flows,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2004, pp. II-397–II-400.
[25] S. Kim, G. E. Sobelman, and J. Moon, “Parallel VLSI architectures for a class of LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISCAS, 2002, pp. 93–96.
[26] E. Yeo, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “Architectures and implementations of low-density parity check decoding algorithms,” in Proc. MWSCAS, 2002, pp. 437–440.
[27] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for DVB-S2 LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur., 2005, pp. 100–105.
[28] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “A 170 Mbps (8176,7156) quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder implementation with FPGA,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2006, pp. 5095–5098.
Zhongfeng Wang (M’00–SM’05) received the B.E. and M.S. degrees in the automation from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1988 and 1990, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2000.
Upon finishing his graduate study, he worked for Morphics Technology Inc., Campbell, CA, for two years and then moved to National Semiconductor Corporation in 2002. Since September 2003, he has been with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, as an Assistant Professor. He has published numerous technical papers and has filed a few U.S. patent applications. His current research interests are in the area of efficient VLSI implementation of error correction codes, digital communications, and cryptography systems. He served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS from 2003 to 2005. Dr. Wang was a recipient of the Best Student Paper Award at the 1999 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS’99). He is a member of Sigma Xi.
Zhiqiang Cui received the B.E. degree from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 1993, and the M.E. degree from Texas A&M University, College Station, in 2002. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at Oregon State University, Corvallis.
His research interests include the area of VLSI design for digital signal processing and communication systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

