P2-16
Overlapped Semi-parallel LDPC Decoder with Dual-diagonal Structure for WiBro Portable Subscriber Station
Yong Ki Byun, Jong Kang Park, and Jong Tae Kim School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University

Abstract--This paper presents an efficient semi-parallel overlapped LDPC decoding algorithm for WiBro portable subscriber station. We use the dual-diagonal parity matrix structure that the check node update and variable node update can be executed concurrently. With this algorithm, decoding can be completed within 72.2% of clock cycles, compared with nonoverlapped decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
WiBro is a high-speed portable internet service based on IEEE 802.16e standard. It is the first mobile WiMax based commercial service. LDPC(low density parity check)-code is one of the famous FEC(forward error correction) code and has been adopted to WiBro system[1]. In WiBro the codeword length and code rate change according to current channel state. Thus, LDPC used in WiBro has to support variable bit-length, variable code rate and low power requirements.
Very sparse H parity matrix makes LDPC decoder simple. Moreover, LDPC decoder using Belief Propagation(BP) algorithm with log likelihood ratio is simply implemented[2]. But, encoding complexity requires the architecture of the decoder to be efficient. In BP algorithm, encoding procedure consists of three steps. The dependencies between the steps limit for each step to operate concurrently. So utilization of hardware is also limited. Some conventional overlapped algorithms address these issues[3]. But, their controls also become complex.
The main contribution on this paper is to propose overlapped semi-parallel LDPC decoder structure with very simple control. It is based on quasi-cyclic and dual-diagonal parity check structure to employ both variable bit-length decoding and efficient encoding architectures. It is not so different from conventional structures, but there are simple modifications on the control block. We make parts of CFU(check functional unit) and VFU(variable functional unit) operate concurrently. And it can reduce the decoding latency. To verify the proposed architecture, we simulated some of WiBro spec. with SystemC in behavioral level and analyzed the comparison results. In section III, we show the experimental results that our decoder structure reduces decoding clock cycles at code rate 1/2 by 73% of ones of nonoverlapped decoder. It can be a choice for the high-speed or low-power design.
II. OVERLAPPED SEMI-PARALLEL LDPC DECODER WITH DUAL-
DIAGONAL STRUCTURE
In this section, we will introduce an overlapped semiparallel LDPC decoder based on dual-diagonal structure for

WiBro system.
A. Quasi-cyclic dual-diagonal structure
Quasi-cyclic(QC) structure with L-parameter makes variable bit-length decoder implementation simpler[4]. QC gives some regular property to LDPC parity matrix H. It requires small changes to H structure.
If the parity matrix H is represented by H=[H1 | H2], and H2 is a low-triangular matrix(Fig.1(a)), generation matrix G can be made easily[5][6]. Moreover, dual-diagonal H2 matrix as shown in Fig. 1(b) can make encoding more efficient[7]. In the Fig. 1, I means L × L identity matrix. And the dark gray block is a circular permutation matrix which shifts the I to the right by x times for any integer x, 0≤ x < L.

(a) 12x12 low-triangular matrix

(b) dual-diagonal matrix

Fig. 1. quasi-cyclic H2 examples of H=[H1 | H2]

B. Overlapped semi-parallel LDPC decoder
LDPC decoding consists of three steps which are the initialization, check node update and variable node update with tentative decoding. When decoding, last two steps are iterated. And each step requires messages of each other. So it limits two steps to operate concurrently. But, If H2 is constructed as shown in Fig. 1(b), we can overlap two steps partially. We modified decoding steps to four steps, instead of conventional three steps. Four steps consist of the initialization, only check node update, overlapped check node and variable node update, and only variable node update. When the variable node update is operated, tentative decoding is also executed. Fig. 2 shows an example of parity check matrix H which can be adopted to the WiBro specification. Code rate is 1/2 and parity matrix H is constructed by 12x24 with QC(L=96). After the initialization step, CFU calculates rows 1 and 2 in 2 clocks in only check node update step. Because of dual-diagonal structure of H2, if VNU starts from column 13, the CNU for row 3 can be calculated concurrently. After 10 clock cycles later, the overlapped check node and variable node update steps are completed. And decoding enters to only variable node update step. VFU calculates

1-4244-0763-X/07/$20.00 ©2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:17:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

column 23 and 24. Then, remaining column 1 to 12 will be calculated by VFU. Temporal decoding results will be stored to the registers when VFU is executed.

(a) non-overlapped decoding

Fig. 2. concurrent execution of CNUs and VNUs in each clock.

III. EXPERIMENT RESULT The reduced clock ratio is given by

(b) overlapped decoding Fig. 3. R=1/2, 2304 bit-length 30-iterated. Decoding waveform

Rreduced

=

NCinit

+ ( NConlyCNU + NCoverlappedNU + NConlyVNU ) * Niter NCinit + (NCCNU + NCVNU ) * Niter

 NConlyCNU + NCoverlappedNU + NConlyVNU NCCNU + NCVNU

where, NCinit is the number of initialization clock, NCCNU and NCVNU are the number of check node update clock and variable node update clock in conventional LDPC, NConlyCNU is the number of clock used in first step, NCoverlappedNU is the overlapped CNU and VNU clock, NConlyVNU is the number of only variable node update, and Niter is the number of iteration. According to this formula, reduced clock ratio depends on H matrix structure. In parallel LDPC system, initialization step can be complete in just one clock by using buffers. Usually the number of iterations is more than 30 in general VLSI implementation with fixed-point numbers. Thus, in the case of R=1/2 spec. WiBro, if we decode the coded data with 30 iterations, the reduced clock ratio would be 72.2%, compared to the conventional non-overlapped decoder.
We simulated LDPC decoder using SystemC in behavioral level based on semi-parallel architecture. In behavioral modeling, 'wait' statement was used to calculate each row and each column node update in a clock. To measure decoding time, we used 12x24 H matrix and 2,304-bit codeword through AWGN channel of 2.5 dB Eb/No in all cases with 100MHz clock rate. Fig 3. shows the simulation results. The proposed LDPC decoder consumed 7,820 ns from initialization to complete decode, whereas non-overlapped decoder consumed 10,820 ns. We can save 27.8% of clock cycles for the coded data with 1/2 code rate. The number of iterations is fixed to 30, but the codeword was decoded out at 4 iteration, because of floating-point simulation.
The BER performance between overlapped and nonoverlapped designs would be exactly same, if the number of iterations is identical.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
Because of implementation complexity of full-parallel LDPC decoder and requirements of the WiBro system, semiparallel LDPC decoder with dual-diagonal QC H matrix could be an alternative. In this paper, we introduce an overlapped semi-parallel LDPC decoder. It is consist of four steps, instead of conventional three steps to give concurrency. The overlapped decoder we presented can reduce decoding clock cycles by 27% of ones for the non-overlapped decoder.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by IT R&D Project funded by Korean Ministry of Information and Communications. We also appreciate IDEC(IC Design Education Center) for EDA tools.
REFERENCES
[1] TTA, TTAS.KO-06.0082, Specifications for 2.3 GHz band Portable Internet Service-Physical & Medium Acess Control Layer
[2] Howard, S.L., Gaudet, V.C. and Schlegel, C., "Soft-Bit Decoding of Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 646-650, Oct. 2005.
[3] Yanni Chen and Parhi, K.K, "Overlapped message passing for quasicyclic low-density parity check codes," IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106-1113, June. 2004.
[4] M. P. C. Fossorier, "Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp.1788–1794, Aug. 2004.
[5] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, "Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, pp. 28942901, Aug. 2005.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, "Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638-656, Feb.2001.
[7] Wenming Liu, Guangxi Zhu, Yongqiang Deng and Yejun He, "Deterministic quasi-regular LDPC codes," VTC-2005-Fall, 28-25 Volume: 1, pp 512- 516, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:17:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

