82

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

LP Decoding Corrects a Constant Fraction of Errors
Jon Feldman, Tal Malkin, Rocco A. Servedio, Cliff Stein, and Martin J. Wainwright, Member, IEEE

Abstract—We show that for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes whose Tanner graphs have sufficient expansion, the linear programming (LP) decoder of Feldman, Karger, and Wainwright can correct a constant fraction of errors. A random graph will have sufficient expansion with high probability, and recent work shows that such graphs can be constructed efficiently. A key element of our method is the use of a dual witness: a zero-valued dual solution to the decoding linear program whose existence proves decoding success. We show that as long as no more than a certain constant fraction of the bits are flipped by the channel, we can find a dual witness. This new method can be used for proving bounds on the performance of any LP decoder, even in a probabilistic setting. Our result implies that the word error rate of the LP decoder decreases exponentially in the code length under the binary-symmetric channel (BSC). This is the first such error bound for LDPC codes using an analysis based on “pseudocodewords.” Recent work by Koetter and Vontobel shows that LP decoding and min-sum decoding of LDPC codes are closely related by the “graph cover” structure of their pseudocodewords; in their terminology, our result implies that that there exist families of LDPC codes where the minimum BSC pseudoweight grows linearly in the block length.
Index Terms—Channel coding, factor graphs, iterative decoding, linear programming, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message passing, Tanner graphs.
I. INTRODUCTION
TURBO codes [7] and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [8] have been the focus of intense study in the last ten years. While their observed error-correcting performance is
Manuscript received February 22, 2005; revised April 15, 2006. The work of J. Feldman is supported by an NSF Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship DMS-0303407. The work of T. Malkin is supported in part by the National Science Foundation CAREER award CCF-0347839. The work of R. A. Servedio is supported in part by the National Science Foundation CAREER award CCF-0347282. The work of C. Stein is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant DMS-9970063 and an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship. The work of M. J. Wainwright is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant DMS-0528488 and an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Fellowship. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 20024.
J. Feldman was with the Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA. He is now with Google, Inc., New York, NY 10016 USA. (e-mail: jonfeld@ieor.columbia.edu).
T. Malkin and R. A. Servedio are with the Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027-7003 USA (e-mail: tal@cs. columbia.edu;rocco@cs.columbia.edu).
C. Stein is with the Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA (e-mail: cliff@ieor. columbia.edu).
M. J. Wainwright is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, and the Department of Statistics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: wainwrig@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Communicated by A Ashikhmin, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2006.887523

unparalleled, the theoretical understanding of this behavior re-

mains incomplete. One very successful technique for analyzing

the average behavior of message-passing decoders on code en-

sembles with large block length is density evolution [9]–[11].

This technique, however, fails to explain the behavior of mes-

sage-passing algorithms on specific finite-length codes when the

messages traverse cycles in the underlying Tanner graph [12].

Successful finite-length analysis of a suboptimal decoding al-

gorithm for LDPC codes requires a useful combinatorial de-

scription of the output space, or the set of pseudocodewords

associated with the decoder. Under the binary erasure channel,

Di et al. [13] identified the message-passing pseudocodewords

as “stopping sets,” and used this characterization to give de-

coding performance results. For more general channels, Wiberg

[14] (see also [15], [16]) used the computation tree associated

with the message-passing decoder to analyze pseudocodewords;

however, this analysis has not led to finite-length performance

bounds, except for limited families of codes.

The linear programming (LP) decoder of Feldman, Karger,

and Wainwright [3], [1], [2] provides an alternative to mes-

sage-passing decoding that is more amenable to finite-length

analysis. Specific LP decoders have been defined for turbo codes

[17] and LDPC codes [1], [2], [18]. The pseudocodewords for

an LP decoder are the vertices of a polytope whose constraints

depend on the structure of the code. In general, LP pseudocode-

words unify many known notions of pseudocodewords for var-

ious codes and decoders (see [3]). For the case of LDPC codes,

Koetter and Vontobel [5], [6] described these LP pseudocode-

words as codewords in “graph covers,” and established a con-

nection to the pseudocodewords of the message-passing “min-

sum” algorithm. For general factor graphs, Wainwright et al.

[19], [20] connected tree-based LP relaxations (such as the LP

decoder [2]) with the broader class of reweighted min-sum al-

gorithms.

Until now, the only known performance results for the LP

decoder were based on graphs with high girth; in particular,

exploiting this high girth yielded an inverse-polynomial word-

error rate (WER) bound for rate- repeat–accumulate codes

[17], [21], [22], and a proof that at least

errors can

be corrected in general LDPC codes under bit-flipping chan-

nels. In this paper, we show that LP decoders can correct up

to a constant fraction of errors in bit-flipping channels. Using

a simple Chernoff bound, this fact implies WER

under the binary-symmetric channel (BSC). This result consti-

tutes the first proof that LP decoding has an inverse-exponen-

tial WER on a constant-rate code. Furthermore, no such WER

bound is known for message-passing decoders such as min-sum

and sum-product (belief propagation) on finite-length LDPC

codes.

Our result is based on the expansion of the Tanner graph,

rather than its girth. More specifically, a Tanner graph is a

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: LP DECODING CORRECTS A CONSTANT FRACTION OF ERRORS

83

-expander if for all sets of variable nodes where

rect adversarial errors up to (and beyond) the Zyablov bound.

, at least check nodes are incident to . With this defini- Guruswami and Indyk [32] (as well as Roth and Skatchek [33])

tion, our main theorem is given explicitly as follows.

construct “near-MDS” codes using expanders. In later work

Theorem 1: Let be an LDPC code with length and rate

at least

described by a Tanner graph with variable

nodes, check nodes, and regular left degree . Suppose is a

-expander, where

and is an integer.

Then the LP decoder succeeds, as long as at most

bits are flipped by the channel.

[34], they achieve the Gilbert–Varsharmov (GV) bound for low rates.
The natural LP decoder for these codes is stronger than the one obtained by reducing the code to an LDPC code and applying the tree-based LP [1], [2] to the associated factor graph; therefore, the results in this paper should not be compared to these more powerful codes. Furthermore, since the preliminary

Random Tanner graphs will meet the conditions of this the- version of this work [23], we have shown that LP decoding

orem with high probability, and recent work by Capalbo et al. can achieve channel capacity [24], using a family of expander

[4] gives efficient deterministic constructions of such graphs. codes along the lines of [29]. While these more sophisticated

The proof of Theorem 1 is based on showing that whenever the expander-based constructions yield stronger theoretical bounds

number of errors in the channel is bounded, and the graph ex- on error correction than those known for LDPC codes, the codes

pands sufficiently, we can find a dual witness: a zero-valued dual themselves are mostly impractical for use in communication

solution to the decoding LP. This dual solution implies that the systems, due to their dependence on large subcodes. (The size

transmitted codeword is optimal for the primal LP, and so LP of these subcodes is often exponentially large in , where

decoding succeeds.

is the gap between the code rate and the desired bound.) There-

A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the ISIT fore, the study of LDPC codes is of independent interest.

2004 symposium [23]. We also note that some techniques developed in this paper have since been used to obtain results for C. Outline

more general expander codes [24].

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec-

A. Related Work: LDPC Codes

tion II, we provide background on LDPC codes, and the associated LP decoder from [2]. In Section III, we show how to prove

The bit-flipping algorithm for expander codes developed by an error bound using a dual witness; it is worth noting that this Sipser and Spielman [25] has a theoretical performance guar- method applies to any LP decoder, not just the one for LDPC

antee similar to Theorem 1. In fact, when the expansion param- codes. Section IV is devoted to the proof of our main result using

eter equals , the error-correction guarantee given in The- the expansion of the Tanner graph. We conclude with some final

orem 1 for LP decoding matches the Sipser–Spielman bound remarks and open questions in Section V. In the Appendix , we

exactly. Burshtein and Miller [26] also use graph expansion to show that graphs with sufficient expansion exist and can be con-

analyze the performance of various related iterative algorithms. structed efficiently.

With respect to the fraction of errors corrected on regular graphs, our results are roughly the same as theirs; specifically, for close

II. BACKGROUND

to , both results show the ability to correct (close to) er- We begin by providing background on LDPC codes, as well

rors, where is the expansion parameter. Lentmaier et al. [27] as LP decoding applied to them [2].

analyze iterative coding for LDPC codes (as well as other ensembles), and establish that under suitable technical conditions, A. LDPC Codes

the error probability decays as

for some constant

.

The LP decoder—as well as iterative algorithms such as

sum-product and min-sum—have the advantage that they apply

in more general settings such as the additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN) channel, and exploit “soft information” from

the channel. Although this entails an increase in running

time, our preliminary experiments indicate that even for the

binary-symmetric case, LP decoding (and other algorithms that

exploit soft information) perform significantly better than the

bit-flipping algorithm of Sipser and Spielman [25].

Let

and

be indices for the

columns (respectively, rows) of the

parity-check matrix

of a binary linear code with rate at least

. The

Tanner or factor graph representation of the code is a bipar-

tite graph with node sets and , and edges between

variable node and check node for all where

. If

the parity-check matrix has a bounded number (independent of

) of nonzero entries in each column, we say that it has low-den-

sity; this condition translates to each node in having bounded

degree. In this paper, we do not require that the check nodes

have bounded degree.

B. Related Work: Other Codes Built From Expanders

The code can be visualized directly from the graph . Imagine

assigning to each variable node a value in

, representing

Expanders also play a role in generalized LDPC construc- the value of a particular code bit. A parity-check node is “sat-

tions. Zémor [28] and Barg and Zémor [29]–[31] have a series isfied” if the bits assigned to the variable nodes in its neighbor-

of papers analyzing expander codes where the “check nodes” hood have even parity (sum to zero

). The bits assigned

are allowed to represent arbitrary linear subcodes (as opposed to to the variable nodes form a codeword if and only if all check

single parity checks in the case of a standard LDPC code). They nodes are satisfied.

show that such codes, together with efficient message-passing We assume that the graph is left-regular; i.e., the degree of

algorithms, can achieve the capacity of the BSC, as well as cor- each variable node

is exactly some constant . Let

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

84

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

denote the neighbors of a node set . For a single node , we let

. For each check

, let

even

Each

represents a local codeword; in other words, if we

set each bit in to , and all other bits in

to , then we

satisfy check .

Let be the “cost” of node , where is the log-likelihood

ratio for the th code bit. When transmitting over the BSC with

crossover probability

, we may rescale the log-like-

lihood ratios such that

if a is received from the

channel for bit , and

if a is received. We assume

that the codeword is sent over the channel; this assump-

tion is valid since the polytope for LDPC codes [2] is “ -sym-

metric” for any binary-input output-symmetric (BIOS) channel;

see Feldman et al. [3] for further details. Therefore, for the BSC

with crossover probability , we have

with probability

, and

otherwise. For a particular setting of the cost

vector , let

be the set of negative-cost

variable nodes.

B. The LP Decoder for LDPC Codes

The first-order LP decoder for LDPC codes [2] has an LP

variable for each node

, indicating the value of the th

code bit. In addition, for each parity check

and each set

there is an LP variable , which serves as an indicator

for using the local codeword to satisfy . Note that the variable

is also present for each parity check, and represents setting

all bits in

to zero. We now give the decoding LP along

with its dual, which we use in the next section:

minimize

such that

The decoding algorithm works as follows. First, we solve the

decoding LP to obtain an optimal solution

. If

, then must represent the maximum-likelihood (ML)

codeword [3]. In this case, we output ; otherwise, if some

has a fractional value, we declare an error. Our LP decoder will

succeed if

is the unique optimum solution of the LP.

(We remind the reader of our previous assumption that we are

sending the all-zeros codeword .) An important fact is that the

decoding LP is solvable in polynomial time even if some of the

check nodes have large degree; we refer the reader to the papers

[2], [18] for details.

III. PROVING ERROR BOUNDS USING A DUAL WITNESS

In order to prove that LP decoding succeeds, we must show

that

is the unique optimum of the LP. To be conser-

vative, we assume failure in the event that the LP has multiple

optima, so that the LP decoder succeeds if and only if

is

the unique optimum solution. Consider the dual of the decoding

LP given above. If there is a feasible point of the dual LP that

has the same cost (i.e., zero) as the point

has in the de-

coding LP, then

is also an optimal point of the decoding

LP. Therefore, using standard results on LP duality [35], in order

to prove that the LP decoder succeeds, it suffices to exhibit a

zero-cost point in the dual. Actually, since the existence of the

zero-cost dual point only proves that

is one of possibly

many primal optima, we need to be a bit more careful; in partic-

ular, we give a dual feasible point that is strictly bounded away

from its cost constraints (2b), which implies using complemen-

tary slackness [35] that

is the unique optimal solution

to the LP. We call such a dual point a dual witness. This argu-

ment is made precise in the upcoming proof.

We refer to the values as edge weights. The following

definition underlies a sufficient condition for a unique zero-cost

dual solution:

edges

(1a)

Definition 1: A setting of edge weights

is feasible if i)

for all checks

and distinct

, we have

(1b)

, and ii) for all nodes , we have

.

(1c)

maximize free

such that

(2a)

(2b)

edges

free (2c)

Note that the constraints

and

are implied

by the other constraints, assuming that every bit is connected

to at least one check. Let be the setting of the variables

appropriate for when

; i.e., for all

and

, we

have

if

, and

otherwise.

Proposition 2: If there is a feasible setting of edge weights,

then the point

is the unique optimum of the decoding

LP.

Proof: Let

be a feasible setting of edge weights.

Taking

for all gives a zero-cost dual solution; it is easily

verified that this solution satisfies the dual constraints (2a) and

(2b) by applying, respectively, conditions i) and ii) from Defini-

tion 1. (For (2a), note that when

, the constraint described

by (2a) is redundant for all where

.) It follows from

the preceding discussion that

is optimal for the cost

function in the decoding LP.

We now show that

is the unique optimum. The strict

inequality in part ii) of Definition 1 implies that

for some positive number , from which it follows that

is an optimal point of the decoding LP under the cost

function where

for all .

Now suppose

is not the unique LP optimum under

the original cost function . Since is the only feasible setting

of the variables when

, there must be some other

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: LP DECODING CORRECTS A CONSTANT FRACTION OF ERRORS

85

feasible point

where

and

. But

since

, we have

, which contradicts the fact

that

is optimal under .

The preceding result can easily be generalized to any LP

decoder, where the dual witness takes on a different form de-

pending on the structure of the code and the LP relaxation. In

fact, a variant of this idea was explored in previous work [36] in

the context of turbo codes, and has recently been explored for

more general expander codes [24].

At one level, trying to find a dual witness is simply a reformu-

lation of the problem of trying to prove that the transmitted code-

word is the optimal primal LP solution. The value of looking at

the dual lies in the analytical flexibility that it affords—in partic-

ular, an ability to trade off error bound quality for ease of anal-

ysis. Take, for example, the extreme case in which the channel

is noiseless, so that

for all . In this case, finding a dual

witness reduces to finding a feasible setting of edge weights,

Fig. 1. A weighting scheme that satisfies the LP dual constraints. Given an
f 2 j 0 g  error set U = i V 
 = 1 , we let U_ V be the nodes not in U with 0 [ more than (1 )c neighbors in N (U ), and let U = U U_ . The matching
M (solid edges) contains at most one edge incident to each check node, at least c edges incident to each node in U , and at least c edges incident to each node
2 2 0 in U_ . For all (i; j) M such that i U , we set  = x, and  = x for 6 all i = i. For all other j, we set all  = 0.

and is very easy: simply set all

. In general, as the noise

increases (and hence more bits get flipped), it becomes increas-

ingly difficult to find a dual witness.

Proposition 3: If there is a -matching of , then there is a feasible edge weight assignment.
Proof: Call a check node in activated if is incident to

IV. USING EXPANSION TO FIND A DUAL WITNESS

an edge

of , and

. Note that an activated check is

This section is devoted to the proof of our main result, previously stated as Theorem 1. We begin by defining a procedure for assigning feasible edge weights , which then allows us to apply Proposition 2. Our procedure uses a special subset of edges called a -matching, defined in Section IV-A. The
-matching is a function of the error pattern received from the channel. In Section IV-B, we show that if a -matching exists, then we can find a feasible assignment of edge weights. In Section IV-C, we prove that a -matching does indeed exist as long as the number of bits flipped by the channel is at most a constant fraction of , where the constant depends on the expansion properties of the graph. We finish the proof of Theorem 1 in Section IV-D.

incident to exactly one edge of , by the definition of . We

assign edge weights as follows (see also Fig. 1), using a positive

constant that we define later.

• For all activated checks , we have

for some

, and

for all other

. Set

, and set

for all other

.

• For all other checks, set all incident edge weights to zero.

This weighting clearly satisfies condition i) of a feasible weight

assignment. For condition ii), we distinguish three cases. For the

following argument, note that all edges in incident to nodes

in receive weight , all other edges in receive weight ,

and all edges not in receive weight either or .

1) For a variable node , we have

. Also, at least

of the edges incident to are in (and each has weight

A. Definition and Notation

). All other incident edges have weight either or .

For the remainder of this section, let be a Tanner graph

with variable nodes each of degree , and moreover let be an

-expander, where

and is an integer.

We also fix the following parameters and sets, which are implicit

functions of and/or the cost vector . Let

.

Note that

, and that is an integer. Define

, and let be the set of positive-cost variable

nodes outside that have more than

neighbors in

(i.e.,

).

Finally, we define

.

Definition 2: A -matching of is a subset of the

edges incident to such that i) every check in

is inci-

dent to at most one edge of , ii) every node in is incident

to at least edges of , and iii) every node in is incident to

at least edges of .

In either case, each has weight at most , and so the total

weight of incident edges is at most

. This is less than as long as

.

2) If

, then

. At least of ’s incident edges

are in , but (trivially) not incident to ; these edges have

weight . All other incident edges have weight either

or . In either case, they each have weight at most , and

so the total weight of incident edges is at most

,

which is less than as long as

.

3) The remaining case is when

, and in this case

. The definition of implies that has at least

neighbors not in

, and so at most

edges

incident to have nonzero weight. We are therefore in the

same situation as in the previous case: all nonzero weights

are at most , and so the total weight of incident edges

is at most

, which is less than as long as

B. Assigning Weights Using a -Matching We give our weight assignment scheme in the following the-

. Summarizing our conditions on , we have

orem (also in Fig. 1). The existence of such an assignment im-

plies decoding success, by Proposition 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

86

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 2. An instance of max-flow used to show that graph expansion implies a (; )-matching (Proposition 4). All edges have unit capacity, except the edges leaving the source s, which have capacity c.

There is a feasible satisfying these conditions as long as , which is true by the definition of .

Fig. 3. A minimum s-t cut (V ; C ; V ; C ) in the flow graph of Fig. 2. One of each edge type is shown, and the edges that contribute to the size of the cut are shown with solid lines. Every edge has unit capacity except those leaving the source s, which have capacity c.

C. Expansion Implies a -Matching

To construct our feasible weight assignment, it remains to show that we can construct a -matching. To do so, we use the expansion of the graph.

Proposition 4: If is a

-expander with

, and

, then has a -matching.

Proof: We construct the -matching by setting up a

max-flow instance (see the books [37], [38] for background on

max-flow). We will construct this flow instance using the vari-

able nodes , the check nodes

, and directed versions of

the edges incident to . We will also introduce two new nodes

(a source and a sink), as well as edges incident to those nodes.

We construct the flow instance as follows (see Fig. 2), with

all integer capacities: For every edge

in where

and

, make a directed edge

with capacity .

Create a source , and make a new edge with capacity from

to every variable node. Create a sink , and make a new edge

with capacity from each check node

to .

We claim that if there exists a flow of value

in this

instance, then there is a -matching . Let be a flow of

value

; without loss of generality, we may assume is

integral [38]. We set to be the set of original edges (from

to

) with unit flow in . Since has value

, every

edge out of the source to the nodes of must be saturated. It

follows that exactly edges out of each

have a unit of

flow in . Thus, satisfies condition ii) of a -matching,

and since

, the set is more than sufficient to satisfy

condition iii) as well. The edges from each check

to

the sink have capacity , and so at most one incoming edge to

each check is carrying flow in . It follows that at most one edge

of is incident to each check in

, and thus, satisfies

condition i) of a -matching.

So it remains to show that there exists a flow of value

,

or equivalently [38] that the minimum - cut is at least

.

Let

describe the minimum - cut as follows:

and are the variable and check nodes, respectively, on the

same side of the cut as the source . Similarly, and are the

variable and check nodes, respectively, on the the same side of

the cut as the sink . This minimum - cut is depicted in Fig. 3.

For node sets and , let

denote the total capacity of

edges going from to . The value of the minimum - cut is

exactly

. Note that

, and

.

We claim that without loss of generality, there are no edges

in the minimum - cut from to ; i.e.,

. To

see this, consider an edge , where

and

. If

we move to the source side of the cut, then we add at most

to the cut value, since the only edge leaving is the one to the

sink . However, we also subtract at least from the cut value,

because the edge is no longer in the cut.

So, we have that the minimum - cut has value

(3a)

(3b)

where (3a) follows from

(since there are no edges

from to ), and (3b) follows from the expansion of .

We note that we have essentially taken the LP dual twice: once in reasoning about a dual witness, and then again by applying the max-flow min-cut theorem. It might be interesting to see a more direct construction of the matching.

Proof of Our Main Theorem

Before proceeding to the proof of Theorem 1, we require the following.

Lemma 5: Suppose

, where

have

.

Proof: Assume to the contrary that

is some subset

where

set

. Since

. Then, we
. Then there . Consider the

we have

by our assumption on

this set expands, and we have i):

Furthermore, we have

. Therefore, .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: LP DECODING CORRECTS A CONSTANT FRACTION OF ERRORS

87

Consider the set

. These are the edges from that The next logical step is to adapt our techniques to different

are not incident to

. Each node in has at most

codes and channels. The idea of constructing a dual solution

such edges, by the definition of . Therefore,

with value zero to prove decoding success applies to any

“ -symmetric” [3] LP decoder and memoryless symmetric

channel (such as the AWGN channel).

and we have ii):

.

Combining the inequalities i) and ii) and using the definition

, we obtain

In a follow-up to this work, a subset of the current authors has shown [24], using a dual witness, that LP decoding with expander codes can achieve the capacity of any memoryless symmetric channel in which the bitwise log-likelihood ratio is

bounded by some constant. Additionally, a bound is proved for

the adversarial channel that is stronger than the one given here.

which is a contradiction. We are now ready to prove our main theorem.

It should be noted, however, that expander codes are much less practical than LDPC codes. Expander codes might have very high—albeit constant—variable degree, and thus are not useful

Theorem 1: Let be a LDPC code with length and rate at

least

described by a Tanner graph with variable

nodes, check nodes, and regular left degree . Suppose is a

-expander, where

and is an integer.

Then the LP decoder succeeds, as long as at most

bits are flipped by the channel.

Proof: By assumption,

for small finite lengths. Turbo codes present another promising application of the
techniques developed in this paper. Since the distance of turbo codes is in general sublinear [39], one cannot prove a “constant fraction of error” result. However, proving that the WER (of the turbo code LP decoder in [17], [18]) goes to zero as the block length increases (for reasonably high rates) would be a significant result. As far as the authors are aware, no such

finite-length error bound is known for turbo codes of any

constant rate (other than the results in [17], [22], [21] for the

and so, by Lemma 5, we have

. This implies RA cycle code—a code with logarithmic distance).

. Therefore, by Proposition 4, there

exists a -matching of , and so by Proposition 3 there

exists a feasible weight assignment. Using Proposition 2, we

conclude that

is the unique optimum of the LP, and so

the decoder succeeds.

APPENDIX EXISTENCE AND CONSTRUCTION OF EXPANDERS
In this appendix, we give theorems showing that there exist families of expander graphs, and we cite results proving that these expanders can be constructed efficiently. We give these re-

For any constant rate between and , a random graph will

meet the conditions of the above theorem for some as required

and some constant

; also explicit families of such graphs

can be constructed efficiently (we discuss this more in the Ap-

pendix ). As an example of Theorem 1, let us set

. Using

sults simply for the sake of completeness of our main result that LDPC codes with LP decoding can correct a constant fraction of errors. The resulting graphs will have large degree requirements and small error-correcting capability, and so improving these results is an important step toward making these codes practical.

an

-expander, Theorem 1 asserts that the LP decoder

will succeed if fewer than

bits are flipped by the channel. A. Expansion From Random Graphs

Interestingly, this result matches the parameters of the statement Using the probabilistic method, one can show the following.

given by Sipser and Spielman [25] in the original paper on ex-

pander codes (i.e., decoding success if fewer than

errors

using an

-expander).

Proposition 6: Let

and

be any fixed

constants, and let be such that

is an integer which is at

least . Then for any such that

there is a Tanner

V. CONCLUSION

graph with variable nodes, check nodes, and regular left

degree which is a

-expander, where

We have given the first strong WER bound for LP decoding;

furthermore, this bound is better than any finite-length bound

(4)

known for the conventional message-passing decoders.

This paper raises a number of open questions. It would be

interesting to see an improvement in the results for LDPC codes.

Proof: We consider random

-bipartite graphs which

The fraction of error proved here (

, see Appendix ) are formed as follows.

is quite far from the performance of LDPC codes observed in practice. Also, constraining to be an integer could require a rather large degree. Both of these problems are a result of the particular method we found for constructing a dual witness,

• For

the th variable node uniformly picks a

-element subset of and forms edges to these check

nodes.

and are not necessarily a deficiency in LP decoding itself. One Any graph formed this way is -regular on the left. We let

could improve our results by a more careful weighting scheme, denote

, the average degree of the check nodes. We note

perhaps using graph structures that are more localized than set first that each set consisting of a single variable node clearly

expansion.

expands by a factor of exactly . Now fix a value

, a set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

88

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

of left-vertices where

, and a set of right-vertices which is a tighter bound than the previously used

of size

(note that is an integer). For each individual bound. Using

,

and

this gives

vertex in , the probability that all of its neighbors lie in is

Since each left-vertex chooses its neighbors independently of

the other left-vertices, the probability that

is at most

. Since there are sets of left-vertices and sets

of

right-vertices, the probability that any set of

left-vertices has its neighborhood of size at most is at most

Thus, if is any constant value such that (6)

we then have that, with probability

, all sets of size

satisfy the required expansion. Inequality (6) does not seem

to yield a nice closed-form expression for . However, one can

verify that, e.g., for

,

, and

, any value

causes (6) to be negative. This gives the

stronger LP decoding performance bound claimed earlier.

B. Explicit Constructions of Expanders

Recently, Capalbo et al. [4] gave the first explicit construc(5) tion of lossless expanders (namely, with arbitrarily close to

Let equals

and . It is easily checked that for

, so (5) ), using the zig-zag graph product [41] through the framework , of randomness conductors. Their work implies the following.

the quantity

is at most , and thus we have

Proposition 7: Let

and

be

any fixed constants. Then for any such that

there is an efficiently constructible Tanner graph with vari-

able nodes, check nodes, and regular left-degree which is

Thus with probability at least , we have that a random graph an

-expander, where

,

formed as described above is a

-expander for

and

.

. Plugging in for and and recalling that the proposition is proved.

Thus, there are efficiently constructible LDPC codes of any constant rate for which LP decoding corrects a constant fraction

Together with Theorem 1, Proposition 6 implies that there

are LDPC codes of any constant rate for which LP decoding

corrects a constant fraction of error. As a concrete example, if

we take

,

, and

, we have that there is a

family of LDPC codes of rate for which LP decoding can

correct

fraction of errors.

We note that a more careful analysis of the random bipartite

of errors. Note that while the above proposition does not directly

guarantee to be an integer, this is not a problem since given

any

there is some such that

and

is an integer (note that any

-expander is clearly also

a

-expander for any

). Thus, in order to apply

Theorem 1, it is sufficient to choose some

for the Capalbo et al. construction.

graphs used to prove Proposition 6 gives a stronger bound on ,

but this bound does not have a convenient closed form. Using

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

this stronger bound it can be shown that for the specific family

of LDPC codes described above (with

,

, and

) LP decoding can correct

fraction of errors.

To see this, note that the proof of Proposition 6 implies that

the probability (over our choice of a random graph) that any set

We would like to thank G. David Forney, Jr., David Karger, Ralf Koetter, and Pascal Vontobel for helpful discussions. In addition, we thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive suggestions that helped to improve the paper.

of size up to fails to expand is at most , where is de-

fined in (4). Using a different bound on binomial coefficients

we can show that for some

to be described below, all

sets of size

fail to expand with exponentially low prob-

ability, where is any fixed constant value in the open interval

. Combining these facts, we have that a random is a

-expander with probability at least

.

In order to obtain the sharper result, we now apply the fol-

lowing “entropy bound” [40] on the binomial coefficient

REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode linear codes,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems (CISS’03), Baltimore, MD, Mar. 2003.
[2] ——, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[3] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
[4] M. Capalbo, O. Reingold, S. Vadhan, and A. Wigderson, “Randomness conductors and constant-degree expansion beyond the degree/2 barrier,” in Proc. 34th ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, Montreal, Canada, May 2002, pp. 659–668.
[5] R. Koetter, 2002, personal communication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FELDMAN et al.: LP DECODING CORRECTS A CONSTANT FRACTION OF ERRORS

89

[6] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2003.
[7] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[8] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[9] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[11] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in Proc. 1998 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Cambridge, MA, Oct. 1998, p. 117.
[12] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[13] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[14] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping , Sweden, 1996.
[15] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models. New York: Springer, 2001, pp. 101–112.
[16] B. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 766–781, Feb. 2001.
[17] J. Feldman and D. R. Karger, “Decoding turbo-like codes via linear programming,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), Vancouver, Canada, Nov. 2002.
[18] J. Feldman, “Decoding Error-Correcting Codes via Linear Programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[19] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “MAP estimation via agreement on (hyper)trees: Message-passing and linear programming approaches,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[20] ——, “Exact MAP estimates via agreement on (hyper)trees: Linear programming and message-passing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3697–3717, Nov. 2005.
[21] N. Halabi and G. Even, “Improved bounds on the word error probability of RA(2) codes with linear-programming-based decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 265–280, Jan. 2005.
[22] G. Even and N. Halabi, “Improved bounds on the word error probability of RA(2) codes with linear programming based decoding,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.

[23] J. Feldman, T. Malkin, R. A. Servedio, C. Stein, and M. J. Wainwright, “LP decoding corrects a constant fraction of errors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 68.
[24] J. Feldman and C. Stein, “LP decoding achieves capacity,” in Proc. Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA’05), Vancouver, Canada, Jan. 2005.
[25] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[26] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for message-passing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 782–790, Feb. 2001.
[27] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “An analysis of the block error probability performance of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3834–3855, Nov. 2005.
[28] G. Zémor, “On expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 835–837, Feb. 2001.
[29] A. Barg and G. Zémor, “Error exponents of expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1725–1729, Jun. 2002.
[30] ——, “Error exponents of expander codes under linear-complexity decoding,” SIAM J. Discr. Math., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 426–445, 2004.
[31] ——, “Concatenated codes: Serial and parallel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 1625–1634, May 2005.
[32] V. Guruswami and P. Indyk, “Near-optimal linear-time codes for unique decoding and new list-decodable codes over smaller alphabets,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Symp. Theory of Computing (STOC), Montreal, Canada, May 2002.
[33] R. M. Roth and V. Skachek, “On nearly-MDS expander codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun. 2004, p. 8.
[34] V. Guruswami and P. Indyk, “Efficiently decodable low-rate codes meeting the Gilbert Varshamov bound,” in Proc. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms (SODA), New Orleans, LA, Jan. 2004.
[35] A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming. New York: Wiley, 1987.
[36] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Linear programmingbased decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.
[37] T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, R. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
[38] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin, Network Flows. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1993.
[39] L. Bazzi, M. Mahdian, S. Mitter, and D. Spielman, “The minimum distance of turbo-like codes,” unpublished manuscript, 2001.
[40] T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[41] O. Reingold, S. Vadhan, and A. Wigderson, “Entropy waves, the zigzag graph product, and new constant-degree expanders and extractors,” in Proc. 41st IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), Redondo, CA, Nov. 2000, pp. 3–13.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

