RECONFIGURABLE FPGA IMPLEMENTATION OF PRODUCT ACCUMULATE CODES

Tiong Aik Koh, Boon Chong Ng, Yong Liang Guan∗

Tiffany Jing Li

School of EEE Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore 639798, Singapore

Department of ECE Lehigh University, Bethlehem,
PA 18015, USA

ABSTRACT
A memory-based, pipelined, serial architecture is developed for implementing product accumulate codes in field programmable gate arrays. A three-stage pipeline structure is exploited on the min-sum decoding algorithm to achieve full utilization of instantiated resources, to reduce latency, and to increase throughput while keeping the performance degradation minimal. Different types of interleavers are investigated and the quadratic permutation polynomial based interleaver is shown to be the best choice in terms of implementation cost, reconfigurability and bit error rate performance. The proposed decoder implemented in Xilinx 2v3000FG6764 chips is capable of processing one full decoding iteration for 1 encoded bit every clock. Thus regardless of the block size, throughput will be determined only by the number of iterations done while latency is linear to block size.
Index Terms— Interleaver, Reconfigurable, Product Accumulate code, FPGA, Prime Factor Interleaver.

1. INTRODUCTION

As a class of provably good codes with linear encoding and

decoding

time

and

flexible

rate

adaptivity

for

rates

above

1 2

,

product accumulate (PA) codes [1] are receiving serious at-

tention for application in wireless and space communications.

The excellent performance of PA codes were demonstrated

by computer simulations in [1], but efficient hardware imple-

mentation has been lagging behind. In this paper, we focus on

a memory-based serial architecture specifically designed for

field programmable gate arrays (FPGA), where logic slices

are complemented by large amounts of on-chip memory. The

structure takes advantage of the dual port nature of this type

of memory, leading to a design which balances the utilization

of logic slices and memory blocks. To the best of the au-

thors’ knowledge, this is the first reported implementation of

PA codes in FPGA.

The proposed design targets achieving full reconfigura-

bility on-the-fly, minimizing resource utilization, while max-

∗This work is jointly supported by Defence Science and Technology Agency - Directorate for Research and Development, DSO National Laboratories and Nanyang Technological University under contract DSOCL05258.

imizing throughput. Judicious selection of the decoding algorithm and pipelining are key for high throughput. Here, we design a three-stage pipeline structure on the min-sum (MS) algorithm to enable cheap implementation and low latency, to maximize instantiated resource utilization, and to increase throughput while keeping a minimal degradation of bit error rate (BER) performance (< 0.25dB).
A second major challenge is the efficient design and implementation of interleavers. We evaluate several classes of algebraic interleavers that allow easy reconfiguration and has low storage requirements. We show that coprime interleavers that are good for software simulation [1] may not suit hardware realization equally well. Instead, we propose to use quadratic permutation polynomial (QPP) based interleavers [2] to strike a best balance between BER performance and implementation cost. The experience gained here can shed insight into the implementation of other serially or parallelly concatenated codes, including, for example, turbo codes, repeat product codes, and convolutional product codes.
Implemented in Xilinx 2v3000FG676-4 chips, our decoder is capable of processing 1 full decoding iteration for 1 bit in 1 clock. Thus it offers a throughput which is independent of the block size, but is only a function of the number of decoding iterations. For example, with a 100 MHz clock and 20 iterations, the proposed decoder supports a throughput of 5Mbps, where throughput is measured as the processing rate of coded bits1. The proposed encoder can process 1 bit every 2 clocks, and thus offers a throughput of 50Mbps for a 100MHz clock. However due to space constraint, the encoder is not descibed in detail here. From the graph perspective, PA codes can also be interpreted as a special class of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Compared to an FPGA implementation of a low-density parity-check convolutional code (LDPC-CC) reported in [9], our implementation of PA codes achieves a more balanced utilization ratio of Slices to BRAM.
2. BACKGROUND ON PA CODES
PA codes are a class of codes composed of a serial concatenation of an outer product code, an interleaver (Π2) and an inner
1It is also possible to measure the throughout in terms of the rate for data bits, but for ease of comparison, here we measure it against coded bits.

1-4244-1222-6/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

249

SiPS 2007

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:20:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

rate-1 recursive convolutional code of the form 1/(1 + D). In what follows, we focus on type I PA codes (PA-I), whose system architecture is depicted in Fig. 1. The outer code comprises a parallel concatenation of two branches of rateT /(T +1) single parity check (SPC) codes separated by an interleaver (Π1). PA codes can be efficiently decoded using the

Fig. 1. PA-I code structure.

message-passing algorithm (MPA) on both the outer and the

inner code. The sum-product (SP) implementation maximally

extracts the coding gain promised by the MPA, whereas the

MS implementation sacrifices the performance in exchange

for a considerably lower complexity. Consider t bits forming a parity check: jt−=10⊕xj = 0. The MS algorithm approximates the SP algorithm by approximating the tanh rule in the

check-node update with⎛a simple signed min oper⎞ation [1]:

Le(xi) = 2 tanh−1 ⎝

t−1

tanh

La(xj) ⎠ 2

j=0,j=i

t−1

≈

sign(La(xj)) min {|La(x1)|}, (1)

j=0,··· ,t−1

j=0,j=i

j=i

where Le and La denote the extrinsic and the a priori loglikelihood ratios (LLR). A modified MS algorithm is also proposed in literature [3], which introduces a compensation term to (1) to bridge the performance gap between the MS and the SP algorithms. However, the increased complexity appears to outweigh the marginal performance improvement for turbo product codes (TPC) and SPC codes [4], thus the modified MS algorithm is not recommended for these codes. From [1], the MS algorithm without compensation incurs only 0.2dB of performance loss compared to the SP algorithm at BER 1e − 5. Considering the significant reduction in resource consumption, here we choose the MS algorithm in our FPGA implementation.

3. INTERLEAVER DESIGN

Since interleavers that are easy to simulate in software do not necessarily lend efficient or cheap implementation in hardware, we first evaluate several interleavers with a search target for ones that are cheap and efficient to implement in FPGA, easy to reconfigure and providing good BER performance. We focus our search effort on algebraic interleavers, since they can be easily reconfigured and require storage of only

a few parameters. Well performing but memory expensive interleavers, such as S-interleavers, are not considered here.

3.1. Coprime Interleavers

Because of their good performance and reconfigurability, the original paper that proposed PA codes [1] suggested using coprime interleavers based on congruential sequences

Fx+1 = (a . Fx + b) mod N,

(2)

where x denotes the input sequential position from 0 to N −1, Fx denotes the interleaved position, mod is the modulus operator, and the parameters a and b satisfy certain constraints as specified in [1]. However, in the context of FPGA, the modulus function in (2) becomes expensive to implement when a > 1 and N is not a power of 2. Hence, coprime interleavers are generally not suited for FPGA realization.
In the special case of a = 1, coprime interleavers reduce to relatively prime interleavers [5]:

Fx+1 = (Fx + b) mod N = (b(x + 1) + F0) mod N (3)

The modulus operation can now be easily implemented with a compare-and-subtract operation, since b < N and the result from the addition will not exceed 2N . However, our simulations, plotted in Fig. 3 (P = 225 and T = 6), show that taking relatively prime interleavers for both interleavers in a PA code incurs a performance loss of > 1dB at BER 1e − 4 as well as a noticeable error flare. Additional tests on the combinations of coprime interleavers in (a > 1) and relatively prime interleavers (a = 1), reveal that Π2 is particularly sensitive to the rigid structure of the relatively prime interleavers. We observe some 0.75dB performance degradation at BER 1e − 5 when using a coprime interleaver for Π1 and a relatively prime interleaver for Π2, but hardly any degradation the other way around; see Fig. 3.
We also examined different types of interleavers for Π1, including helical block interleavers and block interleavers. Due to the space limitation, the results are not shown here, but all of them exhibits similar performances, indicating that the interleaver design is more critical for the serial concatenation between the outer code and inner code and less so for the parallel concatenation within the outer code. It is generally recognized that serial concatenation is more advantageous over parallel concatenation in terms of BER performance, and in the context of PA-I codes, the serial concatenation dominates the performance.

3.2. Prime-Factor Based Multi-Dimensional Helical Block Interleavers

A (two-dimensional) helical block interleaver, or, simply, helical interleaver, as defined in [6], is a block interleaver whose row size R is relatively prime to the column size C:

Fx = r + (c · R)

(4)

r = x mod R, c = x mod C.

(5)

250
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:20:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This construction can be conveniently generalized to mul-
tiple dimensions by using the prime factors of the interleaver
size. Consider an interleaver of size N , where N is factorized into its prime factors f1n1 , f2n2 , · · · fmnm . Since the sizes of the different dimensions of a helical interleaver must be
relatively prime to each other, the resulting helical interleaver has a maximum dimension of m with a size of fini in each dimension. It is also possible to reduce the dimensions by combining multiple fini ’s in one dimension. Take the example of N = 1848 = 23 · 3 · 7 · 11. It is possible to have a 4-dimensional helical interleaver with size 11, 8, 7 and 3 respectively on each dimension. It is also possible to have 3-dimensional helical interleavers, such as 11 × 21 × 8 and 11 × 24 × 7.
For an m-dimensional interleaver with dimensional sizes l0, l1, · · · , lm−1 respectively, the interleaved position of x follows the following simple rule:

Fx = a0 + (a1l0) + (a2l0l1) + · · · + (am−1l0l1 · · · lm−2),
where ai = x mod li, i = 0, · · · , m − 1. Implementation of this interleaver requires m cyclic counters to calculate ai’s, and m − 1 adders and m − 1 multipliers to calculate Fx. Here the counters can individually be either up or down counters.
While helical interleavers are relatively cheap to implement, their performances in PA codes remain to be desired. From the simulation curves in Fig. 4 (P = 231, T = 6 for the helical interleaver and P = 225, T = 6 for the coprime interleaver), it can be seen that the performance degrades significantly for BER below 10e − 3 and thus the helical interleaver is not a good choice performance-wise.

3.3. Quadratic Permutation Polynomial Based Interleavers

A quadratic permutation polynomial based interleaver, proposed recently in [2], scrambles index x to F(x) according to the following rule:

F(x) = (Ax + Bx2) mod N,

(6)

where the parameters A and B satisfy the constraints that B is divisible by the prime factors of N and A is not. Since the quadratic term in (6) makes the modulus operation difficult, it is desirable to express (6) in a recursive form [7]

F(x + 1) = F(x) + H(x) mod N,

H(x) = A + B + 2Bx mod N,

(7)

H(x + 1) = H(x) + 2B mod N,

which then completely eliminates the multiplication operation, since H(x) and 2B are both smaller than N . The modulus operation in the calculation of F(x + 1) and H(x + 1) can be efficiently realized through a simple compare-and-subtract operation.
It should be noted that not every QPP interleaver admit a quadratic form for its inverse [8]. To get around this obstacle, we propose to exploit the dual-port feature of the on-chip

dual port block rams (DPBRAM), and implement both the interleaver and the de-interleaver using the same interleaving pattern in (7). In our implementation, interleaving and deinterleaving are accomplished by writing data into 1 port of the DPBRAM and reading out data from the other port. Thus by having a sequential address on 1 port and the interleaved address on the other port, interleaving and de-interleaving can be accomplished, without the need for the explicit deinterleave sequence, as follows:
Interleave: Read addr F(x) ⇐= Write addr x
De-interleave: Read addr x ⇐= Write addr F(x) .
Fig. 4 shows that, using either the MS or the SP algorithms, QPP interleavers (P = 225 and T = 6) perform only marginally worse (< 0.1dB) than coprime interleavers without visible rising of the error flare. Hence QPP interleavers present a best overall choice in BER performance, reconfigurability and compact implementation, and will be used in our FPGA implementation.
4. DECODER IMPLEMENTATION
The complete structure of the proposed decoder is illustrated in Fig. 2, where the output of the 3 stages are labeled DPBRAM Le, DPBRAM Lo Non-interleaved/Interleaved and DPBRAM Lo, respectively. All the notations here follow those in [1]. Below we highlight a few implementation details.
4.1. Decoder Pipelining
Since a PA code comprises a serial concatenation of an outer code and an inner code, pipelining is highly desirable so that both sub-decoders will be instantiated and can process data simultaneously. The natural and simplest pipelining arranges the decoder in two stages, which are separated by Π2 and which instantiate respectively the inner (sub) decoder and the outer (sub) decoder. It allows one information bit be processed per clock at each stage and, because of the decoupling effect of Π2, the two stages may process different bits at any unit time. An immediate consequence is that the data processed by the outer decoder and by the inner decoder are not strictly sequenced. For example, the outer decoder may be processing a bit using reliability information coming from either the current iteration or the previous iteration of the inner decoding; likewise for the inner decoder. Foreseeable, this incurs performance loss as the number of effective updates is reduced. However, our experiments (Fig. 5) show that the performance loss resulted from the out-of-sequence processing can be well regained by increasing the number of decoding iterations.
To further boost throughput, the outer decoder is again pipelined in two stages, instantiating the two SPC branches respectively. This stage serves to decouple the 2 SPC blocks which are separated by Π1, for similar reasons as above. Thus,

251
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:20:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. Detailed Decoder Structure.

the performance curves in Fig. 5 actually correspond to a three-stage pipeline implementation.
4.2. Inner Decoder
The inner decoder processes information in 3 passes, the forward pass, the backward pass, and the outward pass to the outer decoder, through three Check modules. The data streams exchanged between these modules are illustrated in Table 1 where each row corresponds to one clock tick. It should be understood that the outputs from the Add module and the Check module are both registered, so there is one clock delay between the input and output of each module; but we did not depict that in the table for the sake of clarity. The input to the Check Lef/Leb module comes from the combination of the DPBRAM Lo output and the respective Add Lef/Leb output.
In [1], it was suggested that the forward pass and the backward pass can be made parallel by using the information from the previous iteration rather than waiting for the current iteration. In our FPGA implementation, previous information is utilized not for parallelizing but rather to enable fine pipelining within the inner decoder. For example, by the time the extrinsic information Lef(1) gets produced at the output of the Check Lef module and stored in DPBRAM Lef, it will be too late to feed it as an input to the Add Lef module for calculating Lef(2). This is due to the latency involved in the Check Lef output and in the writing and reading processes of DPBRAM Lef. Hence, in our implementation, extrinsic information Lef(1) used in the calculation of Lef(2) actually comes from the previous iteration.
From the data flow, we see that the Lo input to both Check Lef/Leb modules are the same, thus only one DPBRAM Lo is

needed. For DPBRAM Lch, one port will be used to write in Lch before decoding starts, and both ports will subsequently be used for reading during decoding, thus one DPBRAM Lch suffices. For the inner decoder, one Π2 address generator is shared among all the three Check modules for interleaving and de-interleaving. This is possible because, as explained in section 3.3, only the interleaving pattern is needed to achieve both interleaving and de-interleaving.
4.3. Outer Decoder
The outer decoder consist of 3 components, the Π1-interleaved SPC block, the non-Π1-interleaved SPC block, and the Add module which combines information to feed back to the inner decoder. Duplicate DPBRAM Lo Interleaved/Non-Interleaved is necessary here, as the information must be shared between the 2 SPC blocks. No special alignment of the data streams, as in the inner decoder, is done here.
Finally, an additional Add module is required to combine the reliability information from the inner and the outer decoders, and to make final decoding decisions. These hard decisions can then be used by the SPC Checker module to examine whether the decoded bits satisfy the parity check constraints in both SPC blocks, and, if so, to flag for early termination of decoding. The SPC Checker module can be removed if early termination is not necessary.
5. RESOURCE UTILIZATION
The resource utilization for both the encoder and the decoder is analyzed in Table 2. The combined encoder and decoder (CODEC) takes up only 12% of the logic slices and 18% of the BRAM of the target device, Xilinx 2v3000FG676-4.

252
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:20:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 1. Data stream for inner decoder

Check Le Output

Check Le Input

Add Lef Output

Add Leb Output

Check Lef Input

Le(0) Le(1) Le(2)

∞* (Lch(0) + Lef (0)) (Lch(1) + Lef (1))

(Lch(0) + Leb(0)) (Lch(1) + Leb(1)) (Lch(2) + Leb(2))

Lo(0) Lo(1) Lo(2)

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. Le(n-2) Le(n-1)

. (Lch(n − 3) + Lef (n − 3)) (Lch(n − 2) + Lef (n − 2))

.
(Lch(n − 2) + Leb(n − 2)) (Lch(n − 1) + 0∗)

. Lo(n-2) Lo(n-1)

*boundary condition †not used

Check Lef Output
Lef(0) Lef(1) Lef(2)
. . . Lef(n-2) Lef(n-1)†

Check Leb Input
Lo(0) Lo(1) Lo(2)
. . . Lo(n-2) Lo(n-1)

Check Leb Output Leb(-1)† Leb(0) Leb(1) . . . Leb(n-3) Leb(n-2)

Table 2. PA CODEC Resource Utilization Xilinx FPGA(2v3000fg676-4) Encoder Decoder

Max Block size (P × (T + 2)) 8191

2047

Slices Slice Flip Flops 4 input LUTs

578

1159

419

1136

978

1645

18Kb BRAM Max Frequency (MHz)

5

13

125

125

Table 3. PA CODEC in Xilinx FPGA(2v3000fg676-4) vs

LDPC-CC in Altera FPGA(EP1S80)

PA

LDPC-CC

Clock Rate 120MHz 40, 120MHz

Iteration

18

11

No. of Processor

6

Data-rate

40Mbps

11 40Mbps

Slices

6954

13134

BRAM

66

22

6. HARDWARE-IN-THE-LOOP BER TEST

A hardware-in-the-loop BER test is conducted by implement-

ing the design into an XtremeDSP development kit from Nal-

latech. Baseband Binary Phase Shift Keying (BPSK) modula-

tion is assumed with perfect synchronization. An Xilinx Ad-

ditive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) IPcore is used as the

noise source, which has a 16-bit 2’s complement fixed point

output. The encoded bits, after being impaired by the noise,

are clipped to 5 bits and feed as Lch to the decoder.

Fig. 6 demonstrates the performance of our FPGA de-

coder based on the MS algorithm, 3 stage pipelining, QPP

interleavers and fixed-point representation. In comparison,

the “performance-oriented” decoder discussed in [1] uses the

SP algorithm, no pipelining, coprime interleavers and floating-

point representation, yet performs only about 0.25dB better

at BER 1e − 5.

The simulated results and the experimental results of our

FPGA decoder are also compared. The BER curves agree

well except for the low BER region where the implemented

decoder performs slightly better. This is attributed to the fact

that the simulation assumes that each stage uses all the infor-

mation from the previous iteration, whereas the implemented

decoder actually uses some current-iteration information.

Resource utilization of PA-I decoder is compared against

that of an LDPC-CC implementation [9] in Table 3. For a

fair comparison, both are set to a code rate of 0.5 with BER

1e

−

5

at

Eb No

of

3.1dB,

and

two

Altera

Logic

Element

(LE)

is assumed equivalent to one Xilinx Slice. P = 500 and

T = 2 is used for PA code. To get the same data rate of 40Mbps, 6 PA decoders need to be instantiated. Here the SPC Checker module is removed and thus the PA decoder will always complete 18 decoding iterations and each PA decoder uses 11 BRAM. Compared to LDPC-CC, slice utilization is lower for PA codes but BRAM utilization is higher. Thus, the utilization ratio of Slices to BRAM is more balanced for PA codes than for LDPC-CC. Hence it is possible to pack more PA decoders into an FPGA chip to fully harness the available resources.
7. CONCLUSION
An efficient 3-stage pipelined FPGA implementation of PAI decoder and a 2-stage encoder has been developed. The CODEC is fully reconfigurable, economic in resource consumption, and highly efficient in utilizing the resources instantiated. Implemented in an Xilinx Virtex II FPGA device running at 125MHz, the encoder offers a throughput of 62.5Mbps and the decoder offers a throughput of 4Mbps at 30 decoding iterations. Hardware-in-the-loop BER test has been performed to validate the design. Performance measurement reveals a gap of only 0.25dB at BER 1e − 5 from the “ideal” PA decoder discussed in [1] that targets performance only.
8. REFERENCES
[1] J. Li, K. R. Narayanan, and C. N. Georghiades, “Product Accumulate Codes: A Class of Codes With Near-

253
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:20:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Capacity Performance and Low Decoding Complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 31-46, Jan. 2004.
[2] J. Sun and O. Y. Takeshita, “Interleavers for turbo codes using permutation polynomials over integer rings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 101-119, Jan. 2005.
[3] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “Reduced-complexity iterative decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” IEE Elec. Let, pp. 102104, Jan. 2004.
[4] R. Hu, J. Li, and E. Kurtas, “Quantization and Quantization Sensitivity of Soft-Output Product Codes for FastSpeed Applications,” IEEE Sarnoff Symp., 2004.
[5] K. Xie, W. Wang, and J. Li, “On the Analysis and Design of Good Algebraic Interleavers,” Intl. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Germany, April 2006.
[6] Danny T. Chi, “A New Helical Interleaver,” IEEE MILCOM, pp. 799-804, Oct. 1992.
[7] M. Cheng, M. Nakashima, J. Hamkins, B. Moision, and M. Barsoum, “A decoder architecture for high-speed free-space laser communications,” in Proc. of SPIE, vol. 5712, pp. 174-185, April 2005.
[8] J. Ryu and O. Y. Takeshita, “On Quadratic Inverses for Quadratic Permutation Polynomials Over Integer Rings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, pp. 1254– 1260, March 2006.
[9] Stephen Bates and Gary Block, “A Memory-Based Architecture for FPGA Implementations of LowDensity Parity-Check Convolutional Decoders,” IEEE Intl. Symp. Circuits Sys., vol. 1, pp. 336-339, May 2005.

10−1 10−2 10−3

Both Coprime Interleaver Both Relatively Prime Interleaver Interleaver 2 Relatively Prime Interleaver Interleaver 1 Relatively Prime Interleaver

BER

BER

100 10−1 10−2

Coprime SP Coprime MS QPP SP QPP MS Prime Factor Interleaver MS

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−62

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/No(dB)

Fig. 4. Comparison of Coprime Interleavers, Prime Factor Helical Interleavers (MS), and QPP Interleavers

100 10−1

No Pipeline 30 Iter 3 Stage Pipeline 30 Iter 3 Stage Pipeline 60 Iter No Pipeline 60 Iter

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−62

2.25 2.5 2.75

3

3.25 3.5 3.75

4

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 5. 3-stage pipeline using 30 and 60 iterations of the MinSum decoding

100 10−1

Hardware in the loop Simulated Implementation Simulated Ideal

10−2

10−4

10−3

BER

10−5

10−62

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 3. PA codes with Coprime and Relatively Prime Interleavers

10−4

10−5

10−62

2.25

2.5

2.75

3

3.25

3.5

3.75

4

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 6. Hardware-in-the-loop BER test. P = 225, T = 6.

BER

254
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:20:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

