IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

5

On Designing Good LDPC Codes for Markov Channels
Andrew W. Eckford, Member, IEEE, Frank R. Kschischang, Fellow, IEEE, and Subbarayan Pasupathy, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a reduced-complexity approximate density evolution (DE) scheme for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in channels with memory in the form of a hidden Markov chain. This approximation is used to design degree sequences representing some of the best known LDPC code ensembles for the Gilbert–Elliott channel, and example optimizations are also given for other Markov channels. The problem of approximating the channel estimation is addressed by obtaining a specially constructed message-passing schedule in which the channel messages all approach their stable densities. It is shown that this new schedule is much easier to approximate than the standard schedule, but has the same ultimate performance in the limits of long block length and many decoding iterations. This result is extended to show that all message-passing schedules that satisfy mild conditions will have the same threshold under density evolution.
Index Terms—Code optimization, density evolution, estimation-decoding, Gaussian assumption, irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Markov channels, message-passing schedules.

I. INTRODUCTION

LOW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are a class of linear codes with very sparse parity-check matrices. LDPC

codes may be characterized by a degree sequence, which ex-

presses the probability of finding a given number of ones in

either the rows or the columns of the parity-check matrix. An

LDPC code is regular if every row and every column contains a

fixed number of ones, or irregular if the number of ones varies.

It is known that the bit error performance of irregular LDPC

codes is a function of the degree sequence, which can therefore

be optimized to design good LDPC code ensembles [2].

Informally, the irregular LDPC code design problem can be

posed as follows:

Given a particular communication channel

Maximize code rate

Subject to

,

where is the probability of symbol error, and is the max-

imum acceptable probability of error. For a given degree se-

Manuscript received December 9, 2003; revised August 16, 2006. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Chicago, IL, June/July 2004.
A. W. Eckford was with The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto. He is now with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, York University, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada (e-mail: aeckford@yorku.ca).
F. R. Kschischang and S. Pasupathy are with The Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada (e-mail: frank@comm.utoronto.ca; pas@comm.utoronto.ca).
Communicated by K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2006.887467

quence, the symbol-wise error performance of an LDPC code in the limit of long block length may be obtained analytically through density evolution (DE) [3], [4], which can be used to verify the probability of error criterion. However, exact DE can be inefficient for use in an optimization algorithm, even when optimized for speed of calculation [5]. Much recent effort has focused on fast approximations to DE which are more appropriate for degree sequence design, which includes the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) approximation [6], and the semiGaussian approximation [7], the last of which has the advantage of allowing degree sequence optimization with linear programming.
The use of LDPC codes in channels with memory is attracting interest in the literature. In previous work [8], the use of regular LDPC codes in the Gilbert–Elliott channel was analyzed using DE, under an estimation-decoding strategy, in which intermediate results from the iterative decoding algorithm are used to estimate the channel state, and intermediate channel estimates are used to improve the decoding procedure, which improves both processes. These results both confirmed that the performance of LDPC codes is excellent in the Gilbert–Elliott channel, and showed that large gains can be achieved through the use of estimation-decoding. However, they also indicated that the performance of regular codes falls well short of the Shannon limit, motivating the search for good degree sequences in these channels. Furthermore, the Gilbert–Elliott channel is a simple example of a Markov channel, in which the channel noise is dependent on a hidden Markov chain, and which can be used to represent wireless fading channels. A design procedure, related to the one in this paper, was presented for multiple-input multiple-output fading channels in [9], which assessed the effect of demodulation on the design procedure, but which did not address channel estimation, since the receiver was assumed to know the channel.
The problem of finding very good LDPC degree sequences for estimation-decoding in Markov channels is an interesting open problem of great practical importance. To address the irregular LDPC design problem in Markov channels, we seek simple design tools which approximate DE. However, the task is complicated in that we must not only approximate DE for the LDPC code, but also obtain a related approximation for the channel estimation technique, so that the code can be optimized with respect to the entire estimation-decoding algorithm. In this paper, we will show that this complications can be addressed by the semi-Gaussian approximation in [7], as well as some novel message-passing schedules and theoretical results. Our emphasis in this paper is on designing degree sequences, which parameterize LDPC code ensembles, and then the particular code within this ensemble is selected at random, which is a good strategy when block length is asymptotically large (al-

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

though proving that all codes have the same performance with requires a proof of a concentration theorem for Markov
channels, which remains an open problem). We will first use the Gilbert–Elliott channel as a motivating
example, and subsequently generalize the framework developed for the Gilbert–Elliott channel to binary Markov channels with larger state alphabets. The technique works with general Markov channels, but we give binary Markov examples as a proof of concept, since they are the most challenging type of channel for our design method. The main contributions of this work include: an approximate DE algorithm for the Gilbert–Elliott channel based on the approximation in [7]; theoretical results showing the equivalence in ultimate performance between decoders with different message-passing schedules; and degree sequences based on the derived algorithms which represent the best known LDPC codes for the Gilbert–Elliott channel. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the Markov channel model, and discuss joint estimation-decoding in this channel. In Section III, we introduce a particular message-passing schedule for Markov–LDPC estimation-decoding for which DE is straightforward to approximate, and show that its ultimate performance (in the limit of large numbers of iterations and long block length) is the same as the standard schedule. In Section IV, we state the approximate DE algorithm for the estimation-decoding scheme. Results for the Gilbert–Elliott channel are presented in Section V, and a generalized approximate DE algorithm for Markov channels is presented in Section VI, along with some results.

The Markov chain itself is parameterized by the state transi-

tion probability matrix , which is an

matrix where

Given a particular family, the matrix and the vector parameterize any Markov channel; we write the parameters of any particular channel as

For ease of representation, we extend the hidden state vector

by one element, so

, which changes nothing in the

system. The input–output pdf, including the hidden , is written

(2)

Note that each factor in (2) can be expressed in terms of the

parameters

.

An important special case is the Gilbert–Elliott (GE) channel,

which has its own notation. The GE channel is a binary Markov

channel with two states, labeled

. Each state corresponds

to a binary-symmetric channel (BSC), so

, and

by convention,

. In other words, state corresponds

to a “bad” BSC, while state corresponds to a “good” BSC.

Meanwhile, the matrix has elements

II. SYSTEM MODELS

A. Gilbert–Elliott and Markov Channels

A Markov channel is any channel with a vector of inputs

, outputs

, and hidden channel states

,

so that

• is a discrete, finite index set, i.e.,

;

• forms a regular Markov chain operating in steady state,

independent of ; and

• the channel is conditionally memoryless given , i.e.,

where

and

is a GE channel, it can be expressed as

. Thus, if

with four parameters. Throughout this paper, we will use the

shorthand notation

to denote the fact that is

a GE channel with the given four parameters.

(1)

Because is assumed independent of , we do not consider

partial response channels in this paper.

Equation (1) suggests that each state corresponds to a par-

ticular channel behavior. Let

represent a family

of channel input–output probability density functions (pdfs), in-

dexed by the parameter . To each channel state , we assign

a channel parameter , such that

B. LDPC Estimation Decoding

For iteratively decoded codes such as LDPC codes, the

channel can be estimated as the code is decoded, and inter-

mediate decoding results can assist the estimation task, and

vice versa. This method is called estimation-decoding, and is

straightforward when factor graphs are used to express both the

channel memory and the LDPC code structure.

Let represent the

parity-check matrix of a given

LDPC code. A given binary sequence is a valid codeword if

and only if

(in - arithmetic), where is an

all-zero vector with elements. Thus, writing in terms of its

rows as

that is, given the th state at time , the channel behavior is se-

lected from the given family with parameter . Thus, for the set

of states

, there is a corresponding vector

...

of channel parameters.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ON DESIGNING GOOD LDPC CODES FOR MARKOV CHANNELS

7

it is clear that is a codeword if and only if

(3)

is true for all

. The rows are called parity

checks, and each parity check is satisfied if (3) is true.

To express the LDPC code on a factor graph, we turn to the

characteristic function of the code, , which is defined as

affected by the degree sequence. Thus, in order to maximize the code rate, we must find an optimal degree sequence.
Combining the channel probability mass function (PMF) (2) with the factorization for , we obtain a PMF of the form

otherwise.

(6)

Suppose that exactly entries of the th parity check, , are equal to (where the rest are equal to ), and let represent the indices for which the is equal to . Furthermore, let
be the characteristic function for the parity check , where
otherwise. Then it is easy to see that the characteristic function of the code is given by

which can be expressed on a factor graph as an LDPC subgraph connected to a Markov subgraph, as suggested in [10, Ch. 7] and [11]. Let represent this factor graph. An estimation-decoding algorithm defined over based on the Sum–Product Algorithm (SPA) [12] is discussed in detail in [8], and we assume that this algorithm is used for estimation-decoding. A section of is given in Fig. 1.
C. Message-Passing Schedules and Local Neighborhoods

If each codeword is equally likely to be transmitted, then the probability of transmitting a particular vector is given by
(4)

Estimation-decoding in the GE channel requires not only the SPA calculations, but also a message-passing schedule, which defines the order in which calculations occur. One of the main contributions of this paper is to use an unusual message-passing schedule as a component of a design tool for LDPC codes used in estimation-decoding.
As a starting point, a commonly used schedule is as follows [8].

where represents the number of valid codewords in the code.

Given (4), a factor graph can be drawn to represent an LDPC

code, with variables

and factors

,

with edges assigned randomly (according to an ensemble of pos-

sible edge connections described in [4]). For an edge selected

uniformly at random from all possible edges, the degrees of

the nodes incident to the edge are random variables, and the

probability distributions of these degrees for check and vari-

Standard Message-Passing Schedule: Divide the set of nodes in the factor graph into the set of factor nodes (i.e., parity checks and channel factors), and the set of variable nodes (i.e., symbol variables and channel states). A full iteration proceeds in two steps: first perform the SPA at each factor node, and pass the appropriate messages to each attached variable node. Then perform the SPA at each variable node, and pass the appropriate messages to each attached factor node.

able nodes are called degree sequences. An LDPC code en-

semble is characterized by the degree sequences

, where

, in which is the probability that a

randomly selected edge is incident to a variable node with de-

gree , and where

is the maximum variable degree. Sim-

ilarly,

, in which is the probability

that a randomly selected edge is incident to a parity-check node

with degree , and where is the maximum check degree.

If

, the code is said to be regular, otherwise,

it is said to be irregular.

Assuming that the rows of the parity-check matrix are linearly

independent, the rate of an LDPC code with a given degree se-

quence is given by [3]

This can be thought of as a “flooding” schedule, which gives equal time to all nodes and variables. We will use the performance of estimation-decoding under the standard schedule as a reference point for comparison to other schedules.
Messages calculated and passed in the current iteration are functions of messages calculated and passed between different nodes in previous iterations. To analyze the messages passed under estimation-decoding, such as with density evolution, we form the subgraph of the overall factor graph containing all nodes and edges that participate in the calculation of a particular message along edge at iteration number . This subgraph is called the local neighborhood of the edge , and written [4]. Some important properties of the local neighborhood are

given as follows. (5) • Cycle-Free.

is cycle-free with

as the block

length

. This statement was originally proven for

In the Introduction, we stated that we would optimize (i.e., max-

Markov–LDPC factor graphs in [8, Theorem 1].

imize) the rate of LDPC codes, subject to the constraint of suc- • Random. Given a degree sequence, we choose a code ran-

cessful decoding. However, from (5), the rate is a function of

domly from the respective ensemble of possible codes.

the degree sequence, and furthermore, code performance is also

Thus, the degrees of the nodes surrounding an edge , and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 1. A section of the Markov–LDPC factor graph.

the structure of the local neighborhood, are random vari- to those from Schedule A, to develop a design tool for LDPC

ables. (This is not true of regular LDPC codes, since the codes under estimation-decoding.

degrees of the nodes are all the same, meaning that the structure of the local neighborhood is deterministic.)

III. FACTOR GRAPHS AND APPROXIMATION

Different message-passing schedules include different nodes In this section, we discuss the difficulties encountered in

and edges in the calculation, and hence give rise to different approximating DE for LDPC estimation-decoding in the GE

local neighborhoods. For example, the operations that make up channel. To address these difficulties, we propose an unusual

a complete iteration in the standard schedule can be divided into way of iteratively assembling local neighborhoods, similar to

two parts:

Schedule A, which is useful in creating a design tool for LDPC

• the LDPC Subiteration, which represents message-passing codes under estimation-decoding. The usefulness of this method

operations at the parity-check nodes and at the symbol vari- is then demonstrated by our main theoretical results: under

able nodes; and

mild conditions, all message-passing schedules, and iterative

• the Markov Subiteration, which represents mes- local neighborhood constructions, have the same threshold

sage-passing operations at the channel factor nodes under density evolution. Following from the result that the

and at the channel state variable nodes.

message-passing schedule does not matter, degree sequences

Using this distinction of the subiterations, the standard mes- evaluated using the design tool will have the same threshold as

sage-passing schedule has one LDPC subiteration for every under virtually any other message-passing schedule.

Markov subiteration. We can also consider the following mes-

sage-passing schedule.

A. Shortcomings of Existing Design Tools

Message Passing Schedule A: In one complete iteration, one

LDPC subiteration is performed at the same time as Markov

subiterations, where

.

Existing design tools for LDPC codes fall into one of two categories.
• Expedited methods for performing exact density evolution (such as fast density evolution [5]), along with a nonconvex

This schedule is similar to the schedule from [13], where one

optimization technique.

operation of estimating intersymbol interference (ISI) was fol- • Approximating density evolution by tracking the evolution

lowed by

message-passing operations in the LDPC sub-

of a single parameter of the message pdfs, with the problem

graph, although Schedule A is the reverse of this schedule, with

set up to allow convex optimization [7].

many Markov subiterations followed by one LDPC subiteration. In either case, it is difficult to use these techniques with estima-

The local neighborhood is a function of both the iteration tion-decoding in Markov channels, due to the channel informa-

number and the message-passing schedule. Density evolution tion message , which is a random variable, which carries the

can be used to analyze the messages passed using any mes- information available about a symbol arising from the channel

sage-passing schedule in which the cycle-free property is sat- observation and state estimation. This message is affected by

isfied, which is true for Schedule A (as long as is finite). the iterative estimation which occurs in an estimation-decoding

Furthermore, under the cycle-free assumption, density evolu- algorithm, which is difficult to model. For the first category, to

tion can be used to analyze messages passed under any itera- calculate the channel information density

(i.e., the pdf of

tive method of constructing local neighborhoods, whether they the channel information message), density evolution in Markov

could arise from a “real” message-passing schedule or not. We channels is either time consuming (for two-state Markov chan-

will use this property, along with local neighborhoods similar nels, such as the GE channel) [8], or computationally infeasible

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ON DESIGNING GOOD LDPC CODES FOR MARKOV CHANNELS

9

(for higher order state spaces, since multivariate densities would

have to be calculated). For the second category, this method

works well because LDPC decoding messages are well approx-

imated by the Gaussian density (with variance exactly twice the

mean), so tracking a single parameter of the message pdf, and

assuming Gaussianity, gives good results. However, there is no

single-parameter family of pdfs that can represent the message

pdfs of all possible Markov channels.

Our approach largely uses the single-parameter method (but

as we point out in Section V-C, it is also usable with expedited

forms of density evolution). To represent the parameter that ap-

proximates the extrinsic information after iterations, we will

use the notation . Ideally, we would like a method to re-

late to the pdfs of the channel information messages (i.e.,

channel information densities). That is, for each value of used to approximate the extrinsic information, there should be a particular channel information density corresponding to that value. Thus, would parameterize not only the extrinsic information density, but also an implicit family of channel information

Fig. 2. Different extrinsic message calculations for the message to a parity
0 check, and for a message to a channel factor. The input to both blocks is  ,
representing the extrinsic density at iteration i 1. At the ith iteration,  represents the message passed to the parity check, while  represents the
message passed to the channel factor.

densities, represented by

. In other words,

would

be dependent on exactly one extrinsic density . This would

allow precalculation of all possible

for various predeter-

mined values of .

To accomplish this, consider the use of Schedule A, where

is very large. While the schedule is performing Markov subit-

erations, the extrinsic information densities remain the same,

since nothing is changing in the LDPC subgraph. We have ob-

served that whenever the same extrinsic message density is ap-

plied over a large number of iterations, a stable channel mes-

sage density will result, regardless of the initial channel message

density. (A partial justification of this statement is presented

in Appendix A.) Using this observation, suppose that the ex-

trinsic information densities passed to the channel are replaced

by their single-parameter approximations. These are parameter-

ized by at the th iteration, where the prime superscript is

used to distinguish “pure” extrinsic information that contains

no channel information, such as would be passed to a channel

factor node. For each value of , a stable channel density can

be obtained by applying a large number of operations through

the Markov subgraph, using the approximate extrinsic density

corresponding to that value of . Thus, under Schedule A, the

approximate channel density used to calculate may be ex-

pressed as

, that is, as a function of only one

extrinsic density. (We will use to represent the input–output characteristic of the parameter .)
A small difficulty occurs since and are calculated in different ways, as shown in Fig. 2. Since they are both obtained

Fig. 3. Figure depicting the difference in calculating the channel message t

between Schedule A (top) and Schedule B (bottom). In Schedule B, an addi-

tional LDPC subiteration before each channel factor node means that the mes-

sages can be functions of 

rather than 

.

from extrinsic information at the

th iteration, from the

figure we see that and are both functions of

.

Now suppose we are interested in calculating . From Fig.

2, we require the extrinsic information message to the parity

checks, parameterized by

, and the extrinsic information

message to the channel factors, parameterized by

. Fur-

thermore, since

is in turn a function of

, may

be calculated as a function of

and

.

We can do some further work to eliminate the dependence of

(i.e., independent of what happened at any iteration previous to ). To accomplish this, we only need to make an adjustment
to Schedule A, to bring into sync with .
Message-Passing Schedule B: This schedule is largely the same as Schedule A, except that messages passed from the LDPC subgraph to the channel factor node are subjected to an additional iteration through the LDPC subgraph, as in Fig. 3.

on

, making it only a function of

, which is far This message-passing schedule can only be defined in terms

more desirable since it makes the approximation “memoryless” of the structure of the local neighborhood, rather than in terms

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

of a “real” message-passing schedule that could be implemented

IV. APPROXIMATE DE ALGORITHMS

in a system. Nonetheless, we get what we wanted: from the per-

spective of the approximation, we calculate as a function

of

; we then obtains the stable channel message density

A. Overview and Definitions

using ; and we finish the calculation of as a function

of

and thischannel density. The only change in Fig. 2 is

that the channel message is now

rather than

,

since the calculations leading to are split up and reordered

to allow to “catch up” with .

In this section, we propose a design algorithm by adapting the semi-Gaussian approximation [7] to the requirements of Schedule B. We begin by reviewing the semi-Gaussian approximation and its useful variants, then explain how to calculate the stable message densities to account for channel estimation,

B. Schedules and Density Evolution

and finally, bring the two together to find approximate density evolution algorithms for estimation-decoding.

In this subsection, we show that the standard schedule has the same ultimate performance as both Schedules A and B. In other words, we can design our code under the assumption that Schedule B was used for message-passing, and expect similar performance under the standard message-passing schedule, as well as any other message-passing schedule that satisfies some mild conditions.
Using an irregular code, the local neighborhood of an edge is a random variable, so there exists an ensemble of possible local neighborhoods. Using the standard message-passing schedule, let

We give several procedures in this section, which are related as follows.
• Procedures A, B1, and B2 reiterate elements of the semiGaussian approximation from [7], and are given here for completeness. — Procedure A reiterates the semi-Gaussian approximation for memoryless channels, based on [7]. — Procedures B1 and B2 give a variant of the semi-Gaussian approximation, which separates the pure extrinsic information (from the code) and the channel information (from the channel observation). We divide it into two procedures, as we will reuse Pro-

cedure B1 (which deals with pure extrinsic information,

and is independent of the channel).

represent this ensemble, which contains all possible local neigh-

borhoods under iterations of the standard schedule, along with

their probabilities of occurrence. The probability

is

dependent on the degree sequence

, since the degree se-

quence determined the occurrence probabilities of nodes of each

type and degree. We assume the members of are cycle-free,

since cycle-free local neighborhoods occur with

. Let

and represent the equivalent ensembles under itera-

tions of message-passing Schedules A and B, respectively. Also

let

represent the average probability of error for mes-

sages arising from the ensemble , and similarly for the other

defined ensembles. Then the result may be stated formally as

follows:

Theorem 1:

• Procedures C, D, and E form the core of our method for dealing with channel estimation in a design tool, and adapting the semi-Gaussian approximation to the case of estimation-decoding. — Procedure C explains how to calculate a set of channel message densities for the GE channel using Schedule B, in a manner that is compatible with the semi-Gaussian approximation. (Later, we replace this with Procedure F, which generalizes Procedure C to arbitrary Markov channels.) — Procedure D adapts Procedure A to the case of estimation-decoding, and is dependent on Procedure C to precalculate a set of channel message densities. — Procedure E adapts Procedure B2 to the case of estimation-decoding, again relying on Procedure C to pre-

calculate the channel message densities. It is used along

with an unmodified Procedure B1.

The purpose of the procedures is to perform all the calculations

In other words, whether the ensemble is constructed with message-passing Schedule A, message-passing Schedule B, or the standard schedule, the ultimate probability of error is the same, be it zero or some other value. The proof of the theorem is given in Appendix B, where we also give a corollary showing that the same result applies to any message-passing schedule that satisfies some mild conditions. Intuitively, the theorem holds because the local neighborhoods generated by iterations of Schedules A and B both “fit inside” the local neigh-

borhood

for some

, and “contain” the local neigh-

borhood

for some

. The probability of error for

Schedules A and B is sandwiched between the probability of

necessary to set up the design problem. We show that, following

these calculations, the design problem can be solved using linear

programming.

We now give, or restate, useful notation and definitions which

will be useful in this section. Our message notation partially

follows the notation from [14]. The channel messages are given

by , and their densities are given by . Extrinsic messages

are designated , and their densities are given by

. The

scalar (approximately) parameterizes the messages, so when

invoking the approximation, we will write

, or

,

to make the dependence explicit. For the value of at iteration

, we will write , to be consistent with the notation for local

neighborhoods and ensembles. Thus, the functions , which

error for

and

, so if

as

, the track the evolution of , are defined iteratively, as

schedules all share the same limit.

or

(where the latter notation indicates

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ON DESIGNING GOOD LDPC CODES FOR MARKOV CHANNELS

11

value of

, which is the average probability of error in the

message, as follows:

degree

degree

(8)

where “ ” refers to the event that the message passed over an

edge is in error, and “degree ” refers to the event that the edge

over which the message is passed is incident to a node of degree

. Thus,

is a linear combination of the individual

input–output characteristic functions

.

The following procedure is used to calculate the functions

.

Fig. 4. An example factor graph segment over which the SGA is calculated, similar to a figure from [7].
that the input–output relation has been modified to account for estimation-decoding).

Procedure A: Fixed-Channel SGA:

1) (Initialization 1) Let

represent the channel message

density, and let

be the channel prob-

ability of error. Let

be a set of

quantization points for the interval

. Let

.

2) (Initialization 2) For each

, let

, and let

(9) B. The Semi-Gaussian Approximation

The semi-Gaussian approximation (SGA) has two features which distinguish it from the Gaussian approximation (GA) [15]. Recall that all approximations use a single parameter
to characterize extrinsic information densities. First, under the GA, is the mean of the extrinsic message density; while under the SGA, is the probability that the Gaussian density is less than zero (i.e., under the all-one codeword assumption, the probability of error in the message). Second, and more

be the family of Gaussian extrinsic information densities

parameterized by .

3) For each

, calculate exact density evolution over

the factor graph in Fig. 4 , using

as the channel den-

sity, as the check degree sequence, and as the variable

node degree. (A detailed explanation may be found in [3],

[4].) Let

be the resulting density.

4) For each

, calculate the intermediate function

importantly, while the GA assumes that the densities at the output of both symbol variable nodes and parity-check nodes

(10)

are both Gaussian, the SGA makes this assumption only about densities at the output of the symbol variable nodes, where the Gaussian assumption is generally more accurate, which makes it preferable for handling channels with non-Gaussian channel messages. The SGA thus approximates the densities only at the inputs and outputs of blocks such as in Fig. 4.
To implement the SGA for a particular (potentially nonGaussian) channel and a particular degree sequence , we must find the intermediate input–output characteristic function given that the check degree sequence is and the variable degree is :

and interpolate between the points in to find the value of

the function at other points.

5) Let

. If

, stop; else, go to Step 3.

There is also a faster (yet slightly less accurate) algorithm

from [7], using the principle of intrinsic–extrinsic separation

(IES). Essentially, this technique approximates the output ex-

trinsic message as Gaussian prior to the inclusion of the channel

density , as in Fig. 5. Thus, the input–output character-

istic function may be precalculated without knowledge of the

channel density. To describe this procedure, we describe Proce-

dure B1, in which the pure extrinsic information is calculated,

(7)

and Procedure B2, in which the characteristic functions in (7) are calculated (separating these procedures will be useful in the

Thus,

is the conditional probability of error in the next two sections):

message, given and . Using these functions, the overall Procedure B1: Pure Extrinsic Information: Calculate Pro-

input–output characteristic function for a variable degree cedure A, using

, i.e., a delta function at zero,

sequence , designated

, may be calculated. in place of the true channel message density. Use

for

Marginalizing over the variable degree, we can calculate the

to represent the output intermediate functions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

12

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

through the GE factor graph, using

as the ex-

trinsic message density. This is done in the same manner

as in the DE algorithm described in [8] .

An appropriate value for can be found in an ad hoc manner,

by examining the change in the channel message after each it-

eration of channel estimation DE in Step 3, and choosing

where the change becomes small. Intuitively, the value of is

the horizon on the number of symbols that participate in esti-

mation for any given channel state, so this value will depend on

the length of the channel memory (the longer the memory, the

larger the required value of ).

Now we concern ourselves with the intermediate functions.

For each channel function

calculated using Procedure

C, we need an input–output characteristic function dependent on

this channel, which is obtained using Procedure A. To empha-

size the dependence of this input–output characteristic on ,

and to distinguish it from the memoryless characteristic func-

tions, we write this intermediate function as

Fig. 5. Intrinsic–extrinsic separation—the SGA approximation is applied to the message at the output of the variable node, prior to the addition of the channel message.

Procedure B2: Fixed Channel IES: First, run Procedure

B1. For each

, calculate

,

and obtain a Gaussian density

as in (9). Finally,

for each

, calculate

Furthermore, as we argued in Section III, the input parameter

determines which of the

to use, so the

functional relationship between and must be found.

From Schedule B, the extra iteration through the LDPC sub-

graph which produces represents pure extrinsic information,

which is also used in the first step of the IES procedure. Thus,

the relationship between and can be calculated from

intermediate functions using Procedure B1, represented by

.

These intermediate functions are calculated using the fol-

lowing procedure.

where the operator represents convolution over the dummy variable .

Procedure D: SGA With Channel Estimation: 1) (Initialization step) Define and as before, and use
as in (9). Obtain a full variable degree sequence

In the next two subsections, we will use both the full SGA and

and a check degree sequence . Let

.

the SGA using separation to design approximate DE algorithms. 2) (Precalculation) Run Procedure C to obtain

for

all

.

C. Full SGA

3) For each channel density

, and each variable de-

gree ,

, calculate each intermediate function

Here we implement an algorithm for approximating DE over

Schedule B, using the SGA. Recall from Section II-C that is

the number of instances of channel estimation per iteration. As

we argued in that section, if is chosen to be sufficiently large,

we can replace the channel densities

with their stable

counterparts, which are calculated on the assumption that the

true extrinsic message density is replaced by one of the func-

tions

, indexed by .

The procedure for finding these stable densities is as follows.

Procedure C: Stable Densities:

1) Let

be a quantization of the interval

, obtained by calculating

using

Procedure A, with

as the channel density.

4) Obtain

for all

, and for all

using Procedure B1.

Note that Step 2, marked “Precalculation,” only needs to be cal-

culated once for each channel. These results may be stored and

reused if a different check degree sequence is to be tested.

We now discuss how to obtain the overall input–output rela-

tionship from the intermediate functions, given some variable

degree sequence . The extrinsic message to the channel is cal-

culated similarly to the messages that carry information from

symbol variable nodes to parity-check nodes. In density evo-

, so that contains the parameters which approxi- lution, these variable-to-check message densities are averaged

mate the extrinsic information to the channel.

over , which contains the probabilities that a randomly selected

2) For each

, let

, and calculate edge is connected to a variable node of each degree. However,

as in (9) .

the extrinsic message to the channel is only passed along the

3) For each

, obtain a channel density

by edge connecting that symbol variable to its channel factor node,

performing

iterations of channel estimation DE and there is exactly one of these edges per symbol variable node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ON DESIGNING GOOD LDPC CODES FOR MARKOV CHANNELS

13

Thus, this message is averaged over , which contains the probabilities that a randomly selected node has each degree, and has elements given by
(11)

is used to calculate the extrinsic messages to the channel, and

the resulting function

in the same manner as before.

However, we must also obtain the input–output relation for the

pure extrinsic information, obtained prior to adding the channel

message. We designate this quantity as

, and from the

description of Procedure B1, this is given by

Furthermore, since the message is passed along the edge from the channel, all of the messages from the LDPC code are used, not all-but-one. We then calculate the input–output characteristic function for the extrinsic information destined for the channel, which is given similarly to (8) by

(13)

for each

. Let

represent the function that

maps

to the closest value in , similarly to . Then

the overall input–output relation is given by

(12)

for each

. A mapping

is then obtained by

choosing

as the element of that is closest to

.

The overall input–output characteristic function is then calcu-

lated by

Note that both (12) and the above equation involve only linear combinations of the intermediate functions calculated using Procedure D.

D. SGA With IES
We can take advantage of IES to dramatically reduce the complexity of the full SGA algorithm. In Procedure D, much of the complexity stems from the requirement to calculate an input–output characteristic for each variable degree and each channel density function, in Step 3. Since IES uses an intermediate Gaussian approximation after the pure extrinsic information is calculated, but before the channel message is added, the approximation of the extrinsic information density is separated from the channel density.
Procedures B1 and B2 dealt with IES when the channel density is fixed. Because extrinsic information is unaffected by a changing channel density, Procedure B1 can be retained, while Procedure B2 is replaced by the following:

Procedure E: IES With Channel Estimation:

1) (Precalculation) As in Step 2 of Procedure D, run Proce-

dure C to obtain

for all

.

2) (Precalculation) For each pair

,

calculate

, obtain a Gaussian

density

, and calculate

E. Degree Sequence Optimization

Under the SGA and all EXIT-like approximations, conver-

gence occurs if and only if the decoding “tunnel” is open ev-

erywhere—that is, the transfer functions never intersect. In our

case, this corresponds to the condition that

for

all . Our goal in optimizing these degree sequences is to obtain

the degree sequence which maximizes rate, which still achieves

. However, since the parity-check degree sequence

is always fixed, from (5), maximizing corresponds to max-

imizing

. Thus, the optimization problem we gave

in the introduction may be revised as follows:

Given a Markov channel with parameters

and

a check degree sequence

Maximize

Subject to

;

; and

.

Since

is formed by a linear combination of func-

tions, and since the objective function

is linear, it

appears that linear programming can be used to solve this opti-

mization problem, as suggested in [7]. However, there is a small

difficulty that must be resolved before linear programming can

be directly applied. The extrinsic message to the channel is cal-

culated by (12) and (13) in Procedures D and E, respectively,

and the resultant mapping to a stable density

is nonlinear.

Thus, we may break the optimization into an iterative scheme:

choose some arbitrary variable degree sequence , and use

to calculate (12) or (13) for Procedure D and E, respectively.

Then, keeping fixed, the above is then a linear optimization

problem, and can be solved by linear programming. Finally, let

equal the result of the linear programming procedure, and

continue until the result is the same as .

V. RESULTS FOR THE GE CHANNEL

where the operator represents convolution over .

3) As in Step 4 of Procedure D, run Procedure B1 to calculate

for all

.

A. Illustration of Method
We first give some results that illustrate the operation of our algorithms. Consider a GE channel with parameters

Again, the step labeled “Precalculation” may be calculated in

advance for all degree sequences.

Now, given a variable degree sequence , we calculate the For this GE channel, we precalculate the channel information

function

by assembling the intermediate functions as message densities

using Procedure C. Some examples

follows. As in Procedure D, the function

from (12) of such densities for various values of are given in Fig. 6,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

14

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

TABLE I REGULAR DEGREE SEQUENCES, FOR COMPARISON

TABLE II
DEGREE SEQUENCES OBTAINED USING PROCEDURE D FOR A CHANNEL WITH PARAMETERS (b; g;  ;  ) = (0:01; 0:01; 0:22; 0:01), TESTED WITH DE

design threshold), but at the end of the procedure, the code might

not decode successfully in .

One straightforward method for improving a code is to de-

crease its average check degree. For example, a code with check

degree , i.e.,

, can be improved by changing the check

degree sequence to

, though this is at the

expense of code rate. In our results, we run the design tool with

regular check degrees, which is widely believed to be an appro-

priate setting for capacity-achieving LDPC codes. Thus, there

Fig. 6. An illustration of some stable channel message densities for various values of  . The graph on the bottom is a close-up view of the positive values
of the function on the top.

exists some where

. For each degree sequence

obtained by the design tool, we check the sequence against the

design threshold with exact DE, which was described for the

GE channel in [8]. If decoding is not successful, we find the

smallest so that decoding is successful at the design threshold

where

. Note that with decreasing (corresponding to

better extrinsic information), the “horns” of

become

sharper. This phenomenon implies that, as expected, the channel

estimates are of higher quality; if the channel states were per-

fectly known, these horns would become delta functions.

Our results that follow illustrate the effect of channel estima-

tion on SGA analysis. In Procedure D, we obtained intermediate

functions

using the densities obtained in Procedure

C. Some of these intermediate functions are given in Fig. 7 for

the same GE channel as in Fig. 6, and using a check degree se-

quence with

as the only nonzero entry. For each vari-

able degree , we observe that decreasing (corresponding to

better extrinsic information) causes the intermediate function to

decrease everywhere. This has the effect of opening up the de-

coding “tunnel,” which makes it more likely for the decoding

procedure to be successful.

with

, and report that result.

It is obviously interesting to determine how closely the de-

gree sequences obtained using Procedures D and E approach

the Shannon limit. (We have generally set

, as that

value seems to be sufficient for good performance.) We use the

ratio of code rate to channel capacity, , as a metric in deter-

mining the goodness of the obtained degree sequences. In Ta-

bles II –VII, we give some degree sequences designed for var-

ious GE channels, and the value of

for this channel. For

comparison, in Table I we give these values for the -reg-

ular and -regular LDPC codes. Three interesting conclu-

sions can be drawn from these results:

• Comparing Table II to Table IV, which apply the same

channel to Procedures D and E, respectively, the accuracy

of Procedures D and E seems to be nearly the same. Thus,

Procedure E seems to be preferable, due to its lower com-

plexity.

B. Code Results

• From Tables III –VI, Procedure E seems to be most accurate at rates greater than , and the accuracy decays

Since we are using approximate DE, there is no guarantee

rapidly for low rates. However, degree sequences designed

of successful decoding in a physical system. In general, we

using the procedure have the largest values of

for

have found that the design tool is often (but not always) overly

rates close to .

“optimistic,” claiming that codes will decode successfully in • From all tables, both Procedures D and E seem to be most

channels where more accurate analysis (such as with exact DE)

accurate, and have highest , when the and

shows that they will not. This presents a problem, in that the

are relatively small. This is a concern, since channel ca-

code is designed with a particular channel in mind (called the

pacity can only be attained as

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ON DESIGNING GOOD LDPC CODES FOR MARKOV CHANNELS

15

Fig. 7. An illustration of the effect of channel estimation on SGA approximation, with GE parameters b = g =  = 0:01, and  = 0:22; and with  = 1.

TABLE III
DEGREE SEQUENCES OBTAINED USING PROCEDURE E FOR A CHANNEL WITH PARAMETERS (b; g;  ;  ) = (0:01; 0:01; 0:15; 0:01), TESTED WITH DE

TABLE VI
DEGREE SEQUENCE OBTAINED USING PROCEDURE E FOR A CHANNEL WITH PARAMETERS (b; g;  ;  ) = (0:01; 0:01; 0:40; 0:01), TESTED WITH DE

TABLE IV
DEGREE SEQUENCES OBTAINED USING PROCEDURE E FOR A CHANNEL WITH PARAMETERS (b; g;  ;  ) = (0:01; 0:01; 0:22; 0:01), TESTED WITH DE

TABLE VII
DEGREE SEQUENCE OBTAINED USING PROCEDURE E FOR A CHANNEL WITH PARAMETERS (b; g;  ;  ) = (0:0044; 0:0156; 0:50; 0:0192) (FROM [16]),
TESTED WITH DE

compare our results against degree sequences optimized for sim-

ilar channels. Very little work exists in this area; however, the

BSC has an impulsive channel density function, similarly to the

GE channel density function. In [3], Richardson and Urbanke

presented a rate- degree sequence for the BSC, directly opti-

mized using DE, with

. The best of our degree se-

TABLE V
DEGREE SEQUENCE OBTAINED USING PROCEDURE E FOR A CHANNEL WITH PARAMETERS (b; g;  ;  ) = (0:01; 0:01; 0:30; 0:01), TESTED WITH DE

quences designed using Procedures D and E typically have values of around , implying that these are indeed good degree sequences, although there remains room for improvement.

Nonetheless, these codes are the best known LDPC codes for

the GE channel.

Furthermore, we remark that the values of

can be

improved by searching for channels with lower capacity in

which the codes nonetheless decode. For example, we have

These results confirm that the degree sequences rarely achieve found using exact DE that the code in Table VII also succeeds

at the design threshold. We have found that a con- in a channel with parameters

straint on the value of can somewhat improve the accuracy

of the approximation, at the expense of a small amount of rate,

which can be observed in the second entry of Table II.

The best degree sequences in the literature are usually given for which

. Similar channel searches lead to

for the memoryless Gaussian channel, and have thresholds ex- slightly improved values for most of our codes. However,

tremely close to the Shannon limit. However, to obtain a fair there is no systematic way of finding such channels, so this

comparison with other available degree sequences, we should method is of limited use to a system designer.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 8. Experimental results for the GE channel, using the code in Table VII. To produce the curve,  was varied to produce the given average inversion probability.

C. Discussion

is obtained using an expedited form of density evolution.

From

, the appropriate value of can be calculated, and

that value used to find a precalculated channel density

.

In this section, we consider some points raised by our de- This new density is then fed into the expedited density evolu-

sign tool. First, in Fig. 8, we give experimental results for the tion for the LDPC subiteration, and so on. The resulting (ap-

code designed in Table VII, at code lengths

and proximate) density evolution algorithm can be combined with

. Although the results roughly confirm the location any appropriate nonconvex optimization technique.

of the threshold, we see that the memory inherent in the GE Finally, results have been presented for good turbo codes in

channel causes a significant gap to the threshold, even for these the GE channel [16]. Due to a difference in approach, a direct

relatively long block lengths. This phenomenon was also ob- comparison between these two codes is difficult. The method in

served for regular LDPC codes in [8], although the gap shrinks [16] was to obtain a turbo code of a particular rate and then find,

with increasing code length. Furthermore, the shape of Fig. 8 by simulation, the worst channel (according to some criterion)

indicates an error floor. We have noticed that error floors can in which that code could be decoded successfully. In our case,

occur in these channels when is too large, which was also we start with a channel, and find the highest rate code which

noticed in [3]. It is possible to modify the constraints in our de- successfully decodes in that channel in the limit of long block

sign problem to restrict the maximum value of . However, we length. Thus, starting from the channel given in [16], which re-

leave a criterion on the maximum value of to future work. ported successful decoding with a turbo code at rate

,

Second, the densities calculated by Procedure C can be used we find a code that decodes successfully with rate

.

in concert with other methods of channel design, particularly When this code is shortened to the same block length as the

with expedited forms of density evolution, such as fast den- simulated turbo code, we have observed by simulation that its

sity evolution [5]. The main stumbling block for density evo- performance is worse. However, its rate is considerably higher,

lution analysis of estimation-decoding is the complexity of the so whether this code is “better” or “worse” depends on the de-

messages in the Markov subgraph, which grows exponentially signer’s criteria and perspective. To compare turbo and LDPC

with the number of states. However, we can use the precalcu- codes, at the same rate and in the same channel, would require

lated densities from Procedure C to approximately calculate the optimization of both codes (e.g., the turbo code might need to

evolution of the channel message density. After each subitera- be punctured), so we leave such a head-to-head comparison to

tion through the LDPC subgraph, an extrinsic message density future work.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ON DESIGNING GOOD LDPC CODES FOR MARKOV CHANNELS

17

VI. DEGREE SEQUENCES FOR HIGHER ORDER

To put our proposed method from the previous section into

MARKOV CHANNELS

action, we choose a complicated channel for which no method

exists to explicitly calculate DE: a binary Markov channel with

System designers are most interested in capacity-approaching codes that work in a wide variety of channels. The design tool we have obtained in this paper was initially derived for the

three states. This channel is used as a motivating example; in principle, any Markov channel could be used in its place. The channel we tested has transition probability matrix

GE channel. As we shall show in this section, that design tool

is tremendously versatile, and can be applied to virtually any

(14)

Markov channel.

In our design tool, the current parameter representing the extrinsic information was used to select a channel density func- and inversion probability vector

tion from a family of such functions, precalculated and corre-

sponding to a quantized set of values for . The family of func-

tions was calculated by running exact DE through the channel factor graph, where the density of the extrinsic information mes- An optimized degree sequence for this channel was obtained sage was a density corresponding to . To adapt this method to using Procedure E. We obtained a degree sequence given by

a more complicated channel model, we need only find a way to

obtain a similar family of channel message densities for an ar-

bitrary channel.

Unfortunately, exact calculation of DE over the Markov sub-

graph is difficult when the number of states is greater than two. which has a rate of

. Experimental results illustrating

This is because the messages passed between the channel state this code’s performance are given in Fig. 9, using a sum-product

nodes are probabilities over the channel states, so if there are decoding algorithm. We observe that the actual performance of

states, the message passed between channel states is a vector the code agrees reasonably closely with the designed channel.

with

entries. The pdf of a vector is a multivariate function, This result is highly encouraging to future work in designing

whose evolution is difficult to track, even numerically. However, codes for Markov channels.

we are only interested in the channel message density, which is

a univariate function regardless of the number of states or the nature of the channel. Furthermore, since the design tool implements approximate DE, the requirement to obtain an exactly accurate channel density function is somewhat relaxed. In particular, we can avoid the use of exact DE and instead use Monte Carlo methods to obtain a family of approximate channel densities. Such an approach has previously been used to evaluate the performance of turbo codes [17], and to implement DE in ISI channels [18].
Consider the following Monte Carlo procedure for obtaining a channel message density for some Markov channel , intended to replace Procedure C.

Procedure F: Monte Carlo Stable Densities:

1) Let

be a quantization of the interval

, so that contains the parameters which approxi-

mate the extrinsic information to the channel.

2) For each

, let

, and calculate

as in (9) .

3) For each

, generate a channel message as follows.

Randomly generate a string of

channel observations

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented theoretical results concerning message-passing schedules, and have shown that a carefully chosen message-passing schedule can lead to an easier approximation for channel estimation under LDPC estimation-decoding. Using this result, we have proposed heuristics which allow irregular LDPC degree sequences to be optimized for Markov channels. These heuristics have given the best available codes for the GE channel, and shows promise in more general Markov channels.
The results presented in this paper are merely a few examples of the possible channels in which optimized LDPC codes may be obtained. For instance, it is easy to use this work to design codes for more complicated Markov channels, including Gaussian channels with memory. Nonetheless, the best of our codes achieved roughly 95% of the capacity of the corresponding GE channel. Although this is quite good, it falls short of the tiny gaps to capacity observed in memoryless channels. Future work should focus on closing the gap to capacity further.

according to the channel model , and a string of inde-

pendent extrinsic messages according to the extrinsic den-

sity

. Use the SPA to calculate the channel mes-

APPENDIX A STABLE DENSITIES FOR CHANNEL MESSAGES

sage corresponding to the

th channel observation. In this appendix, we partially justify our approximation by

4) Use iterations of Step 3 and obtain a histogram of the showing that there exists a stable (or invariant) distribution for

resulting channel messages. This histogram, when normal- the channel messages in binary Markov channels. We do not

ized, is the Monte Carlo channel density

address the more difficult question of convergence to this in-

The value of should be set very large, and we have found that variant distribution, although in applying the design techniques

setting it to , or more, ensures that

is a reasonably proposed in this paper, we have empirically observed this con-

accurate approximation of the true density.

vergence in a wide range of scenarios.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

18

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 9. Experimental results for the 3-state binary Markov channel. P is plotted with respect to , the average inversion probability. Results are given for channels with P as in (14) and n = [0:01;  ; 0:5], where  is varied to obtain the given average inversion probability.

We first show that the sequence of forward and backward messages form a Markov chain under two conditions: first, that the independence assumption holds, and second, that the extrinsic message density is always the same. The forward message forms a Markov chain if

where the second line follows from the fact that contains summarized probabilities of , which are calculated using the SPA. Thus, from (15)

Under the SPA, is a function of the incoming forward message , the extrinsic message , and the channel observation
. Thus
(15) since is independent of the forward messages. Furthermore, if is the channel state corresponding to the observation , we can write

which is invariant for all so long as all have the same density. A similar argument can be made to show that the backward message is also a Markov chain.
Under some mild conditions, it is a well-known result that the state probabilities of a Markov chain approach a stable distribution if the state space is finite and countable. However, if
is uncountable, the existence of a stable distribution over the state space is much more difficult to prove. In this appendix, we adapt results from [19], showing first that the forward message Markov chain satisfies the weak Feller property, which states that all bounded, continuous functions on the state space are mapped into bounded, continuous functions by the probability kernel [19, pp. 134-137], as follows.

Lemma 1: The sequence

forms a Markov

chain which satisfies the weak Feller property and the Posi-

tivity/Regularity Criterion.

Proof: We prove the statement for the GE channel; the

lemma can be easily generalized to any binary Markov channel.

Let

represent the SPA calculation of given ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ON DESIGNING GOOD LDPC CODES FOR MARKOV CHANNELS

19

, and . For fixed and , it is easy to show that this function is continuous. To show the weak Feller property, for some
we can represent the mapping of some bounded, continuous function under the probability kernel

(16)

Following the proof of [19, Proposition 6.1.2], each integral in

the last line of (16) results in a continuous function of , and

multiplication by linear functions of does not affect contin-

uousness. Thus,

is continuous, which is sufficient to

show that the chain satisfies the weak Feller property.

To show the Positivity/Regularity Condition, we trivially se-

lect

, i.e., the entire state space, and select

.

Since

,

always. Thus, the Positivity/Regu-

larity Condition is satisfied.

Thus, we have the following result.

Theorem 2: There exists an invariant probability measure

for the Markov chain sequence

.

Proof: The theorem follows directly from Lemma 1 and

[19, Theorem 12.3.4].

Again, a very similar argument can be made for the backward message. Thus, there exist invariant pdfs for both the forward and backward messages.
Finally, we note that the channel message is calculated directly from the forward and backward messages. Thus, it is obvious that the channel message has a stable density if the forward and backward messages have stable densities.

APPENDIX B PROOF OF THEOREM 1
We will prove this result for the case of regular LDPC codes, and then generalize the proof to the case of irregular LDPC codes. In a regular code, there is only one possible cycle-free member of , since the degrees of all the variables and nodes are deterministic. Furthermore, for regular codes, it is known from [8, Theorem 3] that

(17)

which implies that

exists (since

is bounded below by zero). The observation (17) is easy to gen-

eralize to irregular codes.

We will now give a brief result, required in the proof of the

theorem, which relates local neighborhoods that are subgraphs

of one another. Let the factor graph be a local neighborhood

of the edge . Another local neighborhood is a subgraph of

, written

if

• contains some or all of the nodes and edges from ,

and no nodes or edges that are not present in ;

• any variable node in has the same degree as the corre-

sponding variable in ; and

• for any factor node in with smaller degree (i.e., con-

nected to fewer variables) than the respective factor node

in , the factor contained in the node in is the same as

the one in , marginalized over the missing variables with

respect to their prior distributions.

The first condition in the definition is true of the subgraph of

any graph. The second and third conditions are necessary in

the case of the factor graph, and describes the properties of the

pdf represented by the factor graph with respect to the pdf

represented by .

Letting

represent the probability of error of the mes-

sage passed along edge , when this message arises from a local

neighborhood , the definition of a subgraph leads to the fol-

lowing lemma.

Lemma 2: If

, then

Proof: Marginalizing over missing variables with respect

to a prior distribution, as in the third property of the subgraph,

is equivalent to replacing all channel observations with erasures

and executing the SPA, because the SPA performs marginaliza-

tion, and without observations, the densities of the variables are

their prior densities, by definition. Since and are cycle-

free, they are optimal detectors for the variable attached to edge

, and by the Side Information Lemma [8], discarding observa-

tions in an optimal detector cannot result in a lower probability

of error. Thus, since is equivalent to with some observa-

tions discarded,

.

Because it is formed by a flooding-type schedule, the local

neighborhood

contains all possible sequences of edges

through the estimation-decoding factor graph of length starting at the factor node attached to (such that is not the first edge traversed, by the definition of a local neighborhood). Thus, for any properly initialized message-passing schedule,

its local neighborhoods are subgraphs of

for some .

Furthermore,

is trivially a subgraph of all possible local

neighborhoods with any schedule. With this in mind, for all

, let represent the largest integer such that

and

, and let represent the

smallest integer such that

and

.

Then we have the following.

Lemma 3:

for all , and

.

Proof: The first statement is obvious. To prove the second

statement, at least one subiteration takes place in each subgraph

for every iteration, so the shortest sequence of edges in any local

neighborhood is . Thus, all possible sequences of edges of

length are in the local neighborhood, and the local neigh-

borhood is a subgraph of , so

, which obviously

approaches infinity as

.

Now we can prove Theorem 1 for regular LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

20

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Proof: In the case of a regular LDPC code, only one

member each of the ensembles , , and

havs

nonzero probability: respectively, these are the local neighbor-

hoods , , and . For Schedule B, Lemma 2, and the

definitions of and , we have that

Let represent the set of pairs

so that is a subgraph

of . Then the sum in (20) may be broken down as follows:

(18)

(21)

From Lemma 3, both and approach as

. Thus

where the second line follows from the definition of and (19). By a similar argument, we may write
(22)

so we end up with the sandwiching

However, for each pair

,

by

Lemma 2, and thus each term in the sum from (21) is less than

or equal to each term in the sum from (22). Thus,

, which proves the lemma.

The derivation is exactly the same for Schedule A, and the theorem follows.

To prove Theorem 1 for irregular codes, we need to modify

Lemma 2 so as to allow the same sandwiching in (18) when

more than one local neighborhood in the ensemble has nonzero

probability. To do so, we define a subensemble as follows. Let

and be ensembles of local neighborhoods. Also, define the

conditional probability

to be the probability that

is the local neighborhood surrounding , given that surrounds

(for instance, if is a subgraph of , then

).

Then is a subensemble of , written

, if the following

condition holds:

• For any

and any

,

only if

is a subgraph of .

In other words, if we know that the local neighborhood around

is , then is a valid local neighborhood for only if it

contains as a subgraph. Furthermore

(19)

so it is also true that

only if is a subgraph

of . Thus, by marginalization,

can occur only if

has at least one subgraph in , and

can occur

only if is a subgraph of at least one member of . In other

words, if

, then contains those factor graphs which are

the “building blocks” of as subgraphs.

The modified lemma is given as follows.

Lemma 4: If

, then

.

Proof: We can write the probability of error as

For all

, let represent the largest in-

teger such that

and

, and let

represent the smallest integer such that

and

. Lemma 3 is easily generalized to this case, and

we give it without proof.

Lemma 5:

for all , and

.

Finally, we can write the proof of Theorem 1.

Proof: For Schedule B, from Lemma 4, we replace the sandwiching in (18) with

The proof then follows exactly the proof in the regular case, using Lemma 5 in place of Lemma 3.

Finally, we note that the only schedule-specific properties we

used were that Schedules A and B produce local neighborhoods

that are cycle-free with

as the block length goes to in-

finity, and that Lemma 5 holds. Thus, we can give the following

corollary to Theorem 1:

Corollary 1: Let

be an ensemble of local neigh-

borhoods for an arbitrary message-passing schedule that

satisfies both Lemma 5 and the cycle-free property. Then

.

In other words, the result in the theorem applies to a very wide

class of message-passing schedules.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Prof. Masoud Ardakani of the University of Alberta for a number of helpful discussions.

REFERENCES

(20)

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ECKFORD et al.: ON DESIGNING GOOD LDPC CODES FOR MARKOV CHANNELS

21

[3] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[4] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] H. Jin and T. J. Richardson, “A new fast density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Punta del Este, Uruguay, Mar. 2006, pp. 183–187.
[6] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 806–808, May 1999.
[7] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “A more accurate one-dimensional analysis and design of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2106–2114, Dec. 2004.
[8] A. W. Eckford, F. R. Kschischang, and S. Pasupathy, “Analysis of low-density parity-check codes for the Gilbert–Elliott channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3872–3889, Nov. 2005.
[9] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[10] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[11] A. P. Worthen and W. E. Stark, “Unified design of iterative receivers using factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 843–849, Feb. 2001.

[12] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[13] N. Varnica and A. Kavcˇic´, “Optimized low-density parity-check codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 168–170, Apr. 2003.
[14] J. Garcia-Frias, “Decoding of low-density parity-check codes over finite-state binary Markov channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1840–1843, Nov. 2004.
[15] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[16] J. Garcia-Frias and J. D. Villasenor, “Turbo decoding of Gilbert-Elliott channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 357–363, Mar. 2002.
[17] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Thresholds for turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun./Jul. 2000, p. 317.
[18] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution, and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1636–1652, Jul. 2003.
[19] S. P. Meyn, Markov Chains and Stochastic Stability. London, U.K.: Springer-Verlag, 1993.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

