IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

83

Transactions Papers

Performance of Belief Propagation for Decoding LDPC Codes in the Presence of Channel Estimation Error
Hamid Saeedi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we investigate the performance of the belief propagation (BP) algorithm for decoding low-density paritycheck codes over the additive white Gaussian noise channel when there is an incorrect estimate of the channel signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) (referred to as “SNR mismatch”) at the decoder. At the extremes for over- and underestimation of SNR, the performance of BP tends to that of min-sum algorithm and the channel biterror rate, respectively. Our results for regular codes indicate that the sensitivity to mismatch increases by increasing the variablenode degree and by decreasing the check-node degree. The effect of variable-node degree, however, appears to be more profound, such that at a given rate, the codes with the smallest variable and check degrees are more robust against SNR mismatch. For irregular codes, by comparing the thresholds of a few ensembles, we demonstrate that the ensemble which performs better in the absence of mismatch can perform worse in the presence of it. To obtain our asymptotic results, we propose a computationally efficient method based on the Gaussian approximation of density evolution in the presence of SNR mismatch. We also show that the asymptotic results are consistent with simulation results for codes with finite block lengths.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), density evolution (DE), Gaussian approximation (GA), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, min-sum, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) estimation error, SNR mismatch, SNR threshold.
I. INTRODUCTION AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
I N THE belief propagation (BP) algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over the binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel, the knowledge of the channel noise power is necessary to achieve the ultimate performance of the algorithm. Consider a BIAWGN channel
Paper approved by B. Hochwald, the Editor for Communication and Coding Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received June 15, 2005; revised June 7, 2006. This work was supported in part by an Ontario Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology (OGSST), and in part by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). This paper was presented in part at the IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, Stockholm, Sweden, May 30–June 1, 2005, and in part at the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory, Montréal, QC, Canada, June 2005.
The authors are with Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: hsaeedi@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.887488

with input that can take values , and output

, where is a Gaussian random variable with mean zero

and variance

. In the log-likelihood ratio (LLR)

domain, the input to the BP algorithm for each bit should be . Starting from such initial messages, which is
based on a perfect knowledge of the noise power , the BP algorithm performs optimally, in the sense that it provides the

a posteriori probabilities (APPs) for bits assuming a tree-like (cycle-free) graph.
Now consider the case where the noise power is estimated

erroneously as

. We refer to this as “signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR) mismatch,” and define the SNR mismatch ratio

by

. The value of in decibels is called the SNR offset.

The performance of BP with imperfect channel estimation has

been addressed in [1]–[3] for turbo codes, and in [4] and [5]

for LDPC codes. In [4], simulation results for a few codes with

finite block lengths are presented, while in [5], asymptotic anal-

ysis of BP with mismatch in the context of magnetic recording

channels for a regular LDPC code ensemble has been presented.

For the AWGN channel, the results of [4] and [5] indicate that

the algorithm is more sensitive to the underestimation of SNR

than it is to its overestimation.

In this paper, we study the performance of BP in the presence

of mismatch over the AWGN channel for both regular and ir-

regular codes. This study is carried out asymptotically based on

the assumptions of a cycle-free graph and infinite block length.

We also demonstrate that our asymptotic results are consistent

with finite-length simulations.

We show that in the limit when the SNR offset tends to in-

finity, the performance of BP tends to that of the min-sum al-

gorithm [6] and the channel bit-error rate (BER) for the over-

and underestimation of SNR, respectively. This explains why

the algorithm is, in general, more sensitive to the underestima-

tion than it is to the overestimation of SNR.

We also investigate the sensitivity of BP to SNR mismatch as

a function of variable- and check-node degree distributions. Our

results show that for regular codes, the sensitivity increases by

increasing the variable degree and by decreasing the check

degree , with the effect of the former more prominent than

that of the latter. This means that at a given rate, the codes with

smaller and are more robust against SNR mismatch. An

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

84

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

implication of this is that, at least for the tested cases, the regular codes of a given rate which perform better in the absence of SNR mismatch are also more robust in the presence of it. For irregular codes, however, this is not necessarily the case, as shown by an example.
It is well known that BP is superior to min-sum in performance. The fact that min-sum is the limit of BP as the SNR overestimation tends to infinity makes it possible to apply the results of this work to relate the degradation in performance of min-sum, with respect to BP, to the degree distributions of the code. This, for example, implies that among regular LDPC codes of the same rate, codes with smaller and experience a smaller gap between the performance of BP and that of min-sum.
Different tools have been proposed to analyze the asymptotic performance of LDPC codes. The most accurate method, called density evolution (DE) [7], [8] is based on the iterative calculation of the densities of the messages passed between check nodes and variable nodes. DE with continuous-message alphabets is, in general, very complex. The complexity can be reduced by quantizing the messages and performing discretized DE in a finite alphabet space [7], [11]. This results in a less accurate solution. The loss in accuracy subsides and eventually disappears as the number of quantization levels increases and tends to infinity. Other methods have also been proposed in [12]–[14], based on the Gaussian approximation (GA) of densities to reduce the complexity at the expense of less accuracy. The method suggested in [12] is based on tracking the mean of the Gaussian estimated version of the messages, while the approximation proposed in [13] and [14] is based on keeping track of the mutual information between the transmitted bit and the output messages of variable nodes and check nodes through extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts.
Suppose that the all-one codeword is transmitted. In the absence of mismatch, the input LLRs to BP for all the bits are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) with distribution
. This distribution is symmetric (consistent) [7], [8], [12] with the ratio of variance to mean equal to two. As the symmetry property is preserved throughout the iterations of the BP algorithm, the method of GA proposed in [12] can be used to only track the mean of the Gaussian densities throughout the iterative process. This reduces the dimension of the problem from infinity (for full DE) to one, and significantly simplifies the analysis.
In the presence of SNR mismatch, the input LLRs to the

BP algorithm have distribution

. This

distribution is not symmetric, and has a variance-to-mean ratio

0 Fig. 1. Variance-to-mean ratio at the output of variable nodes as a function of
iteration number for a (4,6)-regular ensemble with SNR offsets  = 2; 0 and 2 dB.
thus not applicable. In this paper, to investigate the asymptotic performance of BP in the presence of mismatch, we employ a GA method in which both the mean and the variance of the distributions are tracked. Compared with a discretized DE approach with the same accuracy, our proposed method is less complex.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we explain the proposed GA method and discuss its complexity as compared with that of DE. In this section, we also define the SNR threshold value of an ensemble of codes for a given SNR offset, and the mismatch thresholds for a given channel SNR. We end the section by discussing the asymptotic performance of BP as the SNR offset tends to . In Section III, simulation results are presented and discussed. Section VI is devoted to some concluding remarks.
II. GA, THRESHOLDS, AND ASYMPTOTIC PERFORMANCE OF BP IN THE PRESENCE OF MISMATCH
A. The Proposed Method Based on GA
For regular LDPC codes, the method of [12] approximates the density of messages throughout the iterative process by symmetric Gaussian distributions, and tracks the mean of these distributions using the following two equations at variable and check nodes, respectively:

of

. In Fig. 1, for the first nine iterations, we have

shown the values of variance-to-mean ratio at the output of

variable nodes (input of check nodes) for an ensemble of

(4,6)-regular LDPC codes at SNR = 3 dB and for

2 dB.

(Note that SNR

, where

, and

are the average energy per information bit, one-sided power

spectral density of AWGN, and the code rate, respectively.)

This figure shows that in the case of mismatch, not only is the

ratio of variance to mean not equal to 2, but also it changes

throughout the iterative process. The GA method of [12] is

(1) (2)

where and

are the means of the input and the output

distributions, respectively, is the mean of the initial LLR

values input to the BP algorithm, and function is the ex-

pected value of

.

For the case of mismatch, as the symmetry condition is

violated and as the ratio of variance to mean changes with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SAEEDI AND BANIHASHEMI: BELIEF PROPAGATION FOR DECODING LDPC CODES

85

iterations (see Fig. 1), we need to track both the mean and the variance of the random variables. However, we maintain the Gaussian assumption. For variable nodes, we still use (1) to track the means and employ the following equation for variances:

(3)

For check nodes, we define the following two-input two-output mapping:

(4)
where denotes the expected value, and track the means and variances using

(5)

We compute the mappings and

numerically and

use look-up tables to track the means and variances. In

Fig. 2(a) and (b), we have shown the functions

and

, respectively.

To generalize this analysis to irregular codes, similar steps

as those described in [12] are taken. Assume an irregular code

ensemble with degree distributions

and

for variable nodes and check nodes, re-

spectively, where the coefficient of represents the percentage

of edges connected to nodes of degree , and and are

the maximum variable- and check-node degrees, respectively.

The distribution of messages passed between variable nodes

and check nodes in this case are approximated by Gaussian

mixtures. Suppose that, at a given iteration , the Gaussian

mixture at the output of check nodes and the input of variable

nodes has the mean and the variance and , respec-

tively. For variable nodes of degree , we estimate the output

by a Gaussian random variable and compute its mean and vari-

ance using

Fig. 2. Mapping G. (a) g (m; ). (b) g (m; ).
The output of a check node of degree is then approximated by a Gaussian random variable with the following mean and variance:
The distribution of messages from check nodes to variable nodes is approximated by the Gaussian mixture
. The mean and the variance of this distribution are obtained by the following equations to be used as inputs to variable nodes for iteration :

respectively. The density of the messages from variable nodes to check nodes is then approximated by the Gaussian mixture
. We now define and as follows:
To examine the accuracy of the proposed method, we have compared its threshold results with those generated by DE for a few cases. Our results indicate that with steps of 0.01 for the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

86

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

mean and the variance, the difference between the exact and approximate thresholds is at most about 0.1 and 0.2 dB for regular and irregular codes, respectively.1 We note that this inaccuracy is mainly due to the GA [12], but marginal improvement can be obtained by reducing the step size.

B. Comparison Between the Complexities of the Proposed GA Method and DE

DE, as a tool for asymptotic analysis of iterative decoding,

was first proposed in [7]. A more efficient implementation, re-

ferred to as discretized DE, was then presented in [10] and [11].

This implementation was further improved in [9] in a number

of ways, many of them exploiting the symmetry of the message

distribution. In the case of mismatch, the symmetry condition is

violated, and thus we only compare our proposed method with

that of [10] and [11]. However, we acknowledge that using some

of the modifications described in [9], the method of [10] and [11]

can still be improved.

The DE of [11] is based on discretizing the messages to

quantization levels and processing their corresponding -point

probability mass functions (pmfs) throughout iterations. To

compare the complexity of the DE of [11] and that of our

method, we consider a regular

LDPC code.

At variable nodes, our method only requires two multiplica-

tions and two additions, as described in (1) and (3). In compar-

ison, for the DE of [11], the variable-node operation consists

of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) calculation of the pmf of

the incoming messages from the check nodes, the

-fold

pointwise multiplication of this FFT, also multiplied by the FFT

of the pmf of the initial messages, and finally an inverse FFT of

the result.

At check nodes, our algorithm requires the storage of four

2-D look-up tables for and . The calculation of the output

mean and variance then only involves four table look-ups and

multiplications, as can be seen in (5). For the DE

of [11], one has to store a 2-D lookup table for the map of BP

check-node updates. Using this table, the algorithm calculates a

discrete convolution of the input pmfs, two at a time. This adds

up to

discrete convolutions, each with points. The

complexity of this calculation is quadratic in .

Based on the above discussions, the complexity of discretized

DE not only is a function of and , but also depends strongly

on . Our experiments show that for the same level of accu-

racy as that of our method, discretized DE requires

64

to 256, corresponding to 6- to 8-bit quantization, depending on

the degree distributions and offset values. For these values of

, one can see that our method handily beats discretized DE in

complexity.

We end this part by noting that the simplicity of our algo-

rithm, compared with DE, is particularly helpful for cases where

a large number of threshold calculations are required, or for the

design of irregular LDPC codes at the presence of mismatch.

C. Thresholds

(see, e.g., [7] and [8]). For a given ensemble and an SNR offset

, we define the SNR threshold

as the infimum of all

channel SNRs, such that the BER converges to zero as the itera-

tion number tends to infinity. It is well known that SNR thresh-

olds in the presence of mismatch are always higher than that of

no-mismatch case, i.e.,

0 dB [5]. We mea-

sure the sensitivity of an ensemble of codes to mismatch by the

difference

(dB).

To quantify the amount of tolerable mismatch for a given code

ensemble at a given SNR

, we also define mismatch

thresholds

and

for the over- and underestima-

tion of SNR, respectively. For over- (under)estimation, this is

defined as the supremum (infimum) of SNR offset, such that the

BER converges to zero as the iteration number tends to infinity.

We use the difference

as the mea-

sure of tolerance.

D. Asymptotic Performance of BP at Offset Limits

1) SNR Underestimation: Assume that the SNR offset tends

to minus infinity. In this case, the estimate of the channel noise variance is very large. This makes the initial LLR values

of

very small. Consider the first iteration of BP,

where the initial messages are passed from variable nodes to

check nodes. Without loss of generality, consider a check node

of degree three with two nonnegative extrinsic inputs and

. The output is then equal to (see, e.g., [6])

(6)

Using the Taylor series, for small values of , we have

. Applying this to the second and third terms

of (6), we obtain

. This implies that the messages passed

by check nodes to variable nodes are negligible, compared with

the initial LLR values. This situation will continue throughout

the iterations, and thus the BER tends to that of the channel,

which is equal to

where

2) SNR Overestimation: In the case of SNR overestimation,

the initial LLR values, and thus all the messages passed from

variable nodes to check nodes throughout the iterations, are very

large. In this case, as the magnitude of the difference between

the second and the third terms of (6) is upper bounded by ,

we have

. This is the check node operation of

min-sum (see, e.g., [6] and [15]). As the variable operations of

BP and min-sum are also the same, this implies that the perfor-

mance of BP tends to that of min-sum as the SNR offset tends

to plus infinity.

Threshold values are used to measure the asymptotic performance of code ensembles under iterative decoding algorithms

III. SIMULATION RESULTS

1In line with our results, it can be seen in [12] as well that the GA is generally

We first consider the ensemble of (3,6)-regular LDPC codes

less accurate for irregular codes.

and investigate its asymptotic performance under BP in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SAEEDI AND BANIHASHEMI: BELIEF PROPAGATION FOR DECODING LDPC CODES

87

Fig. 3. BER of a randomly constructed (3,6)-regular LDPC code of length 10 , at different SNR values in the presence of SNR mismatch. Corresponding mismatch thresholds are also given.

Fig. 4. BER of a randomly constructed rate-1=2 irregular LDPC code of length 20 000, with degree distributions given in (7) at different SNR values in the presence of SNR mismatch. Corresponding mismatch thresholds are also given.

presence of mismatch by computing the mismatch thresh-

olds

and

for 1.5, 2.0, 2.5 dB, using our

proposed GA method. These are shown in Fig. 3. Note that

. This is in agreement with the fact

that both SNR values are larger than the min-sum threshold for

this ensemble, which is about 1.7 dB [15]. In Fig. 3, we have

also plotted BER versus SNR offset for a randomly constructed

(3,6)-regular code of length . As can be seen, the waterfall

region of the BER curves starts in the close vicinity of the

computed threshold values. (For all the BER simulations in this

paper, the maximum number of iterations is 100, and at least

50 codeword errors have been observed.) Similar results for a

rate- irregular LDPC code ensemble and a corresponding

random code are presented in Fig. 4. The degree distributions

for variable and check nodes are

(7)
respectively. This ensemble, which is check-regular, is a slight modification of the first ensemble in [8, Table II]. Again, the simulation results of the randomly constructed code of length 20 000 are consistent with the asymptotic results derived by the proposed GA method.
Both Figs. 3 and 4 show that the tolerance of the BP algorithm to the SNR mismatch increases with increasing SNR, i.e.,
is an increasing function of , and that the algorithm is more sensitive to the SNR underestimation than it is to the SNR overestimation, i.e.,

variable and check nodes for regular LDPC codes, in Fig. 5,

we have plotted the normalized SNR thresholds

for a

number of

ensembles, and for the range of SNR offset

between 6 and +6 dB. As can be seen, the sensitivity can

change significantly by the variation of and , particularly

for the SNR overestimation. For example, while 4 dB of SNR

overestimation degrades the SNR threshold by only about

0.1 dB for (3,27) codes, it degrades the threshold by more than

1.1 dB for (5,6) codes. In general, the sensitivity increases

by increasing the variable-node degree and by decreasing

the check-node degree. It also appears that the effect of vari-

able-node degree is more prominent than that of the check-node

degree, such that for a given rate

, the codes

with smaller and are less sensitive to mismatch. For ex-

ample, among rate- ensembles, the (3,6) codes are the least

sensitive, followed by (4,8) and (5,10) ensembles, respectively.

Fig. 5 also shows that while, in general, the SNR underesti-

mation is more deteriorating than the SNR overestimation, for

some ensembles and over a certain range of SNR mismatch,

overestimation is almost as harmful as underestimation is (see,

e.g., (5,6) and (6,8) ensembles for

).

Curves of Fig. 5 asymptotically tend to the performance gap

between BP and min-sum as

. This implies that this

gap decreases by decreasing and increasing , with the

effect of being more profound. As an example, for rate-

regular LDPC codes, the performance gap between BP and

min-sum is about 0.6 dB for the (3,6) ensemble [15]. This

increases to about 0.88 and 1.06 dB for the (4,8) and (5,10)

ensembles, respectively [15].

In Fig. 6, we have plotted the SNR threshold versus SNR

offset for the irregular ensemble described by (7), and two other

rate- irregular ensembles described by the following degree

distributions [8, Table I]:

To have a better picture of the sensitivity of BP to the SNR mismatch and to investigate its variation with the degrees of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

88

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

1 ( ) ( ) Fig. 5. Normalized threshold values   for a number of d ; d ensem0 bles of regular LDPC codes, and for the range of SNR offset  between 6 and
+6 dB.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated the performance of BP for the decoding of regular and irregular LDPC codes in the presence of channel estimation error. It is shown that at the limit of infinite SNR mismatch, the performance of BP tends to that of min-sum and the channel BER, for the over- and underestimation, respectively. This provides a proof that asymptotically BP is more sensitive to the underestimation of SNR than it is to the overestimation of it. It is, however, observed that for some ensembles of LDPC codes and over finite ranges of SNR mismatch, overestimation can be almost as harmful as underestimation.
We demonstrate that the sensitivity of BP to the SNR mismatch increases with increasing the variable degree and decreasing the check degree for regular LDPC codes. The effect of variable degree appears to be more profound, such that among the codes with the same rate, those with smaller and
are less sensitive to mismatch. For irregular LDPC codes, we show that highly irregular codes, which perform very well in the absence of mismatch, face significant degradation in their performance in the presence of mismatch, such that they may perform worse than codes with less irregularity. The sensitivity analysis at the limit of infinite SNR overestimation translates to the analysis of the performance gap between BP and min-sum algorithms as a function of degree distributions.
For the asymptotic analysis, we propose a method based on the GA of DE which tracks both the mean and variance of message distributions. The method is much simpler than DE, and the threshold values computed based on this method are shown to match the finite-length simulations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

1 2 Fig. 6. SNR threshold values for three rate- = ensembles of irregular LDPC 0 codes for the range of SNR offset  between 6 and +6 dB.

The authors would like to thank Mr. H. Xiao for constructing the codes used in Figs. 3 and 4. They also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers and the Associate Editor for their helpful comments, which improved the presentation of the paper.
REFERENCES

and [8, Table II]

Fig. 6 shows that while the ensemble with

outper-

forms the other two ensembles in the absence of mismatch, the

situation changes in the presence of mismatch. The ensemble

with

takes over outside the range of [-0.7 dB,

1.5 dB], while beyond the SNR mismatch of about +4.9 dB, the

ensemble with

is superior.

[1] M. Jordan and R. Nichols, “The effects of channel characteristics on turbo code performance,” in Proc. MILCOM Conf., McLean, VA, Oct. 1996, pp. 17–21.
[2] A. Worm, P. Hoeher, and N. When, “Turbo-decoding without SNR estimation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 193–195, Jun. 2000.
[3] T. A. Summers and S. G. Wilson, “SNR mismatch and online estimation in turbo decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 421–423, Apr. 1998.
[4] D. MacKay and C. Hesketh, “Performance of low density parity check codes as a function of actual and assumed noise levels,” in Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2003, vol. 74.
[5] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Signal-to-noise ratio mismatch for low-density parity-check coded magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 498–506, Mar. 2004.
[6] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1021–1025.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SAEEDI AND BANIHASHEMI: BELIEF PROPAGATION FOR DECODING LDPC CODES

89

[9] H. Jin and T. Richardson, “Fast density evolution,” in Proc. CISS, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2004, pp. 1–6.
[10] S. Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, Sep. 2000.
[11] S. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[12] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of LDPC codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[13] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[14] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[15] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
Hamid Saeedi (S’01) was born in Tehran, Iran. He received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 1999 and 2001, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
His research interests include information theory, wireless communications, and signal processing.

Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communication engineering from Tehran University, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1997.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, IUT. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, where he was a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 1998, where currently, he is an Associate Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications and theory, and implementation of communications algorithms. He has published more than 90 papers in refereed journals and conferences. Dr. Banihashemi has served as an Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since May 2003. He has been involved in many international conferences as Chair, Member of Technical Program Committee, and Member of Organizing Committee. These include Co-Chair of Communication Theory Symposium-Globecom’07, TPC Co-Chair of Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, Member of Organizing Committee for International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and Co-Chair of Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. He is also a member of the Board of Directors for the Canadian Society of Information Theory (CSIT) and the Director of Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University. He is a registered Professional Engineer in the province of Ontario, Canada. He held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students in 1995 and 1996, while working toward the Ph.D. degree. He is also a recipient of Carleton’s Research Achievement Award in 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

