IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

121

Construction of Regular and Irregular LDPC Codes: Geometry Decomposition and Masking
Jun Xu, Member, IEEE, Lei Chen, Ivana Djurdjevic, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Two algebraic methods for systematic construction of structured regular and irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with girth of at least six and good minimum distances are presented. These two methods are based on geometry decomposition and a masking technique. Numerical results show that the codes constructed by these methods perform close to the Shannon limit and as well as random-like LDPC codes. Furthermore, they have low error floors and their iterative decoding converges very fast. The masking technique greatly simplifies the random-like construction of irregular LDPC codes designed on the basis of the degree distributions of their code graphs.
Index Terms—Degree distribution, Euclidean geometry, geometry decomposition, masking, permutation matrix.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, discovered in the early 1960s [1], were rediscovered and shown to form a class of Shannon-limit-approaching codes in the late 1990s and early 2000s [2]–[7]. These codes decoded with a soft-input and soft-output iterative decoding, such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [1], [4]–[6], [8]–[15], achieve amazingly good error performance. Long LDPC codes have been constructed and they perform only a few tenths (or even a few thousandths [7]) of a decibel from the Shannon limit with the SPA. Ever since their rediscovery, design, construction, decoding, performance analysis, and applications of LDPC codes have become focal points of research. Various methods for designing and constructing LDPC codes have been proposed and devised.
Based on methods of constructions, LDPC codes can be divided into two categories: random-like codes [1]–[7], [16]–[22] and structured codes [15], [23]–[56]. Random-like LDPC codes are constructed by computer search based on certain design rules or required code-graph structures, such as girth and degree distributions of nodes, while structured LDPC codes
Manuscript received March 23, 2004; revised September 5, 2006. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCR-0096191, CCR-0117891, ECS-0121469 and by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grants NAG 5-12789 and NNG 05GN13G.
J. Xu is with Marvell Semiconductor, Sunnyvale, CA 94089 USA (e-mail: jxu@marvell.com).
L. Chen is with Legend Silicon Corp., Fremont, CA 94539 USA (e-mail: lei@legendsilicon.com).
I. Djurdjevic is with Hitachi GST, San Jose Research Center, San Jose, CA 95120 USA (e-mail: Ivana.Djurdjevic@hitachigst.com).
S. Lin and K. Abdel-Ghaffar are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu; ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Communicated by G. Zémor, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2006.887082

are constructed using algebraic and combinatorial methods. Long random-like LDPC codes in general perform closer to the Shannon limit than structured LDPC codes of the same length and rate. However, for practical lengths, it has been shown [15], [40], [44], [50]–[53], [56] that well-designed structured LDPC codes perform equally as well as random-like LDPC codes in terms of bit-error performance, block-error performance, error-floor, and rate of decoding convergence, collectively.
A binary regular LDPC code [1] is defined as the null space of a sparse parity-check matrix over GF with the following structural properties: 1) each row has constant weight ; 2) each column has constant weight ; 3) no two rows (or two columns) have more than one -component in common; 4) both and are small compared to the code length. The matrix is said to be -regular and the code given by the null space of is called a -regular LDPC code. Property 3 is referred to as the row–column (RC)-constraint. The RC-constraint ensures that: 1) the minimum distance of the code is at least ; and 2) the Tanner graph of the code is free of cycles of length [15], [56]. An LDPC code is said to be irregular if its parity-check matrix has varying column weights and/or varying row weights.
The performance of an LDPC code with iterative decoding is determined collectively by a number of structural properties of the code. Three most important structural properties are girth, minimum distance, and degree distributions of nodes of the code graph. No single one of these structural properties dominates the code performance. The girth of an LDPC code is defined as the length of the shortest cycle in the code’s Tanner graph [8]. The most critical cycles are cycles of length . For codes with these short cycles, iterative decoding becomes correlated after two iterations, and decoding either does not converge or converges slowly. Therefore, cycles of length must be avoided or removed in code construction. In other words, the girth of a code must be kept at least . However, just having a large girth is not enough, a reasonably large minimum distance is also needed to maintain a low error floor in the code’s error performance. The Tanner graph of an LDPC code whose parity-check matrix satisfies the RC-constraint has a girth of at least .
The error performance of an irregular LDPC code also depends on the degree distributions of the variable and check nodes of its Tanner graph [5], [6]. For infinite code length, degree distributions that optimize the code performance for a given rate can be designed based on the probability density evolution of the messages passed between the two types of nodes in a belief propagation decoder [5], [6]. These optimal degree distributions are derived based on the assumptions that the code

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

graph is cycle-free and infinite number of decoding iterations is being carried out. However, for a code of finite length whose Tanner graph is cycle-free, either its minimum distance or rate is too small for practical applications [57]. Hence, for codes of finite lengths, the degree distributions designed for infinite code length must be adjusted.
This paper presents constructions of both regular and irregular structured LDPC codes with girth of at least . The paper is organized as follows: Section II gives a brief description of Euclidean geometries and their structural properties and introduces a method for their decomposition; Section III gives the constructions of two classes of regular LDPC codes based on the decomposition of Euclidean geometries; Section IV presents a masking technique for constructing regular and irregular LDPC codes and a simple method to convert the degree distributions designed for infinite code length to finite code length; and finally, Section V concludes the paper.

II. EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES AND THEIR DECOMPOSITIONS

This section gives a brief description of Euclidean geometries

over finite fields and their structural properties. Consider the

-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

over GF ,

where is a prime [56], [58]–[61]. This geometry consists

of points, lines, and hyperplanes. A point is an -tuple over

GF and hence there are

points in EG

.

The all-zero point is regarded as the origin of the geometry.

A line in EG

is a one-dimensional subspace or a coset

of a one-dimensional subspace of the vector space of all the

-tuples over GF . There are

(1)

lines in EG

and each line consists of points. Any two

points are connected by one and only one line. Any two lines

are either disjoint (i.e., no point in common) or they intersect at

one and only one point (i.e., one point in common). Lines corre-

sponding to cosets of the same one-dimensional subspace of

are said to be parallel. For each one-dimensional subspace of ,

there are

parallel lines and they form a parallel

bundle [52], [56], [60]. Any two parallel lines are disjoint. A par-

allel bundle of lines contains all the points of the geometry,

each point appears once and only once on only one line. The

lines in EG

can be partitioned into

parallel bundles.

For

, a -dimensional hyperplane (commonly

called a -flat) in EG

is either a -dimensional subspace

or a coset of a -dimensional subspace of the vector space .

Two -flats that do not have any point in common are said to

be disjoint. Flats corresponding to cosets of the same -dimen-

sional subspace of are said to be parallel. For each -dimen-

sional subspace of , there are

parallel flats and they

form a parallel bundle of -flats. These parallel -flats are dis-

joint and contain all the points of EG

, each point ap-

pears once and only once on only one of the flats in the parallel

bundle. For

, a -flat is a line.

Consider the -dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

over GF . Let

be a parallel bundle of

-

flats,

, in EG

. Each

-flat

in

consists of

points and

lines. (These lines contain only

the points in and the expression for follows from (1) by

replacing by

.) Suppose contains the origin of the

geometry. Then is an

-dimensional subspace of the

vector space of all the -tuples over GF . Each of the

other

-flats in

is then a coset of . There-

fore, if

is the set of points in , then for

of

consists of the set of points

where is a point not in any

other

-flat in

.

Since the

-flats in

are mutually

disjoint (in terms of points), two lines in two different

-flats, and , do not have any point in common.

There are lines in each of the

-flats and, therefore,

lines in

. It follows from (1) that there

are

lines in EG

not

contained in

. We denote this set of lines with

. Each line in contains one and only one point in each

-flat in

. This follows from the facts that:

1)

contains all the points of EG

; and 2)

if a line has two points on an

-flat in

,

the line is completely contained in . Since the

-flats

in

are disjoint, the lines in basically perform

the function of connecting them together. For this reason,

we call the lines in connecting lines with respect to the

parallel bundle

of

-flats. The con-

necting lines in can be partitioned into groups, denoted

. Each group, called

a connecting group with respect to

, consists of

lines which form a parallel bundle of lines in EG

.

A line in

consists of points in the form

. Since

and

,

then

. Let

be an -tuple over GF which consists of sections such

that the coordinates in the th section correspond to the

points of the th

-flat in

. Therefore, the

coordinates of correspond to the total points of the geometry

EG

. The incidence vector of a line in

is

defined as an -tuple, denoted , with coordinates ordered as

above such that

if and only if corresponds to a point

on and

otherwise. Since contains one and only one

point from each

-flat in

, each section

of contains one and only one -component (or has weight

one). Hence, the weight of is . For two different parallel

lines in

, their incidence vectors do not have any

-component in common.

For each connecting group

of lines in EG

with

, we form an

matrix whose rows are

the incidence vectors of the lines in

. It follows from

the section structure of the incidence vector of a connecting line

in

that consists of a row of

square

matrices,

. For

, each

is a permutation matrix. Therefore, is a

-regular ma-

trix and is called the incidence matrix of the connecting bundle

. Since two lines in

are parallel, no two

rows in have any -component in common.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODES: GEOMETRY DECOMPOSITION AND MASKING

123

Consider the following matrix:

...

...

... . . .

...

(2)

It is an

array of

permutation matrices. This

matrix simply corresponds to the parallel bundles of lines not

contained in the parallel bundle

of

-flats

in EG

. Since two lines in EG

are either disjoint

or they intersect at one and only one point, no two rows (or two

columns) of have more than one -component in common.

Therefore, satisfies the RC-constraint and consequently its

associated Tanner graph is free of cycles of length four and has

a girth of at least six.

We also define the matrix to be the transpose of , i.e.,

. Then, is a

array of

permutation

matrices. Since satisfies the RC-constraint, also satisfies

the RC-constraint. Therefore, the associated Tanner graph of

also has a girth of at least six.

III. TWO CLASSES OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

For

and

, we form the following

subarray of the array given by (2):

...

... . . . ...

(3)

which is a

array of

permutation matrices. The

column and row weights of

are and , respectively,

and hence

is a -regular matrix.

A. Type-I Regular LDPC Codes

The null space of

gives a -regular LDPC code

of length and rate at least

. This code is

called a Type-I regular LDPC code. Since

is a sub-

array of , it also satisfies the RC-constraint. This ensures

that the girth of the Tanner graph of

is at least . Since

each column has weight and no two columns of

have

more than one -component in common, no or fewer columns

of

can be added to zero. As a result, the minimum

distance of

is at least

[15]. From (3), we see that

consists of columns of permutation matrices, each

column consists of permutation matrices. If we add columns

of

, we obtain a column vector with sections. For

this column vector to be zero, each section of must be zero.

For each section of to be zero, must be even. Consequently,

the minimum distance of

must be even, i.e., it is at least

for odd and at least

for even . On the other

hand, since adding all the columns of any column of permutation

matrices in

yields the all-ones vector, then adding the

columns of two columns of permutation matrices in

yields the all-zeros vector. Therefore, the minimum distance of

is upper-bounded by .

For any given choice of

and , the above construc-

tion gives a sequence of LDPC codes of length

with

various rates and minimum distances for

, with

girth of at least . For a large , a code with a large minimum

distance can be obtained. For any given choice of

and

we obtain a sequence of LDPC codes of various lengths and

rates for

, with minimum distance at least

(or

).

LDPC codes constructed from geometry decomposition can

be decoded with various methods to provide a wide range of

tradeoffs among error performance, decoding complexity, and

speed. Iterative decoding gives close to Shannon-limit perfor-

mance but requires a large number of real computations and a

long decoding delay, especially for codes whose parity-check

matrices have large column and row weights. Besides iterative

decoding, Type-I regular LDPC codes can be decoded with one-

step majority-logic (OSMLG) decoding and weighted bit-flip-

ping (BF) decoding [15]. OSMLG decoding is a hard-decision

decoding [56], [58], [64]. Since no two rows in the parity-check

matrix

have more than one -component in common,

orthogonal check-sums for each received bit can be formed

[56], [64]. With OSMLG decoding based on these orthogonal

check-sums, the LDPC code with parity-check matrix

can correct up to

random errors. For large , OSMLG

decoding of a long Type-I LDPC code can achieve a signifi-

cant coding gain over the uncoded system. OSMLG decoding

requires only simple logic operations and can be implemented

with logic gates to achieve extremely high decoding speed. BF

decoding is also a hard-decision decoding method and was first

introduced by Gallager [1] for decoding LDPC codes based

on the check-sums computed from the hard-decision received

vector. It updates the hard-decision received vector iteratively

by flipping a set of properly selected received bits each time

(or one received bit at a time) in search of a valid codeword.

Its performance can be improved by including the reliability

values of the received bits in the check-sums, called weighted

check-sums, for selecting received bits to flip [15]. Since the

check-sums are weighted for decoding, it is referred to as the

weighted BF (WBF) decoding. A simple WBF decoding can be

found in [15]. Improved WBF decoding algorithms are recently

proposed by Liu and Pados [65], called LP WBF decoding al-

gorithm, and by Shan, Zhao, and Jiang [66], called SZJ WBF

decoding algorithm. WBF decoding requires some real-number

additions; however, it gives a much better performance than the

OSMLG decoding. Since it is iterative in nature, decoding delay

is its disadvantage.

In the following, we use an example to illustrate the construc-

tion of Type-I regular LDPC codes and to demonstrate the ef-

fectiveness and flexibility of these codes with various decoding

methods. In computing the error performances of codes in this

and other examples of this paper, we assume binary phase-shift

keying (BPSK) transmission over an additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN) channel and set the maximum number of de-

coding iterations to 100.

Example 1: Let

and

. Consider the

two-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG

. This geometry

consists of 4096 points and 4160 lines. Each line consists of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. (a) Error performances of the (4096; 3687) code given in Example 1 with both the SPA and LP WBF decodings. (b) Decoding convergence of the (4096; 3687) code given in Example 1. (Figure continued on the following page)

64 points. The lines in this geometry can be partitioned into matrices. Suppose we choose

and

. Take an

65 parallel bundles, each consists of 64 lines. Suppose we de- subarray

of permutation matrices from as in (3).

compose this geometry based on a parallel bundle

of Then,

is an

-regular

matrix over

lines. Then there are 64 connecting groups of lines,

GF . The null space of this matrix gives a

regular

with respect to

. The in- LDPC code with rate and minimum distance at least . The

cidence matrix of

consists of a row of sixty-four error performance of this code decoded with the SPA, the rate

permutation matrices,

. Based of decoding convergence, and the estimated error floor (using a

on (2), we form a

array of

permutation modified technique proposed in [67]) are shown in Fig. 1(a)–(c).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODES: GEOMETRY DECOMPOSITION AND MASKING

125

(c)

(d)
Fig. 1 (Continued). (c) The estimated error-floor of the (4096; 3687) code given in Example 1. (d) Error performances of the (4096; 3373) code given in Example 1 with three decoding methods: SPA, LP WBF, and OSMLG.

From Fig. 1(a), we see that at the bit-error rate (BER) of , the performance of the code with the LP WBF decoding algorithm is

code performs 1.3 dB from the Shannon limit. From Fig. 1(b), we also shown in Fig. 1(a). At the BER of , the code with the LP

see that the SPA decoding of the code converges very fast. At the WBF decoding algorithm performs 2 dB from the Shannon limit

BER of , the performance gap between five iterations and with a significant reduction in decoding complexity compared to

100 iterations is within 0.2 dB. Fig. 1(c) shows that the estimated the SPA.

error floor of the code is below

for BER and

for If we choose

and

, we can construct a

block-error rate (BLER)! No random-like LDPC code has been

LDPC code with rate and minimum distance

constructed and shown to have such a low error floor. The error at least . No random-like LDPC code can be constructed by
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

126

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 2. Error performance of the Type-II LDPC (8112; 7103) code given in Example 2.

computer search with such a large guaranteed minimum distance. The error performances of this code decoded with the SPA, OSMGL and LP WBF decodings are shown in Fig. 1(d). At the BER of , the code decoded with the SPA performs 1.6 dB from the Shannon limit. Since the code has such a large minimum distance, it is not expected to have a high error floor in its error performance with the SPA decoding.
B. Type-II Regular LDPC Codes

LDPC code of rate

and minimum distance at least . The

error performances of this code decoded with the SPA and the

SZJ WBF algorithm are shown in Fig. 2. We see that the code

decoded with the SPA has a beautiful sharp-drop waterfall per-

formance down to the BER of

. The code performs 1.3 and

1.53 dB from the Shannon limit at the BER of

and

,

respectively. The error floor of the code is estimated to be below

the BER of

. At the BER of , the performance gap

between the SZJ WBF algorithm and the SPA is about 1 dB.

For

and

, form a

sub-

array

of the array which is the transpose of .

is a

matrix with column and row weights

IV. CONSTRUCTION OF LDPC CODES BY MASKING

and , respectively. The null space of

gives an LDPC

code

of length , rate at least

, and min-

imum distance at least

(or

). Its Tanner graph has

a girth of at least . The code

is called a Type-II regular

LDPC code. For

is much greater than .

Therefore, the Type-II construction gives a wider range of code

lengths than the Type-I construction for given and ; how-

ever, the Type-I construction gives a wider range of minimum

distances.

Example 2: Consider the three-dimensional Euclidean ge-

ometry EG

over the prime field GF . Suppose we

decompose this geometry based on a parallel bundle

of -flats. The decomposition results in 169 connecting par-

allel bundles of lines, each consisting of 169 parallel lines in

EG

. Based on these connecting parallel bundles of lines,

A. Description of Masking

The parity-check matrix

(or

) of a regular

LDPC code constructed from geometry decomposition is com-

posed of an array of permutation matrices as submatrices. New

LDPC codes can be constructed by masking a selected set of

submatrices of

(or

). Masking reduces the

density of the parity-check matrix (or the number of edges in

its Tanner graph). As a result, the Tanner graph of the new code

obtained has either a smaller number of short cycles or a larger

girth.

The masking operation can be modeled mathematically as a

special matrix product. Let

be a

array

of submatrices of equal size. Let

be a

matrix

over GF . Define the following product of and

:

we can construct a

array of

permutation

matrices. Choose

and

. Take a

subarray

from . The subarray is a

matrix over

GF with column and row weights and , respectively. The

...

...

...

...

null space of

gives an

Type-II regular

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODES: GEOMETRY DECOMPOSITION AND MASKING

127

where

if

and

, an all-zeros

matrix of the same size as , if

.

The above product defines a masking operation in which a

set of submatrices of

is masked by the zero entries of

. The matrix is called the masking matrix,

the base

matrix, and the masked matrix. If both and

are

sparse matrices, then is a sparser matrix. If the Tanner graph

of

is free of cycles of length , the Tanner graph of the

masked matrix is also free of cycles of length , regardless

of the distributions of the -entries in the masking matrix .

If are permutation matrices, which is the case we consider

later, then they are cycle-free. In this case, regardless of the girth

of

, the girth of the Tanner graph of is at least equal

to that of . Since the size of is relatively small compared

to that of

, it is much easier to construct with a large

girth, say

and using the methods in [19], [22], [41].

The masking technique can be applied to the matrices

and

to yield masked matrices and ,

respectively. The null spaces of the masked matrices and

give LDPC codes

and , respectively, of length

, rate at least

, and girth at least . The masking

matrix can be either a regular matrix with constant column

and row weights or an irregular matrix with varying column or

row weights. If is a regular matrix with column weight

and row weight , then

and

are

-regular

LDPC codes with minimum distance at least

(or

).

If is irregular, then

and

are irregular LDPC codes

whose performance depends on the column and row weight

distributions of (or the degree distributions of the nodes of

the Tanner graph of ).

In the next two subsections, we first consider construction of

regular LDPC codes with regular masking, and then we consider

irregular masking.

B. Regular Masking

For given column weight and row weight , a masking

matrix can be constructed with computer search. However,

a class of regular masking matrices can be constructed alge-

braically. Let

, where is a positive integer. Suppose

we want to construct a regular

masking matrix with

column weight and row weight

. A -tuple

over GF is said to be primitive if cyclic shifts of give

different -tuples. Two primitive -tuples are said to be

nonequivalent if one cannot be obtained from the other by

cyclic shifting. To construct , we choose nonequivalent

primitive -tuples of weight , denoted

. For

each primitive -tuple , we form a

circulant with

and its right cyclic-shifts as rows. Then,

gives a

matrix with column and row weights and

, respectively. If is small compared to , then

is a sparse matrix and can be used as a masking matrix. The

nonequivalent primitive -tuples

are called

masking matrix generators. The girth of the Tanner graph of

depends on the choice of these generators.

Masking matrices in circulant form can also be constructed

by decomposing a circulant or a set of circulants. Let be a

circulant with column and row weights that satisfies the

RC-constraint. Since the column and row weights of a circulant

are the same, we say that has weight . For

,

let

be a set of positive integers such that

and

.

Then it is possible to decompose into

circulants with

weights

, respectively. Let be the first column

of . Split into columns of the same length , denoted

, such that the first -components of are put

in , the second -components are put in , and so on, and

the last -components are put in . For each new column

, we form a

circulant by cyclically shifting down-

ward times. This results in

circulants,

,

with weights

, respectively. These circulants are

called the descendants of [51]. It is clear that each descendant

satisfies the RC-constraint and any two distinct descendants

and arranged in a row also satisfy the RC-constraint,

called pairwise RC-constraint. The above decomposition, called

column decomposition, results in a row of circulants forming

the

matrix,

, that can be used as a

masking matrix for code construction. If the Tanner graph of

has a girth , then the girth of the Tanner graph of is at least

. In fact, decomposition of a circulant reduces the number of

its short cycles. If

, then is a

-regular masking matrix.

Circulants that satisfy the RC- or pairwise RC-constraint

can be constructed from finite geometries [15], [50]–[52],

[56]. For example, consider the three-dimensional Euclidean

geometry EG

. Let EG

denote the subgeometry

obtained from EG

by removing the origin and the lines

that pass through the origin. EG

contains 315 lines

not passing through the origin. The incidence vector of each

line in EG

is a -tuple and is primitive. There are

five nonequivalent primitive incidence vectors. Cyclically

shifting these five nonequivalent primitive incidence vectors,

we can form five

circulants, each has weight . These

circulants satisfy the pairwise RC-constraint. Any subset of

these circulants can be used to form a masking matrix whose

Tanner graph has a girth of at least .

To construct a regular LDPC code with masking, the rate and

length of the code depend on the choice of the base matrix;

however, the error performance of the code very much depends

on the choice of the masking matrix, in fact, its column and row

weights, and their ratio.

Example 3: Consider the two-dimensional Euclidean geom-

etry EG

over GF . Suppose we decompose this ge-

ometry based on a parallel bundle

of lines. The de-

composition results in 128 connecting parallel bundles of lines,

each parallel bundle consists of 128 lines, and each line con-

sists of 128 points. The incidence matrix of a connecting

parallel bundle

is composed of a row of one hundred

and twenty-eight

permutation matrices. We use the

above decomposition to form three base matrices for masking to

construct three LDPC codes of the same length with three dif-

ferent rates

and respectively. To construct these

codes, we choose the following sets of and : 1)

and

; 2)

and

; and 3)

and

.

Using (3), we form three base matrices,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

128

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 3. Error performances of three LDPC codes given in Example 3: “Mac” stands for MacKay code.

and

. The first base matrix

is an

obtain three masked matrices

,

array of

permutation matrices. It is an

-reg-

and

. The

ular

matrix. The second base matrix

null spaces of these three masked matrices give three regular

is a

array of

permutation matrices and is LDPC codes of length . The first code is an

a

-regular

matrix. The third base matrix code , the second code an

code , and the

is a

array of

permutation ma- third code an

code . The performances of

trices and is a

-regular

matrix. To mask these three codes decoded with the SPA are given in Fig. 3. At

these three base matrices, we construct three masking matrices, the BER of , they perform 0.95, 1.2, and 1.45 dB from

and as follows. The first masking matrix is a their respective Shannon limits and they do not have error floor

-regular

matrix. This masking matrix consists down to the BER of

( for the rate- code ).

of eight

circulants,

, formed

by using eight nonequivalent primitive -tuples with weight

and cyclically shifting each of them eight times. The second

masking matrix is a

-regular

matrix. This ma-

trix consists of four

circulants,

,

formed by using four nonequivalent primitive -tuples with

The performances of three computer generated MacKay codes [4] with rates , , and are also included in Fig. 3 for comparison. The codes constructed by masking perform as well as the computer generated codes. For rate– , the structured code constructed using masking performs slightly better below the BER of .

weight and cyclically shifting each of them 16 times. The

four nonequivalent primitive -tuples are chosen to make the

Tanner graph of free of cycles of length . The third masking

matrix is a -regular

matrix and consists of

two

circulants,

, formed by using two

nonequivalent primitive -tuples with weight and cyclically

shifting each of them 32 times. The two nonequivalent primitive

-tuples are

C. Irregular Masking

An irregular LDPC code is given by the null space of a sparse

matrix with varying column weights and/or varying row

weights. Consequently, its Tanner graph has varying variable

node degrees and/or varying check node degrees. The degree

distributions of these two types of nodes are expressed in

terms of two polynomials [5], [6],

and

, where and denote the fractions

and

of variable and check nodes in with degree , respectively,

and denote the maximum variable and check node de-

grees, respectively. Since the variable and the check nodes

of correspond to the columns and rows of the parity-check

respectively. The Tanner graph of is also free of cycles of matrix of the code,

and

also give the column

length 4.

and row weight distributions of . It has been shown that the

Masking the three base matrices

error performance of an irregular LDPC code depends on the

and

with ,

and , respectively, we variable- and check-node degree distributions of its Tanner

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODES: GEOMETRY DECOMPOSITION AND MASKING

129

graph [5], [6] and Shannon limit approaching LDPC codes can

be designed by optimizing the two degree distributions based

on the evolution of the probability densities of the massages

passed between the two types of nodes in a belief propagation

decoder. In code construction, once the optimal degree dis-

tributions

and

have been designed, a code graph

is constructed by connecting the variable nodes and check

nodes with edges based on the degree distributions. Since the

selection of edges in the code graph construction is not unique,

edge selection is carried out in a random manner by computer

search. During the edge-selection process, effort must be made

to ensure that the code graph does not contain cycles of short

lengths. Once a code graph is constructed, the corresponding

parity-check matrix is formed based on the edges that con-

nect the variable nodes and check nodes. The null space of

gives a random-like irregular LDPC code.

Geometry decomposition and the masking technique pre-

sented earlier can be used for constructing irregular LDPC

codes based on the degree distributions of variable and check

nodes of their Tanner graphs. For masking, the array

given by (3) (or the array

, which is the transpose of

) is used as the base matrix and the masking matrix

is constructed to have column and row weight distributions

identical (or close) to

and , respectively. Then the

masked matrix

(or

)

has column and row weight distributions identical to

and

. Suppose degree distributions

and

have been

designed for a given code rate and a code of desired length

is to be constructed.

Then code construction is carried out as follows.

1) Choose an Euclidean geometry EG

such that the

parameters and satisfy the constraints: a) If a Type-I

matrix

is used as the base matrix, then

and

; and b) If a Type-II matrix

is used as the base matrix, then

and

.

2) Choose and such that

and

are equal or close to and , respectively.

3) Construct a -regular

base ma-

trix

with

or .

4) Construct a

masking matrix with column and row

weight distributions (or close to)

and .

5) Form the masked matrix

. Then the

column and row weight distributions of are identical

(or close) to

and . The null space of gives

an irregular LDPC code of length and rate , whose

Tanner graph has variable and check node degree distribu-

tions

and , respectively.

The above construction of irregular LDPC codes by masking

and geometry decomposition is basically algebraic. It avoids

the effort of constructing a large random graph with computer

search. Since the size of the masking matrix is relatively small

compared to the size of the code graph, it is very easy to be

constructed with column and row weight distributions identical

(or close) to the degree distributions

and . Since the

Tanner graph of the base matrix is free of cycles of length ,

the Tanner graph of the constructed irregular LDPC code is also

free of cycles of length .

The design algorithm presented in [6] gives optimal degree

distributions for a given code rate only when the code length

approaches infinity and the code graph is cycle-free. However,

for a code of finite length, the distributions designed for infinite

code length must be adjusted. Optimal degree distributions, in

general, contain large fraction of degree- variable nodes. This

causes high error floor in the error performance of the code. To

partially overcome this problem, the following additional de-

sign rules are proposed in [6]: 1) the degree- variable nodes

are made cycle-free; 2) the degree- variable nodes are made to

correspond to the parity-check bits; and 3) the entire code graph

is free of cycles of length . In constructing irregular LDPC

codes based on geometry decomposition and masking, the re-

quirement of design rule 3) is automatically satisfied. The re-

quirement of design rule 2) can be achieved by putting the code

in systematic form. The requirement of design rule 1) is achiev-

able only if the number of degree- variable nodes is less than

the number of parity-check bits of the code to be constructed (or

the number of columns of weight is smaller than the number

of rows of the parity-check matrix). In this case, for construc-

tion based on masking and geometry decomposition, the re-

quirement of design rule 1) can be achieved by constructing the

masking matrix such that the th column of weight that cor-

responds to a degree- variable node has ones in rows numbers

and .

An irregular LDPC code of finite length whose Tanner graph

contains degree- variable nodes in general has an error floor.

Whether the error floor occurs at a high error rate or at a low

error rate depends on the number of degree- variable nodes.

The error floor can be pushed down by either reducing these

variable nodes or removing all of them. Converting part (or all)

of these variable nodes to nodes of the next higher degree, say

degree- , is one approach. Another simple approach is to in-

crease every degree in the degree distribution of variable nodes

by , i.e., degree- is converted to degree- , degree- is con-

verted to degree- , and so on. This

adjustment is

very effective for high-rate codes. If we adjust the variable-node

degree distribution, we must also adjust the check-node degree

distribution accordingly in order to keep the sum of check node

degrees the same as the sum of variable node degrees.

Example 4: The following optimal variable and check-node

degree distributions of a graph are designed for an irregular

LDPC code with rate and infinite length:

, and

. Suppose it is desired to construct an irregular

LDPC code with length

based on these degree dis-

tributions. Again for code construction using the masking tech-

nique, we use a Type-I matrix

given by (3) as the base

matrix. To satisfy the conditions given by Step 1 of the construc-

tion, we choose

and

. Then the geometry

for base matrix construction is EG

. To meet the condi-

tions given in Step 2, we choose

and

. With

the above choices of parameters,

and

, which are close to the desired code length

and rate. Based on (3), we construct the base matrix

using the decomposition of EG

, which is composed of

a

array of

permutation matrices and is a

-regular

matrix. Next we need to construct

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

130

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 4. Error performances of the three irregular LDPC codes given in Example 4.

TABLE I DESIRED COLUMN AND ROW WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF
Z MASKING MATRIX OF EXAMPLE 4

degree- . This conversion results in the following variable node degree distribution:

The new check node degree distribution,

, is slightly dif-

ferent from . Based on these new degree distributions, we

construct a new

masking matrix whose desired

a

masking matrix with column and row weight dis-

tributions close to the degree distributions

and . The

desired column and row weight distributions of are given in

Table I.

Masking

with , we obtain a masked matrix

with column and row weight distri-

butions close to

and . The null space of gives

a

irregular code with rate . From the first

coefficient

of

and the code length , we find

that the desired number of variable nodes of degree- is 1634.

Hence, the desired number of columns of weight in is

1634 which is larger than the number of rows of , 768.

Hence, it is impossible to make the degree- variable nodes

cycle-free and to confine them in the parity-check positions. The

error performance of this code decoded with the SPA is shown in

Fig. 4. We see that performs well above the BER of

,

but it has an error floor just below the BER of

. It has

a very poor block error performance. This shows that applying

optimal degree distributions designed for infinite code length

column and row weight distributions can be obtained from

Table I by simply changing the number of columns with

weight- from 25 to 11, the number of columns with weight–

from 25 to 39, and all the rest remains the same. Construct

by computer search. Masking the same base matrix

with , we obtained a new masked matrix

with column and row weight dis-

tributions close to

and

. The null space of

also gives a

irregular LDPC code with rate

. The number of columns of weight- in is 725 which

is smaller than the number of rows in . Hence, the de-

gree- variable nodes in the Tanner graph of can be made

cycle-free. The error performance of decoded with the SPA

is also shown in Fig. 4. We see that performs much better

than and has a much lower error floor. At the BER of ,

it performs only 1 dB from the Shannon limit.

Suppose we modify the variable-node degree distribution

using degree adjustment. This modification results in

the following variable node degree distribution:

for constructing codes of finite length may result in poor perfor-

mance in the low error rate region.

To improve the error performance of and push its error This adjustment increases the average degree of a variable node

floor down, we modify the variable-node degree distribution by . In order to keep the sum of check-node degrees the same

by converting the 865 excess variable nodes of degree- to as the sum of variable-node degrees, we have to modify the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODES: GEOMETRY DECOMPOSITION AND MASKING

131

Fig. 5. Error performance of the (7680; 6144) irregular LDPC code given in Example 5.

check-node degree distribution . This can be achieved by

increasing each degree in

by without changing its coef-

ficient. This results in a new check-node degree distribution

to the average check-node degree should be equal (or close) to

, where is the desired code rate. For masking construc-

tion of irregular LDPC code, this requires that the ratio of av-

erage column weight to the average row weight of the masking

matrix should be equal (or close) to

.

Example 5: Consider the decomposition of the geometry

Next, we construct a

masking matrix based on EG

given in Example 3. Suppose the desired code rate

and

. The desired column and row weight is . We set

and

. Then the base matrix

distributions of can be obtained from the weight distribu-

tions given in Table I for by simply changing the column

weights from

and to

and , respectively, and

the row weights from and to and , respectively.

Masking

with , we obtain a new masked matrix

. The null space of again gives a

is a

array of

permutation ma-

trices. Suppose we construct a

masking matrix with

12 columns of weight , 12 columns of weight , 24 columns

of weight , and 12 columns of weight . The average column

and row weights of are and , respectively. The ratio of

to is which is exactly equal to minus the desired

irregular code , whose performance decoded

with the SPA is also shown in Fig. 4. It performs very well. It

has no error floor in its bit performance all the way down to the

BER of

and no error floor in its block error perfor-

mance down to the block error rate of

. It outperforms

below the BER of and below the BER of . At

the BER of , it performs only 1.25 dB from the Shannon

code rate . Masking the base matrix with , we obtain a

masked matrix with column weights

and . The null space of gives a

irregular

code with rate . The performance of this code is shown in

Fig. 5. It performs 1 dB from the Shannon limit at the BER of

and 1.15 dB from the Shannon limit at the BER of .

There is no error floor down to the BER of .

limit.
For an irregular LDPC code to perform well (close to the Shannon limit) in the high BER region, its Tanner graph must contain low degree variable nodes, such as degree- and degree- . However, too many low-degree variable nodes may result in high error floor and poor performance in low-error-rate

Before we leave this section, we use an example to compare the performances of an irregular masked LDPC code and a regular masked LDPC code with similar length and rate.

Example 6: The following degree distributions are designed

for an LDPC code with desired length

and rate :

region as shown in last example. A good balance between low-

degree variable nodes and high-degree variable nodes can result

in very good performance over a wide range of BERs. For a good

balance, we found that the ratio of average variable-node degree

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

132

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

Fig. 6. Error performances of the (10272; 8988) irregular LDPC code given in Example 6 and the (10240; 8961) regular LDPC code given in Example 7.

TABLE II

and

DESIRED WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE MASKING MATRIX Z OF EXAMPLE 6

. Then it follows from (3) that the base matrix

is a

array of

permutation

matrices with column and row weights and , respec-

tively. For regular masking, we construct a

masking

matrix that consists of a row of eight

circulants,

. For

, each circulant is gen-

erated by a primitive -tuple over GF with weight . (The

circulant generators are chosen arbitrarily.) The masking matrix

has column and row weights and , respectively. Masking

To meet the constraints given in construction Steps 1 and 2,

with , we obtain a

-regular

we may choose

and masked matrix

. The null space of

. Then the code construction is based on the decom- gives a

regular LDPC code whose performance

position of the Euclidean geometry EG

. From (3), we with the SPA decoding is also shown in Fig. 6. At the BER of

form a

base matrix

with column

, it performs 0.9 dB from the Shannon limit. From Fig. 6,

and row weights and , respectively. The masking matrix we see that the irregular

code outperforms the

is a

matrix. Based on

and , the desired regular

code above the BER of

(within

column and row weight distributions of the masking matrix 0.15 dB) and has an error floor. However, the regular code

are given in Table II. Computer search is carried out to construct outperforms the irregular code below the BER of and has

a

masking matrix with column and row weight distri- no error floor down to the BER of .

butions close to the desired distributions. Again, in constructing

, the degree- variable nodes are put at the parity-bit positions

and are arranged so that no cycles exist among them. Masking

the base matrix

with , we obtain a masked ma-

trix

. The null space of gives a

irregular LDPC code with rate

. The

error performance of this code is shown in Fig. 6. The code per-

forms very close to the Shannon limit down to the BER of .

At the BER of , it performs only 0.75 dB from the Shannon

limit. However, the error floor occurs right below .

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented two algebraic methods, geometry decomposition and masking, for constructing structured regular and irregular LDPC codes with girth of at least
. Construction based on decomposition of finite Euclidean geometries results in two large classes of regular LDPC codes with various lengths, rates, and minimum distances. Codes in these two classes can be decoded with various methods. These decoding methods range from high-performance soft-input and

Example 7: Next we construct a regular masked LDPC soft-output iterative decoding at one end to low-complexity

code with length and rate close to those of the above irregular hard-decision one-step majority-logic decoding at the other

LDPC code. For code construction, we use the end, while weighted bit-flipping decoding offers a good tradeoff

decomposition of EG

given in Example 3. Set

between error performance and decoding complexity. Codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODES: GEOMETRY DECOMPOSITION AND MASKING

133

with reasonably large minimum distances decoded with the SPA can achieve low BER with very low error floor. Long codes with very large minimum distances decoded with one-step majority-logic decoding can achieve very large coding gains over the uncoded BPSK with simple decoding complexity and high speed. The second method, masking the arrays of permutation matrices constructed from the decomposition of Euclidean geometries results in additional new classes of LDPC codes. Numerical results show that LDPC codes constructed by both regular and irregular maskings perform very well with the SPA and close to the Shannon limit and with low error floor. A method using masking technique for constructing irregular LDPC codes from the degree distributions of variable and check nodes of the code graphs has been proposed. This method greatly simplifies the construction of long irregular codes and avoids the complex process of random edge selection. It makes the construction process algebraic. The masking technique can be applied to arrays of permutation matrices constructed by other algebraic methods to generate LDPC codes as long as the arrays or the masking matrices are free of short cycles. Also included in the paper are simple methods to adjust the degree distributions of graph nodes derived based on infinite code length and cycle-free Tanner graph for constructing irregular codes of finite lengths.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. In. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[5] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[7] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[8] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[9] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–525, Sep./Oct. 1995.
[10] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Engr., Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, Apr. 1996.
[11] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[12] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[13] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[14] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority-logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931–937, Jun. 2000.

[15] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[16] L. Ping, W. K. Leung, and N. Phamdo, “Low density parity check codes with semi-random parity check matrix,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 38–39, Jan. 1999.
[17] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved designs using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[18] A. Ventura and M. Chiani, “Design and evaluation of some high-rate irregular low-density parity-check codes,” Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, vol. 2, pp. 990–994, Nov. 2001.
[19] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[20] I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Graph-theoretic construction of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 171–173, Apr. 2003.
[21] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently-encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[22] L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A trellisbased method for removing cycles from bipartite graphs and construction of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 443–445, Jul. 2004.
[23] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Construction of low density parity check codes: A geometric approach,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 137–140.
[24] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes: Construction based on finite geometries,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, San Francisco, CA, Nov. /Dec. 2000, vol. 2, pp. 825–829.
[25] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[26] R. M. Tanner, “Spectral graphs for quasicyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 226.
[27] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Communication Theory and Applications, Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.
[28] P. O. Vontobel and R. M. Tanner, “Construction of codes based on finite generalized quadrangles for iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 223.
[29] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of regular and irregular LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 4.
[30] H. Tang, Y. Kou, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries: Old, new, majority-logic and iterative decodings,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Communication Theory and Applications, Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 381–386.
[31] S. Lin, H. Tang, and Y. Kou, “On a class of finite geometry low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 24.
[32] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Regular low-density parity-check codes from combinatorial designs,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Cairns, Australia, Sep. 2001, pp. 90–92.
[33] B. Vasic, “High-rate low-density parity-check codes based on antiPasch affine geometries,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, New York, Apr./May 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1332–1336.
[34] E. Eleftheriou and S. Ölcer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, New York, Apr./May 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1752–1757.
[35] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[36] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Construction of low density parity check codes: A combinatoric design approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun/Jul. 2002, p. 311.
[37] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
[38] B. Vasic, B. Kurtas, and A. Kuznetsov, “LDPC codes based on mutually orthogonal Latin rectangles and their application in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pt. I, pp. 2346–2348, Sep. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

[39] Y. Kou, J. Xu, H. Tang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On circulant low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 200.
[40] S. Lin, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and H. Tang, “Hybrid construction of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002, pp. 1149–1158.
[41] J. Kim, U. N. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, and V. Pless, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with girth at least six,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002, pp. 1024–1031.
[42] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 79–81, Feb. 2003.
[43] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[44] J. Xu and S. Lin, “A combinatoric superposition method for constructing low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 30.
[45] W. Matsumoto and H. Imai, “Irregular low-density parity-check code design based on integer lattices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 3.
[46] A. Sridharan, D. Sridhara, D. J. Costello, Jr., and T. E. Fuja, “A construction for irregular low density parity check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 4.
[47] N. Kamiya and M. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic codes from a finite affine plane,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 57.
[48] R. Omrani, H.-F. Lu, O. Moreno, and P. V. Kumar, “Construction of low-density parity check codes from optical orthogonal codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 60.
[49] M. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 150.
[50] L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasicyclic LDPC codes based on the minimum weight codewords of Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 239.
[51] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near Shannon limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.

[52] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.
[53] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of low density parity check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268, Jun. 2004.
[54] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Codes for iteratively decoding from partial geometries,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 236–243, Feb. 2004.
[55] Z.-W. Li, L. Chen, L.-Q. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[56] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[57] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2173–2181, Sep. 1999.
[58] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon, Jr., Error Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.
[59] R. D. Carmichael, Introduction to the Theory of Groups of Finite Order. New York: Dover, 1956.
[60] H. B. Mann, Analysis and Design of Experiments. New York: Dover, 1949.
[61] I. Blake and R. C. Mullin, The Mathematical Theory of Coding. New York: Academic, 1975.
[62] C. J. Colbourn and H. J. Dinitz, The CRC Handbook of Combinatorial Designs. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 1996.
[63] H. Tang, “Codes on Finite Geometries,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Comp. Eng, Univ.California, Davis, 2002.
[64] J. L. Massey, Threshold Decoding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[65] Z. Liu and D. A. Pados, “Low complexity decoding of finite geometry LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Anchorage, AK, May 2003, vol. 4, pp. 2713–2717.
[66] M. Shan, C. Zhao, and M. Jiang, “An improved weighted bit-flipping algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” Proc. IEE–Commun., vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 919–922, Dec. 2005.
[67] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:16:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

