IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2007

235

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Alphabet Partitioning Techniques for Semiadaptive Huffman Coding of Large Alphabets
Dan Chen, Yi-Jen Chiang, Nasir Memon, and Xiaolin Wu
Abstract—Practical applications that employ coding for large alphabets often partition the alphabet set into two or more layers and encode each symbol by using some suitable prefix coding for each layer. In this paper, we formulate the problem of finding an alphabet partitioning for the design of a two-layer semiadaptive code as an optimization problem, and give a solution based on dynamic programming. However, the complexity of the dynamic-programming approach can be quite prohibitive for a long sequence and a very large alphabet size. Hence, we also give a simple greedy heuristic algorithm whose running time is linear in the length of the input sequence, irrespective of the underlying alphabet size. Although our dynamic programming and greedy algorithms do not provide a globally optimal solution for the alphabet-partitioning problem, experimental results demonstrate that superior prefix coding schemes for large alphabets can be designed using our new approach.
The authors are with the Department of Computer and Information Science, Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, NY 11201 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.887792

One such setting is developed in this paper, for the purpose of analyzing the distribution of short cycles and the structure of stopping and trapping sets in Tanner graphs of LDPC codes based on idempotent and symmetric Latin squares. The parity-check matrices of LDPC codes based on Latin squares have a special form that allows for connecting the combinatorial parameter of the codes with the number of certain subrectangles in the Latin squares. Subrectangles of interest can be easily identified, and in certain instances, completely enumerated. The presented study can be extended in several different directions, one of which is concerned with modifying the code-design process in order to eliminate or reduce the number of configurations bearing a negative influence on the performance of the code. Another application of the results includes determining to which extent a configuration governs the behavior of the bit-error rate curve in the waterfall and error-floor regions.
The authors are with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80302 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.887791
A Generic Approach to QoS-Based Transceiver Optimization
Martin Schubert and Holger Boche

The Capacity Region of Frequency-Selective Gaussian Interference Channels Under Strong Interference
Seong Taek Chung and John M. Cioffi
Abstract—This paper presents the capacity region of frequency-selective Gaussian interference channels under the condition of strong interference, assuming an average power constraint per user. First, a frequency-selective Gaussian interference channel is modeled as a set of independent parallel memoryless Gaussian interference channels. Using non-frequency-selective results, the capacity region of frequency-selective Gaussian interference channels under strong interference is expressed mathematically. Exploiting structures inherent in the problem, a dual problem is constructed for each independent memoryless channel, in which both mathematical and numerical analysis are performed. Furthermore, three suboptimal methods are compared with the capacity-achieving coding and power-allocation scheme. Iterative waterfilling, a suboptimal scheme, provides close-to-optimum performance, and has a distributed coding and power-allocation scheme which are attractive in practice.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-9515 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.887788

Abstract—We propose a generic framework for jointly optimizing the transmit power allocation and the adaptive receive strategies in a multiuser network with individual quality-of-service (QoS) requirements. The QoS is assumed to be a one-to-one mapping of the signal-to-interference-plusnoise ratio. The feasibility of certain target QoS depends on the mutual interference and on a given sum-power constraint. This coupling can be modeled by interference functions, which determine how the transmit power causes interference to the individual users. We show fundamental properties, like continuity and feasibility, for the most general case when the functions are defined by axioms. Additional properties are shown for the case when the interference functions are based on a parameter-dependent coupling matrix, which allows applying techniques from the theory of nonnegative matrices. We derive a class of iterative algorithms, which exploit the matrix structure. The proposed interation converges monotonically to the global optimum. Starting from the same initialization, it is better than the well-known fixed-point iteration. It can achieve any set of positive QoS values within the QoS feasible region with arbitrary accuracy.
Martin Schubert is with Fraunhofer Institute HHI, 10587 Berlin, Germany. Holger Boche is with Mobile Communications, Heinrich-Hertz-Institut, Berlin 10587, Germany. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.887790
Flip CRC Modification for Message-Length Detection

LDPC Codes Based on Latin Squares: Cycle Structure, Stopping, and Trapping Set Analysis
Stefan Laendner and Olgica Milenkovic
Abstract—It is well known that certain combinatorial structures in the Tanner graph of a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code exhibit a strong influence on its performance under iterative deciding. These structures include cycles, stopping/trapping sets, and parameters such as the diameter of the code. In general, it is very hard to find a complete characterization of such configurations in an arbitrary code, and even harder to understand the intricate relationships that exist between these entities. It is, therefore, of interest to identify a simple setting in which all the described combinatorial structures ca be enumerated and studied within a joint framework.

Shin-Lin Shieh, Po-Ning Chen, and Yunghsiang S. Han
Abstract—Cyclic redundancy check (CRC) bits that are conventionally used for error detection have recently found a new application in the universal mobile telecommunications system standard for message-length detection of variable-length message communications. It was anticipated that the CRC bits, when they are co-worked with the inner convolutional code, can be used to detect the receiver-unaware message length without much degradation in their error-detection capability. This is, unfortunately, not true when the offset or difference between the wrong detected length and the true length is small. Two improvements, i.e., the DoCoMo’s reverse-CRC method, were accordingly proposed. In this paper, we revisited the flip CRC modification by considering the impact of joint decoding of the CRC code and the convolutional code. By generalizing the condition for the selection of the flip polynomials, we found that

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:15:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

