2017 IEEE 35th International Conference on Computer Design

Exploiting Process Variation for Read Performance Improvement on LDPC Based Flash Memory Storage Systems
Qiao Li∗, Liang Shi∗ , Yejia Di∗, Yajuan Du†, Chun J. Xue† and Edwin H.M. Sha∗ ∗College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Shapingba, Chongqing, China
† Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong Email:{qiaoli045, shi.liang.hk, yejia.di.cqu, dyjcityu2013}@gmail.com, jasonxue@cityu.edu.hk, edwinsha@gmail.com

Abstract—With the development of bit density and technology scaling, the process variation (PV) has become much severe on NAND flash memory. As PV presents reliability among flash blocks, which causes read performance variation to read data on different blocks. This paper proposes to improve read performance of LDPC based flash memory by exploiting the reliability characteristics of PV. First, a block grouping approach is proposed to classify the flash blocks based on their reliability. Then, a read data placement scheme is proposed, which is designed to place read-hot data on flash blocks with high reliability and move read-cold data to blocks with low reliability. Experiment results show that, with negligible overhead, the proposed scheme is able to significantly improve the read performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of bit densities and technology sizes, the cost of NAND flash memories has been significantly reduced [1][2]. In addition, 3D NAND flash memory has been introduced to further increase the storage density by stacking cells in layers [1][3]. However, recent works presented that flash memory, including 3D NAND, is experiencing degraded reliability and significant process variation (PV) [4][5][6][7]. To cope with the reliability issue, error correction codes (ECC) with high error correction capability have been suggested. By decoding data with soft information, low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) are able to provide stronger error correction capability over traditional ECC. Therefore, LDPC has been equipped in the state-of-the-art flash memory [4][5][8][9]. LDPC has several drawbacks on flash memory, including bad read performance, high sensing power consumption, and increased read disturbance, especially for the data with high raw bit error rates (RBER) [4][8]. This paper presents an approach to improve read performance on LDPC based NAND flash memory.
Most recent works proposed to reduce the read latency through minimizing the number of sensing levels. For example, the works from [5][8][9] proposed to decrease sensing levels by exploiting specific flash error characteristics. Other works [4][10] proposed to exploit workload access characteristics or data compression to reduce RBER of data.
Liang Shi is the corresponding author: shi.liang.hk@gmail.com. This work is supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (106112016CDJZR185512), NSFC (61772092, 61402059, 61472052 and 61572411), National 863 Programs 2015AA015304 and Huawei Innovation Research Program (HIRP).

However, one of the key characteristics, PV, which has large impact on the reliability of flash memory, has not been well exploited for read performance improvement. Significant PV has been acknowledged for the state-of-the-art flash memory [6][11]. The characteristics of PV are well studied by several recent works, they proposed to exploit it for wear leveling or write performance improvement [6][12][11][13]. None of these works considered the PV impact on read performance for LDPC based flash memory.
Read latency of LDPC based flash memory is highly related to the reliability features of flash blocks. Reading data from more reliable blocks (with lower RBER) incurs smaller latency than reading data from less reliable blocks (with higher RBER). Hence, this work is the first in exploiting PV for read performance improvement on LDPC based flash memory. The work includes two parts. The first part is a flash block grouping approach, which is designed to classify the flash blocks based on their reliability characteristics. The second part is a PVaware read data placement scheme, which is designed to place read data based on their hotness. For read-hot data, they are placed on the group with high reliable blocks, and for readcold data, they are placed on the low reliable group. With the two approaches, the read performance can be significantly improved. This paper has the following contributions:
• Propose a flash block grouping approach to classify the flash blocks based on their reliability;
• Propose a read data placement schemes by placing readhot data on high reliable blocks and read-cold data on low reliable blocks;
• Conduct experiments to verify the effectiveness of the proposed approach.
In the following, Section II presents the background and motivation. Section III presents the proposed approaches. Experiments are presented in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
NAND flash memory uses the amount of charges stored in floating gates or charge traps to represent data. To store n bits in a flash cell, 2n different voltage states are defined. Figure 1 is an example for flash memory with 2 bits per cell, which is realized with 4 voltage states. During programming operations, charges are injected into the flash cell, to move each cell to one of the 4 voltage states. The distribution of each

1063-6404/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE

681

DOI 10.1109/ICCD.2017.118

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:39:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

voltage state and noise margins between neighboring voltage states directly impact the reliability of data stored on flash memory. With more bits stored and less charges used in a flash cell, the noise margins become narrower. This is translated to higher RBER and hence degraded reliability. In order to make up the degraded reliability, error correction codes (ECC) with stronger capability have been suggested, such as low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) [4][9][5].

(with higher RBER). This work will exploit the variations to place data for read performance improvement.
Figure 3 shows the comparison of two data placement schemes. For traditional PV-unaware scheme, data are placed randomly, where read-hot data may be placed on low reliable blocks, which will affect read performance badly. With awareness of PV, if read-hot data are placed on high reliable blocks, the overall read performance will be improved.









9WK

5HDG+RW 'DWD

5HDG&ROG 'DWD

39 GLVWULEXWLRQ

Fig. 1. Flash memory cell with 2 bits per cell and four voltage states.

The error correction capability of LDPC highly depends on the accuracy of input probability information. More accurate probability information is gained by conducting more sensing voltage levels, which can provide a stronger error correction capability. Figure 2 presents an example. When the voltage distributions of different states have overlaps between neighboring states, the data will experience high error rates. In order to decode the data, more sensing voltage levels will be used to differentiate the states. For example, in Figure 2, LDPC may use 9 sensing voltage levels (3 for each pair of neighboring states) to decode the data. In this case, the voltage distributions are partitioned into more regions. More information bits (4 bits in Figure 2 compared to the 2 bits in Figure 1) are required to represent the data. Therefore, compared to decode data with low RBER, decoding data with high RBER incurs increased read latency for LDPC based flash memory.















9WK







Fig. 2. More voltage sensing levels and information bits are required for LDPC decoding.

PV is natural characteristics of semiconductors in NAND flash memory [12][14][15][16]. During the manufacture process, some memory cell device parameters, such as oxide thickness and gate width and length, present great variability, which leads to large reliability variations among flash blocks [17]. The variations are especially severe with continuous technology scaling and bit density increasing on flash memory. State-of-the-art work has tested PV on real flash chips and presented that, the reliability variations among flash blocks can be more than 10 times [12][14][11]. The variation exists among flash cells [7], pages [15], and blocks [14][11][16]. In this work, we focus on inter-block reliability variation. Since read latency of LDPC based flash memory depends on the reliability of flash blocks, the read performance will experience great variations among different blocks as well [4][9]. Reading data from more reliable blocks (with lower RBER) has much better performance than reading data from less reliable blocks

VWURQJ

ZHDN

D 39XQDZDUH

VWURQJ

ZHDN

E 39DZDUH

Fig. 3. Comparison of PV-unaware and PV-aware data placement schemes.

III. PV-AWARE READ DATA PLACEMENT
In this section, a PV aware read data placement scheme is proposed to improve read performance of flash memory. The basic idea is to place read-hot data on high reliable blocks. In the following, we first discuss the flash block grouping approach. Second, with the knowledge of reliability for each block, the data placement scheme is proposed. Finally, the overhead analysis is presented. Figure 4 shows an overview of the proposed approach.
A. Flash Block Grouping
Read latency is used for block grouping on LDPC based flash memory. There are at least two reasons for this metric. First, LDPC is able to differentiate blocks with different reliability. As presented in Section II, the read latency of LDPC based flash memory is highly correlated with the RBER of the accessed data. Accessing data from flash blocks with different reliability incurs different read latency. Second, this work is proposed for read performance improvement on LDPC based flash memory. Using read latency as the metric is more convenient. With the wearing of flash memory, the reliability of flash blocks will be changed. Flash blocks will be classified online during read operations.
LDPC has been designed to support several levels of voltage sensing, where different levels result in different sensing latency. In this case, the metric is measured by counting the number of sensing levels used for the decoding process. In this work, the grouping scheme is designed at the flash block granularity for simplicity. For each block, the read latency of the first accessed page in the block is used to assess its reliability level. Based on the read latency, the block is added to the corresponding groups. Take Figure 4 as an example. There are M groups, where group 1 is the most reliable group and contains the most reliable blocks, and group M is the least reliable one. For the state-of-the-art solid state drives which are organized with multiple chips, the grouping scheme is conducted on each single flash chip.

682 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:39:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6WHS  5HDG+RW 'DWD 3DJH 0LJUDWLRQ

&RXQW 

&RXQW 7
Ă

*URXS  +LJK

*URXS 

*URXS i

6WHS  5HDG&ROG 'DWD %ORFN 0LJUDWLRQ

5HOLDELOLW\

)ODVK %ORFN

)ODVK 3DJH

Ă
*URXS M
/RZ

Fig. 4. Overview of the proposed schemes.

B. Read Data Placement Scheme
In this part, the read data placement scheme among groups is presented, which includes two parts. Part 1: Migrating Read-Hot Data to High Reliable Group. First, a threshold T is applied for read hotness identification. A data page being read for T times is identified as read-hot. If a data page has been read for T time, it is likely to have more read requests and it has a high probability to be read-hot. Once a data page in group i (i > 1) is identified as read-hot, it will be migrated to the group with higher reliability, group i−1, as shown in Figure 4. The migration process works as follows. First, find a free page in group i − 1. If there are no free page in group i − 1, Part 2 presented in the following is executed to allocate free pages. Second, the identified read hot data is copied to the free page. Finally, the original page is invalidated and the mapping information for the data is updated to the new address. After migration, its read count is reset to 0. When the read count reaches T again, the data will be migrated to a even high reliable group. For the first time when a data page is written, the default data allocation scheme in flash memory controller is used [18].
Part 2: Migrating Read-Cold Data Out of High Reliable Group. When a high reliable group has no space for read-hot data migration from low reliable groups, read-cold data will be selected and migrated out of this group. CLOCK algorithm [19] is adopted to select the read-cold data in high reliable groups. The granularity for migration out should be flash block since block is the unit of flash erase operations. Only after a block is erased, the space can be recycled for new read-hot data.
The CLOCK algorithm based migration out works as follows. All blocks in each group are maintained in a CLOCK structure, except for the least reliable group M . For each block, a reference bit is used. The reference bit is set once a read occurs on the corresponding block. The block with reference bit unset is selected and the data in the block is migrated out of the group. During this process, the valid pages in the block are first copied to lower reliable groups. Then, the block is erased and new read-hot data can be migrated in.
C. Overhead Analysis
The implementation has two types of overhead: storage and firmware overhead. The storage overhead in flash controller includes the grouping information, a read counter for each mapping entry, and a CLOCK structure for each group. For

the grouping information, 2 bits are required for each block for the 3-group scheme. Assume a 128GB flash memory with 4KB size pages and 64 pages per block, then the size of the grouping information is 128KB. For the read counter, assume that there are 10% of entries are cached in the controller, then the size of the counters is no more than 800KB when the threshold T is set as 3. For the CLOCK algorithm, the overhead is no more than 1MB. Totally, the implementation storage overhead is only around 2MB for the proposed approaches. Note that all these information are maintained in the flash controller and do not need to be persistent. The firmware overhead includes the computation involved in read counter management, CLOCK algorithm and data migration. The overhead is small as presented in the experiment.
IV. EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS
A. Experiment Setup
The trace driven simulator, Disksim [20] with SSD model [18] is used in the experiment. The simulated system is configured with two bits per cell NAND flash memory. A 128GB solid state drive is configured with eight channels, each of which has eight chips and four planes per chip. Each plane has 2048 blocks and each block has 64 4KB pages.

TABLE I BLOCK GROUPING SCHEMES, SENSING LEVELS AND ACCESS LATENCIES.

Sensing Level 1-Group 2-Group 3-Group 4-Group 7-Group

1

2

3

1

1

2

1

2

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

3

4

6

7

Distributions (%)

9 12.5 21.3 19.6 17.6 12.9 7

Sensing latency (μs) 25 50 Transfer latency (μs) 20 30

75 100 125 150 175 40 40 40 50 50

In the experiment, 5 grouping schemes are used to evaluate the proposed approach, which are presented in Table I. In the table, the first row is the number of sensing levels supported by LDPC, and the second to sixth rows are the 5 grouping schemes for the proposed scheme. The 1-group scheme represents the traditional PV-unaware scheme, where all blocks are in one group. The proposed read data placement scheme works on the other grouping schemes. Take the 3group scheme as an example. Blocks that are decoded by LDPC with 1 sensing level are added into the first group. Blocks that are decoded with 2, 3 or 4 sensing levels are added

683 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:39:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Read response time
Percentage of migration operations

1-Group

2-Group

3-Group

4-Group

7-Group

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0 PROJ_0 HM_0 STG_0 WDEV_0 RSRCH_0 SRC2_0 SRC1_2 HM_1 Average (a) Normalized read response time

7%

6%

Read-hot data migration to high reliable groups

5%

Read-cold data migration out of high reliable groups

4%

3%

2%

1%

0% 2 347 2 347 2 347 2 347 2 347 2 347 2 347 2 347
PROJ_0 HM_0 STG_0 WDEV_0 RSRCH_0 SRC2_0 SRC1_2 HM_1

(b) Migration cost

Fig. 5. Read performance and migration comparison of 5 grouping schemes.

into the second group, and other blocks are added into the third group. Gaussian distribution is used to formulate different PV following previous works [12][16]. In the experiment, the distributions from previous work [12], which are listed at the “distributions” row in Table I, are used.
B. Experimental Results
Figure 5(a) is the normalized read response time for the 5 block group schemes, from which two conclusions can be made. First, the proposed approach achieves significant read response time improvement compared with the PV-unaware scheme, by 60% on average. Second, the read response time for the different grouping schemes has little difference. The smaller number of groups has slightly more benefits. The reason is that it takes less steps for a read-hot data to be migrated to the most reliable groups for smaller number of group schemes.
To evaluate the additional wearing, the percentages of data migration introduced write operations are collected by varying the number of groups. The migration costs are presented in Figure 5(b), where the migration operations are normalized to the total requests. In the results, we separate the costs for the read-hot migration to high reliable groups and the readcold data migration out of high reliable groups. We find that first, migration for read-hot data is much higher than readcold migration. Second, the costs are lower for most traces with larger groups. Third, the total costs are negligible, 2% on average. Overall, this cost is small.
V. CONCLUSIONS
State-of-the-art NAND flash memory is experiencing degraded reliability and significant PV. LDPC is now applied to solve the reliability issue, which introduces significant read performance degradation. This paper is the first in proposing a data placement scheme to improve flash read performance. Firstly, we propose a read latency based flash block grouping scheme to classify flash blocks with different reliability. Secondly, a read data placement scheme is proposed to place read-hot data to the high reliable blocks and read-cold data to the low reliable blocks. Our simulation results show that the proposed approach is effective in gaining great performance improvement of flash memory.

REFERENCES
[1] D. Kang, W. Jeong, C. Kim, D.-H. Kim, and Y. S. Cho, “7.1 256gb 3b/cell v-nand flash memory with 48 stacked wl layers,” in ISSCC ’16, 2016.
[2] S. Lee, J.-y. Lee, I.-h. Park, J. Park, and S.-w. Yun, “A 128Gb 2b/cell NAND flash memory in 14nm technology with tPROG=640ms and 800MB/s I/O rate,” in ISSCC ’16, 2016.
[3] J.-W. Im, W.-P. Jeong, D.-H. Kim, S.-W. Nam, and D.-K. Shim, “7.2 A 128Gb 3b/cell V-NAND flash memory with 1Gb/s I/O rate,” in ISSCC ’15, 2015.
[4] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, K. Wu, C. Ji, Q. Zhuge, and E. Sha, “Access characteristic guided read and write cost regulation for performance improvement on flash memory,” in FAST ’16, 2016.
[5] M. Zhang, F. Wu, X. He, P. Huang, S. Wang, and C. Xie, “REAL: A retention error aware LDPC decoding scheme to improve NAND flash read performance,” in MSST ’16, 2016.
[6] R. A. Pletka and S. Tomic´, “Health-binning: Maximizing the performance and the endurance of consumer-level NAND flash,” in SYSTOR ’16, 2016.
[7] X. Jimenez, D. Novo, and P. Ienne, “Wear unleveling: improving NAND flash lifetime by balancing page endurance,” in FAST ’14, 2014.
[8] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” TCSI ’13, vol. 60, no. 9, Sept 2013.
[9] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in FAST ’13, 2013.
[10] N. Xie, G. Dong, and T. Zhang, “Using lossless data compression in data storage systems: Not for saving space,” TC ’11, 2011.
[11] Y.-J. Woo and J.-S. Kim, “Diversifying wear index for mlc nand flash memory to extend the lifetime of ssds,” in EMSOFT ’13, 2013.
[12] Y. Pan, G. Dong, and T. Zhang, “Error rate-based wear-leveling for nand flash memory at highly scaled technology nodes,” TVLSI ’13, 2013.
[13] Y. Di, L. Shi, K. Wu, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting process variation for retention induced refresh minimization on flash memory,” in DATE ’16, 2016.
[14] M. C. Yang, Y. H. Chang, C. W. Tsao, and P. C. Huang, “New era: New efficient reliability-aware wear leveling for endurance enhancement of flash storage devices,” in DAC ’13, 2013.
[15] D. Wei, L. Deng, L. Qiao, and P. Zhang, “PEVA: A page endurance variance aware strategy for the lifetime extension of NAND flash,” TVLSI ’16, vol. 24, no. 5, 2016.
[16] L. Shi, Y. Di, M. Zhao, C. J. Xue, K. Wu, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Exploiting process variation for write performance improvement on nand flash memory storage systems,” TVLSI ’16, 2016.
[17] A. Spessot, A. Calderoni, P. Fantini, A. S. Spinelli, C. M. Compagnoni, F. Farina, A. L. Lacaita, and A. Marmiroli, “Variability effects on the VT distribution of nanoscale NAND Flash memories,” in IRPS ’10, 2010.
[18] N. Agrawal, V. Prabhakaran, T. Wobber, J. D. Davis, M. S. Manasse, and R. Panigrahy, “Design tradeoffs for SSD performance,” in ATC ’08, 2008.
[19] W. Stallings and G. K. Paul, Operating systems: internals and design principles. prentice hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1998, vol. 3.
[20] J. S. Bucy, J. Schindler, S. W. Schlosser, and G. R. Ganger, “The disksim simulation environment version 4.0 reference manual,” in Parallel Data Laboratory, Carnegie Mellon University, 2008.

684 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:39:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

