The 2017 4th International Conference on Systems and Informatics (ICSAI 2017)

Modified Decoding Algorithm Of LDPC Codes For Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation

Ying-wei LU Nanjing University Of Posts And Telecommunications
NanjingˈChina

Ze-liang Zheng, Xiao-yun HOU Nanjing University Of Posts And Telecommunications
NanjingˈChina

Abstract—Key extraction based on wireless channel- characteristics (Physical-Layer Key) is the new technology to ensure communication security. To solve the problem that the channel characteristics are not completely consistent in the process of key generation, low density parity check (LDPC) codes was proposed. But due to the process of the traditional decoding algorithm of LDPC codes, the computation of check nodes renew is too high and the efficiency of key reconciliation is too low. To overcome this problem, we propose the modified decoding algorithm of LDPC codes that combine traditional decoding algorithm and Offset-base decoding algorithm. This algorithm can reduce the computational complexity efficiently, and improve the efficiency of key reconciliation. Finally, the simulation results demonstrate that, the BER and success ratio of the key reconciliation is improving.
Keywords—Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation ˗ TDD wireless environment˗LDPC Codes˗Offset-Base Decoding algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Because of the reciprocity of channel in the time division duplex (TDD) wireless environment. Two legitimate users Alice and Bob can extract identical channel-characteristics information in coherence time,and use this information to generate the key independently. Due to eavesdropper Eve can’t achieve channelcharacteristics information exactly, key get great security [1] - [3].
But Alice and Bob can’t obtain the completely consistent channel-characteristics information because of the tiny time delay in coherence time and noise in the channel. To solve these problems, key reconciliation is indispensable. Binary search is discussed, although binary search is the simplest method of error correction, but the efficiency of this method is the lowest. A pretreatment scheme based on parity check codes is provided in [5], parity inconsistent code blocks are eliminated, the inconsistency of the secret key is reduced, but this method can’t eliminate error codes completely.
The key reconciliation method in this paper uses Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, was put forward by Gallager in 1962s.The advantage of LDPC codes is the ability to achieve performances close to the Shannon capacity. The security and reliability of LDPC codes is discussed in [7-8]. The method of LDPC Codes for Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation are provided. Completed scheme of LDPC Codes for Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation are discussed in [9-10], among them [10] discuss the calculation of the Intrinsic Log-likelihood Ratio Function and density evolution steps for LDPC codes design. Through [10], the calculation of the Intrinsic Log-likelihood Ratio Function is expended to Frequency domain in [11]. In [12], a new error rate

adaptive scheme is proposed, whose main part is LDPC codes, and the secondary is the binary algorithmˊ
The decoding algorithm of LDPC codes general use LLR BP algorithm, but the complexity of computation check nodes is high. Because of lost of loops in short LDPC cods, the mistakes of decoding codes will increase, lead the low efficiency of PhysicalLayer Key Reconciliation. To solve this problem, this paper propose the Modified Decoding algorithm of LDPC Codes for Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation based on method of OffsetBase algorithm in [13-15], to improve efficiency of key reconciliation.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the system of key reconciliation using LDPC codes is provided and the structure of Key Reconciliation design aspects are discussed. IN Section III, the complete process of the decoding algorithm is provided, and the modified decoding algorithm is discussed. In Section IV, the simulated data and results are provided and analyzed Section V concludes the paper.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND STRUCTURE OF KEY RECONCILIATION
In this paper, we assume system work in an ideal Gaussian channel. In case of stationary users, the randomized Gaussian channel can almost perfectly be obtained by large RECAP antenna arrays[11]. In the time division duplex (TDD) wireless environment, we can consider that Alice and Bob can estimates same data in consecutive time slots and the channel-characteristics information has not changed during the measurements time. For Simplified computational complexity, only extract power as the channel-characteristics information.
A. System Model
All the Physical-Layer Key system can be divided into these parts: extract channel-characteristics information, generate Physical-Layer Key, Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation. The system is presented in “Fig.1”.
According to “Fig.1”, Alice and Bob both transmit appointed training signal to each other in a coherence time.In this case, Alice and Bob receive signal y and y .

y = h x(t)



y = h x(t)



h and h are channel-characteristics information. Because of the reciprocity of channel in the time division duplex (TDD) wireless environment, we can consider the h = h . x(t)

978-1-A5u3t8h6or-i1ze1d07lic-e4n/1se7d/$u3s1e.l0im0it©ed2t0o1: Y7oInEsEeiEUniv. Downloaded on Jun9e9264,2026 at 13:41:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

was known in advance, we can use this to calculate the channelcharacteristics information h and h .If there is an eavesdropper called Eve, it has no correlation with Alice and Bob, eve can’t exert the valid channel-characteristics information.

But the channel exists weak time delay in coherence time,

and coupled with influence of noise,

and y are not equal

completely.

y = h x(t) + n (t)



y = h x(t) + n (t)



Therefore, we obtain secret key after extracted and quantized channel-characteristic information, key and key will exist error codes. In order to solve the problem, Physical-Layer key reconciliation is indispensable.

Alice
h

Bob
h Extract Characteristics澳

key 

syndrome 澳 Transfer syndrome

Joint Reconciliation

key 澳
Figure 1. Communicate system model of Physical-Layer Key
B. Structure of Key Reconciliation Codes
The purpose of physical-layer key reconciliations is to correct the error secret key in communication. In order to increase efficiency of reconciliations and reliability of error correction, we employ Slepian-Wolf coding with Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes for the key reconciliation [16-18].
According to the Slepian–Wolf theorem, the lossless compression of the output of two correlated sources that do not communicate their outputs to each other can be as efficient as if they communicated their outputs. It is true when their compressed outputs are jointly decompressed at a decoder [18]. Since the key estimates at Alice and Bob can be seen as correlated information due to the channel reciprocity, Bob can decode key using ‘sideinformation’ from Alice, hence Slepian-Wolf is appropriate [19].
Two approaches can implement for Slepian-Wolf coding, the parity approach and the syndrome approach, in this paper we use syndrome approach to implement Physical-Layer Key. The parity approach is similar to the parity approach.
First, Alice quantify yAB to generate keyA , of size 1×n, and then multiply Low Density Parity Check H, of size n×k.

syndromeA = H • keyA



Matrix which Alice already have obtained called

syndromeA, of size 1×n-k. Then Alice send syndromeA to the Bob via BPSK modulation, Bob figure out syndromeA. Finally, Bob use syndromeA and hBA for joint demodulation, to obtain

keyA . If effect of key reconciliation is ideal, keyA = keyA . In process of reconciliation, we needn’t encode keyA with LDPC codes, it only needs decode keyA with LDPC codes in Bob. This method simplifies the process of encoding and improves the

efficiency of physical-layer key reconciliation. Throughout the

all process, Eve can only obtain data of syndromeA. But there are 2n−k keys can multiply H to obtain syndrome . It’s very difficult

to find key through syndromeA.

III. MODIFIED DECODING ALGORITHM OF LDPC CODES
Decoding algorithm of LDPC Codes usually use method of LLR BP algorithm, the main steps are: 1. The calculation of intrinsic log-likelihood ratio 2. The initialization of variable node 3. The update of check node 4. The update of variable node 5. Decoding and decision.
What is in difference with fundamental LDPC decoding is that LDPC decoding should revise intrinsic log-likelihood ratio for Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation. In order to improve the decoding efficiency.

A. The Calculation of Intrinsic Log-likelihood Ratio
According to the fundamental theory of LDPC codes. The encoding of information bits and parity bits are all calculated by Alice, Bob only responsible for receiving all bits. The LDPC codes is only influenced by Gaussian noise in channel after data transfer. Bob only considers Gaussian pdf.

Assuming the information bits and parity bits just affected by a standard AWGN physical channel with Gaussian variance σ in transmission, the probability density function is:

( ∓)

p(b|a = ±1) =

e



Hence, the LLR is:

()

LLR = ln ( ) =



But in the Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation, Alice and Bob generate key independent. In process of decoding, Bob should consider variance of σ and σ and σ . It’s necessary to revise the probability density function.
σ is calculated by SNR from formula “(8)”:

σ=



Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June92947,2026 at 13:41:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Because of the identical channel-characteristics, we can consider σ = σ .
When σ = 0.5021, some values of σ and σ are shown in Table I.

TABLE I.
SNR[dB] 10 12 14 16 18 20

VARIANCE VALUES

VALUES

= 0.0502澳 0.0316 0.0199 0.0126 0.0079 0.0050

The calculation of LLR is become:

LLR = ln

b a = +1 b a = −1



According to [11], we can obtain intrinsic log-likelihood ratio of Physical-Layer Key:

LLR = ln ∫ ∫

(10)

∫∫

B. Step of Modified Decoding Algorithm
After calculation of intrinsic log-likelihood ratio, Bob can formally start LDPC codes decoding, the process is as follow:

1ˊ The initialization of variable node To initialize variable node L( ) q
log-likelihood ratio:

by using the intrinsic

L( ) q = L(P ) = LLR



2ˊ The update of check node In fundamental LDPC decoding process, the calculation
formula of L r is:

L r = 2 tanh ∏ \ tanh L( ) q



In the formula, the lowercase l represents the number of
iterations. The min-sum algorithm is a simplified algorithm based on the BP algorithm,澳the update of the check node is simplified as follows:

Lr = 

sign(L( )(q )) ∙ min L( ) q
∈\ \



Log domain BP algorithm and min-sum algorithm is based on the SMP scheduling.澳 In each iteration of the SMP decoding algorithm, both the variable node and the check node calculate and deliver messages at the same time, and each node updates the message synchronously, but the shortcoming of this formula is difficult to get exact data of the check node by using hardware. Because L( ) q obtained by wireless channel-characteristics is
too small, it will easy to make mistake when compute L r .
When there is short loop in check matrix, decoding will not converge properly.
RMP decoding algorithm is different from SMP decoding algorithm. For the RMP decoding algorithm, the variable nodes connecting with the check nodes can be updated using the information which has been refreshed during the iterative process, the convergence characteristics of information can be optimized, so the decoding algorithm of RMP iteration is equivalent to multiple iterations of the SMP decoding algorithm. In [13], two different message passing mechanisms, SMP and RMP are compared. It is shows that the RMP decoding algorithm has the same computational complexity as the SMP decoding algorithm, but RMP decoding algorithm converges faster and the number of iterations is also reduced[14].
The decoding algorithm based on RMP can reduce the number of iterations effectively.澳 Combining the RMP algorithm with the min-sum algorithm, the offset-base formula is proposed. The offset-base formula can overcome these shortcomings, and computational complexity is lower than “(12)”, We obtain formula reference to [15]:

L r = ∏ ∈ \ sgn L q

∙ min L q
∈\

− β, 0 澳 澳





β can be calculated by using the density evolution. In this paper, we consider β = 0. Formula is simplified to “(15)” which is the final formula of updating check node:

L r = 1 − 2 ∙ syn (1, i) ∙ ∏ ∈ \ sgn L q min L q
∈\

∙ 

3ˊ The update of variable node Variable node L q is renewed by using check node:

L q = L(P ) + ∏ \ L r

(16)

4ˊ Decoding and decision
Finally, the decision value is obtained by the calculation of all variable nodes:

L (q ) = L(P ) + ∏ L r

(17)

If L (q ) > 0,B = 0,when L (q ) < 0,B = 1.Decoding 

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June92948,2026 at 13:41:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

completed if HB = 0 or reach maximum iterations, Otherwise, the second step is returned. In section IV, this paper will show the effect of the Modified Decoding algorithm of LDPC Codes for Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation by data simulation.
IV.SIMULATION RESULT
We use MATLAB for simulation, assume the length of key is 16384, the rate of codes is 1/2, and the maximum iterations are 100.
“Fig.2” show the relationship of SNR and error rate before and after decoding. We can see along with increase of SNR, BER drop very faster. When SNR is more than 13, BER completely become 0, this means decoding is successful.

decoding success rate is decrease rapidly. When the error rate is less than 0.09, the number of iterations change from 70 to 5, the decoding success rate is close to 0.9. When decoding success rate is totally 100%, initial error rate is 0.06 and the number of iterations is about 3.

Figure 4. The relationship between initial error rate and the number of iterations

Figure 2. The relationship between SNR and BER
“Fig.3” is a supplement to “Fig.2”, “Fig.3” is show along with the decrease of initial error rate, decoding success rate is increase rapidly. When initial error rate is reach 0.065, decoding success rate is approaching 100%. When initial error rate is 0.065, SNR =13.
Figure 3. The relationship between initial error rate and decoding success rate
“Fig.4” is show the relationship of initial error rate and the number of iterations. Along with the decrease of initial error rate,

Combining the above three Figs, the effect of LDPC codes decoding is promoting obvious with the decrease of initial error rate. When SNR is more than 13, the Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation is totally successful and the number of iterations is less than 4.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce the process of generation and reconciliation of physical-layer key according to the reciprocity of channel in the time division duplex (TDD) wireless environment. The keynote of paper is elaborate the theory and steps that how to use LDPC codes to encoding and decoding physical-layer key. We propose a modified LDPC codes decoding calculation of check node which integrates with offset-base algorithm to improve efficiency of physical-layer key reconciliation in this paper. Through the simulation results, we can see the modified algorithm can obtain fine reliability of physical-layer key reconciliation. The number of iterations is also kept in a lower range.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Wilhelm, I. Martinovic, and J. Schmitt, “Secure Key Generation in Sensor Networks Based on Frequency-Selective Channels,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 31, pp. 1779–1790, September 2013.
[2] J. W. Wallace, “Secure Physical Layer Key Generation Schemes: Performance and Information Theoretic Limits.,” in ICC, pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2009.
[3] A. Sayeed and A. Perrig, “Secure Wireless Communications: Secret Keys through Multipath,” in Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2008. ICASSP 2008. IEEE International Conference on, pp. 3013–3016, March2008.
[4] Liu W. Liu B. Zhong Ch. Li Z. Jiang Y. Tang Y. Liu B. Yang Qi Shen Xiaofang Hu Ch. Peng "Error Reconciliation for Quantum Cryptography" IEEE International Conference on Internet Technology and Applications (iTAP) 2011 pp. 1-3.
[5] JIANG Changbin,SHENG Xiaokun,LI Jie, “Research and implement of testing method for ARM Cortex-M3 based microprocessors. ” Electronic Test,2013 (4):48-51 (in Chinese).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June92949,2026 at 13:41:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[6] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes.” Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[7] LIU Zaishuang, WANG Jian,SUN Rui, “Review on physical-layer security techniques of wireless communications. ” Communications Technology, 2014, 47 (2): 128-135 (in Chinese)
[8] Baldi M,Bianchi M,Chiaraluce F. “Security and complexity of the McEliece cryptosystem based on quas-i cyclic low density parity check code. ” IET Information Security,2013,7 (3): 212-220.
[9] J. Etesami and W. Henkel, “LDPC Code Construction for Wireless Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation,” proc. First IEEE International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC 12), Beijing, China, 2012.
[10] Islam N, Graur O, Filip A, “LDPC Code Design Aspects for Physical-Layer Key Reconciliation.” Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2015 IEEE: pp. 1-7.
[11] O. Graur, N. Islam, A. Filip, and W. Henkel, “Quantization Aspects in LDPC Key Reconciliation for Physical Layer Security” 10th International ITG Conference on Systems, Communications and Coding (SCC), Hamburg, Germany, February 2-5, 2015.
[12] SUN Niuniu,ZHANG Shuilian,XIN Gang, “Joint information reconciliation algorithm based on LDPC codes and BINARY. ” Journal of Information Engineering University, 2013,14 (2):207-212 (in Chinese).

[13] P Radosavljevic, A De Baynast, JR Cavallaro, “Optimized Message Passing Schedules for LDPC Decoding," Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers , 2005 :591-595
[14] J Lei , L Wen , FU Qiang, “Analysis of LDPC Decoding Algorithm Based on Serial Schedule," Journal of Sichuan University , 2006 , 43 (4) :790-795
[15] Zhu X㸪Wang Z㸪Zhang C㸪“Research of LDPC decoding based on LLR BP algorithm.” Electronic Design Engineering㸪2012㸹12㸸022
[16] Tan P, Xie K, Li J. “Slepian-Wolf Coding Using Parity Approach and Syndrome Approach,” Conference on Information Sciences and Systems. IEEE, 2007:pp 708-713.
[17] Tan P, Li J. “A practical and optimal symmetric Slepian-Wolf compression strategy using syndrome formers and inverse syndrome formers.” Proc.allerton Conf.on Communication Control & Computing, 2005.
[18] Liveris A D, Xiong Z, Georghiades C N. “Compression of binary sources with side information at the decoder using LDPC codes.” Communications Letters IEEE, 2002, 6(10):440-442.
[19] Tu Z, Jing L, Blum R S. “An Efficient SF-ISF Approach for the SlepianWolf Source Coding Problem.” Eurasip Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, 2005, 2005(6):1-11.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June12040,02026 at 13:41:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

