IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

9402204

Design of LDPC Codes for Unequal ISI Channels
Watid Phakphisut and Pornchai Supnithi
Faculty of Engineering, King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang, Bangkok 10520, Thailand
In this paper, we design an irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for unequal inter-symbol interference channels based on the modified extrinsic information transfer chart. During transmission, each LDPC codeword will be divided and transmitted to the different channels. The aim of this scheme is to avoid transmitting the whole codeword in a high error rate channel. The simulation results show that the proposed code optimized for both PR1 and PR2 channels can achieve a 0.2 coding gain over the codes designed specifically for each individual channel. When this simple code is applied to a perpendicular channel with these two targets, the coding gains of the proposed code is about 0.08 dB at the frame error rate of 10−3.
Index Terms— Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, partial response (PR) channels.

I. INTRODUCTION Multi-reader system [1] is a current technology being tested in the HDD industry. The multiple readers allow the use of the

two-dimensional signal processing, such as 2-D equalizer and 2-D detector, known as 2-D magnetic recording (TDMR) [2].

Since the availability of multiple 2-D readbacks can be tackled by different 2-D signal processing strategies, several

configurations of multiple readers have been widely studied. In [3] and [4], multi-reader systems are considered, the single-track and multi-track information are detected by arrayreader-based magnetic recording architecture [3] or data from multiple tracks are detected simultaneously [4]. The equalizers and detectors for different targets can be used to handle these different distortions. However, in either 1-D case or 2-D case, the design of powerful channel codes such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for different (unequal) intersymbol interference (ISI) targets has not been mentioned in the literature.
To design capacity-approaching LDPC codes, the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart [5] can be used to design the LDPC codes for multiple-input multiple-output channels, the variable node degree is optimized by matching the mutual information curve of check nodes and variable nodes. For ISI channels, the degrees of check nodes and variable nodes are optimized by means of the density evolution analysis [6]. The EXIT chart analysis for 1-D ISI channels has been proposed in [7]. In this paper, during transmission, each LDPC codeword will be divided and transmitted to the different channels. The aim of this scheme is to avoid transmitting

Fig. 1. Transmission systems with unequal ISI channels.
Such approach is similar to those in [7] and [8], whereby the LDPC code designs were made for ideal conditions first (without media noise). For example, in [8], LDPC codes are designed for 2-D ISI channels as motivated by TDMR channels. Although this approach is simple, it can be easily extended to LDPC code design for full system simulation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the unequal ISI channel models. In Section III, we explain the definition of the check node degrees and variable node degrees of LDPC codes. The proposed EXIT chart for the LDPC codes is provided in Section IV. The simulation results and discussions are given in Section V. Finally, in Section VI, we give the conclusions.

the whole codeword in a high error rate channel. We modify the EXIT chart to optimize the variable node degrees of LDPC codes. By adopting the proposed design method, the variable nodes transmitted to different channels can be optimized separately. The main emphasis is on designing LDPC codes which work well in channels with different ISI levels. We in part assume that the media noise can be handled by the appropriate form of preceding soft-output channel detectors.

II. DESCRIPTION OF UNEQUAL ISI CHANNELS
Let a codeword length N of an LDPC code be divided into L portions. For each portion, the codeword will be modulated by binary phase-shift keying (BPSK). Then, the BPSK signals xl = [xl,0, xl,1, . . . , xl,N/L−1] are transmitted through L partial response (PR) channels as shown in Fig. 1. The received signals yl = [yl,0, yl,1, . . . , yl,N/L−1] from the lth channel can be expressed by

Manuscript received March 10, 2017; revised April 14, 2017; accepted April 25, 2017. Date of publication May 3, 2017; date of current version October 24, 2017. Corresponding author: W. Phakphisut (e-mail: watid.ph@kmitl.ac.th).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2017.2700760

J

yl,k = hl, j xl,k− j + nl,k

(1)

j =0

where Hl = [hl,0, hl,1, . . . , hl,J ] is the channel coefficient vector of the lth PR channel and nl =

0018-9464 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:36:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9402204

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

[nl,0, nl,1, . . . , nl,N/L−1] is the white Gaussian noise sequence. The received signals from each PR channels are sent to the Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) detectors separately. Then, the output signals of the BCJR detectors are combined and sent to the LDPC decoder. As a general rule, we define the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the lth channel as

SNRl = 10 log10

J j =0

hl2,

j

σl2

(2)

where σl2 is the variance of the additive Gaussian white noise. For any unequal ISI channels, we define the difference

in SNR between (adjacent) neighboring ISI channels as

= SNRl+1 − SNRl .

(3)

III. REPRESENTATIONS OF LDPC CODES

An LDPC code is defined by a Tanner graph [9] of which M is the number of check nodes and N is the number of variable nodes. Generally, the variable node degree can be defined by the polynomial [10]

dvmax

λ(x) =

λi x i−1

(4)

i =1

where λi is the proportion of variable node degree i and dvmax is the maximum variable node degree in the Tanner graph. Since the variable nodes are divided into L portions for transmitting through L channels, we follow the approach from [11] and define the fraction of variable nodes such as

L dvmax

λ(x) =

λli x i−1

(5)

l=1 i=1

where λli is the proportion of variable node degree i in the lth portion. The proportion of variable node belonging to the lth portion is given by λl = {λl1, λl2, . . . , λldvmax }. Let nli be the number of variable node degree i in the lth portion, then it is
equal to

nli =

L l=1

λli /i
dvmax i =1

λli /i

N.

(6)

Therefore, the total number of variable nodes in the lth portion

can be computed by

nl =

dvmax i =1

λli /i

L l=1

dvmax i =1

λli /i

N

=

F(λl ) ·

N

(7)

where F(.) is the function having an argument λl . If the

number of the variable nodes in each portion is the same, the equality F(λl ) = 1/L must be satisfied. We also define

the average variable node degree in the lth portion

d¯vl =

L
L l=1

dvmax i =1

λli

dvmax i =1

λli

/

i

.

(8)

For the check node degree, we assume that the fraction of

check nodes is the same for each portion. Thus, the check

node degree is defined as [10]

ρ(x) =

dcmax j =1

ρjx

j −1

(9)

where ρ j is the proportion of the check node degree j . Therefore, the code rate of LDPC code can be obtained by

R =1−

dcmax j =1

ρj/j

L l=1

dvmax i =1

λli

/

i

.

(10)

IV. LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR UNEQUAL ISI CHANNELS
Based on the decoding scheme in Fig. 1, Let IE,DETl and IA,DETl be the mutual information of outgoing and incoming message of the lth BCJR detector. The parameters IE,VND and IA,VND denote the mutual information of outgoing and incoming messages of variable node decoder (VND), respectively. We use IE,CND and IA,CND to denote the mutual information of check node decoder (CND). The computation of the mutual information is given as follows.

A. Mutual Information of BCJR Detector

Given a transmitted bit x ∈ {−1, 1} and the log-likelihood ratio z of the extrinsic information of the BCJR detector, the mutual information can be computed by

I E ,DET

=

1 2

x =±1

∞
p(z|x ) log2
−∞

p(z |x ) p(z) dz

(11)

when p(.) is a probability density function. Since the mutual information computation involves the measured p(z|x = 1) and p(z|x = −1), we use Monte Carlo simulation to estimate the mutual information of the BCJR detector. The
third-order polynomial can be used to approximate the
term IE,DET. Hence, the computation of the mutual information of the lth BCJR detector can be written as a function of IE,DETl (IA,DETl , SNRl ), where the SNR of the lth channel is defined from (2).

B. Mutual Information of Variable Node Decoder
For the VND, since each variable node portion involves the different BCJR detectors, the mutual information of the variable node in each portion will differ. We can obtain the IE,VND by the average of mutual information of variable nodes, i.e

IE,VND(IE,CND, λ)

L dvmax

=

λli ×

l=1 i=1

J (i − 1)( J −1(IE,CND))2 + J −1 IEi ,DETl 2 (12)

where λ = {λ1, λ2, . . . , λL }. The J (.) and J −1(.) functions are

the

mutual

information

computations

in

[5].

The

I

i E

,DETl

term

of

the

l th

BCJR

detector

is

computed

by

(11),

where

I

i A,DET

is

the outgoing mutual information of the variable nodes having

degree

i.

The

I

i A,DET

computation

can

follow

(12)

when

the

mutual information of BCJR detector is ignored, i.e.,

IAi ,DET(IE,CND, i ) = J i × ( J −1(IE,CND))2 . (13)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:36:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PHAKPHISUT AND SUPNITHI: DESIGN OF LDPC CODES FOR UNEQUAL ISI CHANNELS

9402204

C. Mutual Information of Check Node Decoder
For the CND, we follow the approach from [5] to compute the mutual information IE,CND, i.e.,
IE,CND(IA,CND, ρ)
dcmax
≈ 1 − ρ j J ( j − 1)( J −1(1 − IA,CND))2 (14)
j =1
where ρ = {ρ1, ρ2, . . . , ρdcmax }. Given IE,CND and ρ, the computation in (14) can be rearranged to compute the IA,CND. Therefore, the computation of the IA,CND can be written as a function of IA,CND(IE,CND, ρ).

D. Threshold Optimization
To design the LDPC codes of unequal ISI channels, the variable node degrees and check nodes degrees are optimized such that the EXIT curve of the check node lies above the EXIT curve of variable node and the mutual information of variable node and check node converges to 1. Therefore, for a given SNRl and a check node degree ρ, the optimization of the variable node degree λ can be stated as a linear optimization problem. The optimization can be formulated as

Fig. 2. Mutual information of the BCJR detectors.
TABLE I VARIABLE NODE DEGREES OF LDPC CODE FOR ISI CHANNELS

L dvmax

max

λli /i

l=1 i=1

subject to λli ≥ 0

L dvmax
λli = 1
l=1 i=1

F(λl ) = 1/L

TABLE II VARIABLE NODE DEGREES OF LDPC CODE FOR UNEQUAL
ISI CHANNELS

IA,CND(IE,CND, ρ) < IE,VND(IE,CND, λ).

The threshold decoding of LDPC codes is influenced by the BCJR detector. Therefore, to design the LDPC code for ISI channels including media noise, the mutual information of the BCJR detector must be computed exhaustively to indicate the channel output impairment.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Ensemble Code Design
In this paper, we consider two unequal ISI channels (L = 2) with PR1 channel h1(D) = 1 + D and PR2 channel h2(D) = 1 + 2D + D. Fig. 2 depicts the mutual information of the output of BCJR detector. The SNR of the PR1 channel is 4 dB. The SNRs of the PR2 channel are set to 4–6 dB, causing the difference in SNR of 0–2 dB, respectively. The mutual information of the BCJR detector in the PR1 channel is greater than that of the PR2 channel at the same SNR (or = 0 dB). However, when the SNRs of the PR2 channel are increased with = 1, the IE,DET of PR1 is greater than that of PR2 when IA,DET < 0.4. For = 2, the PR1 is lower than PR2.
The resulting mutual information of the BCJR detector suggests using different variable node degrees in LDPC codeword. We use the design method as explained in the previous section to construct the LDPC codes with the code rate of 8/9. The

maximum variable node degree is set to 15. The LDPC codes
that are optimized for either PR1 or PR2 are shown in Table
I. Both codes have the variable node degrees of 2, 3, and 15.
However, for unequal ISI channels in Table II, when the SNR of PR1 and PR2 are set to be equal ( = 0), the first part of the codeword transmitted through the PR1 channel has the variable
nodes degrees of 3, whereas, the second part of the codeword
transmitted through the PR2 channel has the variable node degrees of 2, 3 and 15. For = 1, the optimized variable node degree is slightly changed. The proportion of the variable node
degree of 2 and 15 are increased, conversely, the variable node
degree of 3 is decreased. Herein, we observe that the average of variable node degree d¯vl in the PR1 channel is greater than that of the PR2 channel. Recall that the mutual information of
the BCJR detector corresponding to the PR1 channel is greater than that of the PR2 channel. For = 2, since the mutual information of the BCJR detector corresponding to PR2 is greater than that of PR1, the average variable node degree d¯vl in the PR2 channel is greater than that of the PR1 channel. The
optimized variable node degree will differ from the previous
design significantly. The variable node degree of 2 occurs in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:36:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9402204

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 53, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

node degrees in each codeword portion leads to the differences in FER. The portion transmitted to PR1 channel offers a better FER performance than the PR2 channel. However, at ten iterations, each portion will have similar performance levels. In addition, we apply this simple code to a perpendicular channel with both targets and 40% media noise, the coding gains of the proposed code over the PR2 code is about 0.08 dB at the FER of 10−3.

Fig. 3. FER performance of PR1 code, PR2 code, and proposed code in unequal ISI channels at 10 iterations.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a generic (approach) LDPC code design for multiple channels with unequal ISI levels leading different targets is proposed. We propose the modified EXIT analysis to design the variable nodes of LDPC codes. The simulation results show that the proposed code provides better performances than the codes designed specifically for each single channel. Although in this paper, we start with a generic model, in the future, it can certainly be extended for specific channels with full simulation, by running the entire channel simulation and recollect the statistics at the output of soft-output Viterbi algorithm/BCJR detectors for multi-track system or media noise.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Thailand Research Fund through the RGJ Advanced Programme under Grant RAP59K0015.

Fig. 4. FER performance of the proposed LDPC codes in unequal ISI channels at 5 and ten iterations.
the PR1 channel. The variable node degree of 3 for the PR2 channel is ignored.
B. Performance Comparison
We construct an irregular LDPC code using the progressiveedge-growth algorithm [12]. The variable node degrees in Tables I and II are constraint in the code design. The codeword has 4608 bits and the code rate is 8/9. The iteration number of turbo decoding and LDPC decoding are ten iterations. In Fig. 3, we evaluate the performances of the PR1 code, the PR2 code, and the proposed code in unequal ISI channels with = 0 dB. As expected, the LDPC codes that are designed specifically for either PR1 or PR2 channels do not perform well in unequal ISI channels. The PR2 code offers a better frame error rate (FER) performance than the PR1 code at low SNRs, however, the performance of the PR2 code is still poor at high SNRs. The performance of the proposed code outperforms the other codes significantly at the SNR above 7.8 dB. The SNR gains are 0.2 dB at FER = 2 × 10−4. Since the codeword is divided into 2 portions transmitted though PR1 and PR2 channel, the performance of each portion can be plotted separately in Fig. 4. The difference of variable

REFERENCES
[1] J. R. Barry et al., “Optimization of bit geometry and multi-reader geometry for two-dimensional magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 52, no. 2, Feb. 2016, Art. no. 3100507.
[2] R. Wood, M. Williams, A. Kavcic, and J. Miles, “The feasibility of magnetic recording at 10 Terabits per square inch on conventional media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 917–923, Feb. 2009.
[3] G. Mathew, E. Hwang, J. Park, G. Garfunkel, and D. Hu, “Capacity advantage of array-reader-based magnetic recording (ARMR) for next generation hard disk drives,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 155–161, Mar. 2014.
[4] J. Yao, E. Hwang, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and G. Mathew, “Two-track joint detection for two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR),” in Proc. ICC, Jun. 2015, pp. 418–424.
[5] S. T. Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of lowdensity parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[6] N. Varnica and A. Kavcic, “Optimized low-density parity-check codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 168–170, Apr. 2003.
[7] M. Franceschini, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “EXIT chart-based design of LDPC codes for inter-symbol interference channels,” in Proc. IST Mobile Wireless Commun. Summitt, Jun. 2005, pp. 19–23.
[8] L. Kong, Y. L. Guan, J. Zheng, G. Han, K. Cai, and K.-S. Chan, “EXITchart-based LDPC code design for 2D ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2823–2826, Jun. 2013.
[9] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[10] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[11] C. Poulliat, D. Declercq, and I. Fijalkow, “Optimization of LDPC codes for UEP channels,” in Proc. ISIT, Jul. 2004, p. 450.
[12] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:36:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

