4612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 65, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

Dynamic Scheduling Decoding of LDPC Codes Based on Tabu Search
Xingcheng Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, Chunlei Fan, and Xuechen Chen

Abstract— The informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) strategy decoding algorithms performed exceptionally well for low-density parity-check codes in terms of the error-rate performance. However, the IDS decoding algorithm is greedy because of the unfair computation resources allocation among different variables nodes, which leads to poor convergence performance. In order to reduce the greediness of the IDS algorithm, the tabu search (TS) algorithm is introduced to the dynamic schedulingbased decoding in this paper. In the TS-based dynamic scheduling (TSDS) algorithm, the variable nodes in the Tanner graph are temporarily stored in a tabu list. In the decoding process with the TSDS algorithm, variable nodes stored in the tabu list will not be selected and updated until they are shifted out of the tabu list. Besides, an improved updating order is provided for the TSDS algorithm, by which the computational complexity can be decreased without the loss of error correction performance. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm outperforms other decoding algorithms of interest in terms of bit error rate and convergence performance over the additive white Gaussian noise channel.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, dynamic scheduling algorithms, tabu search, convergence performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], usually decoded using iterative belief propagation (BP) or message-passing algorithm with factor graph, can approach the Shannon-limit error correction performance [2]. Conventional soft-decision decoding for LDPC codes is performed with log-likelihood ratio belief propagation (LLR BP) algorithm. Because in this algorithm all messages of check-tovariable (C2V) nodes and variable-to-check (V2C) nodes are propagated successively, this decoding algorithm is also called flooding or parallel scheduling.
To accelerate the convergence speed and improve the bit error rate (BER) performance, the sequential schedule based decoding algorithms were presented one after another, such as the serial shuffled belief propagation (SBP) [3], [4] and the layered belief-propagation (LBP) [5], [6]. Those algorithms,
Manuscript received January 13, 2017; revised May 11, 2017 and July 13, 2017; accepted July 23, 2017. Date of publication July 28, 2017; date of current version November 15, 2017. The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 61572534, 61173018, 61602531). The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was M. Lentmaier. (Corresponding author: Xingcheng Liu.)
The authors are with the School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: isslxc@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2017.2732950

with which the variable nodes or check nodes are updated in a fixed and predefined order, are called standard sequential scheduling algorithm (SSS) [3]–[7]. The SSS algorithm is different from the flooding in that the latest available information can be used in the same iteration for the SSS algorithm. Simulations show that the convergence speed of sequential scheduling strategies can be improved twice as fast as that of flooding [3].
In the flooding and SSS algorithms, computational resources are assigned to each variable node and check node equally. In other words, whether the information of a variable node is reliable or not, the message of the variable node will be treated equally, i.e. message generated and propagated with no difference in the decoding process. In fact, stable variable nodes or edges have few contributions in the followed decoding. Thus, the limited computational resources will be wasted in the subsequent updating of these reliable and stable variable nodes and edges. Therefore, it becomes an important issue to reasonably and effectively allocate computational resources to different variable nodes. Aiming at it, the informed dynamic scheduling strategy (IDS) was introduced in LDPC decoding [7]. With the IDS algorithm in mind, the residual belief propagation (RBP) of LDPC codes was proposed [7]. RBP is a greedy algorithm, in which the C2V message with the maximum C2V residual is generated and propagated preferentially. Even though the convergence speed of the RBP algorithm is faster than that of SSS and flooding, the error correction performance after turning convergent is poor [7]. To decrease the influence of the greediness of RBP, the nodewise RBP (NW RBP) was presented at the same time [7]. In the NW RBP algorithm, all the C2V messages of the C2V edges that are connected to the selected check node with the maximum C2V residual are propagated simultaneously.
After the IDS of LDPC codes was proposed, an increasing number of dynamic decoding algorithms [8]–[13] have been presented. The variable-to-check RBP (VC RBP) and the node-wise VC RBP (NVC RBP) algorithms [8] focused on the variable node to check node (V2C) residual and preferentially updated the V2C message with the maximum V2C residual. What is more, the two dynamic scheduling algorithms have no pre-computation throughout the decoding process. Therefore, the complexity of these algorithms is low in computation. However, the performance of the two algorithms is not as good as that of the RBP and NW RBP. The informed variable-to-check RBP (IVC RBP) [9] algorithm enhanced the VC RBP by way of selecting the unstable variable nodes and further selecting the edges connected to those variable

0090-6778 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DYNAMIC SCHEDULING DECODING OF LDPC CODES BASED ON TABU SEARCH

4613

nodes to update. With a little more computational complexity, the IVC RBP can achieve excellent error correction performance. In the above IDS algorithms, only one edge or node is chosen to be updated in each selection, while in the lazy queue residual decoding algorithm (LQRD) [10] all the C2V messages whose residuals are larger than a dynamic threshold are updated simultaneously. In this way, the search complexity of LQRD can be decreased significantly and the convergence performance of it can be improved compared to the NW RBP algorithm. In the IDS algorithms the available computational resources are uneven for different variable nodes. Hence, some of the variable nodes have no chance contributing their intrinsic information throughout the decoding process. This type of variable nodes, which partially leads to greediness of the IDS algorithm, is called the silent variable nodes in the silent-variable-node-free residual belief-propagation algorithm (SVNF) [11]. Aiming at the issue of the silent variable nodes, the SVNF algorithm selected and updated the edge with the maximum C2V residual that is connected to each variable node in the decoding process. The dynamic-silent-variablenode-free residual scheduling(D-SVNFS) [14] is an improved version of the SVNF. In the D-SVNFS algorithm, the largest C2V residual that associated with the last updated variable and check nodes is preferentially selected for updating, which improves the convergence speed of the SVNF algorithm. In order to further improve the error correction performance, the dynamic selection strategies (DSS) for IDS were recently proposed [12], [13]. In those dynamic selection strategies, the selection conditions of nodes and edges are related not only to residuals, but to some other judgment criteria.
Although the IDS algorithms mentioned above achieve good results in terms of BER and convergence speed, the greediness of the IDS still exists. In this paper, aiming at the greedy phenomenon in dynamic scheduling strategy, the dynamic scheduling decoding algorithm of LDPC codes based on tabu search (TS) [15], [16] is proposed. The proposed algorithm is here termed as the tabu search based dynamic scheduling (TSDS) algorithm. The tabu search is a type of intelligent algorithms. The fundamental principles behind it are usually applied to solving problems of scheduling [17] and combinatorial optimization [18]. Tabu search can overcome the limitations of local optimization by remembering some visited solutions with a tabu list. In fact, the tabu list is a memory queue that saves the optimized solutions for a period of time. These solutions are prohibited from being accessed for the next successive iterative decoding. According to the insertion order, the solutions stored in the tabu list will be released in turn if the tabu list is full and the stopping criterion of decoding is not satisfied. In this way, the deteriorated solutions will be selected and treated preferentially. The global optimum solution can be obtained accordingly.
Based on the operation mechanism of the tabu search, a new updating order is provided here for the proposed TSDS algorithm. In one updating process of the algorithm, several variable nodes will be updated. The updated ones that satisfy the tabu conditions will be stored into the tabu list. As we discussed before, the variable nodes stored in the tabu list can not be chosen to be updated for a few number of iterations until

they are released. The greediness of the IDS appears mainly because of the unfair assignment of computational resources. Some variable nodes or edges are frequently selected and updated while some others are rarely, and even never updated. The tabu mechanism of the TSDS algorithm can prevent the decoding algorithm from frequently getting trapped in small portions of variable nodes. Thus, the impact of the greediness of the IDS algorithm can be reduced. Simultaneously, the TSDS algorithm can be simplified by pre-computing the messages of V2C edges that are connected to the selected variable node for the next successive decoding. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm performs better than any other existing algorithms in terms of not only BER/FER performance, but also convergence performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly revisits the LLR BP decoding algorithm, RBP decoding algorithm and tabu search algorithm. Section III introduces the proposed TSDS decoding algorithm while Section IV presents the simulation results and further analyzes the complexities of the proposed algorithms. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.

II. REVISITING LDPC DECODING
A. LLR BP Decoding for LDPC Codes
Generally speaking, a binary LDPC code can be described with an M × N parity check matrix H which consists of N variable nodes and M check nodes. We use vi as the symbol for the i -th variable node, and c j as the symbol for the j -th check node. Original log arithmetic likelihood ratios belief propagation (LLR BP) decoding is a two-phase massage passing algorithm [2], which updates all the V2C messages in the first step, and then updates all the C2V messages in the second step. In LLR BP decoding, the initial LLR information of variable node v j is denoted with Cv j , and computed as

Cv j = log

p y j |v j = 0 p y j |v j = 1

,

(1)

where y j represents the j -th variable node measurement information from the channel, v j represents the decoded symbol of the j -th variable node. The V2C message-generating function of variable node v j to check node ci is calculated as

mv j →ci =

mca→v j + Cv j ,

(2)

ca ∈M(v j )\ci

where M(v j )\ci represents all the check nodes connected to

variable node v j excluding check node ci . The C2V message-

generating function of check node ci to variable node v j can

be computed as

⎛

⎞

mci →v j = 2tanh−1 ⎝

tanh mvb→ci ⎠ , (3) 2

vb∈N(ci )\v j

where N(ci )\v j represents all the variable nodes connected to check node ci excluding variable node v j . After generating and propagating all the V2C and C2V messages, the hard decision

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 65, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

Fig. 1. Core decoding procedure for RBP algorithm of LDPC codes.

of variable nodes v j is made based on the LLR value, L v j , calculated as

L vj =

mca→v j + Cv j ,

(4)

ca ∈M(v j )

where L v j represents the LLR value of variable node v j , and M(v j ) represents all the check nodes connected to variable node v j . The two phase message passing decoding process will not stop unless all the parity check equations are satis-
fied or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

B. RBP Decoding for LDPC Codes

In the IDS algorithms, the updating order of the messages is dynamically changed based on the dynamic selection conditions. For the firstly presented IDS algorithm, RBP, the order of message updating with it is determined by the values of the C2V residuals. The C2V residual is the variation of the C2V message values before and after an update. The C2V residual can be defined as [7]

rci →v j =

m

pre ci →v

j

−

mci →v j

,

(5)

where

m

pre ci →v

j

is

the

pre-computation

of

C2V

message.

The

decoding process of RBP is outlined in Fig. 1. At the begin-

ning, all the pre-computations of C2V edges are computed in

order to find the maximum C2V residual. For convenience of

explanation, it is assumed that the edge from check node ci

to variable node v j has the maximum C2V residual. In the

first

step

the

C2V

messages

m

pre ci →v

j

will

be

generated

and

propagated with Eq. (3). Then, variable node v j will propagate

messages to check nodes ca, where ca ∈ M(v j )\ci . After that,

the pre-computations of ca → vb edges will be computed

with Eq. (3), and then the residuals of ca → vb edges will be

computed with Eq. (5), where vb ∈ N(ca )\v j . To avoid being

selected in the next updating, the residual of C2V message

being updated at this time is set to 0.

C. Tabu Search Algorithm
The convergence speed of RBP algorithm is extremely fast in the first few iterations. However, the error correction performance is not a patch on that of the flooding and the SSS algorithms when the number of iterations is large enough.
Tabu search (TS) is an artificial intelligence algorithm [15]. It can be applied to the combinatorial optimization and scheduling problems. The tabu list, which can be considered as a memory system, can help to overcome the local optima.

In each iteration of the tabu search, the visited solutions are judged by some well-defined tabu conditions, and the solutions that satisfy the tabu conditions will be stored in the tabu list. The optimized solutions in the tabu list are called taboo, which will not be chosen and treated until they are released from the tabu list. This tabu mechanism prevents the strategy from visiting the local optimal solutions repeatedly, by which the global optimal solution can be obtained.
In the proposed TSDS algorithm, the updated variable nodes in each decoding process are taken as the visited solutions in the tabu search. After each decoding process, the updated variable nodes will be judged with two tabu conditions. The variable nodes that satisfy the tabu conditions are stored in the tabu list. The first tabu condition is stated as follows.
Tabu Condition 1: The condition that a variable node is to be stored in the tabu list is that, the counter of the unsatisfied parity check equations for the variable node is equal to its degree.
In the oscillating variable nodes based residual belief propagation (OV-RBP) [12] algorithm, the variable node whose counter of the unsatisfied parity check equations is the largest among all the variable nodes is considered to be unreliable. However, the degree distribution of irregular LDPC codes is uneven for different variable nodes. That means, the variable nodes with lower degrees have less opportunity to be chosen in message updating for irregular LDPC codes. Accordingly, the computational resources are unfairly allocated to different variable nodes. Aiming at this problem, we describe the tabu condition 1 in order to reasonably locate the unreliable variable nodes.
The second tabu condition, which is first presented in [19], is a measurement of the stability of variable nodes. we repeat it as follows to have the description of the TSDS algorithm self contained.
Tabu Condition 2: Before and after an update, the changing amount of the LLR value of a variable node is less than 5%, i.e.,
(1 − 5%) Li−1(v j ) < Li (v j ) < (1 + 5%) Li−1(v j ) ,
(6)
where Li (v j ) denotes the LLR value of variable node v j at i -th iteration. In the proposed TSDS algorithm, Li−1(v j ) and Li (v j ) denote the LLR values of variable node v j before and after an update, respectively. When the changed amount of the LLR value of a variable node is small, little of the extrinsic information from the variable node can be made use of. In other words, a variable node is considered to be stable if it satisfies tabu condition 2, and the decoding can not benefit from the information transmitted from this type of variable nodes.
If a variable node satisfies both of the two tabu conditions, it is believed that the variable node is unreliable and little of the extrinsic information from the variable node can be made use of. In decoding, the messages from this type of variable nodes should not be propagated to their connected check nodes. Therefore, we put this type of variable nodes in the tabu list.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DYNAMIC SCHEDULING DECODING OF LDPC CODES BASED ON TABU SEARCH

4615

The tabu list is a first-in, first-out (FIFO) memory system with determined length. When the tabu list is full, the variable nodes stored in the list will be released one by one according to the order of their entering into the FIFO system. In this way, the variable nodes stay in the tabu list for a certain time, and the duration of the stay is related to the length of the tabu list. However, there is a problem for this mechanism. If no variable node satisfies the tabu conditions for a long time, the variable node stored in the tabu list can not be released. Thus, the tabu list will be degenerated into a stop list, which may deteriorate the convergence performance of error correction. In order to ensure the effectiveness of the tabu list, the variable nodes chosen for updating are forced to be added into the tabu list. This process will continue until the stopping criteria are satisfied. In this way, the fundamental principles of tabu search can be well applied to the dynamic scheduling of LDPC decoding algorithm.
III. TABU SEARCH BASED DYNAMIC SCHEDULING (TSDS) ALGORITHM
In order to reduce the greediness of the dynamic scheduling strategy of LDPC codes, we introduce the tabu search algorithm to dynamic scheduling decoding for LDPC codes. In the proposed TSDS algorithm, the updated variable nodes are measured by two tabu conditions. The variable nodes that satisfy both of the tabu conditions will be stored into a tabu list. In the TSDS decoding process the variable nodes stored in the tabu list will not be selected and updated until they are released. Based on the operation mechanism of the tabu search, a new updating order of dynamic decoding strategies is proposed and applied to the TSDS algorithm. In each updating process, not only one but several variable nodes are updated, and the updated variable nodes are chosen to be stored into the tabu list. The selection strategy combines the variable node residual and V2C message residual, by which the search complexity can be simplified. Furthermore, the proposed TSDS algorithm can be simplified by adjusting the order of the decoding steps. We will particularly introduce the TSDS algorithm in the following sub-sections.
A. The Proposed TSDS Algorithm
The selection strategy of the TSDS algorithm is based on the combination of variable node residual and the V2C message residual. The updating order is from the variable nodes to the check nodes. At the beginning of the TSDS algorithm, all the V2C messages mvn→cm are initialized with the corresponding LLR information Cvn , variable nodes residuals r (vn) and V2C residuals r (vn → cm) are initialized with the absolute values Cvn , and all the C2V messages mc→v are set to 0. Figure 2 shows the decoding process of the TSDS algorithm. It is assumed that v j has the maximum variable node residual and v j → ci has the maximum V2C residual for all the V2C edges connected to v j . In the first step, the message from variable node v j to check node ci is updated. Then, for all the variable nodes vb ∈ N(ci )\v j , C2V messages mci →vb are generated and the variable node residuals r (vb) are calculated. At last, in order to calculate the V2C residuals

Fig. 2. Core decoding procedure for TSDS algorithm of LDPC codes.
for the next iteration, the pre-computations of vb → ca edges are performed, where ca ∈ M(vb)\ci . After the decoding steps finished, the variable node residual r (v j ) and the variable node to check node edge residual r (v j → ci ) are set to zero in order to avoid being selected in the next followed iteration. The main decoding procedure of the TSDS algorithm can be illustrated with three steps, as shown in Fig. 2.
After each decoding process of the TSDS, the updated variable nodes will be evaluated with the tabu conditions, and the variable nodes that satisfy the two tabu conditions will be pushed into the tabu list. Taking Fig. 2 as an example, vb1 and vb2 are firstly updated. Then, the two variable nodes will be evaluated with the tabu conditions. With the aid of the conditions, the TSDS determines whether the variable nodes should be put into the tabu list. In the proposed algorithm, all the variable nodes are divided into two sets, the ones that are in the tabu list and the other ones that are not within the tabu list. The variable nodes stored in the tabu list will not be selected in the current round of decoding process, until they are released from the tabu list.
In the TSDS algorithm, the length of the tabu list, which is denoted by TL , is an important factor in decreasing the greediness in decoding. The intuition is that, if a small value is taken for TL , the variable nodes will not stay for long period of time in the tabu list and the TSDS algorithm is easy to fall into the decoding loop of the Tanner graph. On the other hand, if a large value is taken for TL , the variable nodes in the tabu list are unable to be released for a long time. Thus, the most important messages can not be made use of during decoding, which is contrary to the original intention of the IDS algorithm. Considering the limit length TL = N, the variable nodes all can be added to the tabu list but can not be released. Accordingly, the variable nodes will be updated one by one. In this case the TSDS can be considered as a type of SBP algorithm. The difference between them is that only one V2C edge is selected to be updated in the TSDS algorithms. For the other extreme case, i.e. TL = 0, the TSDS can be degenerated into a type of normal IDS algorithm. From the above analysis it can be concluded that, the larger the value of TL , the more balanced the allocation of computational resources to all the variable nodes, and the less greediness with a slower convergence speed. On the contrary, the smaller the value of TL, the faster the convergence speed, but the more greediness the decoding algorithm. Simulations are performed to verify the above conclusion. Figure 3 shows the convergence performance of TSDS when TL takes different values. From Fig. 3 it can be seen that, when TL = 0, the convergence speed is fast while the error correction performance at the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 65, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

Fig. 3. Convergence performance of the TSDS algorithm with different values Fig. 4. BER/FER performance of the TSDS algorithm with different values

of TL for LDPC code of rate 1/2 block-length 576 at Eb/N0 = 3.0d B.

of β for LDPC code of rate 1/2 block-length 576 at Eb/N0 = 3.0d B.

convergence region is poor. With the increase of the value of TL, the convergence speed decreases gradually. When TL ≥ 0.5N, the error correction performance keeps improved as the number of iterations increases, which means that the greediness can be decreased.
From the above analyses we can conclude that, if the fast convergence speed and little greediness are required for the TSDS algorithm, it is necessary to dynamically adjust the value of TL . For the first few iterations of decoding, the value of TL should be small. In this way, the important messages can be made use of as soon as possible and the convergence speed can be increased. As the number of iterations increases, a large value of TL is required to decrease the greediness. In this paper, the length of TL is set as follow:

TL =

α · N · βk, 0.5 · N,

α · βk ≤ 0.5, α · βk > 0.5

(7)

where α and β are the adjustment factors to be used for the dynamic length, TL , of the tabu list, and k is the number of iterations. As we analyzed before, the tabu length should be
small in the first few iterations to ensure a fast convergence
speed. From Fig. 3, it can be seen that the convergence speed
has no obvious difference when the value of TL is equal to 0 and 0.25N in the first few iterations. Therefore, a small value is required for the parameter α. Here, its value is set to 0.01.
From Fig. 3, it also can be seen that when the value of TL is equal to 0.5N, the BER performance is the best after decoding become convergent. Thus, the maximum of TL is set to 0.5N. The factor β is taken as the main adjustment parameter for TL . It is obvious that when the value of β is equal to 1.0, the value of TL is constant, which is α · N. When the value of β is larger than 1.0, the value of TL increases exponentially with the number of iterations. The relationship between the value of β and the BER/FER performance is shown in Fig. 4, where, the value of β is taken from 1.0 to 2.0, and the step length is 0.1. The maximum number of iterations,
denoted by I t, is set to 10 and 50. From the simulation results it can be seen that when I t = 10, the performance has no obvious change, while, when I t = 50, the TSDS can have a significant performance improvement for β ranged from

Fig. 5. Convergence performance of the TSDS algorithm with different values of TL for LDPC code of rate 1/2 block-length 576 at Eb/N0 = 3.0d B.
1.5 to 1.7. If a larger value is set to β, for instance β = 2.0 in Fig. 4, the value of TL grows so fast that the important messages can not be accessed immediately, and the error correction performance will be decreased. In order to have a noticeable comparison between the fixed-length and variablelength of TL, the convergence curves are shown in Fig. 5, where α = 0.01 and β = 1.6 for the variable-length of TL. The simulations clearly demonstrate that the TSDS algorithm can achieve fast convergence speed and good convergence performance of error correction when the length of TL is dynamically adjusted. A large number of simulations show that the decoding performance is excellent when α = 0.01 and β = 1.6. Accordingly, the two parameters, α and β, are set with the above values in the following sections except noted otherwise.
B. The Simplification of TSDS Algorithm
In the decoding process we notice that, if variable node vmax has the maximum residual, the maximum V2C residual will be chosen from the edge set connected to variable node vmax rather than the others. That means, the values of the V2C pre-computations propagated from the other variable nodes will not be used in the continued decoding except that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DYNAMIC SCHEDULING DECODING OF LDPC CODES BASED ON TABU SEARCH

4617

Fig. 6. Core decoding procedure for the simplified TSDS algorithm of LDPC codes.

they are to be selected for updating in the next iteration. For

example, in Fig. 2 (c), if vb1 is selected in the next iteration,

the V2C messages to be updated will

and

the

pre-computations

of

m

pre vb2→ca2

abnedchmovpsb2re→en cfa3rowmillvb1nootnlbye,

taken for use until variable node vb2 is selected. Through the

above analysis, the decoding process can be simplified by

only

pre-computing

the

value

of

m

pre vb1→ca1

.

Thus,

we

change

the updating order by firstly performing the pre-computations,

and calculating the residuals of V2C edges connected to the

variable node with the maximum variable node residual. Note

that

the

pre-computation of

m

pre vb1→ci

should

not

be

calculated

because the message is propagated from check node ci .

To recognize the necessity of the pre-computations, the sym-
bol, Evb1→ci , is used to mark it for edge vb1 → ci . In this paper, the assignment with “1” (i.e., Evb1→ci = 1) is taken as the mark of the “without pre-computation”. In other words, there is no
need to pre-compute the message vb1 → ci when variable node vb is selected for updating. Otherwise, Evb1→ca1 = 0, the precomputation of the message vb1 → ca1 is required.
The decoding steps of the simplified TSDS are shown

in Fig. 6. It is assumed that variable node v j has the maximum

residual, and the updated message of v j at the previous time

ccoommepsutfartoiomnschmevpcjrk→e nciodaendca2V, 2iC.e.reEsvidj →uacla2s

= rv

1. Firstly, j →ci from

the prevariable

node v j are generated and propagated to the connected check

nodes except ca2. Then, if we assume that the edge from

variable node v j to check node ci has the maximum residual,

the

pre-computation

m

pre v j →ci

can

be

assigned

to

mv j →ci

as

the V2C updating message. At last, for all the variable nodes

connected to check node ci excluding the variable node v j ,

C2V messages are generated and the variable node residuals

are calculated. After the simplification of the TSDS algorithm,

only the variable node with the maximum residual needs to

perform the pre-computations, which can significantly reduce

the complexity. The detailed decoding process for the TSDS

algorithm with pseudo-code is described in Algorithm 1.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, the performance of the proposed TSDS algorithm is investigated through a large number of simulations. Then, the decoding complexity for binary LDPC codes consisting of N variable nodes and M check nodes is evaluated. To clearly illustrate the advantages of the proposed algorithms, the decoding performance of LDPC codes is

Algorithm 1 TSDS Algorithm

1: Initialize all mcm→vn = 0 and mvn→cm = Cvn

2: Initialize all r (vn) = |Cvn | and r (vn → cm) = |Cvn |

3: Initialize all Evn→cm = 0

4: Find the largest r (v j ) from the outside of the tabu list

5: 6:

for every ca ∈ N(v

calculate

m

pre v j →ca

j ) and Ev and r (mv

j →ca = j →ca )

0

do

7: end for

8:

Find

the

largest

r (mv j →ci ),

set

m

v

j

→ci

=m

pre v j →ci

9: Set r (v j )=0, r (mv j →ci )=0

10: for every vb ∈ N(ci )\v j do

11: Generate and propagate mci →vb , set Evb→ci = 1

12: Calculate r (vb)

13: Add vb to the tabu list if vb satisfies the tabu conditions

14: end for

15: Add v j to tabu list

16: if stopping rule is not satisfied then

17: Go back to line 4

18: end if

Fig. 7. BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, VC RBP, NW RBP, LQRD, OV RBP, SVNF, D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length 576 LDPC code.
simulated for different algorithms, including LLR BP [1], CSBP [20], VC RBP [8], NW RBP [7], LQRD [10], OV RBP [12], SVNF [11], D-SVNFS [14] and the proposed TSDS algorithm. The simulations are performed over the AWGN channel with BPSK modulation. The LDPC codes are denoted with (n, k), where n represents the block length and k represents the number of information symbols. Codes (576, 288) and (1152, 576) are the irregular LDPC codes constructed based on the IEEE 802.16e standard [21]. Code (1008, 504) is the regular LDPC code constructed with the progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [22]. In this paper the maximum number of iterations is set to 5, except noted otherwise.
A. Error Correction Performance
Figures 7 and 8 show the bit error rate (BER) performance of the decoding algorithms for LDPC codes of block-lengths 576 and 1008. From Fig. 7, the performance curves of the decoding algorithms of interest almost overlap when the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 65, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

Fig. 8. BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, VC RBP, NW RBP, LQRD, OV RBP, SVNF, D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length
1008 LDPC code.

Fig. 10. FER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, VC RBP, NW RBP, LQRD, OV RBP, SVNF, D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length
1008 LDPC code.

Fig. 9. FER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, VC RBP, NW RBP, LQRD, OV RBP, SVNF, D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length
576 LDPC code.

Fig. 11. FER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, VC RBP, NW RBP, OV RBP, SVNF, D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length
576 LDPC code with the maximum number of iterations, 50.

normalized SNR, Eb/N0, is from 1.0 dB to 2.1 dB. That is to say, the error-correction performance of the algorithms is similar. However, when SNR is lager than 2.1 dB, obvious changes have taken place in terms of the BER performance of these algorithms. It can be observed that the D-SVNFS and the proposed TSDS algorithms both achieve the best BER performance at medium to high SNR region among the algorithms of interest. When BER is 1.0×10−6, the D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithm can get 0.3 dB gain compared with the LQRD algorithm [10] and obtain about 0.2 dB gain compared with the SVNF algorithm [11]. The simulation results for a larger block size, 1008, are shown in Fig. 8. The figure clearly shows that the TSDS alone roughly obtains the best BER performance among the algorithms of interest. When BER is 1.0×10−7, the TSDS algorithm can obtain about 0.15dB gain when compared to the SVNF algorithm.
Figures 9 and 10 indicate the frame error rate (FER) vs. Eb/N0 performance with different algorithms for LDPC codes of block-lengths 576 and 1008. We can see that the D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithms again obtain the best FER performance among the algorithms in Fig.9 while the proposed

TSDS algorithm alone has the best FER performance in Fig.10. The FER performance of the OV RBP and the SVNF algorithms are roughly the same, as shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. The FER performance of LQRD algorithm is between the NW RBP and the SVNF algorithms.
To compare the error correction performance at convergence regions, the FER performance of (576, 288) LDPC code is simulated and shown in Fig. 11, where the number of iterations is 50. The figure shows that, when the number of iterations reaches 50, the FER performance of the TSDS algorithm is similar to that of the SVNF and D-SVNFS algorithms but better than that of the other algorithms. The FER performance of different algorithms is not so obvious at the convergence region. This is because the decoding algorithms have been convergent when the number of iterations reaches 50.
To investigate the convergence speed and the error correction performance of the algorithms, the BER vs. the number of iterations is simulated. The performance of the BER vs. the number of iterations for LDPC codes of block-length 576 at Eb/N0 = 3d B and block-length 1152 at Eb/N0 = 2.2d B is presented in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, respectively. Figure 12 shows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DYNAMIC SCHEDULING DECODING OF LDPC CODES BASED ON TABU SEARCH
TABLE I COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS

4619

the TSDS and SVNF continues to improve. Figure 13 shows the convergence performance of the LDPC code with code length 1152 at Eb/N0 = 2.2 d B. It is demonstrated that the convergence speed of the proposed TSDS algorithm is the fastest among all the algorithms of interest. That is to say, the TSDS algorithm has better error correction performance with fewer iterations.

Fig. 12. BER vs. the number of iterations performance of LLR BP, CS BP, VC RBP, NW RBP, OV RBP, LQRD, SVNF, D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length 576 LDPC code at Eb/N0 = 3.0 d B.
Fig. 13. BER vs. the number of iterations performance of LLR BP, CS BP, VC RBP, NW RBP, LQRD, OV RBP, SVNF, D-SVNFS and TSDS algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length 1152 LDPC code at Eb/N0 = 2.2 d B.
that the D-SVNFS and the proposed TSDS algorithm converge fastest. When the iteration number is less than 10, the OV RBP algorithm converges as fast as the SVNF. However, at this time the error correction performance of the OV RBP algorithm gets hardly improved when compared with the TSDS, the SVNF and the D-SVNFS algorithms. That is to say, the error correction performance of the OV RBP algorithm is worse than that of the TSDS, SVNF and D-SVNFS after getting convergent. With the increase of the number of iterations, the BER of

B. Complexity Analysis
In this subsection, the computational complexity of the proposed TSDS algorithm is analyzed and compared with other algorithms. In the Tanner graph of an LDPC code, the number of edges is E = dc M = dv N, where dc and dv denote the average degree of check nodes and variable nodes, respectively. In LDPC decoding, “one iteration” is defined as the process of selecting and updating E edges. The decoding complexity includes those operations in updating and searching. For convenient comparison, the complexity in updating and searching for different decoding algorithms is tabulated, as shown in Table I. The columns (2-nd to 4-th) of the table show the updating complexity, which consists of the number of V2C updating, C2V updating and pre-computations. For the OV RBP, NW RBP, LQRD and SNVF algorithms, the computations of the residuals in them are performed with the C2V pre-computations. Therefore, the pre-computations of these algorithms can be classified to the complexity of C2V calculations (last column in the table). For the proposed TSDS, the pre-computations can be classified to the complexity of V2C calculations (6-th column from the right) because the computations of the residuals are carried out with the V2C precomputations. The 5-th column in the table shows the search complexity, which consists of the search operations in each iteration.
From Table I, we can see that the C2V and V2C messages generated and propagated in one iteration are all E times in the LLR BP, CSBP and OV RBP algorithms. The difference is that the OV RBP has extra C2V pre-computations to obtain the variable nodes residuals. Because the NW RBP, LQRD and SVNF algorithms are devised based on the RBP algorithm, the three algorithms have the same updating complexity as that of the RBP, which was previously discussed in Section II-B. From Fig. 1, we can see that the number of the C2V messages update is E, the number of the V2C messages update is E (dv − 1), and the number of the C2V pre-computations for C2V residuals is E (dv − 1) (dc − 1). Thus, there are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 65, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

E[(dv − 1) (dc − 1) + 1] C2V calculations and E V2C calculations in each iteration for these algorithms.
For the updating complexity of the proposed TSDS, it can be seen from Algorithm 1 that one V2C and (dc − 1) C2V messages are propagated in each updating process. Because the pre-computations are performed at the beginning of each updating, the number of V2C pre-computations is (dv − 2) in the TSDS algorithm. Accordingly, the number of V2C, C2V and pre-computations for updating with the TSDS is E, E (dc − 1) and E(dv − 2), respectively. As we discussed before, the pre-computations of the TSDS should be classified to V2C computations because they are performed with Eq. (2). Thus, there are E(dc − 1) C2V computations and E(dv − 1) V2C computations in the TSDS algorithm. From Table I, it is clearly shown that the updating complexity of the TSDS is less than that of the NW RBP, LQRD and SNVF. Although the number of V2C computations for the TSDS is larger than that of the OV RBP, the number of C2V computations of the former is less than that of the latter. From Eq. (3) and Eq. (2), we can see that each C2V computation consists of (dc − 1) multiplications, (dc − 1) tanh(·) and one tanh−1(·) operations, while each V2C computation consists of only (dv − 1) additions. Therefore, we get the conclusion that the updating complexity of the proposed TSDS is less than that of the OV RBP. In addition, the updating complexity of the proposed TSDS is the lowest among all the IDS algorithms of interest except the VC RBP.
The search complexity is presented in the 5-th column of Table I. In each decoding for the OV RBP, one variable node is selected from all the variable nodes, and then dv messages are updated. Thus, there are E(N − 1)/dv = N(N − 1) comparisons for the OV RBP. However, the dynamic selection strategy of the OV RBP consists of three search conditions, which increases the search complexity of the OV RBP. For the NW RBP and VC RBP algorithms, they select one edge and update dc edges in each decoding. Thus, the number of comparisons for the two algorithms is M(E − 1). The LQRD simultaneously updates all the C2V messages, whose residuals are larger than a dynamic threshold in each decoding. If the average number of messages to be updated in each decoding for the LQRD is denoted with QL , the number of comparisons for each iteration of the algorithm is E(E − 1)/QL. For the SVNF algorithm, the maximum C2V residual is selected among the residuals generated by the check node connected to a certain variable node. It is assumed that vi is just the certain variable node. Then, the C2V edge to be updated is selected from all the edges, ca → vb, where ca ∈ M(vi ), and vb ∈ N(ca )\vi . Thus, for the SVNF, the number of comparisons in each decoding is dv (dc − 1), and the number of compare operations for each iteration is E(dv − 1)dc.
For the proposed TSDS, firstly, the variable node with the maximum node residual is selected from all the variable nodes not within the tabu list. Then, the V2C edge with the maximum V2C residual is selected from the variable node with the maximum node residual. Thus, there are N − TL comparisons in searching the variable node, and dv − 1 comparisons in searching the V2C edge. In summary, the total

number of comparisons for each iteration of the TSDS is

E(N − TL + dv − 1).

According to the above analysis, the SVNF has the lowest

search complexity with O(N). The search complexity of other

IDS algorithm of interest is O(N2). Since the value of TL

is dynamically adjusted, the search complexity of the TSDS

can

be

decreased

from

E

(N

+ dv

− 1)

to

E

(

N 2

+ dv

− 1)

with the increase of the number of iterations. Considering that

the TSDS has better error-correction performance and lower

updating complexity than the SVNF, the proposed TSDS is

acceptable both in terms of the error-correction capability and

the computation complexity.

In addition to the computational complexity, an additional

storage complexity is also required for the tabu list of the

TSDS algorithm. However, such a storage complexity is

acceptable, compared with the whole storage in decoding,

which consists of variable node messages, C2V messages,

V2C messages, residuals and pre-computed messages.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the tabu search is introduced to the dynamic scheduling decoding algorithm for LDPC codes. In order to well apply the fundamental principles of the tabu search in LDPC decoding, a new updating order of dynamic decoding strategies is proposed and the proposed algorithm is termed as the TSDS algorithm. In the algorithm, the updated variable nodes are judged with two tabu conditions, and the variable nodes that satisfy the two tabu conditions are stored into a tabu list. Thus, all variable nodes are divided into two sets with the tabu list. The variable nodes stored in the tabu list are forced not to be selected for updates, by which the greediness of the dynamic scheduling algorithm can be decreased. By dynamically adjusting the length of the tabu list, the TSDS algorithm can achieve a fast convergence speed and good error correction performance. Furthermore, the complexity of the TSDS algorithm can be decreased significantly by performing the pre-computations in the first step of each decoding. The simulation results and analyses show that the proposed algorithm is acceptable, considering the BER/FER performance, convergence speed, and decoding complexity.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 36th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., vol. 1. Pacific Grove, CA, USA, Nov. 2002, pp. 8–15.
[4] W. Phakphisut, P. Supnithi, T. Sopon, and L. M. M. Myint, “Serial belief propagation for the high-rate LDPC decoders and performances in the bit patterned media systems with media noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 3562–3565, Oct. 2011.
[5] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. Design Implement. (SIPS), Austin, TX, USA, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[6] Y.-M. Chang, A. I. V. Casado, M.-C. F. Chang, and R. D. Wesel, “Lowercomplexity layered belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., May 2008, pp. 1155–1160.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: DYNAMIC SCHEDULING DECODING OF LDPC CODES BASED ON TABU SEARCH

4621

[7] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 923–937.
[8] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, and H. Y. Song, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 117–118, Jan. 2009.
[9] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Ye, and G. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[10] M. Beermann and P. Vary, “A generalization of residual belief propagation for flexible reduced complexity LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), San Francisco, CA, USA, Sep. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[11] H. C. Lee, Y. L. Ueng, S. M. Yeh, and W. Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[12] X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and R. Cui, “Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–150, Feb. 2015.
[13] X. Liu, Z. Zhou, R. Cui, and E. Liu, “Informed decoding algorithms of LDPC codes based on dynamic selection strategy,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1357–1366, Apr. 2016.
[14] C. Aslam, Y. Guan, K. Cai, and G. Han, “Low-complexity beliefpropagation decoding via dynamic silent-variable-node-free scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–31, Jan. 2017.
[15] F. Glover, “Tabu search—Part I,” ORSA J. Comput., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 190–206, 1989.
[16] F. Glover, “Tabu search—Part II,” ORSA J. Computing, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 4–32, 1990.
[17] D. Y. Sha and C.-Y. Hsu, “A hybrid particle swarm optimization for job shop scheduling problem,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 791–808, Dec. 2006.
[18] J.-F. Cordeau, G. Laporte, and A. Mercier, “A unified tabu search heuristic for vehicle routing problems with time windows,” J. Oper. Res. Soc., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 928–936, Aug. 2001.
[19] X. Liu, J. Cai, and L. Wu, “Improved decoding algorithm of serial belief propagation with a stop updating criterion for LDPC codes and applications in patterned media storage,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 829–836, Feb. 2013.
[20] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Nov. 2007.
[21] LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY, document IEEE C802.16e-05/0066r3, Jan. 2005.
[22] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

Xingcheng Liu (SM’12) was born in Anfu, Jiangxi, China. He received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in electrical engineering from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, and the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU), Guangzhou, China.
He did post-doctoral research with the University of Southampton, Southampton, U.K., from 2002 to 2003. He was a Visiting Scientist with Oregon State University, Corvallis, USA, from 2004 to 2005. He is currently a Full Professor with the Department of Communications Engineering, School of Electronics and Information Technology, SYSU. He is also the primary investigator of several projects on wireless communications and networking. He has authored over 100 peerreviewed papers in journals and conferences. His main research interests include channel coding theory and applications, mobile communications, wireless sensor networks, and Internet of Things. He received the Royal Society KC Wong Fellowship of the U.K. for his post-doctoral research. Dr. Liu is a Senior Member of the China Institute of Communications.
Chunlei Fan was born in Xihua, Zhoukou, Henan, China. He received the B.E. degree in electronics and information science from the Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha, in 2014, and the M.S. degree in information and communication engineering from Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, in 2017. His research interests include channel coding theory and their applications to communication systems.
Xuechen Chen received the B.S.E. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of California at Riverside, Riverside, in 2012. She has been with the Bell Labs Research Center as a Research Scientist, where she has been involved in multimedia transmission over next generation wireless networks. She is currently an Assistant Professor with the School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Her research interests include, but not limited to sourcechannel coding and distributed source coding especially in delay-constrained applications, compressed sensing and general signal processing and estimation, and localization in wireless sensor networks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:40:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

