This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the Sarnoff 2016 proceedings.

FPGA-accelerated Simulation of a Hybrid-ARQ System using High Level Synthesis
Swapnil Mhaske∗†, Hojin Kee†, Tai Ly†, Predrag Spasojevic∗ ∗Wireless Information Network Laboratory, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
Email:{swapnil.mhaske@rutgers.edu, spasojev@winlab.rutgers.edu} †National Instruments Corporation, Austin, TX, USA Email:{hojin.kee, tai.ly}@ni.com

Abstract—Physical layer processing for 5G wireless is expected to operate at a very high-throughput with very low latency. Developing a channel coding system based on Hybrid Automatic Repeat reQuest (HARQ) for evolving requirements necessitates extensive experimentation involving undesirably long development cycles. We demonstrate the use of a High-level Synthesis (HLS) compiler in LabVIEW Communications to prototype a real world HARQ system using Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, however, without the expertise of an Hardware Description Language (HDL) designer. This implementation consumed 54% of the resources on our FPGA and allowed us to measure errorrate performance of the system over large, realistic data sets using accelerated, in-hardware simulation with a system throughput that is 4x greater than the CPU-based implementation. Furthermore, use of the HLS methodology significantly reduced time to explore the HARQ system parameter space and optimize in terms of error-rate performance and resource utilization.
Index Terms—5G, HARQ, HLS, QC-LDPC, Intellectual Property (IP).
I. INTRODUCTION
A well designed error control coding system can significantly contribute to the overall performance of a communication system. However, implementing channel codes that perform near capacity (such as LDPC [1] and Turbo codes [2]) involve complex encoding and decoding algorithms. A classic example is belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes [1].
The next generation of wireless technology (termed as 5G) aims at providing peak data rates of upto ten gigabits per second with an overall latency of less than 1ms [3], [4]. To fulfill these requirements, one of the directions taken by industrial and academic research alike is the operation of the radios in the mm-wave (30-300GHz) spectrum. Although this spectrum offers large bandwidths, it comes with an unstable wireless channel (relative to the currently utilized spectrum) necessitating the use of techniques such as large antenna arrays and adaptive beamsteering. Thus, in the already space and power constrained terminals, the physical layer processing budget available to the existing systems such as channel coding will further decrease. Moreover, the specifications for 5G are evolving. Industrial and academic effort globally is being directed toward consensus building and standardization. As a consequence, applications under the 5G umbrella being researched and developed today are subject to modifications in the near future.
This imposes the first major requirement on our research

Figure 1: Research methodology for architecture-aware development.
work: flexibility for future modifications. To satisfy this, we use highly reconfigurable FPGA hardware and HLS technology [5] that without expert-level hardware domain knowledge enables us to reliably prototype our research in a short amount of time. With techniques such as timing estimation, constant propagation, pipelining, loop unrolling, memory inference from arrays, HLS compiles untimed dataflow algorithms written with loops and arrays and feedbacks, into RTL HDL implementations that achieves high clock rate and high throughput [5]. The second major requirement is: real world prototyping. Fig. 1 summarizes our research methodology. Even though theoretical simulations validate a novel idea, they fail to comprehensively assess its real world impact. In an effort towards designing and developing an architectureaware [6] channel coding solution, it is crucial to monitor the performance of the system in real-time on actual state-of-theart hardware. This helps us keep track of parameters such as throughput, latency and resource utilization of the system each time a modification is done.
The main contribution of this work is the demonstration of the ability of an HLS tool to generate HDL description for a theoretical algorithm input by a user without expert-level hardware design knowledge. A communication system with not only the physical layer components but also MAC layer protocol was fully implemented using HLS.
Significant amount of work on architectures for channel coding exists. Notably, [7], [8], [9], [10] and [11]. However, this method of development does not offer the flexibility to modify (that our methodology needs) without long development cycles and requires expert knowledge of VLSI and RTL-level design. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the basic theory behind the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:15:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1539-9@2016 IEEE

19

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the Sarnoff 2016 proceedings.

HARQ techniques implemented, Section III explains in detail the system operation. Some of the major advantages of using HLS in LabVIEW Communications and the results achieved thereby are described in Section IV and Section V respectively. And Section VI concludes the paper.

II. THEORY: HARQ METHODS
Wireless channels are susceptible to random fluctuations in their quality, resulting in errors in the transmitted data. One way of tackling this problem is to employ ARQ. Here, the received unit of data (hereon referred to as a packet) goes through an error detection (ED) test such as the Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC). If the CRC test passes, the receiver transmits back an acknowledgment (ACK) feedback signal to the transmitter indicating that the packet was recieved error free. In case the CRC test fails, the receiver sends a negative acknowledgment (NAK). Although ARQ improves the integrity of data transmission, it comes with an increased average number of transmissions.
Hybrid ARQ (HARQ) is a transmission technique that combines Forward Error Correction (FEC) with ARQ. In HARQ, a suitable FEC code protects the data and ED code bits. In its simplest form, the FEC encoded packet - referred to as a Redundancy Version (RV) in this context - is transmitted as per the ARQ mechanism protocol. If received in error, the receiver sends a NAK (retransmission request) to the transmitter. In this scenario, the FEC simply increases the probability of successful transmission, thus reducing the average number of transmissions required in an ARQ scheme. However, this mode of HARQ operation is suitable for a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) range for which the FEC offers a noticeable coding gain [12]. It is not hard to see that, in the SNR region where the FEC does not provide significant coding gains, the HARQ performance deteriorates to that of ARQ. The HARQ effciency (proportional to the FEC code redundancy and the number of transmissions per packet) can be improved by operating it in the following two modes.
A. Type-I
In this mode, in the event of an unsuccessful transmission, instead of discarding the packet at the reciever and requesting a retransmission, the packet is buffered at the receiver and a retransmission is requested. On the arrival of the retransmitted packet, the signal information from the previously buffered packet is combined with that of the retransmitted packet and then decoded. Fig. 2 illustrates the concept. The use of information from the previous trasmit instance has the potential to improve the probability of successful decoding. This in turn has the potential to reduce the average number of transmissions taken. This is also called as HARQ with soft combining or Chase combining [13]. In this brief, we refer to this mode of operation as Type-I HARQ.
B. Type-II
With an increased complexity of operation, this scheme achieves higher throughput efficiency. It is especially suited to

Figure 2: Illustration of Type-I mode of operation showing 3 successive transmissions (RV0 . . . RV2). sys(j) and pi(j) is the chase combined version of the systematic bits and the ith parity subset bits respectively, after j retransmissions, 0 ≤ i, j ≤ 2.
applications where the channel quality fluctuates significantly. This is mainly because each transmit instance is adapted to the channel condition in its FEC code redundancy and/or signal power. When the redundancy of the FEC code is adapted it is termed as Incremental Redundancy (IR) HARQ. Fig. 3 illustrates the operation of one such scheme. Assuming that a systematic [14] FEC code is used, initially, the transmitter sends the first RV as the systematic bits along with a subset of the parity bits. One method to form such a subset of bits is called puncturing the code discussed in detail in Section III-A. If decoding fails at the receiver, the failed RV is buffered and a retransmission is requested. The transmitter prepares the second RV which comprises of another set of parity bits. The parity bits from the most recent RV are combined (exclusively) with the previous ones as depicted in Fig. 3 and decoding is attempted again. This process continues until decoding is successful, or all parity bits of the mother code (see Section III-A) are transmitted, or the maximum number of retransmissions allowed is reached.
III. SYSTEM
To study the performance of the two HARQ schemes (TypeI and Type-II) we have implemented a baseband bidirectional link with two transceiver nodes. This can be compared to a downlink connection between a base station (BS) and a user equipment (UE) with a data channel and a feedback channel. Each node is capable of running the HARQ protocol in its two modes. In our work, the BS (initiator of the transmission) operates in the master mode and the UE operates in the slave mode. A high-level description of the overall system with several subsystems is shown in Fig. 4. At the initiator node, each data packet of length k = 1152 is encoded with an LDPC mother code of rate R = 1/2 and the CRC value for it is simultaneously computed. The RV generator selects bits from the encoded data to form RVs as per the algorithm specified

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:15:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1539-9@2016 IEEE

20

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the Sarnoff 2016 proceedings.

RV Rate (R) Punctured Block Index (J)

RV0 4/5 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22

RV1 3/4

12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22

RV2 2/3

12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22

Table I: Puncturing pattern from [15], for each block index J, zJ to z(J + 1) − 1 bits are punctured from the mother codeword.

Figure 3: Illustration of Type-II mode of operation showing 3 successive transmissions (RV0 . . . RV2).

Figure 5: Frame Structure.

B. MAC-level Operation

Figure 4: HARQ system schematic for one node. Overall, the system simulation uses two nodes (BS) and (UE).
in Section III-A. The header for each packet is generated as per the format shown in Fig. 5 and is encoded with a rate 1/9 repetition code. Finally, the RV is appended to the header and sent over the channel.
At the receiver node, header bits are decoded and the RV combiner uses the information in the header to combine the received signal values for Type-I mode (see Fig. 2) or TypeII mode (see Fig. 3). CRC values from the header and the decoded data are compared to generate a feedback for the initiator node. The feedback (1-bit ACK/NAK) is coded with a rate 1/40 repetition code before sending over the channel. We assume an error-free feedback for this experiment, which is guaranteed by the rate 1/40 repetition code over the SNR range in consideration.
A. Rate Adaptation
In the Type-II HARQ scheme, each RV is a subset of bits of the mother codeword bits. If the channel is known at the transmitter, RVs can be generated in a manner that maximizes the HARQ throughput. In this work however, we do not assume any channel information at either of the nodes. To generate four RVs at four different rates, we use the puncturing method in [15]. The puncturing pattern is summarized in Table I.

Without loss of generality, for N RVs and the maximum number of retransmissions set to RT Nmax, the MAC-level operation of the HARQ protocol is shown in Fig. 6 for the master mode and Fig. 7 for slave mode. For Type-I scheme of HARQ, the RV generator does not puncture any bits and sends the whole mother codeword every transmit instance. Whereas in the Type-II scheme, it generates RVs as per Fig. 8. At the receiver, for the Type-I scheme of HARQ, at the ith transmit instance performs Bi = Bi−1 + RVi, where B denotes the buffer contents and, |B| = n with B0 = 0). For the Type-II scheme, the RV combiner performs B[σ(j)] = RVi(j), where 0 ≤ i ≤ (N − 1), 0 ≤ j ≤ (|RV| − 1) and σ(j) is the position of the jth code bit in the mother codeword determined by the puncturing method.
IV. HLS FOR EASE OF EXPERIMENTATION
The HARQ system comprises of subsystems that can be classified into two main categories based on the nature of the processing they perform. The bit-manipulation subsystems (DSP-like) follow a pattern of processing that does not change significantly on a per transmission basis, in other words, they are more or less stateless. The channel encoders and decoders are examples of this category. The protocol sensitive subsystems on the other hand have to perform functions that are highly sensitive to the state of the system in a given transmission. For instance, the HARQ controller, the RV generator and the RV combiner maintain a state as described in Section III. With a few examples, this section highlights the ease of modification in a short time that HLS provides across subsystems which is otherwise not possible for a purely HDLbased description.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:15:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1539-9@2016 IEEE

21

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the Sarnoff 2016 proceedings.

0 Prepare header for Type-I

START HTID?

B
1 Prepare header for Type-II

Encode and transmit frame

Y

A

Erasure failure

Timeout?

N

HTID = HTID
MCS = MCS RT N = RT N

ACK

Feedback NAK

RT N = RT Nmax ? Y
Decoding Failure

N B

START

send RVN −1 ,

Y

RT N > N − 1

i.e. codeword at the

N

mother code rate

send RVi , where 0 ≤ i ≤ N − 1

STOP
Figure 8: Type-II (IR) mode: from RV0 to RVN−1 codewords are transmitted with decreasing code rate. If the number of retransmissions taken are greater than the available RV s, then after transmitting RV0 to RVN−1, RVN−1 is transmitted for the successive retransmissions.

A

STOP

Figure 6: Flowchart showing the master mode of operation for the HARQ control algorithm.

Figure 9: Realization of an example of protocol-sensitive subsystem using HLS.

START

RT N = 0? N

Y A

0

B

type-I combine bits

HT ID?

1

type-II combine bits

channel decode

A

Figure 10: RTL Block Diagram: Realization of an example of protocol-sensitive subsystem using HDL.

1 CRC result?
0

send ACK

send NAK

B

STOP

Figure 7: Flowchart showing the slave mode of operation for the HARQ control algorithm.

A. Protocol-Sensitive Subsystem Modification
The HARQ controller is essentially a FSM, the operation of which is described in Section III-B. For a reliable and an efficient implementation of an FSM on an FPGA, the designer needs to take care of issues such as clock and input signal timing, state encoding scheme and the choice of the coding style [16]. Modification to the MAC-level protocol directly affects the FSM in our work. For instance, during experimentation the frame structure is likely to undergo modifications. Any modification to the frame structure affects nearly all subsystems. One such example is illustrated in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 where the ith field of the header of length

li bits is read to process output di which is further used to process the data. The description in Fig. 9 is agnostic to the modification and the designer can implement a change without HDL domain expertise. Whereas, in Fig. 10 one can see that the description is specific to the subsystem in which the header is being used. Modifying the length of a field for instance requires modification of counter logic and adjustment of the delay value. This needs to be repeated for all subsystems that are affected by this change. In contrast, HLS Compiler automatically generates the counter logic and delay values in Fig. 10 by propagating the field-length values into the algorithm in Fig. 9, allowing the same algorithmic description to be reused for different values of field-length.
B. Bit-Manipulation Subsystem Modification
The channel coding subsystems namely the LDPC and repetition encoders and decoders are at the core of the HARQ system. The details of the LDPC decoder implementation (results shown in Table III) are available in [6]. HLS also eases the implementation of bit-manipulation subsystems like these. For example, the 9x repetition encoder description in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:15:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1539-9@2016 IEEE

22

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the Sarnoff 2016 proceedings.

Figure 11: Description of the 9x repetition encoder in LabVIEW FPGA (compiled to VHDL by LabVIEW subsequently.) Note the logic required that is specific to the codeword size n.

Figure 13: FER performance of Type-I and Type-II schemes.

Figure 12: Description of the 9x repetition encoder using HLS using just a for-loop without any logic specific to the code.

LabVIEW FPGA shown in Fig. 11. LabVIEW FPGA provides high-level abstraction to VHDL however, is not the same as algorithmic level description that is provided by the HLS compiler in LabVIEW Communications. Comparing this to the HLS algorithmic description shown in Fig. 12 it is evident that modification without much time and effort is facilitated by using HLS.

V. RESULTS

The HARQ system has been implemented on the Xilinx

Kintex-7 series of FPGAs and the algorithmic description was

input using LabVIEW Communications. We chose these set

of tools as the FPGA is available in the NI USRP 2943R

series used for real world prototyping of our research. At the

time of writing this paper, the system performance has been

evaluated for the IEEE 802.16 (2012) [17] set of QC-LDPC

codes. We would like to emphasize here that owing to the ease

of modification, we can, in short development cycles replace

the channel codes with other code structures being researched

such as the one described in [18]. The error-rate performance

for 1k frames of codeword size of n = 2304 is shown in

Fig. 13. The residual Frame Error-Rate (FER) accounts for

the errors that the HARQ protocol failed to correct, whereas

the FER accounts for errors that happen without the use of the

HARQ protocol. The data throughput of the system, defined

as

R RT N

and

the

throughput

averaged

over

the

frames

per SNR

point is plotted in Fig. 14. As expected the performance of the

Figure 14: Throughput performance of Type-I and Type-II schemes.
system is improved with HARQ at the cost of a decrease in the throughput. The FPGA resource utilization for the same is given in Table III.
Scalable Simulation Speedup: Each time any change in the system is made there is a need to evaluate the performance of the system. This is especially true for testing code structures under research. Error-rate performance in excess of 108 bits is required to observe phenomena such as the error-floor of a code [14]. This makes time-efficient simulations not only a luxury but a necessity. In our implementation, while developing a real world prototype we also get the benefit of a 4x speedup in simulation time. We used the non-pipelined 1x version [6] for the LDPC decoder, however if the 2x or pipelined version (performance shown in Table II) if employed has the potential to double the already 4x speedup. We measured the execution time for 10k frames over 40 SNR values. On a host machine (PC) it took about 4.28min and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:15:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1539-9@2016 IEEE

23

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the Sarnoff 2016 proceedings.

on our FPGA testbed it took about 1.02min resulting in a 4x speedup.

1x

2x

Device

Kintex-7k410t Kintex-7k410t

Throughput(Mb/s) 337

608

FF(%)

9.1

5.3

BRAM(%)

4.7

6.4

DSP48(%)

5.2

5.2

LUT(%)

8.7

8.2

Table II: Resource utilization & throughput of the LDPC decoder used in the HARQ system on the Xilinx Kintex-7 FPGA.

Utilization

Clock Rate (MHz)

80

Time to generate VHDL (min) 5

Total Slice (%)

54

LUT (%)

32

FF (%)

19

DSP (%)

12

BRAM (%)

30

Table III: Performance and resource utilization for the HARQ system on the NI USRP-2953R containing the Xilinx Kintex-7 (410t) FPGA.

VI. CONCLUSION
The HLS toolset in LabVIEW Communications enabled us to develop a complex system involving both the physical layer and the MAC layer components of a wireless communication system without a long development process and hardware design expertise. The flexibility and scalability of the system allows us to evaluate the performance 4x faster than a traditional host based simulation over large real world data sets. The HARQ system comprises of not only DSP-like subsystems but also FSM-based subsystems which were implemented on a Xilinx Kintex-7 FPGA with 54% resource utilization.

continual support for this research work and the LabVIEWTM
FPGA R&D and the Advanced Wireless Research team in
National Instruments for their valuable feedback and support.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Information Theory, IRE Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit errorcorrecting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes. 1,” in Communications, 1993. ICC ’93 Geneva. Technical Program, Conference Record, IEEE International Conference on, vol. 2, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070 vol.2.
[3] B. Raaf, W. Zirwas, K.-J. Friederichs, E. Tiirola, M. Laitila, P. Marsch, and R. Wichman, “Vision for Beyond 4G broadband radio systems,” in Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2011 IEEE 22nd International Symposium on, Sept 2011, pp. 2369–2373.
[4] M. Cudak, A. Ghosh, T. Kovarik, R. Ratasuk, T. Thomas, F. Vook, and P. Moorut, “Moving Towards Mmwave-Based Beyond-4G (B-4G) Technology,” in Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), 2013 IEEE 77th, June 2013, pp. 1–5.
[5] H. Kee, S. Mhaske, D. Uliana, A. Arnesen, N. Petersen, T. Riche, D. Blasig, and T. Ly, “Rapid and high-level constraint-driven prototyping using LabVIEW FPGA,” in 2014 IEEE , GlobalSIP 2014, 2014.
[6] S. Mhaske, H. Kee, T. Ly, A. Aziz, and P. Spasojevic, “High-Throughput FPGA-based QC-LDPC Decoder Architecture,” in Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Fall), 2015 IEEE 82nd, Sep 2015, pp. 1–5.
[7] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, Aug 2009.
[8] Y. Sun and J. Cavallaro, “VLSI Architecture for Layered Decoding of QC-LDPC Codes With High Circulant Weight,” IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems, vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 1960–1964, Oct 2013.
[9] N. Onizawa, T. Hanyu, and V. Gaudet, “Design of high-throughput fully parallel ldpc decoders based on wire partitioning,” IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 482–489, Mar 2010.
[10] V. Chandrasetty and S. Aziz, “FPGA Implementation of High Performance LDPC Decoder Using Modified 2-Bit Min-Sum Algorithm,” in International Conference on Computer Research and Development, May 2010, pp. 881–885.
[11] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and A. Dollas, “FPGA-based design and implementation of a multi-Gbps LDPC decoder,” in International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL), Aug 2012, pp. 262–269.
[12] E. Soljanin, R. Liu, and P. Spasojevic, “Hybrid ARQ with random transmission assignments,” Advances in Network Information Theory, P. Gupta, G. Kramer, and A. Wijngarden, Eds. DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Thepretical Computer Science, American Mathematical Society, vol. 66, pp. 321–334, Aug 2004.
[13] D. Chase, “Code combining–a maximum-likelihood decoding approach for combining an arbitrary number of noisy packets,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 385–393, May 1985.
[14] D. Costello and S. Lin, Error control coding. Pearson Education Inc., 2004.
[15] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “A High-Throughput LDPC Decoder Architecture With Rate Compatibility,” Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 839–847, April 2011.
[16] N. Rafla and B. L. Davis, “A Study of Finite State Machine Coding Styles for Implementation in FPGAs,” in Circuits and Systems, 2006. MWSCAS ’06. 49th IEEE International Midwest Symposium on, vol. 1, Aug 2006, pp. 337–341.
[17] “IEEE Standard for Wireless MAN-Advanced Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems,” IEEE Std 802.16.1-2012, pp. 1–1090, Sept 2012.
[18] B. Young, S. Mhaske, and P. Spasojevic, “Rate compatible IRA codes using row splitting for 5G wireless,” in Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), 2015 49th Annual Conference on, March 2015, pp. 1–5.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Rutgers University for their

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:15:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-1539-9@2016 IEEE

24

