Fifty-fourth Annual Allerton Conference Allerton House, UIUC, Illinois, USA September 27 - 30, 2016
Error Correction for Approximate Computing
Hang Zhang∗, Afshin Abdi∗, Faramarz Fekri∗, and Hadi Esmaeilzadeh †
∗School of ECE, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. †College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Abstract— Approximate computing, which sacrifices the accuracy during computation, is a promising technology to save energy. However, large number of computation errors may violate the accuracy requirement of certain applications and should be corrected. Consider a Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) with multiple Streaming Multiprocessors (SMs), where some of these SMs perform accurate computation while the others perform approximate computation. Provided the approximate outputs are correlated with other accurate outputs, we exploit this relation and model the approximate computation process as a communication process. Then the problem of error correction transforms to a problem of decoding and we want to solve it with certain error correction code. Different from the classical communications process, approximate computing raises additional constraints on the code design. In this paper, we propose a semi-regular LDPC code satisfying these constraints and prove this code can be perfectly decoded. Certain properties of the code are analyzed and simulations are provided to verify the statement.
I. INTRODUCTION
For more than five decades, consistent and exponential improvement in transistor scaling coupled with continuous advances in general-purpose processor design has exponentially improved the performance of computing systems. However, as we enter the dark silicon era (as we projected in our study [1], [3]–[5], [7], the benefits from transistor scaling are diminishing and the current paradigm of processor design significantly falls short of the traditional cadence of performance improvements due to power constraints. Performance has hit the power wall. These shortcomings can drastically curtail the IT industry’s ability to continuously deliver new capabilities, breaking the backbone of its economic ecosystem. These challenges have coincided with the big data revolution–applications that extract knowledge from massive amounts of user data. However, the rate of data generation is increasing at an overwhelming rate that is beyond the capabilities of current computing systems to match. Expert analyzes show that the zettabyte barrier was cracked in 2010. In 2011, the amount of information generated surpassed 1.8 zettabytes (trillion gigabytes). by 2020, consumers will generate 50× this staggering
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. ECCS-1609823.

figure [6]. While data generation is quadrupling each year, modern processors have seen a performance improvement of roughly 10-15% every two years. Without continuous performance improvements, grand-challenge applications, such as protein folding, accurate climate modeling, and machine intelligence, may stay out of reach due to their need for significantly higher computation power.
Radical departures from conventional approaches are necessary to provide large efficiency and performance gains for a wide range of applications. As one such departure, general-purpose approximate computing is an emerging area computing that accepts error in computing and breaks the traditional abstraction of “near-perfect” accuracy. Large classes of emerging applications that collect and process data in mobile and cloud services exhibit inherent tolerance to imprecision. Conventional techniques navigate a design space defined by the two dimensions of performance and energy, and traditionally trade one for the other. Approximate computing explores a third dimension, that of error, and trades accuracy for gains in energy and performance. However, certain applications require the error probability to be within some range. This paper aims to navigate this three dimensional space and proposes a method to correct the approximate errors.
In 1948, Shannon developed a fundamental limit on the efficiency of communication over noisy channels. The coding theorem proves the existence of block codes which are capacity achieving and the error probability approaches zero as code length become very long. Inspired by Shannon’s work and the success of LDPC code in performing close to capacity for many channels [2], [9], we want to leverage approximation across the computing stack for orders of magnitude performance and efficiency gains while delivering acceptable output quality by using error control coding. In this paper, our major contributions are listed as the following.
• We exploit the correlation between the accurate outputs and approximate outputs and further model the approximate computing process as a noisy communication channel. With this modeling, we transform the problem of error correction in ap-

978-1-5090-4550-1/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

948

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

proximate computing to a problem of decoding. • We design an error correction code via adopting
the low-density parity check (LDPC) code. Note that the code design for approximate computing is different from the traditional communication setting. In this paper, we point out these additional constraints, i.e., the requirement of the code structure and the check node degree. • We study the stability of the code and prove its effectiveness. First, we consider our designed code as a multi-edge type LDPC code and study its stability. Due to the limitations of traditional analysis method, i.e., ignoring the code structure, we modify the framework in [8] to analyze our code. Then we prove that the designed LDPC code is effective in correcting the approximate computing errors with output correlation modeled as Gaussian channel and BEC channel. Further, the simulation results are presented to verify our statement.
The rest of the paper is organized as the following. In Section II, the system model is described. In Section III, we present the additional constraints of the code design, analyze the code and prove some properties of the designed code. Section IV presents simulation results, and conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. SYSTEM MODEL

We consider a Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) with L×U Streaming Multiprocessors (SMs). For each of the GPU SM, we assume its input to be binary sequences and the outputs to be a vector of length k. The whole set of GPU SMs is divided into two categories: in set I0, the GPU SM performs accurate computation, whereas in set I1 the GPU SM performs approximate computation to achieve energy efficiency.
In set I0, the GPU SM performs the accurate computation. The accurate computation of an arbitrary GPU SM is formulated as a kernel function F (·). The relation between the input Xi and the output Yi can be written as Yi = F (Xi). Note that the computation outputs of GPU SMs are generally correlated. For two arbitrary GPU SM gi and gj, we model the relationship between the accurate outputs Yi and Yj as the following,

P(Yi(l) = Yj(l)) = r, 1 ≤ l ≤ k,

(1)

where Yi(l) and Yj(l) denotes the lth bits in output Yi and Yj , respectively, and r is assumed to be a constant parameter to simplify the problem.
In set I1, the GPU SM performs the approximate computation instead. Here we decompose the approximate computing process into two stages.
• In the first stage, the GPU SM performs the accurate computation and get output Yi. Note that this

Y0

Approximate Computing Channel

~Y0

Decoder

Y0

Y1
Fig. 1. Approximate Computation Channel.

Y ~Y 0 Approximate Computing

0

D

Channel

E

Y0

Imaginary [Y0 P1(Y0)]

C O

Encoder

~ P1(Y0) Parity Correlation P1(Y0)

D E

Y0

Channel

R

Fig. 2. Coding Approaching to Correct Approximate Computing Errors.

output is imaginary and correlated with the outputs

of GPU SMs in set I0. • In the second stage, output Yi passes through a

noisy channel and generates the approximate output Y˜i. Here we assume the noisy channel, called as

Approximate Computing Channel (ACC), to be

memoryless Gaussian channel, which is modeled

as as

Y˜i(l) = Yi(l) + n(il),

(2)

where Yi(l) and accurate output

Y˜i(l) denote the l-th Yi and approximate

element of output Y˜i,

respectively, and n(il) denotes the additive white

Gaussian noise with zero mean and σ2 variance.

Here we want to exploit the relationship between the imaginary accurate output Yi and other accurate outputs to correct the approximate errors in Y˜i.

A. Error Correction Approach
In this subsection, we propose a method based on coding theory to correct the errors of approximate computing. For the presentation clarity, we consider only two GPU SMs: SM g1 which performs exact computations and SM g0 which performs approximate computations. Their computation outputs are denoted as Y1 and Y˜0, respectively.
Note that we decompose the approximate computing procedure into two stages, as shown in the above. To correct the errors, we need some modifications of these two stages, as shown in Fig. 2.
• In the first stage, we assume that the accurate output Y0 is further encoded into a systematic code [Y0 P1(Y0)], where P1(Y0) denotes (n − k) parity check bits associated with Y0. This imaginary encoding procedure is described by [Y0 P(Y0)] = [Y0 GY0], where Gk×n is known as the generator

949

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

matrix and has the form G = Ik PT due to the systematic code requirement. • In the second stage, the codeword [Y0 P1(Y0)] goes through a parallel channel: information bits Y0 pass through the ACC becoming Y˜0 while the check bits P1(Y0) go through the Parity Correlation Channel (PCC) becoming P˜1(Y0). The output of the second stage is the approximate output Y˜0 followed by (n− k) parity check bits.
With the above modifications, our task of correcting the approximate computing errors transforms to the task of decoding, as shown in Fig. 2. Since the systematic encoder in Fig. 2 is imaginative, we do not have access to the parity check bits P˜1(Y0) directly, which are required in decoding. Note that the PCC is imaginative and can be designed by us. We can exploit the relation between the outputs Y0 and Y1 and make parity check bits P˜1(Y0) to be P1(Y1), which are generated by generator matrix Gn×k on output Y1. Provided the code is properly designed, we can correct the approximate computing errors.
III. CODE DESIGN
In the previous section, we have formulated the problem of error correction in approximate computing into a decoding problem. In this paper, we adopt the lowdensity parity check (LDPC) code. In this section, we discuss how to design the error correction code. First we discuss the additional constraints of the code design. Then we analyze this code design through PEXIT in [8] and prove that this code can correct the approximate computing errors.
A. Code Design Constraints
The code design for approximate computing diverges for classical communication setting and raises additional constraints. First, the structure of the code is constraint, as shown in Section II. Due to the requirement of systematic code, the structure of the generator matrix has the form [I PT], which means the corresponding parity check matrix H is written as [P I]. This implies that part of the matrix is fixed as an identity matrix and many variable node has degree one. Note that variable nodes of degree one are generally unwanted in LDPC design [11], which lead to positive error probability provided they are placed randomly.
Second, the check node degree should be uniform and be fixed before code design. Let a be an arbitrary parity check bit from P1(Y0), and b be the corresponding parity bit from P1(Y1). Denote the corresponding check node degree as m and as the XOR operation. Then we

have the following relation,

a = Y0(l1)

Y0(l2 )

···

Y0(lm),

b = Y1(l1)

Y1(l2 )

···

Y1(lm), ls ∈ {1, 2 · · · k}.

(3)

In the above section, we design the PCC to make parity check bits P˜1(Y0), as shown in Fig. 2, to be P1(Y1). With the pairwise correlation given by (1), we get the probability P r{a = b} = 0.5[1 − (1 − 2r)m]. Note that the above probability varies together with the check node degree m. Provided that the PCC is time-independent, the check node degree should stay the same.
Further, to design the code we need to know the capacity of PCC in advance. To simplify the calculation of PCC capacity, we assume the independence of parity check bits P1(Y1). Its capacity is written as 1−H(0.5−(1−2r)m), where H(·) is defined as H(x) = −x log(x) − (1 − x) log(1 − x). Prior to designing the LDPC code, the PCC capacity should be fixed. Therefore, instead of adjusting the degrees of variable nodes and check nodes simultaneously, we can only select the variable node degree with a pre-determined check node degree. Since the PCC decays as the check node degree increases, a low check node degree is preferred and the corresponding variable node degree can be found to correct the approximate computing errors.

B. Code Analysis

Note that in the parity check matrix H, there is a large fraction of variable nodes of degree 1. In the traditional analysis framework [11], the degree one variable nodes lead to positive error probability. However, if we take the structure of the code into account, the error probability can still approach zero provided that we properly place these degree one nodes. To analyze this kind of LDPC code, referred as a multi-edge-type LDPC code, we adopt the analytic framework in [10], [11].
For the multi-edge-type LDPC code, we assume there are me kinds of edges and mr kinds of channels. Define vector d = [d1 d2 · · · dme] and vector b = [b1 b2 · · · bmr ], where di denotes the number of the edges of type i connecting to one node and bi denotes the indicator of the channel type i associated with the variable node. As such, we represent the variable node and check node by the function µ(r, x) and ν(x), which are written as

µ(r, x) =

µbd

r1b1

· · · rmbrr x1d1

·

·

·

xdme
me

,

b,d

(4)

ν(x) =

νd x1d1 · · · xdmmee ,

d

where r = [r1 r2 · · · rmr ] and x = [x1 x2 · · · xme ], nµbd denotes the number of variable nodes specified

950

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

by (b, d) while nνd represents the number of check and B(·) denotes the Battacharya constant associated

nodes specified by d.

with the channel as defined in [10]. We can find that

To simplify the design and analysis of the LDPC code, we restrict the designed LDPC code to be semi-regular LDPC code. In our case, we have two channels as shown

this stability matrix is all-zero provided the variable node degree associated with P is greater than 3. According to Theorem 8 in [10], we prove that

in Fig. 2 (the ACC and the PCC channel) and two types of edge: one type of edge connecting to the degreeone variable node and other type of edges connecting to variable nodes with degrees greater than one. Thus, the corresponding LDPC code is presented by

µ(r, x)

=

k n

r1

x1dv

+

n

− n

k r2x2,

ν(x)

=

n

− n

k x1dc−1x2,

(5)

where dv denote the degree of variable nodes corresponding to sub-matrix P and dc denote the degree of the check nodes.

To analyze the performance of the multi-edge-type LDPC code, new polynomial functions λ(r, x) and ρ(x)

are introduced

λ(r, x) =

µx1 (r, x) µx1 (1, 1)

µx2 (r, x) µx2 (1, 1)

,

(6)

L[a0, ρ(al(Q))] → ∆∞,

(10)

provided that the error probability associated with density Q1 less than a threshold, where L(·) denote the L-densities [11], al(Q) denotes the vector of densities of information transmitted from the variable nodes to the check nodes in the lth iteration with initial densities Q, and ∆∞ denotes the distribution with unit mass centered at the infinity point. Hence, we have proved
the proposition.
Based on Proposition. 1, we give our design method.
First, we pick a check node degree and get the density a0(2) associated with the PCC channel in Fig. 2. Then we iterate the variable node degree and find the code with its corresponding γ greater than the error probability of a0(1). Then for this LDPC code, error probability should approach to zero as its length approaches infinity.

D. The Density Evolution

ρ(x) =

νx1 (x) νx1 (1)

νx2 (x) νx2 (1)

,

(7) Using the notation in the previous subsection, the density evolution for the multi-type-edge LDPC code

where µxi(r, x) and µxi(x) are defined as

can be written as

µxi (r, x) =

dµ(r, dxi

x)

,

νxi (x) =

dν(x) dxi

.

C. Stability

(8)

al = λ [a0, ρ(al−1)] .

(11)

To visualize the process of the density evolution, the

EXIT function [11] is widely used. For different kinds

In this subsection, we analyze the stability of the of channels, the EXIT function varies vastly and may be

LDPC code. First we define a0 = [a0(1) a0(2)] as the hard to calculate. However, for some specific channels, densities [10], [11] corresponding to the two channels such as the Gaussian channel and the BEC channel, the

shown in Fig. 2. Then we have the following proposition. EXIT function reduces to simple forms that can be easily

Proposition 1: The densities Q = [Q1 Q2], satisfying Q2 = a0(2), is a perfectly decodable point if the error probability of the channel with density Q1 is less
than a threshold.

Sketch of Proof: First, we verify that the above LDPC

code is a simple cascade. A detailed explanation of the
simple cascade can be found in [10]. To prove this, we define the set Ξ1 to be consisted of the first k variable nodes of degree more than one while the set Ξ2 corresponds to the rest of nodes. It is easy to verify that the above multi-type-edge LDPC code would be a

simple cascade according to Sec.VIII.B in [10].

Second, we prove the above proposition with Theorem

8 for simple cascade in [10]. Consider the stability

matrix Γ [B(a)], where its ij th element γij is defined

as

γij

=

dλi [B(a), x] dxj

,
x=0

(9)

evaluated. To design the LDPC code, we can approxi-

mate PCC as a Gaussian channel or a BEC channel to

simplify the design procedure. During the simulation,

it is shown that the resulting LDPC code for both the

BEC channel and the Gaussian channel performs well

for practical channels. As such, we approximate the PCC

channel in Fig. 2 as a Gaussian channel and modify

the EXIT function based on the protograph LDPC code

[8] to simplify the code analysis. A detailed description of the algorithm is given in Table 1. Function J(·) is

defined as

J (x) = 1.0− +∞ √ 1

e−

(y−x2 /2)2 2x2

log 2(1+e−y)dy.

−∞ 2πx2

(17)

Note that the above EXIT function for Gaussian

channels can be easily extended to BEC channels by

modifying the update equations (12) and (14) in Table

1. A detailed modification can be found in [8].

951

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 The Modified PEXIT Algorithm
1: Stage I (Initial State) Initialize the input Ich,i, i = 1, 2, which is expressed as Ich,i = J parameter σi2 is the noise variance of the channel i.
2: Stage II (Update State) • Update the information Iev,1 and Iev,2 from the variable node to the check node as

4/σi2 , where the

Iev,1 = J (dv − 1)[J −1(Iec,1)]2 + [J −1(Ich,1)]2 ,

(12)

Iev,2 = Ich,2.

(13)

• Update the information Iec,1 and Iec,2 from the check node to the variable node as

Iec,1 = 1.0 − J (dc − 2)[J −1(1.0 − Iev,1)]2 + [J −1(1.0 − Iev,2)]2 , (14)
Iec,2 = 1.0 − J dc − 1 J −1[1.0 − Iev,1] .
Repeat Stage II Until Either the mutual information Iapp,1 and Iapp,2 both reach 1, or the iteration index reaches the pre-defined maximum value. The parameters of Iapp,1 and Iapp,2 are defined as,

Iapp,1 = J dv [J −1(Iec,1)]2 + [J −1(Ich,1)]2

(15)

Iapp,2 = J [J −1(Iec,2)]2 + [J −1(Ich,2)]2 .

(16)

3: Stage III (Terminating State) If Iapp,1 and Iapp,2 reach 1, it means this LDPC code can be successfully decoded and correct the approximate computing errors.

E. The analysis of the LDPC code

Due to the additional constraints as stated above, whether the designed semi-regular LDPC code can correct all approximate errors remains to be a question. In this subsection, we consider two kinds of correlation channels, Gaussian channel and BEC, and prove that the designed LDPC code can correct these errors.
Proposition 2: For a Gaussian channel correlation, the above designed LDPC code can successfully decode and correct the approximate errors.
Sketch of Proof: For Gaussian channels, we analyze the code with the above PEXIT algorithm shown in Table 1.
Here we only consider the case when dc equals to 2. The Iapp,1 and Iapp,2 can be computed as,

Iapp,1 = J dv[J −1(Ich,2)]2 + [J −1(Ich,1)]2

(18)

= Iapp,2

(19)

As the variable node degree increases, the two quantities Iapp,1 and Iapp,2 can definitely reach 1, which ensures the successful decoding and approximate error correcting.
Proposition 3: For a BEC channel correlation, the designed LDPC code can successfully decode and correct the approximate errors.

Sketch of Proof: Different from the proof for the Gaussian channels, the proof of the BEC channel is accomplished by considering the generator matrix instead of the parity check matrix. Define two polynomials λ(x) and ρ(x) corresponding for the source bits and information bits in the generator matrix as

λ(x) = xdv , ρ(x) = 1 + dv − 1 xdc−2.

(20)

dv

dv

For successful decoding, we require the following condition

1 − ρ−1

1−x 1−ǫ

≥ λ(x), x ∈ (0, 1),

(21)

where ǫ = max (ǫ1, ǫ2). Here ǫ1 is the channel parameter for Channel 1 when approximating as a BEC while ǫ2 is the parameter for Channel 2.
Assuming the check node degree to be three, it is easy to verify that above condition in (21) remains true when dv approaches to infinity. Hence, the approximate computing errors can be corrected.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
We evaluate the performance of the proposed LDPC code. Let the check node degree be 2 and approximate the PCC channel in Fig. 2 as a Gaussian channel with equal-mean method as in [2]. The variable node degree d∗v which achieve successful error correction can be calculated directly from the equation (18). In Fig. 3,

952

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10-1

10-2

Error Probability

10-3

d =5, σ2=0.2

v

1

10-4

d =9, σ2=0.35

v

1

d =12, σ2=0.5

v

1

10-5

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

The

ACC

noise

variance

2
σ

1

Fig. 3. The Relation between the ACC variance and the Error Probability.

[4] Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, Emily Blem, Renee St. Amant, Karthikeyan Sankaralingam, and Doug Burger. Dark silicon and the end of multicore scaling. 2011.
[5] Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, Emily Blem, Renee St. Amant, Karthikeyan Sankaralingam, and Doug Burger. Dark silicon and the end of multicore scaling. IEEE Micro, 32(3):122–134, May 2012.
[6] John Gantz and David Reinsel. Extracting value from chaos. [7] N. Hardavellas, M. Ferdman, B. Falsafi, and A. Ailamaki.
Toward dark silicon in servers. IEEE Micro, 31(4):6–15, July– Aug. 2011. [8] Gianluigi Liva and Marco Chiani. Protograph LDPC codes design based on exit analysis. In Global Telecommunications Conference, 2007. GLOBECOM’07. IEEE, pages 3250–3254. IEEE, 2007. [9] Hossein Pishro-Nik, Nazanin Rahnavard, and Faramarz Fekri. Nonuniform error correction using low-density parity-check codes. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, 51(7):2702– 2714, 2005. [10] Tom Richardson, Ru¨diger Urbanke, et al. Multi-edge type LDPC codes. In Workshop honoring Prof. Bob McEliece on his 60th birthday, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California, pages 24–25. Citeseer, 2002. [11] Tom Richardson and Ruediger Urbanke. Modern coding theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.

we investigate the relation between the error probability and noise variance. We assume the pairwise correlation parameter r to be 0.15 and design the code with the noise variance estimation of ACC being 0.2, 0.35, and 0.5, respectively. The length of the code are 10000, 10000, and 13000, respectively. Note that the noise variance listed in x-axis is higher than the variance value used in the code design. From the curves in Fig. 3, we can find that the performance of the LDPC code is robust even when the practical noise variance is a little higher than the estimated. One example, when dv is 12, this code is designed for the scenario where noise variance being 0.5. However, we find that the error probability is less than 10−3 even when the actual noise variance is twice the variance value used in design.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we model the error correction in approximate computing as a decoding problem over a communication channel. We introduce a novel LPDC design for this problem. We prove the stability and existence of the designed LDPC code. With our modified EXIT chart algorithm, we design the LDPC code that can correct the approximate errors. Moreover the simulation results show that the LDPC code performance is robust even if the actual noise variance is a little higher than the estimate value used in designing the code.
REFERENCES
[1] Shekhar Y. Borkar and Andrew A. Chien. The future of microprocessors. CACM, 54, May 2011.
[2] Sae-Young Chung. On the construction of some capacityapproaching coding schemes. PhD thesis, Citeseer, 2000.
[3] Hadi Esmaeilzadeh, Emily Blem, Rene´e St. Amant, Karthikeyan Sankaralingam, and Doug Burger. Power challenges may end the multicore era. Commun. ACM, 56(2):93–102, February 2013.
953
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

