2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
Finite-Length Quasi-Synchronous LDPC Decoders 
Fran<;ois Leduc-Primeau and Warren J. Gross 
Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Canada 
Abstract-Quasi-synchronous systems aim to reduce energy 
consumption by allowing timing violations in a synchronous 
circuit, while performance guarantees are provided by analyzing 
the system with a suitable deviation model. This paper studies the 
performance of quasi-synchronous LDPe decoders for regular 
codes of finite length. We present an approach to accurately 
predict the decoding performance and energy consumption of 
the decoder for a specific average channel quality and maximum 
number of iterations. These analytical results are then compared 
with gate-level circuit simulations of a quasi-synchronous decoder. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The scale of static and dynamic variations in CMOS process 
technologies is increasing rapidly, with the result that design 
guardbands put in place to ensure the reliable operation of 
the circuit are quickly becoming important contributors to the 
overall delay of the circuit [1]. A possible approach to reduc­
ing the guardbands is to tolerate occasional timing violations 
in the circuit. We call systems that achieve this without a 
compensation mechanism in hardware quasi-synchronous (QS) 
systems. For this approach to work, it is necessary to be able to 
accurately characterize the performante of the QS system while 
accounting for the deviations caused by timing violation events. 
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoders are ideal candidate 
for a QS implementation because only their average error­
correction performance is of interest, and because the high level 
of parallelism of the decoding algorithm could allow tolerating 
even static variations as long as they are not significantly 
correlated across processing units. 
The behavior of faulty LDPC decoders has attracted numer­
ous contributions. Notable previous works include the analysis 
in [2] of the Gallager-A and Sum-Product algorithms when 
messages exchanged in the decoder are affected by noise, and 
an analysis of faulty finite-alphabet LDPC decoders where 
deviations are modeled using conditional distributions [3]. 
However, these analyses use models that are not directly ap­
plicable to deviations caused by timing violations. An analysis 
of the Min-Sum algorithm was performed in [4] for the case 
where computations are reliable, but messages are stored in an 
unreliable memory. Finally, a deviation model that takes into 
account the state dependence of timing violations is proposed 
in [5] for the special case of binary-output circuits. 
In this paper, we use a deviation modeling approach proposed 
in [6] that can generate accurate memoryless deviation models 
of QS circuits, and show how this deviation model can be used 
to predict the performance and energy consumption of a QS 
decoder operating on a finite-length code. Two approaches can 
be used to predict the error correction performance. First, the 
deviation model can be used within a Monte-Carlo simulation 
325 
978-1-5090-3401-7116100 ©2016 IEEE 
based on a high-level software implementation of the algorithm. 
More interestingly, for moderately long codes, the performance 
can be predicted from density evolution (DE) results, allowing 
to determine the performance of a particular finite-length QS 
decoder very rapidly. As a result, the operating condition 
can be optimized specifically in terms of the chosen code 
length, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and maximum number of 
iterations. 
II. DECODER ARCHITECTURE 
In this paper, we restrict our attention to regular LDPC codes, 
in which all variable nodes have degree dv, and all check 
nodes have degree de. The decoder that we consider implements 
the Offset Min-Sum (OMS) algorithm, a well known approx­
imation to the Sum-Product algorithm that achieves similar 
performance. An LDPC decoder proceeds by exchanging belief 
messages between the variable and check nodes of the code's 
Tanner graph, and a decoder implementation can be divided 
into variable-node processor (VNP) blocks that implement the 
variable node (VN) computation, and check-node processor 
(CNP) blocks that implement the check node (CN) compu­
tation. We implement a row-layered decoder architecture, in 
which all the messages sent by a given CN are computed in 
parallel, but VN messages are generated one edge at a time. 
By using this architecture with the corresponding row-layered 
message-passing schedule, the number of decoding iterations 
can be reduced approximately by a factor of two [7], and for this 
reason it is widely used for circuit implementations (e.g. [8]). 
One CNP block can be combined with de VNP blocks to 
form a processor unit. Each VNP block in the unit takes as 
input the VN total belief Ai, as well as the intrinsic belief >-7, 
which corresponds to the message that was previously received 
by the VN on edge e E {1, 2, . . .  , dv} (note that Ai = Le >-1). 
After sending messages to the CNP and receiving messages 
back, each VNP outputs the updated values of Ai and >-1. This 
processor can be pipelined, and in this architecture we divide it 
into two pipeline stages. The complete architecture is composed 
of a number of processor units and of a memory. 
The values Ai and >-7 are represented using a fixed-point 
representation. When using the OMS algorithm, these values 
can be thought of as integers without loss of generality. The 
belief totals Ai are initialized using the channel outputs. We 
assume that codewords are transmitted over an Additive White 
Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. For a channel output Yi and 
channel noise variance ()&, the initial belief total A;O) is given 
by rounding 
(1) 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
to the nearest integer. The number of bits used to represent the 
messages, the value of 0:, and the offset parameter of the OMS 
algorithm are chosen based DE results obtained for a reliable 
decoder (these values are given in Section IV). 
Note that to generate the circuit results in Section IV, we 
actually use a decoder containing a single processor unit, 
since the number of processors has no impact on decoding 
performance or energy consumption. Since we focus on the 
energy required by the computations, we assume that the 
memory is reliable and consumes no power. 
III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
A. Deviation Model 
The signal propagation delays in CMOS circuits vary accord­
ing to many factors, but in this paper we focus on the delay 
variations associated with the state of the circuit, and assume 
that the operating condition condition of the circuit, denoted 
" is deterministic. The fact that propagation delays depend on 
the state of the circuit makes it challenging to model deviations 
caused by timing violations, since deviations depend not only 
on the circuit's current input but also on the previous one. 
We will model deviations occurring in a QS LDPC decoder 
by using the approach proposed in [6], where the dependence 
on the circuit's state is replaced with a dependence on the sta­
tistical distribution of the input, yielding a memory less model 
that is nonetheless accurate. Since we are usually interested 
in the progress made by the decoder from one iteration to 
the next, we can summarize the effect of deviations on the 
decoder by considering that every message v;, exchanged 
from a variable node i to a check node j in iteration t is 
replaced by a faulty message J-l;J. We then define a family 
of conditional distributions of J-lJ given v;,, indexed by 
the operating condition " and by the message error rate at 
the beginning of the iteration pt-l). To further improve the 
model's accuracy, we also condition the distributions on the 
value of the transmitted bit Xi corresponding to variable node 
i. Omitting the node indices i and j, the model can be denoted 
as 
(-y p(t-l») 
lP'1"(:) 1,,(1),x (J-l I v, x) . 
The model is said to be weakly symmetric if 
(2) 
(-y,p9t-l») 
_ 
_ 
(-y,p9'-l») 
_ 
lP' (t)1 (t) (J-l1 v,x -1) -lP' «)1 (t) (-J-lI-V,x - -1) 
J-L 
v ,x 
J-L 
v ,x 
holds for any given realization of the channel noise, and in that 
case it is shown in [6] that DE can be used to determine the 
performance of the QS decoder when the code length tends to 
infinity. 
The deviation model in (2) describes the iterative behavior 
of the decoder, but when studying the decoding of a finite­
length code, we are also interested in measuring the error rate 
at the output of the decoder, which depends on the a-posteriori 
estimate represented by the VN total Ai' To do this, we define 
a second deviation model similar to (2) but that provides the 
conditional distribution of the faulty belief total in terms of the 
ideal one, that is in terms of the value that would be computed 
if the last decoding iteration had been reliable. Denoting the 
326 
ideal belief total of some VN after iteration t by K(t), the 
output deviation model is given by 
(3) 
Note that the output deviation model could be simplified further 
since in most cases the output is only used to take a binary 
decision on the value of the transmitted bit. 
B. Deviation and Energy Measurements 
In order to quickly cover the range of possible input dis­
tributions that will be seen by the circuit, we approximate 
the distribution of extrinsic messages in the decoder as a 
one-dimensional (I-D) Normal distribution, that is a Normal 
distribution with a mean J-l and variance (Y2 such that J-l = 0:(y2, 
where 0: is the constant in (1). Note that this approximation 
is only used to measure deviations, and not to measure the 
error rate of the decoder. The I-D Normal distribution can 
be equivalently described in terms of its error rate parameter 
Pe 
= 6 erfc ( h). We select a small set of Pe values, and 
for each value, measure the conditional distributions in (2) and 
(3) by performing Monte-Carlo simulations on the gate-level 
representation of the processing circuit. This is repeated for 
every operating condition, of interest to construct the complete 
deviation model. Simultaneously, we also record the switching 
activity in the circuit in terms of Pe, in order to estimate the 
circuit's power consumption and construct an energy model that 
depends on Pe. 
Even though the deviation measurements are performed by 
assuming a specific noise variance (y& for the AWGN channel, 
the deviation model does not depend on (y&, and we have 
observed that the model remains accurate for other variance 
values. 
C. Density Evolution 
Since messages in the decoder are quantized, the error cor­
rection performance of the decoder on a cycle-free graph can be 
evaluated exactly by performing DE with discrete distributions 
[9]. We perform DE in the usual way, but we take into account 
the layered message-passing schedule used by the hardware 
implementation, and apply an additional transformation on the 
distribution of VN-to-CN messages according to (2). For each 
decoding iteration, we also compute the distribution of the VN 
total belief Ai' Note that Ai is obtained by summing dv CN-to­
VN messages together (rather than dv -1 in the case of extrinsic 
messages). After evaluating the distribution of the ideal total, 
we apply (3) to obtain the distribution of Ai. 
D. Finite-length Performance 
The performance of a finite-length LDPC code differs from 
the performance given by performing DE on a cycle-free graph 
for two reasons. First, good LDPC codes necessarily contain 
cycles [10], which introduce harmful correlation among the 
messages exchanged by a belief propagation decoder. Second, 
because the codewords have a finite length, the channel noise 
realization associated with a particular transmitted frame has a 
varying distribution. We now discuss how the error-correction 
performance and energy results obtained by using DE with the 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
deviation model can be used to determine the performance and 
energy consumption of a quasi-synchronous decoder operating 
on a a finite-length code, in the case of a transmission through 
the AWGN channel. 
To illustrate the variations in channel noise, it is helpful to 
first consider a binary symmetric channel with parameter Po. In 
a codeword of infinite length, a fraction Po of the transmitted 
bits will be received in error, with probability 1. However, 
in a finite-length codeword, the number of incorrect bits in 
a codeword will vary according to a Binomial distribution. 
Denoting by Pobs the fraction of incorrect bits observed in the 
codeword, the observed channel can be described by a binary 
symmetric channel (BSC) with parameter Pobs. For a code of 
length N, this parameter has the distribution 
IP'pobJPobs) 
= (
N
N )P:PobS(l - Po)N-NPObS. 
(4) 
Pobs 
For large N, this distribution can be approximated by a 
Gaussian distribution with mean Po and variance Po (1-Po) / N. 
In the case of the AWGN channel, the observed channel 
cannot be described by a single parameter. Nonetheless, it is 
shown in [11] that approximating the noise realization by a 
1-D Gaussian distribution with error-rate parameter Pobs leads 
to accurate predictions of the performance of moderately long 
codes. This is also corroborated by our own results presented 
in Section IV. 
Since the decoding performance concentrates to the cycle­
free case as the code length goes to infinity, we can expect the 
cycles to have a smaller impact on performance as the code 
length increases. In fact, it was shown in [11] that the frame 
and bit error rates of moderately long codes can be determined 
accurately based only on the channel threshold associated with 
the code ensemble and with the decoding algorithm. 
The results presented in [11] apply to the case where the 
number of decoding iterations is large. We present a similar 
method that is able to predict the decoding performance for 
any number of decoding iterations. Being able to predict the 
bit and frame error rate as a function of the number of 
iterations is important to explore tradeofl's involving latency. 
In addition, predicting the frame error rate as a function of 
decoding iterations will allow a precise evaluation of the energy 
consumption of the decoder. 
Let us denote by P(Po) the output bit error rate of the 
decoder after t iterations, when using a code of length N and 
an operating parameter " and when the average channel error 
rate is Po. Similarly, let P/01(Po) denote the output bit error 
rate after t iterations for an infinite-length code, which can 
be obtained using DE. Recall that in this case, the observed 
channel has parameter Pobs 
= Po with probability 1. If we 
ignore the effect of cycles, the distinction between P(Po) 
and P/01(Po) is only due to the variability of the observed 
channel. Therefore, we can express the finite-length bit-error 
rate (BER) as 
(t) 
{! (t) ( 
) ( 
Po(1- Po)) d 
P"(,N(Po) 
= 
Jo P"(,oo Pobs cPN Pobs; Po, 
N 
Pobs, 
o 
(5) 
327 
where cPN(X; fL, (72) is the probability density function of a 
normal random variable with mean fL and variance (72. The 
function P/01(po) can be evaluated at discrete intervals using 
DE, and linear interpolation used to construct a continuous 
function. Since a single deviation model is valid for all Pobs 
values of interest, no additional circuit simulation is required. 
The frame-error rate (FER) R !)N(PO) can be evaluated in a 
similar way. In a cycle-free graph and for a given received 
frame with an observed noise distribution of Pobs, a frame 
remains in error if at least one bit is estimated incorrectly. 
Therefore, when the channel noise corresponds to an error rate 
of exactly Pobs, the FER R3?oo(Pobs) is given by 
R"t,# (Pobs) 
= 1 - (1 - P/01 (PObS)) N 
(6) 
In the finite-length case, we take the expectation over the 
possible channel noise realizations, and obtain 
(t) 
j'! (t) ( 
) ( 
Po(1 - Po)) 
R"(,N(Po) 
= 
0 R"(,oo Pobs cPN Pobs; Po, 
N 
dPobs· 
(7) 
The energy consumption of the decoder during iteration 
t + 1 is modeled as a function of the message error rate pt) 
and of the current operating condition f. Since pt) is fully 
determined by the channel distribution Pobs, by" and by t, we 
can also express the energy as a function of these quantities. 
We denote the energy consumption of iteration t for a fixed 
observed channel Pobs by E2:L(Pobs). If we assume that the 
decoder is terminated as soon as a valid codeword is found, the 
decoding energy required to decode a particular frame depends 
on the number of iterations that was required for that frame. 
The average energy consumed by the decoder to decode each 
codeword is therefore 
(8) 
where L is the maximum number of decoding iterations. If the 
latency of one iteration is T"( and is constant throughout the 
decoding, we can also obtain the average energy-delay product 
(EDP) metric of the decoder as 
(9) 
If the latency is not constant, it simply appears inside the sum 
in (8). 
E. Operating Condition Selection 
In CMOS circuits, there exists a tradeoff between energy 
consumption and latency. For this reason, it is interesting to 
seek to minimize the product of energy and delay, or EDP. 
The EDP objective provides more flexibility in finding solutions 
because the clock period of the circuit can be chosen arbitrarily, 
whereas the supply voltage is constrained to the points for 
which the standard cell libraries have been characterized. 
The EDP metric of the decoder varies in terms of the 
channel quality. Since a finite-length code of reasonable length 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
cannot achieve a low error rate near the ensemble threshold, 
the optimization should be performed at the SNR where the 
decoder is likely to be operated. We choose an SNR of 1.7 dB, 
which corresponds to a channel output error rate of Po = 0.112. 
When the decoder is to be operated at a single operating 
condition 'Y, one way to minimize EDP is simply to evaluate 
(9) for every possible TUsing MATLAB, (8) can be evaluated 
in a few seconds on a laptop CPU. 
IV. RESULTS 
A. Experimental Setup 
We construct a (3,6) code of length N 
= 32000 using a 
random construction free of 4-cycles. The code was generated 
using MacKay's freely available codeS generator [12]. By 
studying the performance of a reliable implementation of the 
decoder, we set 0: in (1) to 4 and the OMS correction offset 
to 1, while the number of quantization bits used to represent 
messages is set to 6 in order to obtain decoding performance 
similar to a floating-point implementation. 
The processing unit of the decoder is synthesized using 
Cadence Encounter [13] to TSMC's 65 nm process. The 
synthesis uses the tcbn65gplus cell library and is performed 
at the default supply voltage of Vdd = 1 V, with a target clock 
period of 2 ns. After synthesis, we generate timing annotations 
for the circuit at several Vdd values, in increments of 0.05 V. 
A testbench then instantiates the gate-level version of the 
processing unit. The testbench connects the processor with 
the memory, and implements an early termination mechanism 
that stops the decoder as soon as a valid codeword is found. 
The early termination mechanism itself is not affected by 
timing violations. The received frames that are processed by 
the decoder are generated by transmitting random codewords 
modulated with binary phase-shift keying through an AWGN 
channel. 
In addition to the simulation of the decoder circuit, the 
performance of the QS decoder can be evaluated by building the 
deviation model into a high-level software implementation of 
the decoding algorithm. Deviations applied to VN-to-CN mes­
sages are sampled from (2), and deviations applied to the VN 
total beliefs are sampled from (3). At every decoding iteration, 
the message error rate parameter pt-l) of the deviation model 
is updated to track the error rate progress of the particular frame 
being decoded. Note that unlike the predictions based on DE, 
the high-level Monte-Carlo approach is expected to be accurate 
for any code length. 
B. Discussion 
We present the bit and frame error rate of the decoder 
operated at (Vdd 
= 0.85 V, Tclk 
= 2.2 ns) in Fig. 1, and at 
(Vdd 
= 0.85 V, Tclk 
= 2.3 ns) in Fig. 2. In both cases, the 
error rate is evaluated with three different methods. The "gate­
level" results show the error rate measured using a gate-level 
simulation of the decoder, with timing annotations correspond­
ing to the chosen operating condition. The "sw MC" results are 
generated using the high-level software implementation of the 
decoding algorithm. These high-level software results actually 
use a flooding message-passing schedule while doubling the 
328 
10° ,----,--,----,--,----.----,-, 
a: 
o 
: 
10-6 
ffi 
co 
+sw MG, reliable, 60 flood. iter. 
'*"sw MG, OS, 60 flood. iter. 
-+sw MG, OS, 60 flood. iter., no ET 
-A-gate·level, OS, 30 lay. iter. 
-e-OE·based, OS, 30 lay. iter. 
-€rOE-based, reliable, 30 lay. iter. 
.... OS Threshold (30 lay. iter.) 
10.12 '-'---'--'----'--'----'---'--' 
1.35 
1.4 
1.45 
1.5 
1.55 
1.6 
1.65 
1.7 
Eb/No [dB] 
Fig. 1. Bit (solid curves) and frame (dashed curves) error rate of the (3,6) 
code of length 32,000 for a QS decoder at 'Y = (0.85 Y, 2.2 ns) , compared 
with a reliable decoder. 
10° ,--,---,---,--,---,-,---,-, 
a: 
o 
: 
10-6 
ffi 
co 
+sw MG, reliable, 60 flood. iter. 
'*"sw MG, OS, 60 flood. iter. 
-+gate-Ievel, OS, 30 lay. iter. 
-e-OE-based, OS, 30 lay. iter. 
-€rOE-based, reliable, 30 lay. iter. 
.... OS Threshold (30 lay. iter.) 
1012 L..&_-'-_--'--_--'-_--'-_--' __ '--_..L.-_--' 
1.3 
1.35 
1.4 
1.45 
1.5 
1.55 
1.6 
1.65 
1.7 
Eb/No [dB] 
Fig. 2. Bit (solid curves) and frame (dashed curves) error rate of the (3,6) 
code of length 32,000 for a QS decoder at 'Y = (0.85 Y, 2.3 ns) , compared 
with a reliable decoder. 
maximum number of iterations. Finally, the "DE-based" results 
are generated by evaluating (5) and (7) numerically. The gate­
level simulations are of course the most computationally inten­
sive, and for this reason can only be generated for relatively 
high error rates. On the other hand, once the deviation models 
have been generated, the curves based on DE can be generated 
in less than a minute. 
We can see in Fig. 1 that operating the decoder at 'Y 
= 
(0.85 V, 2.2 ns) results in an important loss of coding gain. At 
this operating condition, up to 3% of the messages are affected 
by deviations. Despite the large deviation rate, both the high­
level simulation and the DE results can accurately predict the 
performance of the decoder when the SNR is 1.4 or l.5 dB. 
Starting at 1.6 dB, the DE result predicts an error floor that is 
not observed in the decoder that uses early termination. On the 
other hand, when early termination is not used ("no ET"), the 
DE result accurately predicts the performance. The ability of a 
reliable early termination mechanism to eliminate an early floor 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing 
-e-(0.85V, 2.4ns), max. 30 iter. 
-8-(0.85V, 2.3ns), max. 30 iter. 
-)Eo (0.85V, 2.3ns), GL, max. 30 iter. 
-6-(0.85V, 2.2ns), max. 30 iter. 
+ (0.85V, 2.2ns), GL, max. 30 iter . 
.... (1.0V, 2.0ns), max. 30 iter. 
-(1.0V, 2.0ns), max. 100 iter. 
2L-____ L-____ L-____  ____ 
 ____  ____  
1.4 
1.45 
1.5 
1.55 
Eb/No [dS[ 
1.6 
1.65 
1.7 
Fig. 3. Average EDP required to decode a frame of the (3,6) code of length 
32,000 at various operating conditions, using layered message-passing. The 
dotted curves are based on the frame error rate measured on the gate-level 
model. 
caused by deviations was previously noted in [14], and can be 
explained by the fact that when deviations occur independently 
from one iteration to the next, the probability that deviations 
prevent termination decreases exponentially in the number of 
additional iterations. 
When the operating condition is instead selected as "( 
= 
(0.85 V, 2.3 ns), the deviation rate remains below 1 %, and the 
error correction performance of the QS decoder becomes very 
similar to the performance of a reliable decoder. Both the DE­
based results and the high-level software accurately predict the 
performance. 
Finally, Fig. 3 shows the EDP metric at three different oper­
ating conditions. We can first see that since an early termination 
mechanism is used, the maximum number of iterations only has 
an impact on EDP at low SNR values. Indeed, the impact of 
decoding iterations that have a low probability of being required 
is negligible on the average energy and EDP. For this reason, 
the erroneous error floor obtained with the DE-based result at 
"( = (0.85 V, 2.2 ns) has no impact on the EDP evaluation. The 
first interesting thing to note from Fig. 3 is that a QS decoder 
can actually have a worse EDP than a reliable decoder, even 
as its coding gain is degraded. The reason is that the slower 
convergence of the QS decoder can overcome the reduction 
in the energy of each decoding iteration. Also note that the 
optimal operating condition can be different depending on SNR. 
The operating condition that yields the best EDP at 1.7dB is 
"( = (0.85V, 2.3ns), providing a gain of 15% with respect to 
the reliable decoder. 
To assess the accuracy of the EDP results, we would ideally 
like to measure the energy used by the gate-level decoder at 
each iteration. However, this would require measuring switch­
ing activity separately for each iteration, which is cumbersome. 
Instead, we assume that the energy model E245(Pobs) is 
accurate, since it is measured on a test circuit that is identical to 
the decoder circuit. We then evaluate the energy consumption 
using the frame error rate R t,$(po) measured on the gate-level 
329 
decoder. The resulting EDP is shown as dotted curves in Fig. 3. 
These curves confirm that the frame error rate at each decoding 
iteration is predicted accurately, which leads to accurate energy 
predictions, as long as the energy model itself is accurate. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we performed gate-level simulations of an 
Offset Min-Sum LDPC decoder affected by timing violations, 
and showed that its decoding performance can be accurately 
predicted using the memory less deviation model introduced in 
[6]. We introduced an analytical approach based on density 
evolution that allows predicting the BER and FER of the QS 
decoder after any number of iterations, which in turn can be 
used to obtain accurate estimates of its energy consumption or 
EDP metric. 
The EDP gain results presented are only due to the fact that 
different circuit inputs activate different paths through a circuit 
and cause different delays. We expect that much larger gains 
can be obtained once process and operating condition variations 
are taken into account. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to thank CMC Microsystems for providing 
access to the Cadence tools and TSMC 65nm CMOS technol­
ogy. Warren Gross is a member of ReSMiQ and of SYTACom. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Rahimi, L. Benini, and R. K. Gupta, "Variability mitigation in nanome­
ter CMOS integrated systems: A survey of techniques from circuits to 
software," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 104, no. 7, pp. 1410-1448, luI. 
2016. 
[2] L. Varshney, "Performance of LDPC codes under faulty iterative decod­
ing," IEEE Trans. Inf Theory, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4427-4444, luI. 2011. 
[3] E. Dupraz, D. Declercq, B. Vasic, and V. Savin, "Analysis and design of 
finite alphabet iterative decoders robust to faulty hardware," IEEE Trans. 
on Communications, vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 2797-2809, Aug. 2015. 
[4] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and A. Burg, "Density evolution for min­
sum decoding of LDPC codes under unreliable message storage," IEEE 
Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 849-852, May 2014. 
[5] S. Brkic, O. Al Rasheed, P. Ivanis, and B. Vasic, "On fault tolerance of the 
Gallager B decoder under data-dependent gate failures." IEEE Commun. 
Lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1299-1302, Aug. 2015. 
[6] F. Leduc-Primeau, F. R. Kschischang, and W. l. Gross, "Modeling 
and energy optimization of LDPC decoder circuits with timing 
violations," 
CoRR, vol. abs/1503.03880, 2015. [Online]. Available: 
http://arxiv.orglabs/ 1503.03880 
[7] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and l. Goldberger, "Efficient serial message-passing 
schedules for LDPC decoding," IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, 
vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076-4091, Nov 2007. 
[8] C. Roth, P. Meinerzhagen, C. Studer, and A. Burg, "A 15.8 pllbitliter 
quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.lln in 90 nm CMOS," in 2010 
IEEE Asian Solid State Circuits Conf, Nov. 2010, pp. 1-4. 
[9] S.-Y. Chung, l. David Forney, T. l. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, "On the 
design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045dB of the Shannon 
limit," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001. 
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. 
Cambridge 
University Press, 2008. 
[11] R. Yazdani and M. Ardakani, "Waterfall performance analysis of finite­
length LDPC codes on symmetric channels," IEEE Trans. on Communi­
cations, vol. 57, no. II, pp. 3183-3187, Nov 2009. 
[12] D. l. C. MacKay, "Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes." [Online]. 
Available: hup://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uklmackay/codes/data.html 
[13] Cadence Design Systems Inc., "Encounter digital implementation 
system." [Online]. Available: http://www.cadence.com/products/di/edi_ 
system 
[14] C. K. Ngassa, V. Savin, E. Dupraz, and D. Declercq, "Density evolution 
and functional threshold for the noisy min-sum decoder," IEEE Trans. on 
Communications, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1497-1509, May 2015. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:12:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
