Area-Efficient Fault-Tolerant Design for
Low-Density Parity-Check Decoders
Bohua Li
Tsinghua National Laboratory for
Information Science and Technology
Beijing 100084, China
Email: libh14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Yukui Pei
Tsinghua Space Center
Beijing 100084, China
Email: peiyk@tsinghua.edu.cn
Ning Ge
Tsinghua National Laboratory for
Information Science and Technology
Beijing 100084, China
Email: gening@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—As technology moves into nano-realm, large area of
the chip is especially vulnerable to single event upset (SEU) in
space applications. In this paper, low cost fault-tolerant schemes
are presented for the key modules of Low-Density Parity-Check
(LDPC) code decoder to save logic resources. For counters, a
fault-tolerant scheme based on m-sequence and Hamming coding
is proposed, whereby the soft errors generated by SEUs can
be located and corrected by a simple Hamming decoder. For
RAM contents, we first propose a layered pipelined architecture
absorbing LLR RAM into V2C RAM to reduce memory bits,
which will lower the impact of SEUs. Then, a RAM hardening
scheme is proposed, which only requires to detect soft errors
by parity check, while the error correction is accomplished by
decoder’s own iterative decoding capability that has not been
exploited sufficiently. Simulation results show that the proposed
fault-tolerant counter could totally avoid SEUs and saves 42% of
cell area compared with TMR method and the layered pipelined
architecture saves 42% and 12% of memory bits compared with
[4] and [15]. In addition, the hardened RAM cells will not
cause extra bit errors when a soft error happens under the
environments of high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The cost is
only one parity bit for each RAM content, which is much less
than conventional hardening schemes.
Index Terms—Fault-tolerance, quasi-cyclic low-density parity-
check (QC-LDPC) codes, single event upset (SEU).
I. INTRODUCTION
It is widely recognized that emerging hardware’s reliability
is facing many challenges. Especially when modern CMOS
circuits applied in space communications, the circuit itself
will be vulnerably corrupted by single event effects caused
by high-energy particles (usually from cosmic rays or from
the radiation belts). Single event upset (SEU) [2] is one of the
most serious effects. It alters the state of flip-flops or memory
cells resulting in soft errors [14]. It reduces the reliability of
the chip and produces extra bit errors or even fatal errors if
no action taken. Especially, with the request of space devices,
such as scaling of the power supply voltage, increasing in the
operating frequency and reducing in the minimum feature size,
the circuits are more and more susceptible to SEU.
As a fault-tolerant technique in space communication, Low-
density parity-check (LDPC) codes [6] are widely adopted
to protect transmitted bits in many modern communication
systems for their excellent error correction capability and
simplified decoding algorithm. In this work, we investigate
the LDPC code decoder. However, there are few techniques
to protect its circuits and the existing methods cannot be
directly used in the whole complicated LDPC decoder circuits:
Triple modular redundancy (TMR) [8] is the commonly used
hardening technique, which triplicates the original module and
adds a majority voter to correct a single error if one of the
three replicates is affected by SEUs. However, TMR consumes
more than three times hardware resource compared with its
unprotected counterpart, although it is effective to mask an
error [12]. [10] presented a simplified fault-tolerant method
which is based on redundant residue number system, which
however is only suitable for linear operation systems, such as
finite impulse response (FIR) filters. As for protecting RAM
module in a chip, error detection and correction (EDAC) codes
[9] is commonly used, like (7,4) Hamming code as a simple
way, which however is inefficient because it usually requires
three parity check bits for four data bits to correct one soft
error [5].
A LDPC decoder usually consists of control logic, RAM
cells, barrel shifter (BS), check node unit (CNU), and variable
node unit (VNU) [4], which is difficult and needless to be
hardened as a whole. Instead, we would harden representative
control logic and crucial RAM cells respectively, considering
that BS, CNU and VNU can be hardened as RAM cells
because they can be categorized into data path whose input-
output data is read from or written into RAM cells. To design
an area-efficient fault-tolerant LDPC code decoder, the main
contributions of our work are:
1) Considering counters are the most frequently used con-
trol logic in all parts of the decoder, we propose a
low cost fault-tolerant counter based on m-sequences
combined with Hamming coding, which totally avoids
SEUs and saves 42% of cell area compared with TMR
method;
2) To reduce SEU occurrence possibility on LDPC code
decoder chip, we design a layered pipelined architecture
absorbing LLR RAM into V2C RAM, which saves 42%
and 12% of memory bits compared with [4] and [15];
3) To farther harden RAM cells, with taking full advantage
of erasure characteristic of LDPC code decoder, we
propose a scheme that only detects soft errors by parity
check, then the errors will be corrected by decoder’s
inherent iterative decoding process. The scheme cost
much less than EDAC hardening schemes and can
correct one soft error caused by SEU.
The rest part of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, LDPC code decoder architecture and error injection results
are discussed. In Section III, a fault-tolerant counter based
on m-sequence and Hamming coding is presented. Section
978-1-5090-1701-0/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LLR 
RAM
Barrel 
Shifter
CNU
C2V 
RAM
VNU
V2C 
RAM
Control Logic
Column Processing
Row Processing
Intrinsic ROM
Barrel 
Shifter
Fig. 1.
QC-LDPC decoder architecture using normalized MSA decoding
algorithm.
IV introduces the proposed layered pipelined architecture and
RAM Hardening schemes. Analysis and synthesis results in
different modules of LDPC decoder are shown in Section V.
Section VI concludes this paper.
II. PRELIMINARY OF LDPC DECODER
Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) [15] code is a special type
of LDPC code, which is much more suitable for high-speed
implementation at lower complexity and less memory bits
[13]. It is widely applied in many modern communication
standards, such as CCSDS, 802.11n, 802.11ad and 802.16e.
The decoding algorithms for a QC-LDPC code mainly include
min-sum algorithm (MSA) [1] and sum-product algorithm (S-
PA) [6]. Since the MSA simplifies the check node processing,
it leads to significant silicon area, memory bits reduction only
at a cost of 0.5 dB performance loss. Especially, after the
modified MSAs, namely normalized MSA and offset MSA,
were proposed, the gap between the SPA and the modified
MSA can be reduced to 0.05 dB with proper parameters [3].
The general QC-LDPC code decoder architecture using
MSA decoding algorithm is shown in Fig.1, where LLR RAM,
C2V RAM, and V2C RAM are used to store channel intrinsic
logarithm likelihood ratio (LLR), check-to-variable messages,
and variable-to-check messages respectively, CNU and VNU
are usually a group of parallel comparators and accumulators,
BS is a set of shift registers which can move any step at one
clock cycle, Intrinsic ROM stores the parameters of parity
check matrix of QC-LDPC codes. The decoder process in
detail is introduced in [15] and [11], so the same will not
be repeated here.
Fault injections [7] are performed on an unhardened 802.11n
(4,24,54,85) QC-LDPC decoder to test which module is sus-
ceptible to SEU, setting BPSK modulation, AWGN channel
as simulation condition. By artificially inserting upsets on the
gate-level netlist of the decoder, 100000 SEUs are injected
randomly into the internal registers of each module at different
time respectively. It is notable that there is no need to inject
errors to ROM, because the containing data is permanent
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
10
−10
10
−8
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
SNR (dB)
BER
 
 
no error
errors in barrel shifter
errors in RAM cells
errors in VNU & CNU
errors in control logic
Fig. 2. Error injection results of each module.
which will not be affected by SEUs. As shown in Fig.2, the
errors occurred in control logic invalidate the decoder while
errors in other modules result in the similar increase of bit
error rate (BER).
Hence, the control logic is the most important module that
we should harden due to errors in it leading to system crash.
Above all, counters are the most frequently used control logic
in QC-LDPC code decoder: BS is controlled by signals reading
from the Intrinsic ROM and the read address is generated
by counters, so are the controllers of CNU and VNU; the
read/write addresses of RAM cells are also generated by
counters. However, when adopting conventional TMR method,
thousands of registers will horrifically increase since there are
about 700 registers in a (4,24,54,85) LDPC code decoder by
synthesization. Therefore, in the following work, we propose
a low cost m-sequence based counter to correct soft errors
caused by SEUs. In addition, the remaining small amounts of
control logic, such as chip select, enable, reset signals etc., are
hardened by TMR method, which consume quite few resources
since they are stored in 1-bit registers.
As for other modules in QC-LDPC code decoders, it can
be seen from Fig.2 that the effects are similar when SEUs are
injected into RAM cells, BS, CNU and VNU. Since the data
processed by BS, CNU and VNU is read from or written into
RAM cells, the hardening schemes of these modules are the
same. Furthermore, since CNU and VNU are groups of simple
XOR gates, comparators, and adders, they can be implemented
totally by combinational logic circuits that no bit-flip will
happen.
III. PROPOSED FAULT-TOLERANT COUNTER
In this section, we shall present the proposed fault-tolerant
counter based on Hamming coded m-sequence. Different from
operating in the field of the real numbers, m-sequence operates
in the field GF(2𝑞), which can be conveniently combined with
linear block codes. Counting function is realized by changing
the states of m-sequence.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
m-
sequence
Hamming 
coding
Error location 
& recovery
Proposed coding 
scheme
Counter 
out
Fig. 3. Proposed fault-tolerant counter structure.
As shown in Fig.3, the proposed coding scheme is based on
m-sequence combined with Hamming coding, which can be
generated directly by a state transfer matrix. The error location
and recovery module can be simplified as a Hamming decoder,
which locates the error position, recovers the Hamming codes
corrupted by SEUs and outputs the corrected m-sequence.
Suppose C𝑖is a code word in an (n,k) block code. Let
{𝑥𝑖1, 𝑥𝑖2, ⋅⋅⋅, 𝑥𝑖𝑘} denotes one of 2𝑘−1 states of m-sequence,
which will be encoded into the code word C𝑖. Thus, the vector
of 𝑘information bits into the encoder is denoted by
X𝑖= [𝑥𝑖1, 𝑥𝑖2, ⋅⋅⋅, 𝑥𝑖𝑘]𝑇,
and the output of the encoder is the vector
C𝑖= [𝑐𝑖1, 𝑐𝑖2, ⋅⋅⋅, 𝑐𝑖𝑛]𝑇.
The encoding operation performed in a linear block encoder
can be represented as
C𝑖= G𝑇X𝑖,
(1)
where G is the generator matrix of the code.
The state transfer relation of m-sequence can be expressed
as
X𝑖+1 = MX𝑖,
(2)
where M is the state transfer matrix of m-sequence.
Thus, we have
C𝑖+1
=
G𝑇X𝑖+1 = G𝑇MX𝑖
=
G𝑇MAG𝑇X𝑖,
(3)
where AG𝑇= I𝑘.
Since any generator matrix of a linear block code can be
arranged by column permutations to the form,
G = [I𝑘∣R],
where R is a 𝑘× (𝑛−𝑘) matrix that determines the (𝑛−𝑘)
parity check bits. Thus, when A = [I𝑘∣0𝑘×(𝑛−𝑘)], it satisfies
that AG𝑇= I𝑘.
Substituting (1) into (3), we obtain
C𝑖+1 = G𝑇MAC𝑖= PC𝑖,
(4)
where P = G𝑇MA is the state transfer matrix of the proposed
coding scheme.
Since the output of the proposed coding scheme is a
standard Hamming code word, the error location can be
Barrel 
Shifter
CNU
C2V 
RAM
Barrel 
Shifter
VNU
Control Logic
Column Processing
Row Processing
Intrinsic 
ROM
V2C RAM
layer m+1
layer m
Fig. 4. Layered pipelined decoder architecture for reducing memory bits.
accomplished by a Hamming decoder, i.e. by some modulo-2
addition operations. Based on the calculated error position, we
can recover the corrupted code word and output the corrected
m-sequence for counting purpose.
IV. PROPOSED SCHEME FOR RAM CELLS
This section proposes two methods on RAMs for low-
cost LDPC decoder preventing SEU. First, because SEU only
happens in flip-flops or memory cells and not happen in
combinational logic circuits, reducing the quantity of memory
cells means reducing the ratio of RAM area to whole LD-
PC code decoder area. In consequence, the SEU occurrence
possibility on the chip will decrease. Due to few RAM
bits leading to better fault-tolerance capability, we propose
a layered pipelined decoder architecture to reduce memory
bits. Second, considering that the LDPC decoding algorithm
have inherent fault-tolerance ability, we propose a scheme that
only detects soft errors by parity check, then the errors will be
corrected by decoder’s own iterative decoding capability that
has not been exploited sufficiently.
A. Layered pipelined decoder architecture
As discussed before, reducing the required memory bits
of the decoder is a fundamental approach not only to lower
the impacts of SEUs, but also to achieve area efficiency. For
conventional normalized MSA LDPC code decoder architec-
ture, its time schedule is shown as Fig.5(a), where the channel
LLR messages are added to the extrinsic messages at the end
of each iteration. Thus they need to be stored in a separate
RAM. In this work, we consider to absorb LLR RAM into
V2C RAM to reduce memories, since they are two largest
RAMs whose area scales are the same. As shown in Fig.4,
the proposed layered pipelined decoder architecture is based
on layered schedule [16], which divides the check nodes (or
variable nodes) into many layers, while updates a layer of
check nodes (or variable nodes) and all variable nodes (or
check nodes) that associated with the updated check nodes (or
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Extrinsic
Messages 2
LLR
⋯
V2C 
Extrinsic
Messages 1
1st 
iteration
2nd 
iteration
Extrinsic
Messages n
nth iteration
V2C 
V2C 
(a)
Extrinsic
messages
V2C 
RAM
V2C 
messages
layer m
(b)
Fig. 5. Time schedules of two architectures: (a) the conventional architecture
and (b) the proposed architecture.
Add 1 
parity bit
1
2
3
N
 Parity 
check
RAM
Right
Wrong
Output 
directly
Output 
zero
Input
Fig. 6. Proposed scheme for hardening RAM cells.
variable nodes) in two successive steps [11]. In our proposed
architecture, the LLR is stored in the V2C RAM in initial
state and each iteration is divided into multiple layers. Its time
schedule is shown in Fig.5(b), the updated extrinsic messages
are accumulated to the corresponding V2C RAM contents in
each layered process. Thus, no extra memory is required for
the channel intrinsic messages.
B. RAM hardening scheme
EDAC codes are commonly used for protecting RAM cells,
which requires several parity check bits for each RAM content
to correct one soft error. It may be too costly for LDPC code
decoders which contain a great number of RAM cells. (7,4)
Hamming code as an example, it needs nearly double area
to harden the RAM. Our proposed scheme requires only one
parity check bit for each RAM content to detect whether it is
affected by SEUs. If one soft error occurs, the corresponding
RAM content will be set to zero.
As shown in Fig.6, the inputs are fed into RAM cells after
adding one parity bit. Parity check is carried out immediately
when the data read from RAM. If a SEU happens, the checking
result will be wrong and the output will be set to zero.
Otherwise, there is no SEU happens and the data will be output
directly with parity bit removed.
V. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Costs and effectiveness in m-sequence based counter
The proposed fault-tolerant counter has been implemented
and synthesized targeting a TSMC 0.13-𝜇m eight-metal-layer
TABLE I
AREA COMPARISON BETWEEN CONVENTIONAL TMR AND OUR PROPOSED
SCHEME.
Area (𝜇m2)
Area ratio (scaled to TMR)
Original counter
249
0.2
TMR method
1254
1
This work
731
0.58
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
500
1000
1500
injected register
injected errors
Fig. 7. Errors injected into internal registers.
standard CMOS technology using the Synopsys design tools.
The synthesis results will show the overhead reduction of
proposed scheme relative to conventional TMR method. We
take a 4-bit counter as example, the linear block code is a
(7,4) Hamming code and the m-sequence is generated by
a 4-stage shift register with feedback. Table I summarizes
the area occupation of the original counter with its fault-
tolerant counterparts hardened by conventional TMR method
and our proposed scheme, respectively. It can be seen that
the conventional TMR method consumes much more than
three times hardware resources than the original counter. It
is because the TMR method not only includes three identical
original counters, but also requires error correction circuit to
recover the corrupted counter from errors. Moreover, it can
be demonstrated that our proposed m-sequence based scheme
has a significant advantage in area occupation, who saves 42%
cell area compared with TMR method.
To validate the effectiveness of our fault tolerance scheme,
fault injections are performed. 10000 SEUs are injected ran-
domly into the internal registers at different time, Fig.7 shows
the number of injected errors of different registers. The outputs
of the proposed counter are absolutely correct, i.e. our fault-
tolerant scheme is effective against SEUs.
B. Costs and effectiveness in hardened RAM cells
To compare the cost of memory bits in different QC-
LDPC code decoder architectures under same conditions, we
implement LDPC code decoders in [4] and [15] using our
proposed layered pipelined architecture. In [4], the decoder
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE II
MEMORY BITS COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT ARCHITECTURE FOR
QC-LDPC CODES.
Architecture
Memory bits
Ratio
LDPC code in [4]
[4]
45568
1
This work
26624
0.58
LDPC code in [15]
[15]
225865
1
This work
199771
0.88
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
10
−10
10
−8
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
SNR (dB)
BER
 
 
without SEU
hardened RAM with SEU
unhardened RAM with SEU
Fig. 8.
BER performance of the decoder adopting our proposed hardening
scheme for RAM cells.
parameters are: 4096 code length, 7/8 code rate, 4 quantization
bits, 10 maximum iteration, 512 parallel degree. In [15], the
decoder parameters are: 7493 code length, 4/5 code rate, 8
quantization bits, 15 maximum iteration, 127 parallel degree.
As summarized in Table II, the proposed LDPC code decoder
architecture can bring 42% and 12% of memory bits reduction
compared with [4] and [15], respectively.
As analyzed, the proposed RAM hardening scheme only
requires one parity bit, which saves quantity of memory bits
than EDAC RAM hardening schemes. In order to validate its
effectiveness, 100000 SEUs are injected randomly into RAM
contents at different time. Fig.8 shows the BER performance of
LDPC code decoder adopting our proposed RAM hardening
scheme when SEUs are injected, which is nearly the same
as the decoder with no SEU occurs. Moreover, comparing
with the LDPC code decoder with unhardened RAM cells,
our proposed scheme has about 0.25 dB performance gain at
a BER of 10−6 when the same SEUs are injected.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present low cost schemes to harden coun-
ters and RAM cells commonly used in LDPC code decoders.
The proposed fault-tolerant counters are based on m-sequence
and Hamming coding, whose the error location and recovery
could be simplified to a Hamming decoder. Synthesis results
demonstrate that it brings 42% of area reduction compared
with the conventional TMR method. The proposed layered
pipelined architecture absorbs LLR RAM into V2C RAM,
brings 42% and 12% of memory bits reduction compared with
[4] and [15]. Moreover, the proposed RAM hardening scheme
also saves quantity of storage resources compared with EDAC
hardening schemes, who only requires error detection by parity
check. Fault injections are performed to validate that our fault-
tolerant counters could totally avoid SEUs and RAM contents
would not cause extra bit errors at high SNR situations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the National Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under grant No.
61301079, 91338103 and 91538202 and Tsinghua University
Initiative Scientific Research Program.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Anastasopoulos.
A comparison between the sum-product and the
min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution. In
Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001. GLOBECOM’01. IEEE,
volume 2, pages 1021–1025. IEEE, 2001.
[2] M. Berg, H. Kim, M. Friendlich, C. Perez, C. Seidleck, K. LaBel, and
R. Ladbury. Seu analysis of complex circuits implemented in actel rtax-s
fpga devices. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci, 58(3):1015–1022, 2011.
[3] J. Chen and M. P. Fossorier. Density evolution for two improved bp-
based decoding algorithms of ldpc codes.
Communications Letters,
IEEE, 6(5):208–210, 2002.
[4] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and X. Zhang. Reduced-complexity column-layered
decoding and implementation for ldpc codes.
arXiv preprint arX-
iv:1204.2577, 2012.
[5] A. Ejlali, B. M. Al-Hashimi, M. T. Schmitz, P. Rosinger, and S. G.
Miremadi. Combined time and information redundancy for seu-tolerance
in energy-efficient real-time systems.
Very Large Scale Integration
(VLSI) Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 14(4):323–335, 2006.
[6] R. G. Gallager. Low-density parity-check codes. Information Theory,
IRE Transactions on, 8(1):21–28, 1962.
[7] Z. Gao, P. Reviriego, W. Pan, Z. Xu, M. Zhao, J. Wang, and J. A.
Maestro.
Efficient arithmetic-residue-based seu-tolerant fir filter de-
sign. Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, IEEE Transactions on,
60(8):497–501, 2013.
[8] I. Koren and C. M. Krishna. Fault-tolerant systems. Morgan Kaufmann,
2010.
[9] S.-F. Liu, P. Reviriego, and J. A. Maestro. Efficient majority logic fault
detection with difference-set codes for memory applications. Very Large
Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 20(1):148–156,
2012.
[10] Z. Luan, X. Chen, N. Ge, and Z. Wang. Simplified fault-tolerant fir filter
architecture based on redundant residue number system.
Electronics
Letters, 50(23):1768–1770, 2014.
[11] Z. Luan, Y. Pei, and N. Ge. A fast convergence and area-efficient decoder
for quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes.
In Communications
(APCC), 2013 19th Asia-Pacific Conference on, pages 458–462. IEEE,
2013.
[12] K. S. Morgan, D. L. McMurtrey, B. H. Pratt, and M. J. Wirthlin. A
comparison of tmr with alternative fault-tolerant design techniques for
fpgas. Nuclear Science, IEEE Transactions on, 54(6):2065–2072, 2007.
[13] H. Park, S. Hong, J.-S. No, and D.-J. Shin.
Construction of high-
rate regular quasi-cyclic ldpc codes based on cyclic difference families.
Communications, IEEE Transactions on, 61(8):3108–3113, 2013.
[14] P. Reviriego, C. Bleakley, and J. A. Maestro.
Signal shaping dual
modular redundancy for soft error tolerant finite impulse response filters.
Electronics letters, 47(23):1272–1273, 2011.
[15] B. Xiang, R. Shen, A. Pan, D. Bao, and X. Zeng. An area-efficient and
low-power multirate decoder for quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check
codes. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, IEEE Transactions
on, 18(10):1447–1460, 2010.
[16] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam. High throughput
low-density parity-check decoder architectures. In Global Telecommu-
nications Conference, 2001. GLOBECOM’01. IEEE, volume 5, pages
3019–3024. IEEE, 2001.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:10:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
