IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2016

1713

Exhaustive Enumeration of Elementary Trapping Sets of an Arbitrary Tanner Graph
Hossein Falsafain and Sayyed Rasoul Mousavi

Abstract— An effective branch-and-bound (B&B) algorithm for exhaustively enumerating the elementary trapping sets (ETSs) in an arbitrary given Tanner graph is described. Given a Tanner graph G and a positive integer ν, we introduce a novel 0-1 integer linear programming (ILP) formulation of the NP -hard problem of finding the minimum ω for which there exists an (ω, ν)-ETS in G. The B&B procedure is then based on the LP relaxation of this 0-1 ILP formulation. Our novel 0-1 ILP description of the problem yields a strong (tight) LP relaxation, which allows the search space to be pruned very effectively, as confirmed by experimental results. An obvious advantage of the proposed approach is that it does not require the input Tanner graph to be of a particular form (e.g., variable-regular).
Index Terms— Branch-and-bound (B&B) algorithm, elementary trapping set (ETS), error-floor, exhaustive enumeration of ETSs, integer linear programming (ILP), low-density parity-check (LDPC) code.
I. INTRODUCTION
I T IS a widely known fact that the presence of certain vertex configurations in the Tanner graph corresponding to the parity-check matrix describing a low-density paritycheck (LDPC) code can severely degrade the error-correcting performance under message-passing decoding. If the decoder gets stuck at such a non-codeword state, then it cannot escape its basin of attraction. Such problematic configurations, which are commonly called error-prone (sub-)structures, are the main cause of the notorious phenomenon of error-floor [1]–[3]. In this letter, we focus on a particular type of error-prone structures, called elementary trapping sets (ETSs), which have been found to exert serious degrading effects on the errorcorrecting capability of LDPC codes [4]–[6].
Enumerating the error-prone structures in a given Tanner graph G is of at least threefold importance: Firstly, the exhaustive/non-exhaustive set of error-prone structures can be employed for estimating and predicting the error-floor performance of the LDPC code corresponding to G by use of the importance sampling technique. Secondly, such a set can be used for constructing an LDPC code of better errorcorrecting performance. This can be done by eliminating the given error-prone structures from G. Several removal approaches have been proposed in the literature. Some of these techniques try to eliminate the target configurations by introducing new redundant/non-redundant parity-check equations
Manuscript received May 21, 2016; accepted June 29, 2016. Date of publication July 7, 2016; date of current version September 8, 2016. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Baldi.
H. Falsafain is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan 84156-83111, Iran (e-mail: h.falsafain@ec.iut.ac.ir).
S. R. Mousavi is with the Department of Computer Engineering and Information Technology, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran 15916-34311, Iran (e-mail: srm@aut.ac.ir).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2016.2587860

into the parity-check matrix corresponding to G. Thirdly, and finally, such a set can be employed for improving the errorcorrecting capability of the message-passing decoder. To avoid being trapped in a non-codeword state, the decoder can make use of the set as a look-up table. If a pre-known decoder failure is encountered, then a post-processing routine will enable the decoder to escape from it (see, e.g., [3]).
In this letter, we propose a novel approach for the exhaustive enumeration of ETSs that is in essence similar to the methods proposed in [2] and [3], i.e., it is a linear programming (LP)based branch-and-bound (B&B) algorithm. In contrast to the methods described in, e.g., [4]–[6], the proposed method does not require the input Tanner graph to be variable-regular. Given a Tanner graph G and a positive integer ν, we present a novel 0-1 integer linear programming (ILP) formulation for the problem of finding the minimum ω for which there exists an (ω, ν)-ETS in G. Afterwards, we describe our B&B procedure that utilizes this formulation in the bounding step. The presented 0-1 ILP formulation can provide a strong LP relaxation, which leads to significant pruning of the search tree. Several exhaustive/non-exhaustive trapping set enumeration algorithms have been proposed in the literature [2]–[9]. However, to our knowledge, the present approach is the first specifically developed for the exhaustive enumeration of ETSs in an arbitrary given Tanner graph, without any restriction on the structure of to-be-enumerated ETSs.
The rest of this letter is structured as follows. In the next section, after presenting some background material, we detail our novel B&B algorithm. Numerical results verifying the validity and effectiveness of the approach are presented in Section III. Finally, Section IV summarizes the conclusions.
II. AN LP-BASED B&B APPROACH FOR THE EXHAUSTIVE ENUMERATION OF ETSs
Let us begin by briefly recalling some basic definitions, notations, and facts. The Tanner graph corresponding to a parity-check matrix H is a bipartite graph with partite sets C and V . Each vertex in V is associated with a column of H and each vertex in C is associated with a row of H. The vertices in V are called variable-nodes, and the vertices in C , check-nodes. The check-node corresponding to the i th row is connected to the variable-node corresponding to the j th column if the (i, j ) entry of H is equal to 1. Let a Tanner graph G = (C ∪ V , E ) be given. For a subset U of V , let us denote by N(U ) the set of neighbors of U . The subgraph of G whose vertex-set is U ∪ N(U ) and whose edge-set is the set of all those edges in E that have one end-vertex in U and the other in N(U ) is commonly called the subgraph induced by U . We denote this subgraph by G[U ]. Furthermore, we denote by O(U ) the subset of N(U ) comprised of the checknodes whose degrees in G[U ] are odd, and by E(U ) the

1558-2558 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1714

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2016

subset of N(U ) consisting of the check-nodes whose degrees

in G[U ] are even. The check-nodes in O(U ) are referred to

as unsatisfied, and the check-nodes in E(U ) are referred to as

satisfied. A subset U of V of size ω for which |O(U )| = ν is

called an (ω, ν) trapping set, where |·| denotes the cardinality

of a set. An (ω, ν) trapping set U is said to be elementary

if every check-node in G[U ] has degree one or two (in the

subgraph G[U ]). If H is the parity-check matrix associated

with the Tanner graph G, then by an (ω, ν)-ETS in H we

refer to a set of indices of columns of H whose corresponding

variable-nodes form an (ω, ν)-ETS in G. As stated earlier, it

has widely been recognized in the literature that the error-

floors of LDPC codes are primarily due to ETSs.

Let a parity-check matrix H and a positive integer ν

be given. It has been proven that finding the minimum ω

for which there exists an (ω, ν)-ETS in the Tanner graph

corresponding to H is an NP -hard problem [1]. We denote this

problem as MINETS. Suppose that we are given a parity-check

matrix H and two positive integers ωmax and νmax. Our aim is to construct the exhaustive set of all (ω, ν)-ETSs of H with

ω ≤ ωmax and ν ≤ νmax. This is, of course, a computationally

intractable task in general. Indeed, from computational com-

plexity point of view, our exhaustive enumeration technique is

of exponential worst-case time complexity, which means that

it is only applicable to short-to-moderate length LDPC codes.

This is also the case for the methods of [2], [3], and [7]. Now

we are ready to describe the algorithm. We firstly provide a 0-1

ILP formulation of the MINETS problem. In the sequel, we

denote by Hi• the i th row of H, and by H• j its j th column.

Moreover, we denote the support of a binary vector v, defined

as the set of coordinates where v is nonzero, by supp(v).

Theorem 1: and let ν be a

gLiveetnHpo∈siFtim2ve×ninbteegear.gIifvezn∗

parity-check matrix denotes the optimal

objective function value of the formulation ILP1 described

through (1)–(7), then the minimum ω for which there exists an (ω, ν)-ETS in the Tanner graph corresponding to H is z∗.

n

ILP1: Minimize z = x j ,

(1)

j =1

subject to

ζi ≤

x j , for i = 1, 2, . . . , m,

(2)

j ∈supp(Hi•)

x j + ζi ≤ 2, for i = 1, 2, . . . , m,

(3)

j ∈supp(Hi•)

xj ≤

xk + ζi ,

k∈supp(Hi•)\{ j }

for i = 1, 2, . . . , m and for all j ∈ supp(Hi•), (4)
m

ζi = ν,

(5)

i =1

x j ∈ {0, 1}, for j = 1, 2, . . . , n,

(6)

ζi ∈ {0, 1}, for i = 1, 2, . . . , m.

(7)

Proof: For every j , 1 ≤ j ≤ n, we associate a binary
indicator variable x j with H• j , which has the following interpretation: x j is 1 if the variable-node corresponding to H• j takes part in the ETS, and is 0 otherwise. Furthermore, for each i , 1 ≤ i ≤ m, a binary indicator variable ζi has

been assigned to Hi•, which indicates that whether or not the check-node corresponding to Hi• is unsatisfied. Firstly, we have to show that the inequalities (2)–(4) impose the
condition

ζi = 1 ↔

x j = 1,

(8)

j ∈supp(Hi•)

where the symbol “↔” stands for “is equivalent to” or “if and

only if”. If ζi = 1, then the inequalities (2) and (3) imply that j∈supp(Hi•) x j = 1. In this case, the inequalities (4)

trivially hold. This means that the inequalities (2) and (3)

ensure that the “if” part of (8) holds. On the other hand, if

ζi = 0, then we necessarily have j∈supp(Hi•) x j = 1, since
otherwise, if x is the unique variable in x j : j ∈ supp(Hi•) such that x = 1, then x > k∈supp(Hi•)\{ } xk + ζi = 0. This means that if j∈supp(Hi•) x j = 1 holds, then we have a violated inequality in (4). The inequalities (4) impose

the condition ζi = 0 → j∈supp(Hi•) x j = 1, which is equivalent to j∈supp(Hi•) x j = 1 → ζi = 1. Therefore, the inequalities (4) ensure that the “only if” part of the

condition (8) is met. Finally, the inequalities (3) guarantee

that the induced subgraph contains no check-node of degree

greater than two, and (5) ensures that it contains exactly ν

unsatisfied check-nodes.

Indeed,

if

x

∗ j

is

the

value

to ILP1, then the set {1 ≤

of x j in j ≤n:

an

x

∗ j

optimal solution = 1} represents

a (z∗, ν)-ETS, and there exists no (ω, ν)-ETS in the Tanner

graph corresponding to H with ω < z∗. Algorithm 1

summarizes a B&B procedure for the exhaustive enumeration

of ETSs in an arbitrary given Tanner graph. The algorithm maintains a pool A of active (open, live) subproblems.1

Indeed, the state-space of the problem is explored as a tree,

called a search tree (a.k.a. state-space tree). The root of the tree

(line 1) represents the original feasible region and each node

corresponds to a subregion. Each node a in the search tree A is

indeed a subproblem that can be described by a ternary vector

of length n. The i th entry of such a vector is in {0, 1, }. If the

entry is 0 or 1, then we say that the coordinate is constrained,

otherwise the coordinate is said to be unconstrained. We define the support of such a vector a = (a1, a2, . . . , an) ∈ {0, 1, }n,
denoted by supp(a), to be the set of indices j , 1 ≤ j ≤ n, such that a j = 1. A vector v = (v1, v2, . . . , vn) ∈ F2n is said to be compatible (consistent) with a ∈ A if for every constrained

coordinate j , 1 ≤ j ≤ n, we have v j = a j . Therefore, each node a, called as an active node, represents a subproblem

in which the search is restricted to those ETSs compatible

with it.

In order for the formulation ILP1 to be used in Algorithm 1

(line 12), a couple of slight changes need to be made. Firstly,

since we wish to find all (ω, ν)-ETSs in G for which ν ≤ νmax,

the linear constraint (5) should be changed to

m i =1

ζi

≤

νmax.

Secondly, to prevent the algorithm to return a codeword as

an ETS, the linear constraint

m i =1

ζi

≥

1

has

to

be

added

to

the formulation.

At every node a, by exploiting the LP relaxation of a 0-1 ILP

formulation of the problem, we obtain a lower bound LB(a) on

1In our implementation of Algorithm 1, the active subproblems are maintained in a last-in-first-out stack. In other words, as in [2], the algorithm traverses the tree in a depth-first manner.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FALSAFAIN AND MOUSAVI: EXHAUSTIVE ENUMERATION OF ETSs OF AN ARBITRARY TANNER GRAPH

1715

Algorithm 1 A B&B Procedure for the Exhaustive

Enumeration of ETSs

Input: A Tanner graph G, and two positive integers ωmax and νmax Output: The exhaustive set L of all (ω, ν)-ETSs of the

Tanner graph G with ω ≤ ωmax and ν ≤ νmax 1: Set A ← {( , , . . . , )} and L ← ∅.

2: while A = ∅ do

3: Choose and remove an active node a = (a1, a2, . . . , an) ∈ {0, 1, }n from A.

4: if | supp(a)| > ωmax then

5:

Go to 2.

6: else if there is no unconstrained coordinate in a then

7:

if supp(a) represents an (ω, ν)-ETS with ν ≤ νmax

then

8:

L ← L ∪ {supp(a)}.

9:

end if

10:

Go to 2.

11: end if

12: Compute a lower bound LB(a) on the size of the (ω, ν)-

ETSs with ν ≤ νmax that are compatible (consistent) with a.

13: if the LP instance proved infeasible or LB(a) > ωmax

then

14:

Go to 2.

15: end if

16: Choose an index j , 1 ≤ j ≤ n, for which a j = (i.e.,

a j is an unconstrained coordinate) and create two new

nodes (subproblems) a and a . The j th component of

a is 1, the j th component of a is 0, and all other entr-

ies of a and a are the same as those in a. Set A ← A∪

{a , a }.

17: end while

18: return L

the size of the (ω, ν)-ETSs with ν ≤ νmax that are consistent with a. The underlying logic behind the process is that if no further exploration beyond an active node in A is worthwhile, then the node can be excluded from any further consideration.
There are two criteria that indicate that an active node is nonpromising. The first fathoming criterion is that, if the relaxed
subproblem proved infeasible, then obviously there is no sense in exploring the corresponding subtree further. Thus, we can fathom this subproblem. The subproblem a is then said to be pruned by infeasibility. The second fathoming criterion is that, if for a node a ∈ A we have LB(a) > ωmax, then the node cannot lead to an ETS of size ≤ ωmax, thus it is futile to search for such an ETS in the subtree rooted at a. Consequently, the node can be dismissed from further consideration. In this case, we say that the subproblem a is pruned by bound.
Algorithm 1 is conceptually similar to the algorithms described in [2] and [3]. However, what makes it very effective
is the tightness of the LP relaxation of ILP1. The MINETS problem may be formulated as an ILP model in various ways.
These models are not equivalent in terms of the tightness of the LP relaxation. The tighter the relaxation is, the better (higher) the lower bound LB(a) will be, which results in a more effective pruning (lines 12–15). Specifically, after some

minor modifications, one can describe the MINETS problem using the ILP formulation presented in [3, Section III.B]:

n

ILP2: Minimize z = x j ,

(9)

j =1
subject to

x j = 2ξi + ζi , for i = 1, 2, . . . , m, (10)

j ∈supp(Hi•)

ξi + ζi ≤ 1, for i = 1, 2, . . . , m,

(11)

m

ζi = ν,

(12)

i =1

x j ∈ {0, 1}, for j = 1, 2, . . . , n,

(13)

ζi ∈ {0, 1} and ξi ∈ {0, 1}, for i = 1, 2, . . . , m. (14)

More precisely speaking, the above formulation can readily be

obtained by dropping the constraints of being fully absorbing

set (FAS), which are

i∈supp(H• j ) ζi ≤

| supp(H• j )|−1 2

,

for

j = 1, 2, . . . , n, from the formulation given in [3] and

introducing the inequalities (11) into it. Observe that the

inequalities (10) and (11) guarantee that ζi = 1 if and only
if the check-node corresponding to Hi• is unsatisfied. Moreover, the inequalities (11) ensure that the induced subgraph contains no check-node of degree greater than two.2 As will

be demonstrated in the next section, this formulation provides

a poor LP relaxation, which can lead to excessive branching,

high memory consumption, and long computation time.

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS This section presents some experimental results demon-

strating the validity and effectiveness of our new approach.

Firstly, we compare the results of applying the presented method to the well-known (3, 5)-regular (155, 64) Tanner

quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC code with those reported in [4]–[6];

secondly, we present some experimental results of applying

the proposed approach to three irregular LDPC codes; and

finally, we provide a comparison of the formulation ILP1 with

its counterpart described through (9)–(14). It should be high-

lighted that the ETSs that can be enumerated by our approach

are not restricted to those of a particular structure. In par-

ticular, the resulting ETSs may be connected or disconnected.

However, in this section, we only consider the connected ones.

In our implementation of Algorithm 1, we employed the B&B

framework provided by the state-of-the-art commercial ILP

solver CPLEX [10], within which multiple integer-feasible

solutions to an ILP instance can be generated. The algorithm

has been implemented in C++, and the experiments have been

carried out on an Intel Core i7-2670QM 2.20 GHz laptop with

4.00 GB of RAM, running MS Windows 7 (64-bit) OS. It is

worthwhile to note that, in line 16 of Algorithm 1 we select an unconstrained coordinate j , 1 ≤ j ≤ n, and introduce two

new subproblems a and a that are equal to a at coordinates

2One common approach to obtain a stronger formulation of a problem is to use cutting planes (valid inequalities) so as to get a better approximation to the convex hull of feasible solutions. The formulation ILP1 is a strengthened version of ILP2 obtained through the introduction of valid inequalities. In fact, it can be proved that the inequalities (4) are a subset of the set of valid inequalities that can be obtained by the use of Gomory’s fractional cutting plane technique for tightening the LP relaxation of ILP2. These, together with the constraints (2), (3), and (5), imply the linear constraints from which they are derived (i.e., the constraints (10)–(12)) and, furthermore, provide a tighter LP relaxation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1716

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2016

TABLE I (ω, ν)-ETSs WITH ω ≤ 12 AND ν ≤ 4 IN THE (155, 64) TANNER CODE
TABLE II NUMERICAL RESULTS FOR THREE DIFFERENT IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

in ILP1, we can force Algorithm 1 to return only those ETSs in which each variable-node is connected to at least two satisfied check-nodes. This is generally a more effective way than finding all possible ETSs, and then retaining the desired ones.3 Moreover, if the aim is to enumerate the ETSs of the above-described type in a variable-regular Tanner graph with girth at least six, then the method given in [6] can yield much faster execution times compared with our method. For example, the approach of [6] requires only 442 secs to enumerate the (ω, ν)-ETSs of the above type with ω ≤ 12 and ν ≤ 4 in the (155, 64) Tanner code, whereas our method (by introducing the inequalities (15) into the formulation) takes 9888 secs to do so.4 Finally, it should be remarked that because of the inherent intractability of MINETS, our exhaustive enumeration algorithm is only applicable to shortto-moderate length LDPC codes.

TABLE III A COMPARISON OF THE FORMULATIONS ILP1 AND ILP2
other than j , but the j th entry of a is 0, and the j th entry of a is 1. The variable x j is then called the branching variable. To decide which variable should be branched on is a matter of importance. The branching variable can be chosen according to various branching strategies. In our implementation, CPLEX selects the most suited branching strategy among the available ones (e.g., most/least integer infeasibility, strong branching, and pseudo-cost branching) by itself, according to its own internal criteria.
Table I lists the multiplicities of all (ω, ν)-ETSs of the (155, 64) Tanner code with ω ≤ 12 and ν ≤ 4. The results presented in [4, Table VII], [5, Table III], and [6, Table XXII] are also included for comparison. Notice that the ETSs considered in [4]–[6] are restricted to those in which each variable-node is connected to at least two satisfied check-nodes. However, there exist connected ETSs that are not of this kind. The number of ETSs of the above type is shown in parentheses in our Tables I and II. Our results are entirely consistent with those given in [4]–[6]. Table II summarizes the results of applying the proposed algorithm to three irregular LDPC codes. The first code is the (504, 252) progressive edge growth (PEG) LDPC code whose parity-check matrix PEGirReg252x504 is given in [11], and the other two codes are the (576, 288) and the (1056, 528) IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) QC-LDPC codes. Finally, Table III provides a comparison of the formulations ILP1 and ILP2. All times are in seconds. As is evident from Table III, ILP1 provides a much more effective performance, with respect to both computational time and number of evaluated nodes, which can be attributed to the fact that it provides stronger LP relaxation bounds than its counterpart.
We conclude this section by making some remarks. It can be proved that by including the inequalities
i∈supp(H• j ) ζi + 2x j ≤ | supp(H• j )|, for j = 1, 2, . . . , n, (15)

IV. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed a novel B&B procedure for exhaustively enumerating the ETSs in a given Tanner graph. The major advantages of the proposed approach are as follows: Firstly, it is an exhaustive enumeration algorithm; secondly, it does not require the input Tanner graph to be variable-regular; and finally, the to-be-enumerated ETSs are not restricted to those of a particular structure.
REFERENCES
[1] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1640–1650, Apr. 2010.
[2] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient algorithms to find all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[3] G. B. Kyung and C. C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[4] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization and efficient exhaustive search of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 323–326, Mar. 2015.
[5] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[6] Y. Hashemi and A. Banihashemi. (2015). “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes.” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/ abs/1510.04954
[7] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[8] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[9] S. Abu-Surra, D. Declercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), Jan./Feb. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[10] CPLEX User’s Manual (Version 12 Release 6), IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA, 2015.
[11] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes, accessed on May 20, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
3For instance, after introducing the inequalities (15) into ILP1, the CPU time for enumerating the above type of (ω, ν)-ETSs in the (504, 252) PEG code was reduced to 1531 secs for ω ≤ 15 and ν = 1, and to 1017 secs for ω ≤ 10 and ν = 2 (cf. the corresponding values in Table II).
4The CPU time for enumerating all connected (ω, ν)-ETSs with ω ≤ 12 and ν ≤ 4 in the (155, 64) Tanner code (without the aforementioned restriction) was 11660 secs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

