454

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

Hard-Decision Decoding Algorithms for LDPC Codes Based on Matching Pursuit
Jianzhong Guo , Ruoxi Li, Yuan Zhang, Jing Chen , Dejin Kong , and Yan Wu

Abstract— This letter presents a novel binary matching pursuit (BMP) algorithm for the decoding of hard-decision low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The traditional matching pursuit algorithm over GF(2) is susceptible to mismatching and cause a chain of errors. To overcome this problem, two strategies are proposed, one is to introduce a kind of new matching reliability, and the other is to adopt a scheme of multiple decoding modules. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm not only greatly outperforms the bit-flipping (BF) algorithm, but also outperforms the hybrid soft-decision algorithm such as weighted BF algorithm in error performance, and has the advantage of low complexity.
Index Terms— LDPC, hard decision decoding, binary matching pursuit (BMP), iterative decoding, BER.
I. INTRODUCTION
HARD-decision decoding algorithm of low-density paritycheck code (LDPC) is always appealing in some low complexity high speed communications such as underwater wireless optical communications and free space optics, where A/D converter is not adopted and binary bitstream outputs directly from a limiting amplifier [1]. In this case, both soft decision decoding such as belief propagation (BP) algorithm and its variants, and hybrid soft decision decoding such as weighted bit-flipping (WBF) and its variants [2], [3], [4], [5], gradient descent BF and its variants [6], [7] cannot be used, because soft information is not available. Therefore, researchers keep an unremitting search for good hard decision algorithms for the decoding of LDPC codes [8], [9], [10].
Recently, matching pursuit (MP) algorithm has drawn the attention of the coding field due to its great efficiency in compressed sensing. Taking maximum inner product as the criterion of matching, the traditional MP algorithm can recover sparse pattern (position of nonzero element) with great efficiency and accuracy in real or complex field [11]. However, as for the binary Galois field (GF2)) over which the LDPC code operates, this is not the case, for there tends to be more than one atom (a column of the parity-check matrix) producing maximum inner product with the residual, so it is very difficult to recognize which one really matches [9]. If a wrong atom is
Manuscript received 11 September 2023; revised 29 October 2023; accepted 28 November 2023. Date of publication 7 December 2023; date of current version 12 March 2024. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U2141255 and 62001333. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was V. Bioglio. (Corresponding author: Jing Chen.)
Jianzhong Guo, Ruoxi Li, Yuan Zhang, Dejin Kong, and Yan Wu are with the School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Wuhan Textile University, Wuhan 430079, China (e-mail: jianzg@whu.edu.cn).
Jing Chen is with the School of Electronic Information, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: chen.j@whu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2023.3340560

chosen, mismatching will occur. Moreover, mismatching can propagate during iterations and cause a chain of errors.
In view of these facts, we investigate binary MP (BMP) algorithms and take some strategies to avoid mismatching. The main work is as follows:
(1) A binary MP (BMP) algorithm is investigated to decode hard decision LDPC code, in which approaches are adopted to avoid atoms being continuously chosen.
(2) Matching reliability is introduced to improve matching accuracy. It is an integer associated with the frequency of an atom selected by the previous iterations, indicating the extent of the atom’s matching with the residual of syndrome. The atom with both maximum inner product and maximum reliability is chosen as optimal matching. This method greatly increases the accuracy of the matching.
(3) A scheme of collaborative decoding with multiple modules is proposed to reduce mismatching caused by the first iteration in which the reliability is initialized as zero.
The remainder of this letter is organized as follows. In section II, the BMP algorithm is presented for the decoding of LDPC codes. Section III presents the improved BMP algorithm, in which two strategies of reducing mismatching are proposed. Simulations are conducted in section IV, and some comparisons are made therein. Finally, the letter is concluded in Section V.
II. BMP ALGORITHM FOR THE DECODING OF LDPC CODES
A. Notations
In this letter, all vectors are assumed to be column vectors, for example, a codeword c is an n × 1 column vector. Let H = (h1, h2, · · · , hw, · · · , hn) be a binary m×n parity check matrix with average column weight and row weight (dv, dc), in which each column is referred to as an atom. An (n, k) binary linear block code C is defined as the null space of the parity check matrix H, where equation Hc = 0 holds for any codeword c ∈ C over GF(2). Let cˆ be a noisy version of c, and eT = (e1, e2, · · · , en) be the corresponding error pattern, where ei equals 1 or 0 indicating if there is an error or not, there holds cˆ = c + e. The notation ϕ represents empty set.

B. Optimization Problem in LDPC Codes
The syndrome can be expressed as the form of linear measurements

s = Hcˆ = He = · · · + hi + · · · + hj + · · ·

(1)

where hi or hj is the ith or jth column from the parity-check matrix H, corresponding to ei = 1, ej = 1.

1558-2558 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: HARD-DECISION DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES BASED ON MP

455

The aim of hard-decision decoding is to recover the error pattern e from equation (1). However, for an (n, k) linear block code, there are 2k solutions or error patterns satisfy equation (1) without extra information. The optimal decoding is to find the codeword c∗ ∈ C to minimize the bit error rate (BER), which is equivalent to find out the sparsest solution, and the problem can be described as the following optimization

eˆ = argmin ∥e∥0

s.t. s = He

(2)

where ∥∥0 represents the 0-norm, or the number of non-zero elements. Since equation ∥e∥0 = ∥e∥1 holds over GF(2), the equation (2) is equivalent to the following equation (3)

eˆ = argmin ∥e∥1

s.t. s = He

(3)

Usually, error pattern e is such a sparse vector that can be solved by algorithms from compressed sensing if the condition of restricted isometry property (RIP) is satisfied. As pointed out in [9], the parity-check matrix of LDPC code satisfies the RIP condition; therefore, the error pattern e can be solved by the MP algorithm.

than or equal to the average number of errors, that is

κ

≥

∥e∥0

= √

nPe

(4)

Pe = erf c( SN R)/2

(5)

where Pe is the error probability without error correcting code, SNR is signal to noise ratio, and erf c(·) is the complementary error function. At SNR=2, for example, Pe is approximate to 0.02 according to (5), and κ is approximate to 0.02n.

Algorithm 1 BMP Algorithm
Input: hard channel output cˆ, maximum iterations κ, parity check matrix H = (h1, h2, · · · , hw, · · · , hn)
Initialization: error position Λ0 = ϕ, residual r0 = Hcˆ, mismatching position Ω0 = ϕ, iteration i = 1
do
(hλi , · · · , hλj ) = argmax ri−1, hw : ω = 1, · · · , n, ω ∈/ Ωi−1
randomly choose hλi

Λi =

Λi−1 ∪ λi Λi−1 \ λi

for λi ∈/ Λi−1 for λi ∈ Λi−1

Ωi =

Ωi−1 ∪ λi Ωi−1

for λi ∈/ Λi−1 for λi ∈ Λi−1

C. Matching Pursuit Algorithm Over GF(2)
In the traditional MP algorithm, an atom has been chosen in the previous iteration is allowed to be chosen again, for it is not necessarily orthogonal to the residual [11]. This can bring both advantage and disadvantage to the decoding of LDPC codes. On the one hand it provides an access to recover mismatching, on the other hand it can cause error and decrease the speed of convergence, for twice choosing an atom does not change the residual over GF(2), but changes the set of error position.
However, if an atom is chosen again and again, it is most probable that it is trapped in a trapping set [12]. Therefore, the case that an atom is continuously chosen is referred to as mismatching. So, in the BMP algorithm, measures must be taken to handle the problem of twice choosing an atom. Only when a matching atom is chosen in each iteration can the residual decrease rapidly, otherwise, it will not converge to zero.
Based on the above analysis, the BMP algorithm can be described as algorithm 1, in which the notations Λi, Ωi and ri represent the vectors of error position, mismatching position and residual for the ith iteration, respectively; the notations Λ0 = ϕ, Ω0 = ϕ and r0 = Hcˆ represent that they are initialized as empty set and syndrome; the notation Λi = Λi−1 ∪ λi or Ωi = Ωi−1 ∪ λi represents the element λi is incorporated into the vector Λi or Ωi, and the notation Λi = Λi−1 \ λi represents the element λi is removed from the vector Λi, where λi is the index of the atom chosen during the ith iteration. All the addition operates over GF(2), with the exception of inner product, which is computed over integer field.
In order to recover the error pattern e, the maximum number of iterations κ should cover all the errors. It should be greater

ri = ri−1 ⊕ hλi
i=i+1
while((i < κ) and ri 1 > 0)
return Λi, ri
III. THE IMPROVED BMP ALGORITHM
A. The Improved BMP Algorithm
In MP-based decoding algorithms, the most important step is to search for the matching atom and its position in the parity-check matrix according to the criterion of maximizing the inner product between residual and atoms. Unfortunately, in LDPC decoding, there tends to be one or more atoms that meet this criterion at each iteration, frequently including unmatching ones. It is very difficult to recognize which one really matches, and one of them will be randomly chosen if no extra information is available. Therefore, mismatching is liable to occur. Only when all the matching atoms are chosen can the residual decrease to zero rapidly, otherwise, mismatching and error will propagate, and the residual will not converge to zero.
In order to improve matching accuracy, we introduce reliability, an integer associated with an atom indicating the extent of its matching with the residual. The bigger is the value of the reliability, the higher is the degree of the matching. In practice, the reliability of an atom can be counted by the times of its maximizing the inner product during the iterations. Therefore, at the current iteration, an atom with both maximum inner product and maximum reliability is chosen as the matching atom.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

456

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

The improved BMP (IBMP) algorithm can be described as algorithm 2, in which the notation Li = (l1, · · · , lj, · · · , ln) represents the vector of reliability, with the initialization L0 = 0. During the ith iteration, the reliability is updated by the equation lλi ∗ = max(Li) or lλi ∗ = lλi ∗ − d, decided by whether there is a mismatching or not, where d is a constant
integer. Simulations show that the algorithm performs well
when the constant integer is equal to dv, the degree of the columns of the parity-check matrix.

Algorithm 2 Improvement of BMP with reliability
Input: hard channel output ˆc, maximum iterations κ, parity check matrix H = (h1, h2, · · · , hw, · · · , hn)
Initialization: error position Λ0 = ϕ, reliability L0 = 0, mismatching position Ω0 = ϕ, residual r0 = 0, r0 = Hcˆ, iteration i = 1
do
(hλi , · · · , hλj ) = argmax ri−1, hw : ω = 1, · · · , n, ω ∈/ Ωi−1

Li =

Li−1 + 1 for λi, · · · , λj Li−1 for else

lλi ∗ = max Li

Λi =

Λi−1 ∪ {λ∗} for λ∗ ∈/ Λi−1 Λi−1 \ {λ∗} for λ∗ ∈ Λi−1

Ωi =

Ωi−1 ∪ {λ∗} for λ∗ ∈/ Λi−1 Ωi−1 for λ∗ ∈ Λi−1

lλi ∗ = lλi ∗ − dv for λ∗ ∈ Λ

ri = ri−1 ⊕ hλ∗

ri−1, hw for ω = 1, · · · , n requires ndv logic operations and n(dv −1) addition operations in integer. To locate the columns with maximum inner product, (n − 1) comparison operations in integer are required. For the BMP and IBMP algorithms, more integer addition and comparison operations are needed, varying with SNR, BER and iterations. As pointed previously that the number of errors is no more than κ, the average operations of addition and comparison can be calculated as shown in table I. It should be noted that in MP-based algorithms the parity check is not required during iterations, which greatly decreases the computational complexity.
Decoded in real field, the standard WBF algorithm needs mdc +ndv real addition [2], n−1 real comparison operations, and m(n − 1)dc logic operations for parity check during each iteration. In addition, it requires a small increase in computation for preprocessing before iterative decoding which involves in m(dv − 1) operations of comparison in real field. The detailed comparison is shown in table I.
Since real operations are more complex than integer operations and logic operations, the WBF has higher complexity than the hard decision algorithms such as BF, MP, BMP and IBMP. Though multi-module scheme for the IBMP algorithm can increase the complexity, the decoder can be implemented parallelly so that the influence on computational complexity can be ignored.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, simulations are conducted via BPSK modulation over an AWGN channel to test the validity of the BMP and improved BMP algorithms. PEG-LDPC codes are employed, with column weight 3, and row weight 5, 6, or 7 unequally, and simulation results are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2.

i=i+1
while((i < κ) and ri 1 > 0)
return Λi, ri
Though the introduction of reliability can greatly improve the performance of matching, however, at the first iteration, the reliability is initialized to be zero and cannot provide any information for decoding. As a result, an atom is randomly chosen, and mismatching is liable to occur. The first iteration mismatching greatly influence the BER performance.
In order to avoid mismatching occurring in the first iteration, the improved BMP algorithm adopts multiple decoding modules to work parallelly and collaboratively, and then combines them together to produce the decoding output. Simulation results show that this strategy can considerably reduce mismatching.
B. Complexity Analysis
The complexity of the BF and MP based algorithms rests with computing the inner product and seeking for the largest one. As for a LDPC code with average column weight dv and row weight dc, the standard way to compute inner product

A. Performance Comparison
Fig. 1 shows the comparison of BER performance among various algorithms under the same conditions, including the BMP algorithm, the improved BMP algorithm, the SMP algorithm [13], the BF algorithm, the WBF algorithm and the log-BP algorithm. The code length is 128, the rate is 1/2, and maximum iterations is 12.
Simulation results demonstrate that though as a kind of hard-decision decoding, the BMP algorithm and improved BMP algorithm are superior to the SMP algorithm and the BF algorithm in BER performance. Furthermore, the improved BMP algorithm can outperform the traditional WBF algorithm proposed in [2], though it has a gap with the log-BP algorithm.
It should be noted that the WBF algorithm is a hybrid soft-decision one, which needs soft information to help to decode. Besides, the hybrid decoding algorithms also include the MWBF algorithm, IMWBF algorithm, gradient descent BF algorithm, etc. Since soft information is needed in the decoders, these algorithms are not applicable to some low-complexity high speed communications, for example, underwater wireless optical communications, where A/D converter is not available. Therefore, they are not simulated and compared with the proposed BMP and improved BMP in this letter.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUO et al.: HARD-DECISION DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC CODES BASED ON MP

457

TABLE I COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY PER ITERATION

codes have the advantage of flexibility in block length and rate, the improved BMP algorithm has practical value in low complexity communication systems.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, the BMP algorithm and the improved BMP algorithm are investigated to decode hard-decision LDPC codes. BER performance is compared by simulations, and computational complexity is compared by analysis. Results show that the improved BMP algorithm has such good error correcting capability that it can be put into application in low complexity high speed communication system such as underwater wireless optical communications, where A/D converter is not adopted.

Fig. 1. Performance comparison with different algorithms.
Fig. 2. Performance comparison with different code length.
B. Influence of Block Length Upon BER Performance The influence of block length upon the BER performance
of the improved BMP algorithm is shown in Fig. 2, where the PEG-LDPC code is employed, with length 128, 256, 512 respectively, and rate 1/2. For the sake of comparison, the performance curve of the (127, 64) BCH code is plotted, where the decoder employs Berlekamp-Massey (BM) algorithm.
From the curves we can see that the BER performance of the improved BMP algorithm gets better and better with the increase of block length. For example, when the block length is 512, the proposed algorithm has BER performance comparable to that of the (127,63) BCH code, for both curves are almost coincident when the SNR is greater than 6. Since the LDPC

REFERENCES
[1] P. Wang, C. Li, and Z. Xu, “A cost-efficient real-time 25 Mb/s system for LED-UOWC: Design, channel coding, FPGA implementation, and characterization,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 36, no. 13, pp. 2627–2637, Jul. 15, 2018.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[4] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[5] J. Oh and J. Ha, “A two-bit weighted bit-flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 874–877, May 2018.
[6] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[7] G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead, and E. Boutillon, “Noisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 3385–3400, Oct. 2014.
[8] S. Yeo and I.-C. Park, “Improved hard-reliability based majority-logic decoding for non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 230–233, Feb. 2017.
[9] J. Guo et al., “Matching pursuit algorithm for decoding of binary LDPC codes,” Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput., vol. 2021, pp. 1–5, Oct. 2021.
[10] J. Jung and I.-C. Park, “Multi-bit flipping decoding of LDPC codes for NAND storage systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 979–982, May 2017.
[11] J. A. Tropp, “Greed is good: Algorithmic results for sparse approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2231–2242, Oct. 2004.
[12] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “From cages to trapping sets and codewords: A technique to derive tight upper bounds on the minimum size of trapping sets and minimum distance of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 2062–2074, Apr. 2019.
[13] N. Kalouptsidis and N. Kolokotronis, “Fast decoding of regular LDPC codes using greedy approximation algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2011, pp. 2005–2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:21:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

