2024 26th International Conference on Digital Signal Processing and its Applications (DSPA) | 979-8-3503-6172-8/24/$31.00 В©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/DSPA60853.2024.10510122

Software for Analyzing Cycles in QC LDPC Code Protographs

Aleksei Kharin, Aleksei Ovinnikov, Konstantin Zavertkin, Sergei Ganin Sphera Lab Limited Liability Company Ryazan, Russia
kharin.a.v@labsphera.ru, ovinnikov.a.a@labsphera.ru, zavertkin.k.n@labsphera.ru, ganin.s.v@labsphera.ru

AbstractвҖ”The paper is devoted to an overview of the designed software that allows you to adjust the presence of cycles with certain parameters in Tanner graphs. The key indicator in the analysis of cycles is the number of unique block checks, the presence of which is determined by the route in the protograph. To verify the correctness of the created modification of the developed specialized software, a set of programs has been prepared that solve the problem of analyzing and classifying the cycles available in the Tanner graph. The method of detecting routes in protographs of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes has also been improved both in terms of computational costs and memory used.
KeywordsвҖ”Communication systems, Quasi-Cyclic codes, LowDensity Parity-Check codes, error correction codes, routes, cycles, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern channel coding technologies are characterized by fairly high requirements for computing resources and memory. Along with the development and optimization of decoders for various communication channels, decision-making methods in demodulators, as well as the organization of signal processing in a fixed-point format, it is necessary to consistently create special code structures. Quasi-cyclic ensembles, the paritycheck matrices of which have a cellular structure, have found wide practical application [1], [2] in the class of LDPC codes. Each cell is a single diagonal matrix with a column weight of one or more. The parity-check matrix may also contain empty circulants, which are square zero matrices. An LDPC code is called regular if the degrees of the code and parity nodes of the corresponding bipartite graph are fixed, otherwise we are talking about an irregular code. The absence of zero circulants in the regular QC LDPC code indicates that the bipartite graph is fully connected for it. The classic way to synthesize such codes is to perform a topological transformation from the base to the parity-check matrix. In addition, for incompletely connected graphs, you should first obtain a protograph using the density evolution method [3] or EXIT diagrams [4], [5]. In the process of expanding the basic graph, there is a need to analyze individual cycles and routes, calculate connectivity metrics or other quality indicators.
This work was carried out in the areas of developing new and modifying previously created software that implements the tasks of synthesis and analysis of quasi-cyclic LDPC
This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation under Grant 2229-20140.

codes. The number of unique block checks is selected as the key indicator by which cycles of different lengths can be separated in regular quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. The analysis of their number can be carried out both along separate routes in the protograph and at the intersection of short cycles. To assess the correctness of the developed modification, a set of software modules has been developed that convert the paritycheck matrix into a Tanner graph, search for cycles up to a user-defined length and convert these cycles into protograph routes with classification of these routes by the number of block checks included in them. Thus, the correctness of the modifications made to the main LDPC code generation project is monitored. The method of route detection in basic matrices and graphs of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes has also been further improved, both in terms of computational costs and memory involved.

II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATIONS

Let Gb{Vb вҲӘ Cb, Eb} denote a base bipartite graph of an (n, k) QC LDPC code of rate R = k/n, which consists of the set of dc = n/z variable nodes Vb = {v0, v1, ..., vdcвҲ’1}, the set of dv вүҘ (n вҲ’ k)/z check nodes Cb = {c0, c1, ..., cdvвҲ’1} and the set of l edges Eb = {e0, e1, ..., el}. Where z is called a lifting factor. An LDPC code is said to be quasi-cyclic if it can be presented by a (dv, dc) base matrix where each element represents a z Г— z circulant permutation matrix. The paritycheck matrix H of a k/n rate QC LDPC code of length n = z В· dc can be represented by:

пЈ® P0,0

пЈҜ P1,0

H =пЈҜ пЈҜ пЈ°

...

P0,1 . . . P0,dcвҲ’1 пЈ№

P1,1 . . . P1,dcвҲ’1 пЈә

...

...

...

пЈә пЈә пЈ»

(1)

PdvвҲ’1,0 PdvвҲ’1,1 . . . PdvвҲ’1,dcвҲ’1

where Pi,j =

wi,j t=1

I(sit,j )

represents

a

sum

of

square

z

Г—

z

circulant permutation matrices I(sit,j) whose nonzero elements

in each row are cyclically shifted to the right by sit,j for value

wi,j > 0 and Pi,j is a square zero matrix for wi,j = 0.

The base weight matrix of a QC LDPC code can be

represented by:

пЈ® w0,0

пЈҜ w1,0

Wb

=

пЈҜ пЈҜ

пЈ°

...

w0,1 . . . w0,dcвҲ’1 пЈ№

w1,1 . . . w1,dcвҲ’1 пЈә

...

...

...

пЈә (2) пЈә пЈ»

wdvвҲ’1,0 wdvвҲ’1,1 . . . wdvвҲ’1,dcвҲ’1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where wi,j вүҘ 0 is called a circulantвҖҷs weight and represents a number of circulant permutation matrices in Pi,j.
The set of nodes Vb in the base graph corresponds to the columns of Wb (2). The set of nodes Cb in the base graph corresponds to the rows of Wb. Each wi,j defines number of edges between Vi variable node and Cj check node. Total number of edges is equal to l = i,j wi,j.
We define a route r of length g as a sequence of edges r = {e0, e1, ..., egвҲ’1} that starts and ends at the same variable node vi where ej Мё= ej+1 for j вҲҲ [0, g вҲ’ 1].
III. ENUMERATION FOR CYCLES IN PROTOGRAPHS
Different approaches can be used to track cycles presence in the constructed code when building it from the protograph. The straightforward one is to lift the protograph and then check for cycles in the lifted graph. This approach is computationally complex. The first reason is that the protograph should be lifted every time before the check. The second one is that lifting factor value can be up to several thousands. So, a lifted graph size is multiple times bigger than the size of the corresponding protograhp. And looking for cycles in the lifted graph requires much more time.
A faster approach is to check for cycles in the lifted graph based on the information that can be obtained from the protograph only. This is possible thanks to the known connection between routes in a protograph and cycles in the graph lifted from the protograph [6]. Yet, to utilize this connection for LDPC codes construction utils it is necessary to find a way to enumerate routes in the protograph.
As was mentioned in the Definitions sections routes differ significantly from cycles. So, commonly used approaches for cycles enumeration can be used here. It is necessary to find a way to enumerate routes in protopraphs and to construct base equations for the routes.
IV. FEATURES OF THE SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF
THE CYCLE ENUMERATION ALGORITHM
In the first version of our code construction application, we use an approach that is based on the representation of long routes through combination of short cycles. This approach utilizes the idea that there is a limited number of variations of routes of length 8 and 10. And each of these variations can be described as a combination of a pair of short cycles. For routes of length 8 it is two cycles of length 4. And for routes of length 10 it a cycle of length 4 and a cycle of length 6. This idea was formalized and described in detail in [7] and [8].
Representing routes through short cycles has its advantages when constructing LDPC codes. First, we were able to utilize a fast and well-known technic to enumerate cycles in the protograph. And then use the cycles to search for routes.
Second, the original condition for cycle [6] requires not only the base equation for the route to be or not to be equal to zero but also applies restrictions on the base equations of short cycles that are part of the longer route. As we represent routes as a combination of short cycles, we can easily check

those additional restrictions. This allows us to be more flexible during code construction. In a common case when additional restrictions are not considered it is only possible to construct codes with a certain girth. While with the restriction counted, we can for example eliminate cycles of length 8 and still keep some cycles of length 4. This is especially useful when constructing codes with a certain emd specter [9].
Third, not only a route is considered as a combination of short cycle. Its base equation is also a combination of base equations of short cycle. So, to check the condition for a certain route it is only necessary to perform one addition or subtraction. This leads to minimization of computational complexity and allows to achieve better results [10].
Finally, for every found route of length 8 or 10 we have full information about its structure, including what type of route it is and what vertexes and edges it consists of. This allows us to exclude routes of a certain type. That can be useful for example when eliminating some cycles that lead to trapping sets [11]. This ability was used to obtain new results [12] by eliminating certain types of cycles of length 8 in regular codes with code nodes weight of 3 and 4.
When constructing code with such complex conditions applied to its properties it is very important to control the results of the generation. Not only the girth or total number of cycles of specific length but also types of cycles that exist. A complex of software applications was developed to do so. It includes an application for fast cycles enumeration in a lifted graph. And one for analysis of the obtained cycles and its mapping to routes in the protograph.
The application used for cycles enumeration in a lifted graph is based on the same approach that is used in the code construction application. But it is implemented as a standalone piece of software. It is applied to a lifted graph to obtain a list of unique cycles with a length up to specified value. The result list of found cycles is stored in a text file where each cycle is described by a sequence of values related to the nodes of the lifted graph.
The application used for the analysis of the obtained list of cycles must solve a number of tasks. Because construction of the code is performed on the level of protograph it is necessary to map cycles from the lifted graph to the routes in the ptotograph. Also, some sets of conditions and restrictions applied to a protograph are described in terms of routes. For example, to generate a code without some trapping sets it is necessary to eliminate cycles that originate from certain types of routes. While other cycles of the same length may be left untouched [11]. And in the end, it is important to understand if all the cycles related to the desired routes are eliminated or not. That is another reason to map cycles found in a lifted graph to the routes in the protograph.
It is known that one route in a protograph leads to a set of q cycles in a lifted graph. So, when mapping cycles to the routes it also necessary to exclude repeated occurrences of the same route that is connected to a set of cycles. Only unique routes should be left after processing to simplify further analysis. Yet, this task is not straight forward as nodes in a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Possible subgraphs for routes of length 8

sequence describing the same may follow in different order after mapping a cycle to the route. To exclude repeated routes the application applies different modifications to the route before it is compared to already found ones to ensure that only unique routes are stored.
The final step on analysis includes routes identification. All found unique routes should be described as one of the possible configurations that can exist in a protograph and lead to a cycle of the specified length. For example, there are nine possible subgraphs that lead to a cycle of length 8 (Figure 1). So, any found cycle of length 8 is mapped to a route. And every route is identified as one of the possible configurations. Identifying routes is very useful for further code analysis. Especially in the cases when sets of restrictions applied to a code are based on the elimination of certain types of cycles, like in [11].
The whole process of code generation and verification includes a number of steps. Each of them is executed with a specifically developed application. The process can be presented as a block schema in Figure 2. The implemented approach to routes enumeration in protograph has a number of advantages and allows to generated codes with a rather complicated sets of conditions and restrictions. Yet, the used approach for routes enumeration suffers from some problems.
First, it is difficult to expand it for longer routes. If we would like to enumerate routes of length 12, we will have to determine all possible routes of this length. Then we will have to analyze them to decide how they can be presented as a combination of short cycles. The main problems here are the following. Number of possible routes configurations grows rapidly with route length вҖ“ it is over a hundred of them for routes of length 14. At some point it would take too much time to analyze them all manually. Another problem is that starting with routes length of 12 it becomes impossible to represent some configurations as a combination of a pair of short cycles, because they actually consist of three or more cycles with a length of 4 or more. And this makes it more difficult to count those routes and analyze them.
Second, the approach does not suite protographs with parallel edges. Cause adding even parallel edges of order 2 leads

Fig. 2. Code generation and analysis
to such routes that can not be described as any combination of short cycles. And with the introduction of parallel edges the number of possible routes of a certain length grows even more.
Finally, the approach seems to be computational complex. It requires comparison of pairs of short cycles. With bigger protographs number of short cycles grows. And they all must be compared to each one. So, the complexity grows exponentially. It becomes impossible to use the approach for big protographs because time to enumerate routes in it turn out to be too long.
To solve the described problems an approach to routes enumeration based on trees was proposed. It is described in detail in [13]. After testing it with different protographs we found out that it suffers from a significant problem. It can find

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I. Comparison of algorithms for analyzing routes and intersections of short cycles, dv = 6, g = 12

dc Tc, sec Tr, sec Tr, sec (g = 14) Tc/Tr

9 87

6.2

31.46

14

10 198

8

130.25

24.75

11 344

21.2

301.27

16.22

the same route through different branches of a tree and store it multiple times as its description will vary.
To solve the problem we had to eliminate repeated routes. To do so every new found route should be compared to the previously found to check if this configuration already exists in the list. The task to check through all the already found routes is computationally complex as the number of routes grow with the size of a protograph and with the desired routes length. To overcome this problem we implemented a set of optimizations that helped us to keep the processing time at a moderate level.
We utilized a special form of routes storage that was already described in [13]. And to get all the benefits from the form of storage we used the following technics to boost the performance of the comparison process.
V. ROUTES STORAGE OPTIMIZATION
The previously developed method of finding routes in protographs has been significantly modified in terms of comparison with the basic equations (BEs). The essence of the changes made is based on splitting any route into two parts. The first of them corresponds to the positive coefficients of the BE, and the second to the negative ones. Next, the nodes of the protograph from the left and right parts of the route are sorted separately in ascending order. Thanks to this modification, it becomes easier to identify duplicate arrays of the same length, which significantly reduces memory costs. The presence of positive and negative parts of the BE reduces the length of the route, which on the one hand reduces the amount of data memory occupied, and on the other hand eliminates unnecessary repetitions of the same BEs. In the process of working with sorted arrays, so-called вҖқmirrorвҖқ routes were identified, for which the permutation of the positive and negative parts of the BEs also leads to duplication. It was also possible to exclude from consideration. The use of all the presented modifications makes it possible to reduce the number of unique routes and, as a result, the solved BEs. In particular, for a fully connected protograph dv = 2, dc = 3 wij = 1, вҲҖi, j, В¬(i = 0, j = 1), w01 = 2, it was possible to reduce the number of routes with lengths of 8, 10 and 12 by 11.8, 42.5 and 69.1 %, respectively. Next, we will conduct a comparative analysis of two generations of software for the synthesis of basic matrices of QC LDPC codes.
VI. RESULTS
The developed software for the synthesis of QC LDPC codes is based on two fundamentally different approaches to cycle analysis. The first involves searching for cycles in a protograph without parallel edges, as well as matching short cycles of lengths 4 and 6 with each other to obtain the missing

routes. Due to the fact that the rules for obtaining unions of cycles have been worked out up to and including length 10 [7], [8], it is not possible to carry out a reliable analysis of a graph with a girth of 12 or more with this approach. The second method is based on a tree route search algorithm and does not have the limitations noted above. The question arises how quickly each of the methods solves the task. To answer this question, the following experiment has been set up. An ensemble of regular fully connected graphs with parameters dv = 6, dc вҲҲ [9, 11], g вҲҲ [12, 14] was selected, then the procedures for synthesizing basic matrices without restrictions on the size of the circulant were launched. Code synthesis took place on the following hardware platform: Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-8550U CPU 2 GHz, RAM 16 GByte. The results presented in table 1 demonstrate a significant advantage in the speed of execution of a project working on the second principle. The gain in the speed of the QC LDPC code synthesis program based on route search in the protograph is 14 times or more.
VII. CONCLUSION
The developed software makes it possible eliminate some elementary trapping sets in regular quasi-cyclic codes with a low density of parity checks with the possibility of fine-tuning the ensemble of eliminated cycles. The tunable parameters include the girth of the Tanner graph and an upper bound on the number of block checks. A software package has been developed that checks for the presence of cycles of different lengths, as well as classifies cycles of eight by nine subsets in regular quasi-cyclic codes with a low density of parity checks. The complex includes programs that perform the following transformations: expanding the base matrix, obtaining the Tanner graph from the parity-check matrix (1), finding the girth of the Tanner graph and numbering cycles in it, compressing and eliminating duplicate cycles in the protograph and classifying them into subgroups. Route analysis in QC LDPC code protographs has been modified too. In the future, it is planned to continue research in this direction.
software has been developed to
REFERENCES
[1] CCSDS 131.1-O-2 Low Density Parity Check Codes For Use in NearEarth and Deep Space Applications, 131x1o2e2s.pdf
[2] R1-166769, Discussion on Length-Compatible Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes, Samsung from 3GPP TSG-RAN WG1 86, 22th вҖ“ 26th August 2016, Gothenburg, Sweden
[3] S. Jayasooriya, M. Shirvanimoghaddam, L. Ong, G. Lechner, and S. J. Johnson, вҖңA new density evolution approximation for LDPC and multiedge type LDPC codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 4044вҖ“4056, Oct 2016.
[4] G. Liva and M. Chiani, вҖқProtograph Idpc codes design based on exit analysis,вҖқ in Proc. IEEE Globecom, Washington, USA, Nov. 2007, pp. 3250-3254.
[5] G. Liva and M. Chiani, вҖқExtrinsic information transfer analysis for protograph-based LDPC codesвҖқ, IEEE Trans. Comm., 2006.
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier. Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788вҖ“1793, Aug. 2004.
[7] Kharin A.V., Zavertkin K.N. Ovinnikov A.A. вҖқDetecting Cycles of Length 8 in the Tanner Graph of a QC-LDPC Code Based on Protograph AnalysisвҖқ, Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 56, pp. 173вҖ“184, 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[8] Kharin, A.V, Zavertkin K.N, Ovinnikov A.A. вҖқDetecting Cycles of Length 10 in the Tanner Graph of a QC-LDPC Code Based on Protograph AnalysisвҖқ, Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 56, pp. 317вҖ“331, 2020.
[9] A. Kharin, A. Dryakhlov, E. Mirokhin, K. Zavertkin, A. Ovinnikov and E. Likhobabin, вҖқIrregular QC-LDPC Codes Generation Based on EMD Maximization Criterion for Protograph,вҖқ 2020 9th Mediterranean Conference on Embedded Computing (MECO), Budva, Montenegro, pp. 1-4, 2020.
[10] A. Kharin, A. Dryakhlov, K. Zavertkin, A. Ovinnikov and E. Likhobabin, вҖқLower Bounds of Regular QC-LDPC Codes and SES Generation Algorithm,вҖқ in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 964968, May 2022.
[11] S. Naseri and A. H. Banihashemi, вҖңConstruction of girth-8 QC-LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,вҖқ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1904вҖ“1908, Nov. 2019.
[12] Aleksei Ovinnikov, Aleksei Kharin, Konstantin Zavertkin, Sergei Ganin, Nikita Vinogradov, вҖқSmall Elementary Trapping Sets Elimination of Girth-8 QC-LDPC CodesвҖқ, 2023, Manuscript submitted for publication
[13] A. Kharin, K. Zavertkin and S. Ganin, вҖқAn Approach to Routes Enumeration in QC LDPC Base Matrices,вҖқ 2023 25th International Conference on Digital Signal Processing and its Applications (DSPA), Moscow, Russian Federation, pp. 1-4, 2023.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:22:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

