IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 1, MARCH 2024

49

PEAR: Unbalanced Inter-Page Errors Aware Read Scheme for Latency-Efficient 3-D NAND Flash
Meng Zhang , Fei Wu , Member, IEEE, Qin Yu, and Changsheng Xie , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Although three-dimensional (3D) NAND flash memory has demonstrated impressive benefits including high capacity and storage density, data reliability is now a major worry because of long-term storage and ongoing cell wearout. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are frequently utilized in flash storage systems because of their superior error correcting capabilities to guarantee data reliability. LDPC codes can be hard-decoded or soft-decoded with significant differences depending on the raw bit error rate (RBER). By using fine-grained memory sensing operations, high RBER leads to increased decoding iterations for hard-decoding and more read levels for soft-decoding. In order to reduce the number of decoding iterations and read levels by lowering the RBER, this paper proposes an unbalanced inter-page errors aware read strategy for 3D NAND flash memory, called PEAR. A preliminary experiment is initially carried out to demonstrate that high RBER causes an increase in the number of decoding iterations and read levels. The substantial RBER fluctuation between pages is next analyzed from the viewpoint of the threshold voltage shift. Finally, PEAR properly places the read voltages between the two states with the most and second-most electrons in accordance with the phenomenon of threshold voltage drift, enabling the employment of hard-decoding with low read levels and successfully avoiding soft-decoding procedures with larger RBER. According to simulation results, PEAR can dramatically reduce RBER, decoding iterations, read levels, and read latency.
Index Terms—3D NAND flash memory, RBER, P/E cycles, retention time, LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE MULTI-LAYER structure and multi-bit storage per cell of three-dimensional (3D) NAND flash memory [1] have demonstrated excellent advantages such as
Manuscript received 8 November 2023; accepted 14 December 2023. Date of publication 22 December 2023; date of current version 8 March 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62102156, Grant U2001203, Grant 62372197, and Grant U22A2071; in part by the Joint Fund for Intelligent Computing of Shandong Natural Science Foundation under Grant ZR2023LZH007; in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB2804300; and in part by the Key Laboratory of Information Storage System, Ministry of Education of China, and the Engineering Research Center of Data Storage Systems and Technology. (Corresponding author: Fei Wu.)
Meng Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn).
Fei Wu, Qin Yu, and Changsheng Xie are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: wufei@hust.edu.cn; cs_xie@hust.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TDMR.2023.3346190.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDMR.2023.3346190

large capacity and high storage density. Nevertheless, interlayer interference, retention, and program/erase (P/E) errors pose a major concern for data reliability [2]. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are widely utilized as mainstream error correction codes (ECC) in 3D NAND flash storage systems [3] to assure data reliability. Hard and soft-decoding, which have varying error-correction capacities, are both used in LDPC decoding. Hard-decoding can meet the error correction requirement when the raw bit error rate (RBER) is low and there are few P/E cycles and short retention time. Regrettably, as retention time and P/E cycles gradually rise, the increasing RBER outpaces the hard-decoding system’s capacity for error correction, resulting in decoding failure and additional decoding iterations. Soft-decoding with improved error-correction performance must therefore be used. More surprisingly, despite the fact that soft-decoding can undoubtedly increase reliability, applying multi-read voltages results in fine-grained memory sensing, which significantly raises read levels [4]. In conclusion, high RBER adds additional read levels for soft-decoding and causes significant decoding latency for hard-decoding. Reduced RBER is crucial for lowering read levels and decoding latency, as was already mentioned.
There have been numerous prior works on how to reduce the RBER of flash memory from distinct viewpoints. The read voltage can be tuned based on the error characteristics of flash memory [6], [7]. In order to attain high reliability, efficient data cache [9] and fresh [10] techniques are also suggested. Moreover, it is possible to remap an error-prone state to a state with substantial error resistance [11]. To achieve optimal read voltages (ORV), Li et al. [12] proposed an overlap-error-record error-correcting-code (OER-ECC). Utilizing read sensing procedures, previously read and decoded data, ORV is determined and modified. By utilizing the cache read command and powerful ECC engine, Park et al. [13] introduced the pipelined read retry (PR2) and adaptive read retry (AR2) systems. Both PR2 and AR2 lessen the read delay brought on by read retry operations and each subsequent retry step, respectively. By utilizing the unbalanced state transition features brought on by changes in the threshold voltage distribution due to retention time and P/E cycles, this paper optimizes the read voltage. The proposed scheme only optimizes the read voltage between higher state transition ratios, eliminating unnecessary voltage shifts between other states. In addition, we investigate the variation of interlayer and interpage RBER and decoding iterations of 3D TLC flash memory after using normal read and optimized read. Some layers and pages can be satisfied using

1530-4388 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

50

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 1, MARCH 2024

just a normal read under certain retention time and P/E cycles. Some layers and pages, however, need the use of an optimized read voltage. Because the higher RBER exceeds the LDPC hard decoding error correction range. RBER can be greatly decreased and come within the range of hard decoding error correction after utilizing the optimal read voltage. Decoding latency can also be greatly reduced.
By only adjusting the hard-read voltage adaptively between states 00 and 10 (i.e., the state with the most electrons for 3D multi-level cell (MLC) flash memory), this paper develops an unbalanced inter-page errors aware read scheme called PEAR with the goal of reducing the RBER of 3D NAND flash memory. This is due to the substantially high RBER caused by the transition from state 10 to state 00, which has a much larger percentage (i.e., seen in Fig. 3) caused by retention time and P/E cycles. In particular, a preliminary experiment is conducted initially, which demonstrates that high RBER caused by retention time and P/E cycles raises the read levels for soft-decoding and the number of decoding repetitions for hard-decoding. The cause of the high RBER is then revealed from the standpoint of the threshold voltage shift. Additionally, using a model of threshold voltage drift, PEAR appropriately places the read voltage between the two states with the most and second-most electrons. More crucially, employing PEAR allows for the RBER to fall into the LDPC hard-decoding error correction region with only one read voltage (i.e., called hard-read voltage), avoiding the need to do soft-decoding for 3D NAND flash memory. Lastly, PEAR is carried out through simulation studies showing a considerable reduction in RBER, decoding iterations, decoding latency, and read latency.
The following is a summary of this paper’s significant contributions:
• According to experimental findings, a higher shift percentage from the state with the most electrons to the state with the second-most electrons is the main causes of high RBER. As a result, it results in more read levels for soft-decoding and a lot more decoding iterations for hard-decoding.
• By properly calibrating the hard-read voltage, this paper proposes PEAR. By lessening the RBER, hard-decoding iterations are reduced. Most significantly, soft-decoding is successfully avoided, which significantly lowers read levels, decoding iterations, and read latency.
• Perform simulation experiments to verify the PEAR’s efficacy. There is a considerable reduction in RBER, decoding iterations, decoding delay, and read latency.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The background and motivation of 3D NAND flash memory are described in Section II. The design of PEAR is detailed in Section III. Finally, simulation results are analyzed, followed by the conclusion in Sections IV and V, respectively.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
The background of 3D NAND lash memory is initially covered in this section. After that, the motivation for this paper is presented by using a preliminary experiment to illustrate

Fig. 1. The basic structure of 3D NAND flash memory.
the different LDPC decoding iterations using hard and softdecoding.
A. Basics of 3D NAND Flash Memory
Two-dimensional (2D) and 3D stacked NAND flash memory are two categories based on the number of storage layers. Word lines (WL) and bit lines are the components of 2D NAND flash blocks with the planar structure. According to Fig. 1, 3D stack NAND flash blocks have a three-dimensional structure and are made up of numerous storage layers, each of which has multiple WLs, a substrate, a top selection transistor (TSG), a bottom selection transistor (BSG), and a silicon channel. Operations for data write, read, and erase are managed by the TSG and BSG. Furthermore, 3D NAND flash cell structure includes two types of floating gate (FG) and charge trap (CT). The key distinction is that the storage media in FG and CT cells, respectively, are polysilicon (conductor) and silicon nitride film (insulator). CT NAND flash memory can be expanded more readily than FG NAND flash memory.
2D and 3D NAND flash memory are divided into singlelevel cell (SLC), multi-level cell (MLC), triple-level cell (TLC), and quad-level cell (QLC) categories based on the number of bits stored per cell. SLC, MLC, TLC, and QLC cells store one bit with two states, two bits with four states, three bits with eight states, and four bits with sixteen states, respectively. The first bit recorded in each cell of 3D MLC NAND flash memory is referred to as the most significant bit (MSB), and the second bit as the least significant bit (LSB). All MSBs in one WL make up the MSB page, or upper page, and all LSBs make up the LSB page, or lower page.
B. Hard and Soft-Decoding of LDPC Codes
The threshold voltage distribution for 3D NAND flash memory is more susceptible to overlapping when retention time and P/E cycles are taken into account. The sensed voltage cannot be reliably identified to which threshold window when reading data in the overlapped region, leading to inaccuracies. Hard-decoding of LDPC codes is only used to increase reliability when the RBER is low. One read voltage is applied between two state distributions to perform the hardread process, as depicted in Fig. 2. Soft-decoding must be started when the RBER is high enough to require more error correction than hard-decoding. Applying extra-read voltages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PEAR: UNBALANCED INTER-PAGE ERRORS AWARE READ SCHEME

51

Fig. 2. The hard-read and soft-read of 3D MLC NAND flash memory.
around the hard-read voltage activates the soft-read action. It may take two hard reads and four soft reads to conduct the soft-decoding procedure when reading MSB pages with a high RBER. There are seven intervals between each of the four state distributions. The log likelihood ratio (LLR) has seven distinct values that are each quantized by three bits. The LLR is the initial soft information of decoding (i.e., real values). One hard-read and two soft-read operations between state 01 and state 00 may be carried out for soft-decoding when reading LSB pages with high RBER. Four intervals are created using the state distributions, and two bits of LLR quantization are used.
Although soft-decoding can significantly improve the ability of error correction by multi-read, the read levels are noticeably raised. Hard-decoding has a far smaller capacity for error correction than soft-decoding, but it can significantly lower read levels. Thus, it is essential to avoid soft-decoding and obtain a high level of reliability.
C. Motivation
To ensure data reliability, soft-decoding must be implemented when the RBER of 3D NAND flash pages is high. The read latency is unstable because it is challenging to accurately set the number and placement of read levels. In addition, high RBER necessitates a significant number of hard-decoding iterations prior to soft-decoding. In order to mitigate the consequences on both hard and soft-decoding, this paper focuses on reducing RBER. This section provides a detailed explanation of the motivation behind this work through preliminary experiments.
This paper examines how various RBERs of MSB and LSB pages affect LDPC code decoding iterations, as illustrated in Fig. 3. At a specific P/E cycle, the RBER steadily rises along with increased retention time. The longer the retention time, the wider the RBER gap between MSB and LSB pages becomes. The RBER of the MSB pages is close to 1.5 × 10−2 at 5K P/E cycles and retention time of 106s, and it approaches 2.0 × 10−2 at 10K P/E cycles. With increasing retention duration, decoding iterations increase. Moreover, the number of MSB hard-decoding iterations is expanding to a greater amount than LSB hard-decoding. The hard-decoding iterations increase quickly, reaching an extraordinarily high value when the P/E cycle is 5K and the retention duration exceeds 105s, as well as when the P/E cycle is 10K and the retention time exceeds 104s. After that, soft-decoding must be used to guarantee reliability. Two hard reads and two soft reads are exploited for 5K P/E cycles in order to carry out

MSB soft-decoding. For 10K P/E cycles, two hard reads and four soft reads are utilized due to much higher RBER of the MSB pages caused by more P/E cycles. Although the decoding iterations are greatly reduced, the read levels are increased (see Fig. 3 (b)). In this paper, we use the LDPC code with an 8/9 code rate to encode the 2KB of data. The page size is larger for 3D flash memory (i.e., 18592B) [19]. User information and error correction codes (ECC) are stored in block 18592B, which may contain 8 codewords per page with a 2KB information length for each codeword. The maximum code rate is set to 8/9 when there is a shortage of ECC storage capacity. With hard-decoding, the ECC capacity is about 6.5× 10−3. It indicates that bit errors can be completely rectified when the raw bit error rate (RBER) is within a certain range of 6.5 × 10−3. There are fewer iterations of decoding.
Analysis is done on the cause of the significant RBER difference between MSB and LSB pages. The probability of misreading the stored state increases when the threshold voltage drifts. The variation of the state error percentage under various retention time is shown in Fig. 4. As retention time increases, various states show varying error percentages. In particular, regardless of P/E cycles of 5K or 10K, the error percentage from state 10 to state 00 (denoted as 10 -> 00) gradually rises with retention time and becomes abnormally high when retention time surpasses 104s. MSB errors can be caused by the shift of 11 to 01, and the high error percentage produces large MSB errors. On the other hand, shifts from 01 to 00 and 00 to 01 can result in LSB errors, though the likelihood of this happening drops off over time and remains minimal. As a result, there is an increasing gap between MSB and LSB page errors. Therefore, it is crucial to reduce MSB page errors, particularly after a lengthy retention period.
III. THE PROPOSED PEAR SCHEME
The PEAR overview and algorithm to precisely locate the read voltage are presented in this section.
A. PEAR Overview
Fig. 5 depicts the overview of PEAR. The RBER is regarded as a significant element that influences the decoding iterations, read levels, and read latency. The RBER will be higher when using conventional read as retention time and P/E cycles rise. The LDPC hard-decoding procedure is launched first when error correction is carried out. Higher RBER may exceed the error-correcting capability of LDPC hard-decoding, leading to decoding failure and more iterations. In order to guarantee reliability, soft-decoding is enabled, raising read levels and transmission latency. Finally, higher read latency of 3D NAND flash memory is caused by more decoding iterations, read levels, and transmission latency. PEAR is proposed to decrease read delay, the RBER of the MSB pages be reduced by placing the read voltage in the proper range between state 00 and state 10 for more P/E cycles and a longer retention time. As previously mentioned, a shift of 10 to 00 results in significant MSB errors. Attenuating the error percentage from 10 -> 00 and subsequently lowering MSB errors becomes more crucial. The threshold voltage drift model is used to apply the read

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

52

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 1, MARCH 2024

Fig. 3. The variation of decoding iterations and RBER under different retention time and P/E cycles.

Fig. 4. The variation of error percentage of storage states under different P/E cycles and retention time.

Fig. 5. The overview of motivation.
voltage in the correct manner. One advantage of PEAR is its ability to prevent the use of soft-decoding, which lowers read levels and transmission delay. Moreover, PEAR can also lessen the strain of hard-decoding and cut down on decoding attempts.
B. PEAR Algorithm Algorithm 1 contains two parts that demonstrate the PEAR
algorithm’s description: reading and decoding MSB and LSB pages. The P/E cycles and retention time are taken into account when choosing the proper read voltage during the reading and decoding processes. By using the usual hard-read threshold

when reading the LSB pages, the RBER is reduced. This is due to the fact that, as shown in Fig. 4, the error percentage of 10->00 and 00->10 is rather low. The error correction requirement can be satisfied by the hard-decoding carried out by entering the LLR. If the retention duration and P/E cycles are more than a specific threshold when reading the MSB pages, the PEAR read is performed in accordance with the amount of the threshold voltage drift, as explained in Section III-C. Otherwise, the traditional hard-read is used, and the hard-decoding process is implemented. The decoding iterations are counted simultaneously during the decoding process.
C. PEAR Read Optimization
The PEAR read optimization process is thoroughly explained in this section. The schematic representation of PEAR read between states 00 and 10 is shown in Fig. 6. It just requires 1 conventional hard-read voltage at a specific retention time and P/E cycles when employing hard-decoding for the LSB pages. It takes one conventional hard-read voltage between states 11 and 01 and one PEAR read voltage between states 00 and 10 to use hard-decoding for the MSB pages. This is because applying the PEAR read voltage between state 11 and state 01 is not necessary due to the low state error percentage of 01->11. The PEAR read voltage can be applied between state 00 and state 10, however, because the state error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PEAR: UNBALANCED INTER-PAGE ERRORS AWARE READ SCHEME

53

Algorithm 1 PEAR Algorithm

Input: Read commands of MSB and LSB, P/E cycles and

retention time

Output: Decoded bit data

1: if Read the LSB pages then
2: Read bits Dlisb(1 ≤ i ≤ Pagesize) exploiting the conventional hard-read voltage

3: for i = 1 from Pagesize do

4:

if Dilsb = 0 then

5:

LLRlisb = Qlsb

6:

else

7:

LLRlisb = Plsb and satisfies Qlsb + Plsb = 0.

8:

end if

9: end for 10: Launch LDPC hard-decoding by inputting Dlisb and the
maximum decoding iteration is set as Itrmax
11: end if

12: if Successfully decode or get to Itrmax then 13: Count the decoding iterations

14: end if

15: if Read the MSB pages then

16: When retention time and P/E cycles are larger than

the threshold, compute the amount of threshold voltage

drifts
17: Read bits Dmi sb(1 ≤ i ≤ Pagesize) by exploiting the PEAR read voltage between state 00 and state 10, and

utilizing the conventional hard-read voltage between

state 11 and state 01

18: for i = 1 from Pagesize do

19:

if Dmi sb = 0 then

20:

LLRimsb = Qmsb

21:

else

22:

LLRmi sb = Pmsb and satisfies Qmsb + Pmsb = 0.

23:

end if

24: end for 25: Launch LDPC hard-decoding by inputting Dmi sb and the
maximum decoding iteration is set as Itrmax
26: Repeat Step 13 to Step 15

27: end if

percentage from state 10 to state 00 is considerable. The read
data has the lowest RBER for states 00 and 10 when the read
voltage is in the middle of the threshold voltage distribution mean voltage. As a result, there is Vm2 − μs0f0 = μs1f0 − Vm2. We get

Vm2

=

μ1sf0

+ 2

μ0sf0 .

(1)

Similarly, there is Vp − μs0a0 = μ1sa0 − Vp. We get

Vp

=

μs1a0

+ μ0sa0 . 2

(2)

The result of formula (1) minus formula (2) is

Vm2

−

Vp

=

μs1f0

+ 2

μ0sf0

−

μs1a0

+ 2

μs0a0 .

(3)

Fig. 6. The overview of PEAR read.

We get

Vp

=

2Vm2

− |μs1f0

− μ1sa0| 2

−

|μ0sf0

−

μ0sa0| .

(4)

Here, Vp denotes the proposed PEAR read scheme, and Vm2 is the conventional read voltage between states 00 and 10.

The state 00 distributions means before and after shifting are

represented μs1a0 adhere

by μ0sf0 and to the same

μ0sa0, respectively. Similarly, μs1f0 and principle. The usage of soft-decoding

at the longer retention time and more P/E cycles is avoided

because to the PEAR read’s contribution to lowering RBER,

decoding iterations, and read latency of the MSB pages. The

read data has the lowest RBER for states 00 and 10 when

the read voltage is in the middle of the threshold voltage

distribution mean voltage. The read data is susceptible to errors

when the threshold voltage distribution drifts. If the sensed

voltage is smaller than Vp when applying the PEAR read voltage Vp, the probability of bit errors is approximately

Ep1 =

μs1a0 P00(x)dx =
Vp

μ1sa0

1

√

−
e

(x−μs0a0 )2 (2 σ0s0a)2

dx.

Vp

2π σ0s0a

(5)

Here, σ0s0a denotes the standard deviation of the 00 state distribution. P00(x) represents the probability density function

of state 00. If the sensed voltage is larger than Vp, the

probability of bit errors is approximately

Ep2 =

Vp
P10(x)dx =
μs0a0

Vp μs0a0

√1 2π

σ1s0a

−
e

(x−μs1a0 )2 (2 σ1s0a)2

dx.

(6)

Ep1 + Ep2

=

μs1a0 Vp

√1 2π

σ0s0a

−
e

(x−μ0sa0 )2 (2 σ0s0a)2

dx

+

Vp μs0a0

√1 2π

σ1s0a

−
e

(x−μ1sa0 )2 (2 σ1s0a)2

dx. (7)

The read data has the lowest RBER when min{Ep1 + Ep2}.

min{Ep1 + Ep1 + Ep2

Ep2} depends on has a minimum

the changes in Vp, value for μs1a0 − Vp

μ0sa0, and = Vp −

μμs01saa00..

As a result, for state 00 and 10, the read data has the lowest

RBER when the read reference voltage is in the middle of the

threshold voltage distribution mean voltage. This is verified

by simulation experiments, as shown in Fig. 7. The PEAR

read helps to reduce the RBER, decoding iterations, and read

latency of the MSB pages, which avoids the use of soft-

decoding at the longer retention time and more P/E cycles.

With scaling 3D NAND (adding more tiers), the calculated

PEAR read voltage will differ. The cell threshold voltage

distribution will fluctuate with different scaling sizes and tiers

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

54

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 1, MARCH 2024

RBER, decoding iterations, read levels, decoding latency, and read latency.

Fig. 7. The variation of RBER using the conventional and PEAR read.
due to process variations, and its mean and variance are different. The computed read voltage differs as a result. The distribution of cell threshold voltage has an impact on the read voltage and evolves together with it. The cell loses or captures fewer electrons, the cell threshold voltage transfer is reduced, and the crossover of the threshold voltage distribution in neighboring states is not very serious when the retention period and P/E cycles are short. By employing normal read voltages, a lower RBER can be achieved. However, the cell charge is lost or caught more as retention time and P/E cycles rise, the cell threshold voltage is easily moved, leading to significant cross between nearby threshold voltage distributions. Higher RBER is the outcome of the normal read voltage. To decrease RBER and improve reliability, it is important to dynamically modify the read voltage in response to changes in the threshold voltage.
The read voltage of various layers varies because of the process variation, which causes changes in the threshold voltage of various layers and differences in RBER between layers, as illustrated in Fig. 11. Some layers have to adjust the read voltage when retention time and P/E cycles are the same, whereas other layers may satisfy the demand by employing normal read voltage. Both charge trap and floating gate 3D NAND flash memory are compatible with the calculated PEAR read voltage. Because the PEAR read voltage is modified in accordance with the change in the cell threshold voltage distribution, whether using charge trap or floating gate 3D NAND flash memory. Under various retention time and P/E cycles, the threshold voltages of the two types of 3D NAND flash memory will drift, causing adjacent threshold voltage distributions to cross. If the normal read voltage is employed at the end of 3D NAND flash memory lifetime (long retention duration, huge P/E cycles), the RBER will be higher. Multiple read voltages must be supplied to begin LDPC soft decoding in order to maintain dependability, which increases read latency. However, by exploiting the optimized read voltage, RBER can be decreased. The usage of soft decoding and associated latency overhead can be avoided if the lowered RBER is within the LDPC hard decodings error correction range.
IV. EVALUATION AND RESULTS ANALYSIS
The evaluation methodology for PEAR is initially described in this section, followed by an analysis of the variations in

A. Evaluation Methodology
Data encoding and decoding are two operations that are involved in the computer simulation that evaluates the proposed PEAR method. The first procedure uses a quasicyclic parity-check matrix with a column weight of 4 and a row weight of 36 to produce and encode 2KB of random data. There are four storage states for 3D MLC NAND flash memory created by combining two codeword sets. Each state has an initial mean and variance representing the initial threshold voltage distribution. The second process uses the 3D NAND flash model [5] to simulate the threshold voltage drift while taking into account P/E cycles and retention time as inputs. As shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, the RBER and error percentage of storage states are counted using the conventional and PEAR read voltages after the quantity of voltage shifts has been determined. The MSB and LSB reads are activated to retrieve the LLR information for decoding when performing hard and soft-decoding. The normalized minsum algorithm [12] is used for decoding, and the number of decoding iterations is counted. Each decoding iteration is set to 2μs [13]. The transmission delay is set to 20μs. One extra sensing and transmission latency are set to 14μs and 10μs, respectively [14]. The sensing latency of MSB and LSB pages is approximately 121μs and 99μs, respectively [2].
B. Results Analysis
Fig. 7 illustrates the variation in RBER under various retention time and P/E cycles when utilizing conventional and PEAR read. Overall, whether of 5K or 10K P/E cycles, the RBERs of MSB and LSB pages grow with longer retention time. The RBER of the MSB pages with the usual read, however, increases more quickly. What’s more intriguing is that the RBER slowly rises after using the PEAR read, which is reduced from 2.0 × 10−2 to 1.5 × 10−3 at 10K P/E cycles and decreased from 1.2×10−2 to 6.3×10−4 at 5K P/E cycles. The results of the simulations demonstrate that PEAR can significantly lower the RBER and enable the usage of harddecoding.
Additionally, as shown in Figs. 8 (a) and 8 (b), distinct read modes are used to count decoding iterations with hard and soft-decoding (i.e., 2 hard-read+2 soft-read for P/E=5K, and 2 hard-read+4 soft-read for P/E=10K). The outcomes of the simulation demonstrate that both hard and soft-decoding iterations rise with retention time. The maximum number of hard-decoding iterations using the conventional read is 30 when retention time is 106s for 5K and 10K P/E cycles. Bit errors cannot be fully rectified, which undermines the reliability of the data. After using PEAR, the number of the MSB pages decoding iterations is significantly reduced, and it approaches the number of the LSB pages decoding iterations when using the traditional read. In other words, PEAR effectively closes the gap between MSB and LSB pages in terms of decoding iterations and RBER. Moreover, the number of decoding iterations after utilizing PEAR is lower

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PEAR: UNBALANCED INTER-PAGE ERRORS AWARE READ SCHEME

55

Fig. 8. The variation of decoding iterations using the conventional and PEAR read under different retention times and P/E cycles. 2HR+2SR denotes 2 hard-read plus 2 soft-read. 2HD+4SR represents 2 hard-read plus 4 soft-read.

Fig. 9. The variation of decoding latency using the conventional and PEAR read under different retention times and P/E cycles.

Fig. 10. The variation of read latency using the conventional and PEAR read under different retention times and P/E cycles. The read latency mainly includes sensing latency, transmission latency, and decoding latency.

than that of soft-decoding, regardless of whether there are 5K or 10K P/E cycles. Also, by reducing the need for numerous read operations to carry out soft-decoding, the read levels are substantially reduced.

Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 9 (a) and Fig. 9 (b), we evaluate the variation of decoding latency by utilizing the conventional and PEAR read under varied retention time with P/E cycles of 5K and 10K. The decoding delay is substantially

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

56

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 1, MARCH 2024

Fig. 11. The variation of RBER under different retention times and P/E cycles. Each TLC cell contains three bits, with the first bit being referred to as the least significant bit (LSB), the second as the center significant bit (CSB), and the third as the most significant bit (MSB). All LSBs, CSBs, and MSBs are found on the same wordline on the lower page (LP), upper page (LP), and extra page (EP), respectively.

larger when the P/E cycle is 5K and the retention time is 106s, reaching 60μs for the MSB pages when utilizing harddecoding with the conventional read. The decoding delay is substantially reduced, at roughly 3μs, when the MSB pages are hard-decoded using the PEAR read. The decoding delay is really close to the hard-decoding delay for the LSB pages. Besides that, there is a significantly less decoding latency between the two pages. What’s more intriguing is that the decoding latency is also lower than when soft-decoding with 2HR+2SR is employed. When retention time is 105s for P/E cycles of 10K, the decoding delay of the MSB pages has increased to a very high value of roughly 50μs. The decoding latency reaches 60μs for retention time of 106s. The decoding delay can still be greatly decreased when performing harddecoding with the PEAR read. Decoding latency is still quite high when beginning soft-decoding with 2HD+4SR.
In addition, as shown in Fig. 10 (a) and Fig. 10 (b), we investigate the change in read latency using the conventional and PEAR read under various retention time and P/E cycles. The read latency is significantly higher for softdecoding MSB pages with 2HR+2SR and 2HR+4SR due to increased additional sensing and transmission latency. Because of the lower RBER when employing the PEAR

read with hard-decoding, the read latency can be significantly decreased.
Finally, studying the interpage and interlayer RBER changes under various retention times and P/E cycles after utilizing normal read and optimized read, we examine 3D TLC NAND flash memory chips. RBER varies significantly for different pages as well as in different layers as a result of process variation, as shown in Fig. 11. The formula (8) can be used to model the equivalency between the high-temperature baking time and the matching room-temperature retention time [22].

AF = T1 = exp Ea × 1 − 1

(8)

T2

K

Tr Ta

AF is the acceleration factor of retention in formula (8). Ea
indicates the material’s molecular surface activation energy
and is connected to the flash medium’s physical characteristics.
For the flash memory, Ea is set to 1.1eV. The Boltzmann constant, denoted by K, has a value of 8.62 × 10−5eV/K.
The retention times at temperature Tr and temperature Ta are represented by the variables T1 and T2, respectively. The value of Tr represents the real ambient temperature where the data is stored. Ta, which can be set to 85oC, is the high temperature for retention accelerated testing. Formula (8) indicates that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: PEAR: UNBALANCED INTER-PAGE ERRORS AWARE READ SCHEME

57

Fig. 12. The variation of decoding iterations under different retention time and P/E cycles.

when Ta is set to 85oC, 13 hours of high temperature heating is equal to 3 months of room temperature retention. 26 hours of high temperature heating is equal to 6 months of room temperature retention. 39 hours of high temperature heating is equal to 9 months of room temperature retention.
For 3 months, 6 months, and 9 months of retention time, respectively, the RBER of LP, UP, and EP with normal read does not surpass the error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding (i.e., 6.5 × 10−3) when the P/E cycles are 1k. The RBER of the LP is within the LDPC hard decoding’s error correction range when the P/E cycles are 3k. However, while utilizing normal read, the UP’s RBER exceeds the LDPC hard decoding’s error correction range for retention time of 9 months at the second layer. The RBER is decreased and falls within the LDPC hard decoding error correction range after using the optimized read. Additionally, for the retention period of 9 months at the 2nd and 7th layers, the RBER of the EP likewise exceeds the error correction range of LDPC hard decoding. The RBER can also fall inside the LDPC hard decoding error correction range after employing the optimized read. The LDPC decoding error correction range for the retention period of 6 months at the 2nd, 3rd, and 63rd layers as well as 9 months at the 2nd, 3rd, 8th, 62nd, and 63rd

layers is exceeded when the P/E cycles are 5k. For retention time of 3 months at the second layer, 6 months at the 2nd to 25th, 54th to 58th, 61st to 63rd, and 9 months at all layers, the RBER of the UP with normal read exceeds the LDPC decoding error correction range. For retention time of 3 months at the 2nd, 3rd, 7th, and 9th layers, 6 months at the 2nd to 24th, 34th, 58th, 59th, and 62nd layers, and 9 months at all layers, the RBER of the EP with normal read exceeds the LDPC decoding error correction range. The RBER is greatly reduced and falls within the LDPC hard decoding error correction range when the optimized read is utilized.
As shown in Fig. 12, we also investigate the variance in decoding iterations under various retention times and P/E cycles. For retention time of 3, 6, and 9 months, the number of decoding iterations of LP, UP, and EP is significantly reduced when the P/E cycles are 1k. This is because a lower RBER requires fewer decoding iterations. The number of decoding iterations is still minimal at 3k P/E cycles. However, at the retention duration of 9 months, the UP’s number of decoding rounds is relatively high. The maximum number of decoding rounds, specifically for the EP, reaches 30 at the 2nd layer. Because of this, bit errors cannot be fixed, which results in hard decoding failure. Hard decoding failures are more likely

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

58

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 1, MARCH 2024

to occur when P/E cycles are 5k. It is interesting to see that the number of decoding iterations is significantly decreased after using the optimized read.
V. CONCLUSION
The RBER directly influences both the hard and softdecoding of LDPC codes in 3D NAND flash memory. Increased hard-decoding iterations and read levels of softdecoding are caused by high RBER that is brought on by P/E cycles and retention duration. The preliminary experiments used in this paper reveal that a dramatically high percentage between the state with the most electrons and the state with the second-highest percentage of electrons leads to a high RBER. After that, PEAR is proposed as an approach to fundamentally reduce RBER using a read optimization process that can adaptively identify the read voltage. According to the simulation results, PEAR can significantly reduce RBER and decoding iterations. Also, the implementation of softdecoding is successfully avoided, lowering the read levels. Overall, PEAR can drastically lower 3D NAND flash memory read latency.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Liu et al., “Characterizing the reliability and threshold voltage shifting of 3D charge trap NAND flash,” in Proc. DATE, 2019, pp. 312–315.
[2] Q. Xiong et al., “Characterizing 3D floating gate NAND flash: Observations, analyses, and implications,” ACM Trans. Stor., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–31, Apr. 2018.
[3] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[4] Y. Du, S. Huang, Y. Zhou, and Q. Li, “Towards LDPC read performance of 3D flash memories with layer-induced error characteristics,” ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1–25, Apr. 2023.
[5] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “Improving 3D NAND flash memory lifetime by tolerating early retention loss and process variation,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–48, Dec. 2018.
[6] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[7] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.

[8] T. Tokutomi, M. Doi, S. Hachiya, A. Kobayashi, S. Tanakamaru, and K. Takeuchi, “Enterprise-grade 6x fast read and 5x highly reliable SSD with TLC NAND-flash memory for big-data storage,” in Proc. ISSCC, 2015, pp. 1–3.
[9] F. Li, Y. Lu, Z. Wu, and J. Shu, “ASCache: An approximate SSD cache for error-tolerant applications,” in Proc. 56th DAC, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[10] E. Farjallah, J. M. Armani, V. Gherman, and L. Dilillo, “Improvement of the tolerated raw bit error rate in NAND flash-based SSDs with selective refresh,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 96, pp. 37–45, May 2019.
[11] J. Guo, W. Wen, J. Hu, D. Wang, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “FlexLevel NAND flash storage system design to reduce LDPC latency,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 1167–1180, Jul. 2017.
[12] Q. Li et al., “Optimal read voltages decision scheme eliminating read retry operations for 3D NAND flash memories,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 131, 2022, Art. no. 114509.
[13] J. Park, M. Kim, M. Chun, L. Orosa, J. Kim, and O. Mutlu, “Reducing solid-state drive read latency by optimizing read-retry,” in Proc. 26th ACM Int. Conf. Archit. Support Program. Lang. Oper. Syst., 2021, pp. 702–716.
[14] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, W. Liu, Y. Wang, and C. Xie, “Exploiting error characteristic to optimize read voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5490–5496, Dec. 2020.
[15] H. Sun, W. Zhao, M. Lv, G. Dong, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting intracell bit-error characteristics to improve min-sum LDPC decoding for MLC NAND flash-based storage in mobile device,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2654–2664, Aug. 2016.
[16] R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Chuang, C.-L. Yang, C.-H. Li, K.-C. Ho, and H.-P. Li, “Improving read performance of NAND flash SSDs by exploiting error locality,” IEEE Trans. Comput., 2016, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1090–1102, Apr. 2016.
[17] Y. Du, D. Zou, Q. Li, L. Shi, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “LaLDPC: Latencyaware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. 33rd MSST, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[18] Q. Li, M. Ye, Y. Cui, T. Ren, T. Kuo, and C. J. Xue, “Resolving the reliability issues of open blocks for 3-D NAND flash: Observations and strategies,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4076–4087, Nov. 2022.
[19] C. Zambelli, L. Crippa, R. Micheloni, and P. Olivo, “Investigating 3D NAND flash read disturb reliability with extreme value analysis,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 486–493, Dec. 2021.
[20] M. M. Hasan and B. Ray, “Reliability of NAND flash memory as a weight storage device of artificial neural network,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 596–603, Sep. 2020.
[21] P. Li et al., “Reliability characterization and failure prediction of 3D TLC SSDs in large-scale storage systems,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 224–235, Jul. 2021.
[22] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND flash memory device reliability by exploiting selfrecovery and temperature awareness,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), 2018, pp. 504–517.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:23:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

