IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

299

Efficient Active Deep Decoding of Linear Codes Using Importance Sampling
Hassan Noghrei , Mohammad-Reza Sadeghi , and Wai Ho Mow , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— The quality and quantity of training data significantly affect deep learning model performance. In error correction, generating high-quality samples with minimal noise is crucial. This letter presents a method that combines a modified Importance Sampling (IS) distribution with active learning to generate high-quality samples. The suggested IS distribution generates samples iteratively from shells with error probabilities within a specific range. This approach enhances the performance of BCH(63,36) and BCH(63,45) codes with cycle-reduced paritycheck matrices. The proposed IS-based-active Weight Belief Propagation (WBP) decoder improves the error-floor region by up to 1.9dB on the BER curve compared to the conventional WBP decoder.
Index Terms— Importance sampling distribution, deep learning, error-correction codes, active learning, belief propagation.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N THE error-correction context, training a neural network decoder with a high-quality dataset is essential to effectively correct errors in real-world scenarios. The dataset should include samples that are neither excessively noisy nor perfectly correct. Instead, the dataset should consist of samples close to the decision boundary, where the decoder is uncertain about the correct output [1], [2], [3].
Nachmani et al. [4], [5] proposed Weighted Belief Propagation (WBP), a model-based approach for linear codes. They incorporated learnable weights on the edges of the Tanner graph used in the Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm [6] to mitigate the negative impact of short cycles. Through their research, they discovered that training the WBP decoder with different signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) resulted in varying decoding performances. In [2], Gruber et al. propose the normalized validation error (NVE) as a measure of how well a neural network decoder (NND) performs compared to Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) decoding over a range of different SNRs. The NVE measure is used to identify an optimal training SNR for the NND, which is the SNR value resulting in the lowest NVE. Gruber also noted that if SNR → ∞ or → 0, the generated samples can be far from the decision boundary and either too easy or too difficult for the NND to learn, which could lead to poor generalization performance. In [3], Kim et al. proposes a guideline for
Received 8 November 2024; accepted 2 December 2024. Date of publication 9 December 2024; date of current version 13 February 2025. This work was partially supported by the General Research Fund of the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (Project No. 16214422). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was C. Condo. (Corresponding author: Mohammad-Reza Sadeghi.)
Hassan Noghrei and Mohammad-Reza Sadeghi are with the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran 159163-4311, Iran (e-mail: silver68@aut.ac.ir; msadeghi@aut.ac.ir).
Wai Ho Mow is with the Department of ECE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong (e-mail: eewhmow@ust.hk).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2024.3514493

choosing an appropriate SNR for generating a training set that includes samples close to the decision boundary. Beery et al. in [1] proposes an active deep decoding approach to address the problem of generating training data that is well-suited for learning the decoding function, where the WBP algorithm is used in conjunction with an active sampling strategy to generate samples that are in a specific Hamming-distance of the all-zero codewords or fulfill the reliability criteria. The approach involves generating samples that are neither too noisy nor correct and are close to the decision boundary, using a distribution defined not only by SNRs.
To summarize these results, apparently, an effective training dataset should consist of samples near the decoder’s decision boundary, where decoders exhibit the highest uncertainty regarding the transmitted code words. In this study, we utilize an IS sampling technique (a technique used to estimate the properties of a target distribution by sampling from a different distribution known as the IS distribution, typically biased to emphasize regions of the target distribution with small values) to generate samples from regions where the decoder exhibits the highest uncertainty [7], [8]. The selection of an appropriate training dataset relies on the problem at hand and the network architecture used. Various decoders, such as shallow neural belief propagation and deep WBP, may necessitate different dataset distributions due to their architectural disparities. As time progresses, the effectiveness of a training dataset can diminish, leading to the need for an active evolution of its distribution. Active learning, which involves iteratively selecting informative examples, can improve decoder efficiency.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows
1) We propose novel acquisition functions to identify regions where the decoder exhibits uncertainty.
2) We introduce a new sampling method for training neural network decoders.
3) We propose an efficient active deep decoding technique for linear codes by combining IS distributions and active learning. This approach can guide the machine-learning decoding community’s efforts to generate high-quality training samples.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. Section II covers the necessary background. In section III, an acquisition function to determine the appropriate location for querying the next batches is presented. Section IV introduces a detailed explanation of the methods. Section V presents numerical results, and Section VI concludes this letter.
II. PRELIMINARIES
This section provides a concise review of the preliminaries, including WBP, IS distribution, and active learning, to ensure self-containedness.

1558-2558 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

300

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

A. Weighted Belief Propagation Decoder
The Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm is an iterative message-passing algorithm that operates on a bipartite graph called the Tanner graph. This graph represents a linear block code and consists of variable nodes (VNs) and checks nodes (CNs). BP passes messages between VNs and CNs until convergence or a maximum number of iterations. It has been shown to achieve near-optimal performance for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [6]. To enhance the performance of BP and counteract the effect of short cycles, Nachmani et al. proposed a weighted version of BP called WBP, also known as the BP feed-forward (BP-FF) and Neural BP [4], [5]. In WBP, a Tanner graph is unrolled to incorporate a fixed number of decoding iterations, and the algorithm takes Log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) as input. Trainable weights are assigned to the variable-check and check-variable message updating rules, which are referred to as VN layers and CN layers, respectively. In addition, the weighted version of the LLR outputs in the BP decoder are passed through the sigmoid function to map the output LLR to plain probability. Finally, BP-FF optimization is achieved through the Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) multiloss and stochastic gradient descent methods [1], [5].

B. Active Learning
Active learning is a process of improving a machine learning model’s performance by selecting and labeling new samples to add to the training dataset. This is achieved by choosing samples that are either highly informative or uncertain of the model’s predictions. In deep active learning, the acquisition function plays a crucial role in selecting unlabeled samples for annotation and inclusion in the training set [9].
In the context of training neural network decoders for channel decoding or error correction, data is unlimited when the channel model is known and samples are labeled. Hence, active learning can be used to select new compelling samples for inclusion in the training dataset iteratively. In their letter [1], the authors employ distance and reliability parameters as a means to select new informative samples and define the acquisition function. However, an alternative approach for generating compelling samples and defining the acquisition function is to leverage the error probability conditioned on a shell denoted as Yr. This shell is defined with a thickness of ∆r and can be represented as follows

Yr = {z ∈ Y; ∥z∥ ∈ [r − ∆r, r]} ,

(1)

here, r belongs to the set R = {0} ∪ R+, Y represents the observation space, and ∥ · ∥ denotes the Euclidean norm.

III. ACQUISITION FUNCTION AND ITS APPROXIMATION
The data point selection process involves using an acquisition function to determine where to label the next batches. One such acquisition function introduced in this section relies on error probabilities conditioned on shells of a specific thickness.
To do so, first, consider the problem of generating samples for all-zero transmission over the AWGN channel with the noise density probability function f (z) and with BPSK modulation. The sampling process for generating z can be

equivalently done by uniformly selecting zˆ as the unit vector

in

the

direction

of

z,

i.e.,

zˆ

=

z ∥z∥

,

and

scaling

it

by

the

magnitude or radius r = ∥z∥, which follows the scaled Chi

distribution [10], i.e.

rn−1

g(r)

=

2

n 2

−1

σn

Γ

n 2

e , −

r2 2σ2

r ≥ 0,

(2)

where Γ(·) is the Gamma function, n is the code length, σ2 represents the noise variance, and r ∈ R. Then, set a
range [rmin, rmax] in R so that P r (r ∈/ [rmin, rmax]) < ϵ, and partition the observation space Y into M shells

Yl = {z ∈ Y; rl−l ≤ ∥z∥ ≤ rl} , for l = 2, 3, . . . , M, (3)

where

rl

=

rmin

+ l∆r,

where

∆r

=

1 M

(rmax

−

rmin),

and

rM = rmax. Finally, define acquisition function θl as

θl = P r (I(z) = 1; z ∈ Yl) ,

(4)

where I(z) is an indicator function, returning 1 if the received word y = x + z falls inside the decoder’s error region, 0 otherwise. The acquisition functions, θls, are also referred to as error ratios and approximately equal θ(rl) = P r (I(z) = 1; ∥z∥ = rl) as ∆r → 0, for l = 2, 3, . . . , M [7]. Obviously, these values, indeed, are the error probabilities conditioned on Yls.
The error ratios θl incre√ase progressively and reach a value of 1 when rl > rpack = dmin (when using ML decoding), where dmin represents the minimum Hamming distance. The specific values of θl depend on the decoder being employed. For example, two BP decoders with different numbers of iterations will yield distinct θl values. Sampling from shells where θl → 1 generates excessively noisy samples, while sampling from shells where θl → 0 produces completely correct samples. To achieve a balance between challenge and decodability in the generated samples, We ensure that the values of θls remain sufficiently small and assign 0 to θl if it falls outside the range θl ≤ γ. Here, γ is a positive real number between 0 and 1. The error ratios θl represent error probabilities that need to be estimated. One approach to estimating these probabilities is by using iterative methods and a Monte Carlo estimator like

1 Nl

θl

=

Nl

I (zi ),
i=1

(5)

where Nl represents the number of samples generated from Yl, and zi ∈ Yl.

IV. PROPOSED IS-BASED ACTIVE DEEP DECODING

The quality and quantity of training data significantly

impact the performance of a neural network decoder. How-

ever, obtaining an effective dataset that includes samples near

the decoder’s decision boundary is challenging [1], [2], [3].

To tackle this challenge and create a dataset with high-quality

samples, we propose combining active learning with an IS

distribution on the segmented observation space.

To accomplish this, let’s start by defining the probability

mass function (p.m.f) over shell Yls, or equivalently over sub-

interval (rl−1, rl], as Pl =

rl rl−1

g(r)dr.

It

is

evident

that

as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOGHREI et al.: EFFICIENT ACTIVE DEEP DECODING OF LINEAR CODES USING IMPORTANCE SAMPLING

301

∆r approaches 0, we have Pl = g(r)∆r. Then, sampling radius r, used to scale the uniformly selected unit vector zˆ, based on

M

Pl∗ =

θlPl

θlPl

(6)

l=1

leads to the most challenging samples to decode [7]. To find Pl∗, we need to estimate the values of θl. To do so,
we first select a neural network decoder and a set of SNRs to
create the training samples and test samples.
Next, the number of quantization levels (M ) in (3), error
ratios, and decoder weights should be initialized. In the
beginning, θ ← 1 and the decoder weights are set to 1. For the T th iteration, update Pl∗(T ) in (6) as

M

Pl∗(T ) =

θl(T )Pl

θl(T )Pl

(7)

l=1

Next, generate training and test datasets based on the updated Pl∗(T ) in (7), and train the decoder using the training samples. After training a specific number of epochs (N2), use the test samples to evaluate the decoder performance and to update the error ratios θl(T ) using (5). As mentioned before, the most appropriate samples for training the decoder correspond to
shells with radii near the decoder’s packing radius, where the
error ratios are very low. If no errors are generated for these
radii in the initial iterations of the training process, these error
ratios become zero when updated using equation (5). Thus,
no further samples are generated from them. To avoid this
issue, after updating θl’s using (5), the following assigning function will be used to interpolate the values of θl’s between two consecutive non-zero θl’s,

θl(T )

=

θl(m Ti)n ,  
θl(kT ) +  

θl(kT

)

−

θ(T )
lk+1

rlk −rlk+1

(rl

−rlk

),

θl(m Ta)x ,

l = lmin − 5, . . . , lmin
l = lk, lk +1, . . . , lk+1 l = lmax, lmax + 1, . . . , M
(8)

where lmin, lmin + 1, . . . , lmax are the indices of the non-zero error ratios after using (5). The error ratios greater than a specific threshold γ are assigned a zero value to ensure the generated samples are not too noisy. The training process persists until either the error decreases (the loss function value) to an acceptable level or the maximum number of iterations (N1) is reached. The decoder’s weights will be updated during each iteration based on the generated samples and their corresponding error. In Algorithm 1, we summarize the above explanations and show the details of the proposed decoder.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We evaluated the performance of our proposed decoder by generating training samples using the algorithm for training the BP-FF decoder on two linear codes: cycle-reduced BCH(63,45) and BCH(63,36) (CR-BCH) [11]. These codes

Algorithm 1 IS-Based Active Deep Decoding input : Parity-check matrix, training SNRs, γ, M, N1, and N2; output: The optimal weights; Initialization: θl ← 1, W ← 1, i ← 0, and Pl∗ with (7); while error decreases and i ≤ N1 do i ← i + 1; Generate training and test samples based on Pl∗; for epoch=0 to N2 do Train the decoder using training samples; end Evaluate the decoder using test samples and update θl with (5) and (8); if θl ≥ γ then θl ← 0; end Update Pl∗ using (7); end Return: the optimal value for W;
TABLE I TRAINING HYPER-PARAMETERS
were chosen for comparison with BP-FF [1]; further comparisons across various codes can identify where the proposed sampling method is most effective [12]. The number of iterations was set to L = 5, and an all-zero transmission over an AWGN channel was used, following previous works [1], [4], [5]. The neural network decoders underwent 250 training epochs, and the hyper-parameters (HPs) used for training are summarized in Table I. Algorithm 1 is used only in offline training to optimize BP decoder weights, ensuring no added complexity during testing or real-world use.
During testing, the FER and BER of the trained decoder are estimated by transmitting the all-zero codeword with BPSK modulation over the AWGN channel until at least 100 block errors have been accumulated for each SNR. Moreover, we compare the approximated FER and BER with results from [1], which employs active learning to generate efficient training samples for training neural network decoders, introducing distance and reliability parameters to generate samples close to the decision boundary of the decoder.
Figures 1 and 2 display the BER and FER results for the cycle-reduced BCH(63,36) and BCH(63,45) codes. The results clearly demonstrate that utilizing the proposed method for sampling leads to superior performance for the BP-FF decoder compared to conventional BP, original BP-FF [1], and the BP-FF decoder trained on samples satisfying reliability criteria and with Hamming weights ranging from 1 to dmax = 3 [1].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

302

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 29, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2025

Fig. 1. FER and BER comparisons for the cycle-reduced BCH(63, 36) code.
Fig. 2. FER and BER comparisons for the cycle-reduced BCH(63, 45) code.
We classify our contribution into two regions: the waterfall region and the error-floor region, following the approach in [1]. In the waterfall region, the IS-based BP-FF achieves up to 0.62 dB lower BER and 0.32 dB lower FER compared to the original BP-FF decoder for both codes. Moreover, for the BCH(63,45) code, the IS-based BP-FF exhibits nearly identical BER and FER to BP-FF by reliability and dmax = 3

(the best-published results in [1]), while its performance slightly lags behind BP-FF by reliability and dmax = 3 for the BCH(63,36) code [1].
In the error-floor region, the improvement increases from 1.7 dB to 1.9 dB in BER and from 1.5 dB to 1.9 dB in FER for all codes compared to the BP-FF decoder. Similarly, compared to BP-FF by reliability and dmax = 3, the improvement ranges from 1.42 dB to 1.75 dB in BER and 0.9 dB to 1 dB in FER for different codes. These results clearly demonstrate that utilizing the proposed IS distribution integrated with active learning to generate samples from regions where acquisition functions fall within a specific range can significantly enhance the decoder’s performance.
VI. CONCLUSION
The letter presents an approach that combines the IS distribution and active learning to sample training data from regions where the decoder’s conditional error probabilities lie within a specific range. The objective is to generate challenging and informative training data to improve the decoder’s performance. The results show significant improvements, with SNR gains of up to 1.9 dB and 2.3 dB compared to conventional BP-FF and BP methods, respectively. These findings provide strong evidence that training the decoder with samples based on the IS distribution can lead to substantial performance enhancements.
One possible direction is to use machine learning to enhance error probability estimation based on partitioned observation spaces. These methods may improve training efficiency and decoding performance.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Be’Ery, N. Raviv, T. Raviv, and Y. Be’Ery, “Active deep decoding of linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 728–736, Feb. 2020.
[2] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. T. Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in Proc. 51st CISS, Mar. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[3] H. Kim, Y. Jiang, R. Rana, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Communication algorithms via deep learning,” 2018, arXiv:1805.09317.
[4] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2016, pp. 341–346.
[5] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[7] J. Pan and W. H. Mow, “A new importance sampling algorithm for fast simulation of linear block codes over BSCs,” in Proc. IEEE ITW, Aug. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[8] J. Pan and W. H. Mow, “Radius domain-based importance sampling estimator for linear block codes over the AWGN channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2022, pp. 1343–1348.
[9] Y. Gal, R. Islam, and Z. Ghahramani, “Deep Bayesian active learning with image data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learning(ICML), 2017, pp. 1183–1192.
[10] A. Leon-Garcia, Probability, Statistics, and Random Processes for Electrical Engineering. London, U.K.: Pearson Education, 2017.
[11] M. Helmling et al. (2019). Database of Channel Codes and ML Simulation Results. [Online]. Available: http://www.uni-kl.de/channelcodes
[12] Y. Yuan, P. Scheepers, L. Tasiou, Y. C. Gültekin, F. Corradi, and A. Alvarado, “On the design and performance of machine learning based error correcting decoders,” 2024, arXiv:2410.15899.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:04:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

