ISlT 2000,Sorrento, Italy, June 25-30,2000

Gaussian Approximation for Sum-Product Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

Sae-Young Chung
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, M.I.T.
e-mail: sychungalids . n i t . edu

Rudiger Urbanke
Communications Theory Lab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
e-mail: Rudiger .Urbanke0epfl. ch

Thomas J. Richardson
Lucent Technologies, Murray Hill, NJ
. e-mail: t jralucent com

Abstract - We use a Gaussian approximation (GA)
for analyzing the sum-product algorithm for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes and memoryless binary-input continuous-output additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. This simplification allows us to calculate the threshold quickly and to understand the behavior of the decoder better. We have also designed high rate LDPC codes using the GA that have thresholds less than 0.05 dB from the Shannon limit.

The message update rule becomes now tl = f (9, tl-l), where s = mu, is the mean of uo and t1 is the ensemble mean of the output messages of check nodes at I-th iteration. The initial
value to is 0. Note that since t l = f ( s , O ) > 0 for s > 0, the
iteration will always start.
We define the threshold s* as the infimum of all s in R+
+ such that tI(s) converges to 00 as 1 00. By finite induction, we conclude that i f s > S*,tl(s)convergesto 00. The following
lemma shows an alternative interpretation of the threshold.
Lemma 1 t l ( s ) will converge to 00 iff

I. INTRODUCTION
For many interesting channels and iterative decoders, LDPC codes exhibit a threshold phenomenon: an arbitrary small bit error probability can be achieved if the noise level is smaller than a certain threshold and the probability of bit error is larger than a positive constant for a noise level above the threshold as the block length tends to infinity [l].
In this paper, we present a simple method to estimate the thresholds of randomly constructed irregular LDPC codes for memoryless binary-input continuous-output AWGN channels under sum-product decoding. This method is based on approximating densities of log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages as Gaussian mixtures. We assume for each variable node the graph is a tree up to a certain depth as validated by the general concentration theorem [2].

t < f ( s , t ) , vt E R+.

(1)

As in the case of DE [2] we can derive a stability condition:

Theorem 1 If A2 < A;, then t will converge to infinity if the initial value of t i s large enough. If A2 > A;, then t
cannot converge to infinity for any initial value o f t , where
- A; = e1/2d / ndjr=2(3. 1)Pj.

For this model it is even possible to derive expressions for
the convergence rate of the probability of error PI.In partic-
ular, for A2 < A;, PI behaves asymptotically as the following

aSl+O0:

where a &d b are constants that depend on A(x),p(x) and s. These predictions fit well with the actual results using DE.

11. GAUSSIANAPPROXIMATION
If all incoming messages of a variable node are Gaussian, then the resulting extrinsic information distribution is also Gaussian because it is the sum of independent Gaussian random variables. Numerical results using density evolution (DE) [l]show that the extrinsic information distributions from both variable and check nodes are very close to Gaussian even though the inputs are not. From now on, we assume all extrinsic information distributions are Gaussian. By enforcing the consistency condition [2] at each iteration, we can greatly

111. OPTIMIZATION OF DEGREESEQUENCES For given p(x) and rate, we can find optimal A(z) that maximizes the noise threshold. This can be performed by maximizing the rate subject to the normalization and the inequality constraint in ( l ) , which can be done using linear programming. Optimization of p ( ~ c)an be done similarly. We show when we consider only low error probability regions, the optimal form of p(x) is concentrated in 1 or 2 consecutive degrees. We have successfully optimized degree sequences using these methods up to within 0.05 dB from the Shannon limit for rates greater than 0.99. Good degree sequences were

improve the accuracy of the approximation and reduce the DE also obtained for lower rates. Online demonstration of de-

+

zfL2 problem to a one-dimensionalone.

Let A(x) =

A i d - ' and p(x) =

gree sequence optimization using the GA and more results pixi-' be the de- are available at http://truth.mit .edu/-sychung.

gree sequences for the variable and check nodes, respectively.

For 0 < s < 00 and 0 5 t < 00, we define f ( s , t ) as

IV. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to express their appreciation to Prof.

G. D. Forney, Jr. for his many helpful comments on this paper.

where +(x) is defined by

REFERENCES
[l] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, "The Capacity of LowDensity Parity Check Codes under Messagepassing Decoding," November 1998, submitted to IEEE IT.
[2] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi and R. Urbanke, "Design of Provably Good Low-Density Parity Check Codes," April 1999, submitted to IEEE IT.

0-7803-5857-0/00/%10.00 0 2 0 0 0 IEEE.

31 8

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:22:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

