ISIT 2000, Sorrento, Italy, June 25-30,2000

Codes on Graphs: Normal Realizations
G. David Forney, Jr.
M.I.T. e-mail: forney@lids.mit .edu

Abstract - Wiberg e t al. [6] proposed graphical code realizations using three kinds of elements: symbol variables, state variables and local constraints. We focus on normal realizations, namely Wiberg-type realizations in which all symbol variables have degree 1 and state variables have degree 2.
A natural graphical model of a normal realization represents states by leaf edges, states by ordinary edges, and local constraints by vertices. Any such graph may be decoded by message-passing (the sumproduct algorithm).
We show that any Wiberg-type realization may be put into normal form without essential change in its graph or its decoding complexity.
Group or linear codes are realized by group or linear realizations. We show that an appropriately defined dual of a group or linear normal realization realizes the dual group or linear code. The symbol variables, state variables and graph topology of the dual realization are unchanged, while local constraints are replaced by their duals.
I. SUMMARY
Tanner [5] founded the subject of “codes on graphs,” building on Gallager’s work on low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2]. A “Tanner graph” is a bipartite graph in which there are two types of vertices, representing symbol variables and local constraints (e.g., parity checks). Tanner also developed the algorithm now generically known as the “messagepassing” or “sum-product’’ algorithm for decoding codes on graphs, generalizing Gallager’s APP ( a posterzorz probability) decoding algorithm, and proved that this algorithm performs exact APP decoding on arbitrary cycle-free graphs.
Wiberg et al. [6] made an important advance by introducing a third type of vertex, representing state variables. They thus made connections with trellis representations of codes, and with turbo codes and turbo decoding algorithms. Since this work, “codes on graphs” have become the common intellectual foundation for the study both of moderate-complexity codes such as traditional block and convolutional codes, and of capacity-approaching codes such as turbo codes and LDPC codes [l,31. The more powerful codes are based on graphs with cycles; their graph-based decoding algorithms have been shown empirically t o work very well, even though few theorems are known for graphs with cycles.
In this paper, we consider Wiberg-type realizations in which symbol variables and state variables are restricted to degrees 1 and 2, respectively, called normal realizations. We show that such a restriction involves no loss of generality nor increase in graphical or decoding complexity. With this restriction, we are able to prove a powerful and general duality theorem which applies to group or linear graphical models of arbitrary topology- in particular, to graphs with cycles.

A Wiberg-type realization [6] is based on a set of symbol
variables { A k , k E I A } , a set of state variables { S j , j E IS}, and a set of local constraints {Ci,iE l e } , constraining some
subset of the variables. The realization generates a code C consisting of all symbol configurations a that occur as part of some global symbol/state configuration (a,s ) that satisfies all local constraints. In the linear or group case, each variable is a vector space or group, the local constraints are linear or group codes, and the code C is then a linear or group code.
The degree of a variable is the number of local constraints in which it is involved. A Wiberg-type realization is normal if the degree of each symbol variable is 1 and of each state variable is 2. For example, a conventional state realization (trellis) has local constraints corresponding to trellis sections that involve triples ( ~ ka,k , s k + l ) , k E Z, and thus is normal.
A normal realization is naturally represented by a normal graph consisting of degree-1 leaf edges representing symbol
variables Ak , degree-2 ordinary edges representing state variables Sj, and vertices representing local constraints Ci. An
edge is connected t o a vertex if the corresponding variable is involved in the corresponding local constraint.
It is easy t o show that any Wiberg-type realization may be converted to a normal realization by replicating variables. The normal graph of the resulting realization looks essentially the same as the Wiberg-type graph of the original realization, and may be decoded with the same complexity.
The dual realization of a group or linear normal realiza-. tion is the realization in which each variable is replaced by its character group (the same variable, if its alphabet is finite), each local code is replaced by its dual code, and a sign inverter is inserted in each ordinary edge. We prove that a dual realization realizes the dual group or linear code, regardless of the topology of the associated normal graph. This result greatly generalizes Mittelholzer’s result [4] for dual trellises, and shows that the dual of any code may be realized by use of the same graph and same state spaces as the primal code.
REFERENCES
S. M:Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 325-344, Mar. 2000.
R. G. Gallager, “Low-densityparity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, July 1998.
T. Mittelholzer, “Convolutionalcodes over groups: A pragmatic approach,” Proc. 33d Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput. (Allerton, IL), pp. 380-381, Sept. 1995.
R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger and R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Euro. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 6 , pp. 513-525, Sept./Oct. 1995.

9
0-7803-5857-0/00/$10.00 0 2 0 0 0 IEEE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:23:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

