62

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 4, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2000

Decoding Low Density Parity Check Codes with Finite Quantization Bits
Li Ping, Member, IEEE, and W. K. Leung, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—This letter is concerned with the implementation issue of the sum-product algorithm (SPA) for decoding the low density parity check codes. It is shown that the direct implementation of the original form of SPA is sensitive to the quantization effect. We propose a parity likelihood ratio technique to overcome the problem. It is shown that for comparable performance the new method can be implemented with much less quantization bits, which can lead to considerably lower decoding cost.
Index Terms—Error correcting codes, low density parity check codes, turbo codes.

where is defined by

(2)

Clearly, for

,

can be determined recursively from

smaller subsets. In the Appendix , it is shown that (1) is uniquely

defined for a given .

I. INTRODUCTION
T HE SUM-PRODUCT algorithm (SPA) [1], is a fast decoding method for the low density parity check (LDPC) codes. It is based on the manipulations of the difference between two probability values (see [2] and [3]). The subtraction involved in SPA, however, renders it sensitive to the quantization effect. This can be a serious concern for practical implementation. In this letter we propose a technique based on the so-called parity likelihood ratio (plr) function to overcome the difficulty. For convenience, we will use SPA to indicate its direct form as given in [1] and [2]. We will refer to the new method as PLR algorithm (PLRA). SPA and PLRA are actually equivalent under perfect arithmetic, but the latter is less sensitive to the quantization effect as it avoids subtraction operation. Simulation results show that PLRA can operates with 6 quantization bits without incurring significant performance loss. This is compared with about 12 quantization bits required for SPA to achieve comparable performance.

II. THE PARITY LIKELIHOOD (PLR) FUNCTION

Let

be a set of positive real numbers and

denote by

the number of elements in . Let symbol

“ ” represent the union of two nonoverlapping sets. The new

method is based on the so-called PLR function [4] defined by

if

, i.e.,

if

with

and

(1)

III. DECODING THE LDPC CODES BY PLRA

A. Notations

Let and be the codeword and the parity check matrix,

respectively, of a linear code, so that

. The following

notations will be adopted in this letter [2]:

th row of , also referred to as the th

check;

:

, i.e.,

includes

the indices of all the columns in that

have th entry being 1;

:

, i.e.,

the indices of all the rows of

th entries being 1;

includes that have

and

initial probability of being 0 and 1, re-

spectively, based on the observation of ;

,

a posteriori information of being 0 and

1, respectively, based on the observation of

and checks ,

,

where

is

excluding .

The information provided by check is

excluded here to avoid the correlation ac-

cumulation during the iterative process;

.

.

Denote

:

and let

be the

set obtained by excluding

from . Let the size of be

. The equivalence between PLRA listed below and SPA

in its original form [1] is given in Appendix . Notice that no

subtraction is involved in the algorithm below.

Manuscript received March 17, 1999. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. N. C. Beaulieu. This work was supported by the City University of Hong Kong under Grant 7100009.
The authors are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong (e-mail: eeliping@cityu.edu.hk).
Publisher Item Identifier S 1089-7798(00)01243-6.

B. Parity Likelihood Ratio Algorithm (PLRA)

Initialization: Initially, assign the elements in

to

.

Main Stage: The following two steps are carried out itera-

tively.

1089–7798/00$10.00 © 2000 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PING AND LEUNG: DECODING LOW DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODES

63

Horizontal Step: Compute the intermediate variable as

and

(3)

Vertical Step: Update

as

and

(4)

Output: At completion

if otherwise.

C. Complexity Analysis

The cost of the horizontal step per row is

-func-

tions (an -function consisting of two multiplications and two

additions).

Vertical Step: The two-way technique again applies here ex-

cept that the -functions are replaced by multiplications. Let

be the nonzero elements in

. Let

and

. Recursively com-

pute

for

and

for

. Then,

for all except

and

. The horizontal step requires

multiplications per column.

Overall Complexity: Assuming that the average value of

is and the average value of

is

. Then

PLRA requires about

multiplications and

additions per iteration. For a rate code,

. Let

as used in [2]. Then PLRA requires a

total of multiplications and additions.

Comparison with SPA: As a comparison, SPA [2] requires

about

multiplications and

additions. Thus the

decoding costs of PLRA and SRA are similar in terms of

operation numbers. However, since PLRA is less sensitive

to the quantization effect, it actually has much lower overall

implementation cost, as shown below.

The following discussion is only concerned with the number

of operations involved. The impact of quantization bits on im-

plementation costs will be considered later.

Horizontal Step: Equation (3) can be evaluated as follows.

Let

and

be the nonzero

elements in

. Define

,

, and

,

, so that

with the understanding that

and

sets. Then, according to (1)

are empty

(5)

except

and

.

and

can be generated recursively based on a

two-way technique as

and for
and for

D. Quantization and Clipping

Consider the practical decoding process where signals are

represented by a finite number of bits. For PLRA, the ratio

takes value in

. It is thus reason-

able to set the quantization levels to ,

, , ,,

. This is equivalent to a midtread [5] uniform rep-

resentation of

in the logarithm domain. In our simulation

study, the value is determined empirically (see Fig. 1). We ob-

served that it is necessary to clip the inputs of the -function

for the following reasons. For

,

suppose that both and take the maximum level

in

the quantization scheme. The correct output is approximately

. However, if all the intermediate variables are also

clipped to

, then we will have an output 1, which incurs

a serious error. (The likelihood ratio 1 implies no information

at all.) This problem can be solved by clipping the inputs of the

-function to approximately

. In this way, again suppose

that

and clipping is applied. The -function

will give approximately

. This is a more reason-

able (though not exact) output.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES

Fig. 1 shows the simulation results of different number of

quantization bits for PLRA. It is seen that with 6 bits, the perfor-

mance is very close to the ideal case. As comparison, we include

the simulated performance for SPA in Fig. 2. Since SPA works

with

that takes value in (−1, +1), a uniform quan-

tization scheme in (−1, +1) is used. It is seen that satisfactory

performance (

) can be achieved with 12 bits, dou-

bling the requirement of PLRA.

An interesting observation of Figs. 1 and 2 is that the

quantization effects result in an error floor for both algorithms.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

64

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 4, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2000

In both cases the advantages of PLRA are readily seen.

V. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
We have demonstrated that the direct implementation of SPA can be very sensitive to the quantization effect. We have also demonstrated that the PLR technique can greatly reduce the quantization level required, which leads to significant reduction in decoding costs.
The reviewers of this letter draw our attention to an unpublished work [6] on the capacity of the LDPC codes. It appears that an adaptive quantization scheme with varying quantization step size during the iterative decoding process can be potentially advantageous. We are currently looking into this issue for the PLRA technique proposed above.

Fig. 1. Performances of PLRA with t = 3, information length = 30 000, code rate = 1/2, and iteration number = 40. (s = 2 for 6 bits quantization, s = 3 for 5 bits quantization, and s = 8 for 4 bits quantization).

APPENDIX THE EQUIVALENCE BETWEEN PLRA AND SPA

Let

be a set of positive real numbers. Based

on the definition of the function in (1) and (2), it can be

shown by induction that the function can be uniquely eval-

uated as

(6)

Combine (3)and (6)

Fig. 2. Performances of SPA with t = 3, information length = 30 000, code

rate = 1/2, and iteration number = 40.

(7)

(This should be distinguished from the inherent error floor of the coding scheme.) Notice that the error floor of PLRA is much lower than SPA.
The saved quantization bits can lead to lower implementation cost for PLRA. Consider two fast techniques.

• The first is to use a logarithmic table.1 The size of the table is determined by the number of quantization bits. For

SPA and PLRA, the size of the tables are

and

, respectively.

• The second is to use a size 64 × 64 two-dimensional look-up table for the -function in PLRA. This method

is very fast since the horizontal step only involves table

searching. The multiplications in the vertical step can

be realized by additions in the logarithm domain (see

footnote). A similar technique for SPA would require a

size 4096 × 4096 multiplication table.

1If we adopt the quantization levels in the form of s (as explained in Section III-D), multiplication can be implemented by an addition of the exponent indices but then addition requires the logarithm function.

Basically, the last line above is equivalent to the horizontal step of SPA in [2]. The vertical steps of PLRA and SPA are obviously equivalent.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, 1997.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay. Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices. [Online] Available: ftp://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk/pub/www/ mackay/mncN.ps.gz
[4] L. Ping, “Modified turbo codes with low decoding complexity,” Electron. Lett., vol. 34, no. 23, pp. 2228–2229, 1998.
[5] B. Sklar, Digital Communications Fundamentals and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke. The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding. [Online] Available: http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/who/tjr/pub.html
[7] D. Divalar and F. Pollara, “Multiple turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Milcom’95, 1995, pp. 279–285.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:29:58 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

