IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

325

The Generalized Distributive Law
Srinivas M. Aji and Robert J. McEliece, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this semitutorial paper we discuss a general message passing algorithm, which we call the generalized distributive law (GDL). The GDL is a synthesis of the work of many authors in the information theory, digital communications, signal processing, statistics, and artificial intelligence communities. It includes as special cases the Baum–Welch algorithm, the fast Fourier transform (FFT) on any finite Abelian group, the Gallager–Tanner–Wiberg decoding algorithm, Viterbi’s algorithm, the BCJR algorithm, Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm, the Shafer–Shenoy probability propagation algorithm, and the turbo decoding algorithm. Although this algorithm is guaranteed to give exact answers only in certain cases (the “junction tree” condition), unfortunately not including the cases of GTW with cycles or turbo decoding, there is much experimental evidence, and a few theorems, suggesting that it often works approximately even when it is not supposed to.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, distributive law, graphical models, junction trees, turbo codes.

(We summarize (1.1) by saying that

is obtained by

“marginalizing out” the variables and from the function

. Similarly, is obtained by marginalizing

out , , and from the same function.) How many arithmetic

operations (additions and multiplications) are required for this

task? If we proceed in the obvious way, we notice that for each

of the values of

there are terms in the sum defining

, each term requiring one addition and one multiplica-

tion, so that the total number of arithmetic operations required

for the computation of

is . Similarly, computing

requires operations, so computing both

and

using the direct method requires operations.

On the other hand, because of the distributive law, the sum in

(1.1) factors

(1.3)

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE humble distributive law, in its simplest form, states that . The left side of this equation involves

three arithmetic operations (one addition and two multiplica-

tions), whereas the right side needs only two. Thus the distribu-

tive law gives us a “fast algorithm” for computing

. The

object of this paper is to demonstrate that the distributive law

can be vastly generalized, and that this generalization leads to

a large family of fast algorithms, including Viterbi’s algorithm

and the fast Fourier transform (FFT).To give a better idea of the

potential power of the distributive law and to introduce the view-

point we shall take in this paper, we offer the following example.

Using this fact, we can simplify the computation of

.

First we compute tables of the functions

and

defined by

(1.4)

which requires a total of

additions. Then we compute

the values of

using the formula (cf. (1.3))

Example 1.1: Let

and

be given

real-valued functions, where , , , and are variables taking

values in a finite set with elements. Suppose we are given

the task of computing tables of the values of

and ,

defined as follows:

(1.1)

(1.5)

which requires multiplications. Thus by exploiting the dis-

tributive law, we can reduce the total number of operations re-

quired to compute

from to

. Similarly, the

distributive law tells us that (1.2) can be written as

(1.2)

(1.6)

Manuscript received July 8, 1998; revised September 23, 1999. This work was supported by NSF under Grant NCR-9505975, AFOSR under Grant 5F49620-97-1-0313, and a Grant from Qualcomm. A portion of McEliece’s contribution was performed at the Sony Corporation in Tokyo, Japan, while he was a holder of a Sony Sabbatical Chair. Preliminary versions of this paper were presented at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Ulm, Germany, June 1997, and at ISCTA 1997, Ambleside U.K., July 1997.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125 USA (e-mail: {mas; rjm}@systems.caltech.edu).
Communicated by F. R. Kschischang, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(00)01679-5.

where

is as defined in (1.4). Thus if we precompute a

table of the values of

( operations), and then use (1.6)

( further operations), we only need

operations (as

compared to for the direct method) to compute the values

of .

Finally, we observe that to compute both

and

using the simplifications afforded by (1.3) and (1.6), we only

need to compute

once, which means that we can compute

0018–9448/00$10.00 © 2000 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

the values of

and with a total of only

operations, as compared to for the direct method.

The simplification in Example 1.1 was easy to accomplish, and the gains were relatively modest. In more complicated cases, it can be much harder to see the best way to reorganize the calculations, but the computational savings can be dramatic. It is the object of this paper to show that problems of the type described in Example 1.1 have a wide range of applicability, and to describe a general procedure, which we called the generalized distributive law (GDL), for solving them efficiently. Roughly speaking, the GDL accomplishes its goal by passing messages in a communications network whose underlying graph is a tree.
Important special cases of the GDL have appeared many times previously. In this paper, for example, we will demonstrate that the GDL includes as special cases the fast Hadamard transform, Viterbi’s algorithm, the BCJR algorithm, the Gallager–Tanner–Wiberg decoding algorithm (when the underlying graph is cycle-free), and certain “probability propagation” algorithms known in the artificial intelligence community. With a little more work, we could have added the FFT on any finite Abelian group, the Baum–Welch “forward-backward” algorithm, and discrete-state Kalman filtering. Although this paper contains relatively little that is essentially new (for example, the 1990 paper of Shafer and Shenoy [33] describes an algorithm similar to the one we present in Section III), we believe it is worthwhile to present a simply stated algorithm of such wide applicability, which gives a unified treatment of a great many algorithms whose relationship to each other was not fully understood, if sensed at all.
Here is an outline of the paper. In Section II, we will state a general computational problem we call the MPF (“marginalize a product function”) problem, and show by example that a number of classical problems are instances of it. These problems include computing the discrete Hadamard transform, maximum-likelihood decoding of a linear code over a memoryless channel, probabilistic inference in Bayesian networks, a “probabilistic state machine” problem, and matrix chain multiplication. In Section III, we shall give an exact algorithm for solving the MPF problem (the GDL) which often gives an efficient solution to the MPF problem. In Section IV we will discuss the problem of finding junction trees (the formal name for the GDL’s communication network), and “solve” the example instances of the MPF problem given in Section II, thereby deriving, among other things, the fast Hadamard transform and Viterbi’s algorithm. In Section V we will discuss the computational complexity of the GDL. (A proof of the correctness of the GDL is given in the Appendix.)
In Section VI, we give a brief history of the GDL. Finally, in Section VII, we speculate on the possible existence of an efficient class of approximate, iterative, algorithms for solving the MPF problem, obtained by allowing the communication network to have cycles. This speculation is based partly on the fact that two experimentally successful decoding algorithms, viz., the GTW algorithm for low-density parity-check codes, and the turbo decoding algorithm, can be viewed as an application of the GDL methodology on networks with cycles, and partly on

some recent theoretical work on GDL-like algorithms on graphs with a single cycle.
Although this paper is semitutorial, it contains a number of things which have not appeared previously. Beside the generality of our exposition, these include:
• A de-emphasis of a priori graphical models, and an emphasis on algorithms to construct graphical models to fit the given problem.
• A number of nonprobabilistic applications, including the FFT.
• A careful discussion of message scheduling, and a proof of the correctness of a large class of possible schedules.
• A precise measure of the computational complexity of the GDL.
Finally, we note that while this paper was being written, Kschischang, Frey, and Loeliger [41] were simultaneously and independently working out a similar synthesis. And while the final forms of the two papers have turned out to be quite different, anyone interested in the results of this paper should have a look at the alternative formulation in [41].

II. THE MPF PROBLEM

The GDL can greatly reduce the number of additions and multiplications required in a certain class of computational problems. It turns out that much of the power of the GDL is due to the fact that it applies to situations in which the notions of addition and multiplication are themselves generalized. The appropriate framework for this generalization is the commutative semiring.

Definition: A commutative semiring is a set , together with two binary operations called “ ” and “ ”, which satisfy the fol-

lowing three axioms:

S1. The operation “ ” is associative and commutative, and there is an additive identity element called “ ” such that

for all

. (This axiom makes

a commutative monoid.)

S2. The operation “ ” is also associative and commutative, and there is a multiplicative identity element called “ ”

such that

for all

. (Thus

is also

a commutative monoid.)

S3. The distributive law holds, i.e.,

for all triples

from .

The difference between a semiring and a ring is that in a

semiring, additive inverses need not exist, i.e.,

is only

required to be a monoid, not a group. Thus every commutative

ring is automatically a commutative semiring. For example, the

set of real or complex numbers, with ordinary addition and mul-

tiplication, forms a commutative semiring. Similarly, the set of

polynomials in one or more indeterminates over any commu-

tative ring forms a commutative semiring. However, there are

many other commutative semirings, some of which are summa-

rized in Table I. (In semirings 4–8, the set is an interval of

real numbers with the possible addition of .)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

327

TABLE I
A SOME COMMUTATIVE SEMIRINGS. HERE S DENOTES AN ARBITRARY COMMUTATIVE RING, IS AN ARBITRARY FINITE
3 SET, AND DENOTES AN ARBITRARY DISTRIBUTIVE LATTICE

-marginalization of the global kernel , which is the function , defined by
(2.2)

In (2.2), denotes the complement of the set relative to the

“universe”

. For example, if

, and if

, then

For example, consider the min-sum semiring in Table I

(entry 7). Here is the set of real numbers, plus the special

symbol “ .” The operation “ ” is defined as the operation of

taking the minimum, with the symbol playing the role of the

corresponding identity element, i.e., we define

for all

. The operation “ ” is defined to be ordinary

addition [sic], with the real number playing the role of

the identity, and

for all . Oddly enough, this

combination forms a semiring, because the distributive law is

equivalent to

We will call the function

defined in (2.2) the th objec-

tive function, or the objective function at . We note that the

computation of the th objective function in the obvious way

requires

additions and

multipli-

cations, for a total of

arithmetic operations, where

denotes the size of the set . We shall see below (Section V)

that the algorithm we call the “generalized distributive law” can

often reduce this figure dramatically.

We conclude this section with some illustrative examples of

the MPF problem.

Example 2.1: Let , , , and be variables taking

values in the finite sets , , , and . Suppose

and

are given functions of these vari-

ables, and that it is desired to compute tables of the functions

and

defined by

which is easily seen to be true. We shall get a glimpse of the

importance of this semiring in Examples 2.3 and 4.3, below.

(In fact, semirings 5–8 are all isomorphic to each other; for ex-

ample, 5 becomes 6 via the mapping

, and 6 becomes

7 under the mapping

.)

Having briefly discussed commutative semirings, we now de-

scribe the “marginalize a product function” problem, which is

a general computational problem solved by the GDL. At the

end of the section we will give several examples of the MPF

problem, which demonstrate how it can occur in a surprisingly

wide variety of settings.

Let

be variables taking values in the finite

sets

, with

for

. If

is a subset of

, we denote the

product

by , the variable list

by , and the cardinality of , i.e., , by . We denote

the product

simply by , and the variable list

simply by .

Now let

be subsets of

.

Suppose that for each

, there is a function

, where is a commutative semiring. The

variable lists are called the local domains and the functions

are called the local kernels. We define the global kernel

as follows:

ptThis is an instance of the MPF problem, if we define local domains and kernels as follows:
local domain local kernel

The desired function

is the objective function at local

domain , and

is the objective function at local domain

. This is just a slightly altered version of Example 1.1, and

we shall see in Section IV that when the GDL is applied, the

“algorithm” of Example 1.1 results.

Example 2.2: Let , , , , , and be six vari-

ables, each assuming values in the binary set

, and let

be a real-valued function of the variables ,

, and . Now consider the MPF problem (the commutative

semiring being the set of real numbers with ordinary addition

and multiplication) with the following local domains and

kernels:

local domain local kernel

(2.1)

With this setup, the MPF problem is this: For one or more of

the indices

, compute a table of the values of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

Here the global kernel, i.e., the product of the local kernels, is

and the objective function at the local domain

is

which is the Hadamard transform of the original function [17]. Thus the problem of computing the Hada-
mard transform is a special case of the MPF problem. (A straightforward generalization of this example shows that the problem of computing the Fourier transform over any finite Abelian group is also a special case of the MPF problem. While the kernel for the Hadamard transform is of diagonal form, in general, the kernel will only be lower triangular. See [1, Ch. 3] for the details.) We shall see below in Example 4.2 that the GDL algorithm, when applied to this set of local domains and kernels, yields the fast Hadamard transform.

Example 2.3: (Wiberg [39]). Consider the linear code defined by the parity-check matrix

binary

Fig. 1. The Bayesian network in Example 2.4.
The global kernel is then

Suppose that an unknown codeword

from this

code is transmitted over a discrete memoryless channel, and that

the vector

is received. The “likelihood” of a

particular codeword

is then

if is a codeword
if is not a codeword.
Thus the objective function at the local domain is

(2.3)

where the

’s are the transition probabilities of the

channel. The maximum-likelihood decoding problem is that

of finding the codeword that maximizes the expression in

(2.3). Now consider the MPF problem with the following

domains and kernels, using the min-sum semiring (semiring

from Table I). There is one local domain for each codeword

coordinate and one for each row of the parity-check matrix.

all codewords for which

It follows that the value of for which

is smallest is

the value of the th component of a maximum-likelihood code-

word, i.e., a codeword for which

is

largest. A straightforward extension of this example shows that

the problem of maximum-likelihood decoding of an arbitrary

linear block code is a special case of the MPF problem. We shall

see in Example 4.3 that when the GDL is applied to problems

of this type, the Gallager–Tanner–Wiberg decoding algorithm

results.

local domain

...

...

local kernel

Example 2.4: Consider the directed acylic graph (DAG) in

Fig. 1.1 In a DAG, the “parents” of a vertex , denoted

, are

those vertices (if any) which lie immediately “above” . Thus in

Fig. 1,

, and

. Let us associate a

random variable with each of the vertices, and assume that each

random variable is dependent only on its “parents,” i.e., the joint

density function factors as follows:

Here is a function that indicates whether a given parity check is satisfied, or not. For example, at the local domain
, which corresponds to the first row of the parity-check matrix, we have
if if

B E 1This example is taken from [29], in which stands for burglary, is for A R W earthquake, is for alarm sound, is for radio report, and is for Watson’s
call.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

329

Fig. 2. The Bayesian network for the probabilistic state machine in Example 2.5.

or, using streamlined notation

where the constant of proportionality is given by

(2.4)

A DAG, together with associated random variables whose joint

density function factors according to the structure of the DAG,

is called a Bayesian network [18].

Let us assume that the two random variables and are

observed to have the values and , respectively. The prob-

abilistic inference problem, in this case, is to compute the con-

ditional probabilities of one or more of the remaining random

variables, i.e., , , and , where the conditioning is with re-

spect to the “evidence”

. Now consider the

MPF problem with the following local domains and kernels:

Similarly, the computation of the conditional probabilities of and can be accomplished via evaluation of the objective
functions at the local domains and , respectively. Thus the problem of probabilistic inference in Bayesian networks is a special case of the MPF problem. We shall see in Section IV that when the GDL is applied to problems of this type, the result is an algorithm equivalent to the “probability propagation” algorithms known in the artificial intelligence community.

local domain local kernel

Then by (2.4) (using semiring from Table I, viz. the set of

nonnegative real numbers with ordinary addition and mul-

tiplication) the global kernel

is just the function

, so that, for example, the objective function

at local domain is

Example 2.5: As a more useful instance of the probabilistic

inference problem, we consider a probabilistic state machine.2

At each time

, the PSM has state , input

and output . The are probabilistically generated, inde-

pendently, with probabilities . The output depends on

the state and input and is described by the conditional prob-

ability distribution

. The state also depends on

and , with conditional probability

. If the a

priori distribution of the initial state is known, we can write

the joint probability of the inputs, states, and outputs from time

to

as

(2.5)

But by Bayes’ rule
so that the conditional probability of , is

, given the “evidence”

This means that the PSM is a Bayesian network, as depicted in

Fig. 2.

Suppose we observe the output values, denoting these

observations by

(“ ” for evidence), and wish

to infer the values of the inputs based on this evidence. This

is a probabilistic inference problem of the type discussed in

Example 2.4. We can compute the conditional probability

2Our probabilistic state machines are closely related to the “hidden Markov models” considered in the literature [32].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

330

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

by taking the joint probability in

(2.5) with the observed values of and marginalizing out all

the ’s and all but one of the ’s. This is an instance of the

MPF problem, with the following local domains and kernels

(illustrated for

):

local domain local kernel

2 2 2 Fig. 3. The trellis corresponding to the multiplication of three matrices, of
sizes 2 3, 3 3, and 3 2. The (i; j)th entry in the matrix product is the sum of the weights of all paths from a to b .
multiplying matrices can be formulated as the following MPF problem:

This model includes, as a special case, convolutional

codes, as follows. The state transition is deterministic, which

means that

when

and

otherwise. Assuming a memoryless

channel, the output is probabilistically dependent on ,

which is a deterministic function of the state and input, and so

. Marginalizing the product of

functions in (2.5) in the sum-product and max-product semir-

ings will then give us the maximum-likelihood input symbols or

input block, respectively. As we shall see below (Example 4.5),

when the GDL is applied here, we get algorithms equivalent to

the BCJR and Viterbi decoding algorithms.3

Example 2.6: Let be a

a commutative semiring, for

tries in by

, where for

variable taking values in a set with

want to compute the product

matrix with entries in . We denote the en, is a
elements. Suppose we

Then for

we have by definition

local domain local kernel ...

the desired result being the objective function at local domain

.

As an alternative interpretation of (2.7), consider a trellis of

depth , with vertex set

, and an edge of weight

connecting the vertices

and

.

If we define the weight of a path as the sum of the weights of

the component edges, then

as defined in (2.7) rep-

resents the sum of the weights of all paths from to . For

example, Fig. 3 shows the trellis corresponding to the multipli-

cation of three matrices, of sizes , , and . If the

computation is done in the min-sum semiring, the interpretation

is that

is the weight of a minimum-weight path from

to .

We shall see in Section IV that if the GDL is applied to the

matrix multiplication problem, a number of different algorithms

result, corresponding to the different ways of parenthesizing the

expression

. If the parenthesization is

(2.6)

and an easy induction argument gives the generalization

(illustrated for

), and the computation is in the min-sum

semiring, Viterbi’s algorithm results.

(2.7)

(Note that (2.7) suggests that the number of arithmetic opera-

tions required to multiply these matrices is

.) Thus

3To obtain an algorithm equivalent to Viterbi’s, it is necessary to take the negative logarithm of (2.5) before performing the marginalization in the min-sum semiring.

III. THE GDL: AN ALGORITHM FOR SOLVING THE MPF PROBLEM
If the elements of stand in a certain special relationship to each other, then an algorithm for solving the MPF problem can be based on the notion of “message passing.” The required relationship is that the local domains can be organized into a junction tree [18]. What this means is that the elements of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

331

Fig. 4. A junction tree.

can be attached as labels to the vertices of a graph-theoretic tree

, such that for any two vertices and , the intersection of

the corresponding labels, viz.

, is a subset of the label on

each vertex on the unique path from to . Alternatively, the

subgraph of consisting of those vertices whose label includes

the element , together with the edges connecting these vertices,

is connected, for

.

For example, consider the following five local domains:

local domain

Fig. 5. A junction tree which includes the local domains fx ; x g, fx ; x g, fx ; x g, and fx ; x g.

and when a particular message rule is used:

is updated, the following

These local domains can be organized into a junction tree, as

shown in Fig. 4. For example, the unique path from vertex to

vertex is

, and

, as required.

On the other hand, the following set of four local domains

cannot be organized into a junction tree, as can be easily veri-

fied.

local domain

(3.1)

A good way to remember (3.1) is to think of the junction tree

as a communication network, in which an edge from to

is a transmission line that “filters out” dependence on all vari-

ables but those common to and . (The filtering is done by

marginalization.) When the vertex wishes to send a message

to , it forms the product of its local kernel with all messages it

has received from its neighbors other than , and transmits the

product to over the

transmission line.

Similarly, the “state” of a vertex is defined to be a table

containing the values of a function

. Initially,

is defined to be the local kernel

, but when is updated,

the following rule is used:

(3.2)

However, by adjoining two “dummy domains” local domain

to the collection, we can devise a junction tree, as shown in

Fig. 5.

(In Section IV, we give a simple algorithm for deciding

whether or not a given set of local domains can be organized

into a junction tree, for constructing one if it does exist, and for

finding appropriate dummy domains if it does not.)

In the “junction tree” algorithm, which is what we call the

generalized distributive law (GDL), if and are connected

by an edge (indicated by the notation

), the (directed)

“message” from to is a table containing the values of a

function

. Initially, all such functions are de-

fined to be identically (the semiring’s multiplicative identity);

In words, the state of a vertex is the product of its local kernel

with each of the messages it has received from its neighbors. The

basic idea is that after sufficiently many messages have been

passed,

will be the objective function at , as defined

in (2.2).

The question remains as to the scheduling of the message

passing and the state computation. Here we consider only two

special cases, the single-vertex problem, in which the goal is to

compute the objective function at only one vertex , and the

all-vertices problem, where the goal is to compute the objective

function at all vertices.4

For the single-vertex problem, the natural (serial) sched-

uling of the GDL begins by directing each edge toward the

4We do not consider the problem of evaluating the objective function at k vertices, where 1 < k < M . However, as we will see in Section V, the complexity of the M -vertex GDL is at most four times as large as the 1-vertex GDL, so it is
reasonably efficient to solve the k-vertex problem using the M -vertex solution.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

332

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

TABLE III A “HYBRID” SCHEDULE FOR THE ALL-VERTICES GDL FOR THE
JUNCTION TREE OF Fig. 4

Fig. 6. The junction tree of Fig. 4 with the edges directed towards v .
TABLE II A SCHEDULE FOR THE SINGLE-VERTEX GDL FOR THE JUNCTION TREE OF
Fig. 4, WITH TARGET VERTEX v

target vertex . Then messages are sent only in the direction toward , and each directed message is sent only once. A vertex sends a message to a neighbor, when, for the first time, it has received messages from each of its other neighbors. The target computes its state when it has received messages from each of its neighbors. With this scheduling, messages begin at the leaves (vertices with degree ), and proceed toward , until has received messages from all its neighbors, at which point computes its state and the algorithm terminates.
For example, if we wish to solve the single-vertex problem for the junction tree of Fig. 4, and the target vertex is , the edges should all be directed towards , as shown in Fig. 6. Then one possible sequence of messages and state computations runs as shown in Table II.
It will be shown in Section V that this scheduling of the single vertex GDL requires at most

arithmetic operations

(3.3)

where

is the label of , and , the degree of , is the

number of vertices adjacent to . This should be compared to

the complexity of the “obvious” solution, which as we noted

above is

operations. For example, for the junction

tree shown in Fig. 6, the complexity of the single-vertex GDL

is by (3.3) at most

arithmetic

operations, versus

for the direct computation.

For the all-vertices problem, the GDL can be scheduled in

several ways. For example, in a fully parallel implementation,

at every iteration, every state is updated, and every message

is computed and transmitted, simultaneously. In this case the

messages and states will stabilize after a number of iterations

at most equal to the diameter of the tree, at which point the states of the vertices will be equal to the desired objective functions, and the algorithm terminates. Alternatively, the GDL can be scheduled fully serially, in which case each message is sent only once, and each state is computed only once. In this case, a vertex sends a message to a neighbor when, for the first time, it has received messages from all of its other neighbors, and computes its state when, for the first time, it has received messages from all its neighbors. In this serial mode, messages begin at the leaves, and proceed inwards into the tree, until some nodes have received messages from all their neighbors, at which point messages propagate outwards, so that each vertex eventually receives messages from all of its neighbors.5 We will see in Section IV that the fully serial all-vertices GDL requires at most
arithmetic operations. There are also a variety of possible hybrid schedules, intermediate between fully parallel and fully serial. For example, Table III shows a hybrid schedule for the junction tree of Fig. 4, in which the computation is organized into four rounds. The computations in each round may be performed in any order, or even simultaneously, but the rounds must be performed sequentially. That concludes our informal discussion of GDL scheduling. We end this section with what we call the “scheduling theorem” for the GDL. Thus let be a junction tree with vertex set and edge set . In the GDL, messages can be passed in both directions on each edge, so it will be convenient to regard the edge set as consisting of ordered pairs of vertices. Thus for example for the tree of Fig. 4, we have
A schedule for the GDL is defined to be a finite sequence of subsets of . A typical schedule will be denoted by
5We might therefore call the fully serial all-vertices GDL an “inward–outward” algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

333

Fig. 7. The message trellis for the junction tree in Fig. 4 under the schedule
of Table II viz., E = f(3; 1)g, E = f(4; 2)g, E = f(5; 2)g, E = f(2; 1)g.

Fig. 8. The message trellis for the junction tree in Fig. 4, under the schedule
of Table III, viz., E = f(3; 1); (4; 2); (5; 2)g, E = f(1; 2); (2; 1)g, and E = f(1; 3); (2; 4); (2; 5)g.

. The idea is that is the set of messages that are updated during the th round of the algorithm. In Tables II and III, for example, the corresponding schedules are

Table II Table III

Given a schedule

, the corresponding

message trellis is a finite directed graph with vertex set

, in which a typical element is denoted by ,

for

. The only allowed edges are of the form

; and

is an edge in the mes-

sage trellis if either

or . The message trellises

for the junction tree of Fig. 4, under the schedules of Tables II

and III, are shown in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. (In these fig-

ures, the shaded boxes indicate which local kernels are known

to which vertices at any time. For example, in Fig. 7, we can see

that knowledge of the local kernels , , and has reached

at time

. We will elaborate on this notion of “knowl-

edge” in the Appendix.)

Theorem 3.1 (GDL Scheduling): After the completion of the message passing described by the schedule

Fig. 9. (a) The local domain graph and (b) one junction tree for the local domains and kernels in Example 2.1.

the state at vertex will be the th objective as defined in (3.2)

if and only if there is a path from

to

in the corre-

sponding message trellis, for

.

the single-vertex and all-vertices serial GDL described earlier in this section.
IV. CONSTRUCTING JUNCTION TREES

A proof of Theorem 3.1 will be found in the Appendix, but

Figs. 7 and 8 illustrate the idea. For example, in Fig. 8, we see

that there is a path from each of

to

,

which means (by the scheduling theorem) that after two rounds

of message passing, the state at will be the desired objective

function. This is why, in Table III, we are able to compute

in round 3. Theorem 3.1 immediately implies the correctness of

In Section III we showed that if we can construct a junction tree with the local domains as vertex labels, we can devise a message-passing algorithm to solve the MPF problem. But does such a junction tree exist? And if not, what can be done? In this section we will answer these questions.
It is easy to decide whether or not a junction tree exists. The key is the local domain graph , which is a weighted com-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

334

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

Fig. 10. Constructing a junction tree for the local domains f1; 2g, f2; 3g, f3; 4g, and f4; 1g by triangulating the moral graph.

plete graph with vertices main, with the weight of the edge

, one for each local dodefined by

If

, we will say that is contained in . Denote

by

the weight of a maximal-weight spanning tree of .6

Finally, define

Theorem 4.1:

, with equality if and only if there

is a junction tree. If

, then any maximal-weight

spanning tree of is a junction tree.

Proof: For each

, denote by the number

of sets which contain the variable . Note that

Let be any spanning tree of , and let denote the number of edges in which contain . Clearly

Furthermore,

, since the subgraph of induced

by the vertices containing has no cycles, and equality holds

if and only if is connected, i.e., a tree. It follows then that

with equality if and only if each subgraph is connected, i.e., if is a junction tree.

Example 4.1: Here we continue Example 2.1. The LD graph

is shown in Fig. 9(a). Here

.

A maximal weight spanning tree is shown in Fig. 9(b), and its

weight is , so by Theorem 4.1, this is a junction tree, a fact

6A maximal-weight spanning tree can easily be found with Prim’s “greedy” algorithm [27, Ch. 3], [9, Sec. 24.2]. In brief, Prim’s algorithm works by growing the tree one edge at a time, always choosing a new edge of maximal weight.

that can easily be checked directly. If we apply the GDL to this

junction tree, we get the “algorithm” described in our introduc-

tory Example 1.1 (if we use the schedule

,

where

,

, and

).

If no junction tree exists with the given vertex labels , all is

not lost. We can always find a junction tree with vertices such

that each is a subset of the th vertex label, so that each local

kernel may be associated with the th vertex, by regarding

it as a function of the variables involved in the label. The key

to this construction is the moral graph7 which is the undirected

graph with vertex set equal to the set of variables

,

and having an edge between and if there is a local domain

which contains both and .

Given a cycle in a graph, a chord is an edge between two

vertices on the cycle which do not appear consecutively in the

cycle. A graph is triangulated if every simple cycle (i.e., one

with no repeated vertices) of length larger than three has a chord.

In [18], it is shown that the cliques (maximal complete sub-

graphs) of a graph can be the vertex labels of a junction tree if

and only if the graph is triangulated. Thus to form a junction

tree with vertex labels such that each of the local domains is

contained in some vertex label, we form the moral graph, add

enough edges to the moral graph so that the resulting graph is

triangulated, and then form a junction tree with the cliques of

this graph as vertex labels. Each of the original local domains

will be a subset of at least one of these cliques. We can then at-

tach the original local domains as “leaves” to the clique junction

tree, thereby obtaining a junction tree for the original set of local

domains and kernels, plus extra local domains corresponding to

the cliques in the moral graph. We can then associate one of

the local kernels attached to each of the cliques to that clique,

and delete the corresponding leaf. In this way we will have con-

structed a junction tree for the original set of local kernels, with

some of the local domains enlarged to include extra variables.

However, this construction is far from unique, and the choices

that must be made (which edges to add to the moral graph, how

to assign local kernels to the enlarged local domains) make the

procedure more of an art than a science.

7The whimsical term “moral graph” originally referred to the graph obtained from a DAG by drawing edges between—“marrying”—each of the parents of a given vertex [23].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

335

Fig. 11. The LD graph for the local domains and kernels in Example 2.2. (All edges have weight 1.) There is no junction tree.

Fig. 13. Constructing a junction tree for Example 4.2.

of them, and viewing the associated local kernels as functions on the enlarged local domains:

local domain

local kernel

Fig. 12. The moral graph (top) and a triangulated moral graph (bottom) for the local domains and kernels in Example 2.2.
For example, suppose the local domains and local kernels are local domain local kernel

As we observed above, these local domains cannot be organized

into a junction tree. The moral graph for these domains is shown

in Fig. 10(a) (solid lines). This graph is not triangulated, but the

addition of the edge 2–4 (dashed line) makes it so. The cliques

in the triangulated graph are

and

, and these

sets can be made the labels in a junction tree (Fig. 10(b)). We can

attach the original four local domains as leaves to this junction

tree, as shown in Fig. 10(c) (note that this graph is identical

to the junction tree in Fig. 5). Finally, we can assign the local

kernel at

to the local domain

, and the local

kernel at

to the local domain

, thereby obtaining

the junction tree shown in Fig. 10(d). What we have done, in

effect, is to modify the original local domains by enlarging two

The difficulty is that we must enlarge the local domains enough so that they will support a junction tree, but not so much that the resulting algorithm will be unmanageably complex. We will return to the issue of junction tree complexity in Section V.
The next example illustrates this procedure in a more practical setting.

Example 4.2: Here we continue Example 2.2. The local do-

main graph is shown in Fig. 11. Since all edges have weight ,

any spanning tree will have weight , but

.

Thus by Theorem 4.1, the local domains cannot be organized

into a junction tree, so we need to consider the moral graph,

which is shown in Fig. 12(a). It is not triangulated (e.g., the

cycle formed by vertices , , , and has no chord), but it

can be triangulated by the addition of three additional edges, as

shown in Fig. 12(b). There are exactly three cliques in the trian-

gulated moral graph, viz.,

,

,

and

. These three sets can be organized into a

unique junction tree, and each of the original five local domains

is a subset of exactly one of these, as shown in Fig. 13(a). If we

want a unique local domain for each of the five local kernels, we

can retain two of the original local domains, thus obtaining the

junction tree shown in Fig. 13(b). Since this is a “single-vertex”

problem, to apply the GDL, we first direct each of the edges

towards the target vertex, which in this case is

.

It is now a straightforward exercise to show that the (serial,

one-vertex) GDL, when applied to this directed junction tree,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

336

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

Fig. 14. A junction tree for Example 4.3.

yields the usual “fast” Hadamard transform. More generally, by extending the method in this example, it is possible to show that the FFT on any finite Abelian group, as described, e.g., in [8] or [31], can be derived from an application of the GDL.8

Example 4.3: Here we continue Example 2.3. In this case, the local domains can be organized as a junction tree. One such tree is shown in Fig. 14. It can be shown that the GDL, when applied to the junction tree of Fig. 14, yields the Gallager–Tanner–Wiberg algorithm [15], [34], [39] for decoding linear codes defined by cycle-free graphs. Indeed, Fig. 14 is identical to the “Tanner graph” cited by Wiberg [39] for decoding this particular code.

Example 4.4: Here we continue Example 2.4. The local do-

mains can be arranged into a junction tree, as shown in Fig. 15.

(In general, the junction tree has the same topology as DAG,

if the DAG is cycle-free.) The GDL algorithm, when applied

to the junction tree of Fig. 15, is equivalent to certain algo-

rithms which are known in the artificial intelligence commu-

nity for solving the probabilistic inference problem on Bayesian

networks whose associated DAG’s are cycle-free; in particular,

Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm [29], and the “probability

propagation” algorithm of Shafer and Shenoy [33].

Example 4.5: Here we continue Example 2.5, the proba-

bilistic state machine. In this case the local domains can be

organized into a junction tree, as illustrated in Fig. 16 for the

case

. The GDL algorithm, applied to the junction tree of

Fig. 16, gives us essentially the BCJR [5] and Viterbi [37][11]

algorithms, respectively. (For Viterbi’s algorithm, we take the

negative logarithm of the objective function in (2.5), and use the

min-sum semiring, with a single target vertex, preferably the

“last” , which in Fig. 16 is . For the BCJR algorithm,

we use the objective function in (2.5) as it stands, and use the

sum–product semiring, and evaluate the objective function at

each of the vertices , for

. In both cases,

the appropriate schedule is fully serial.)

G G 8For this, see [1], where it is observed that the moral graph for the DFT over
a finite Abelian group is triangulated if and only if is a cyclic group of prime-power order. In all other cases, it is necessary to triangulate the moral graph, as we have done in this example.

Fig. 15. A junction tree for Example 4.4. This figure should be compared to Fig. 1.

Example 4.6: Here we continue Example 2.6, the matrix

multiplication problem. It is easy to see that for

, there is

no junction tree for the original set of local domains, because

the corresponding moral graph is a cycle of length

. It is

possible to show that for the product of matrices, there are

possible triangulations of the moral graph, which are in one-to-

one correspondence with the different ways to parenthesize the

expression

. For example, the parenthesization

corresponds to the triangulation shown in Fig. 17.

Thus the problem of finding an optimal junction tree is iden-

tical to the problem of finding an optimal parenthesization. For

example, in the case

, illustrated in Fig. 18, there are two

different triangulations of the moral graph, which lead, via the

techniques described in this section, to the two junction trees

shown in the lower part of Fig. 18. With the top vertex as the

target, the GDL applied to each of these trees computes the

product

. The left junction tree corresponds to paren-

thesizing the product

as

and requires

arithmetic operations, whereas the right junc-

tion tree corresponds to

and requires

operations. Thus which tree one prefers depends on the

relative size of the matrices. For example, if

,

,

, and

, the left junction tree requires 15 000 oper-

ations and the right junction tree takes 150 000. (This example

is taken from [9].)

As we discussed in Example 2.6, the matrix multiplication

problem is equivalent to a trellis path problem. In particular,

if the computations are in the min-sum semiring, the problem

is that of finding the shortest paths in the trellis. If the moral

graph is triangulated as shown in Fig. 17, the resulting junction

tree yields an algorithm identical to Viterbi’s algorithm. Thus

Viterbi’s algorithm can be viewed as an algorithm for multi-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

337

n Fig. 16. A junction tree for the probabilistic state machine (illustrated for = 4).
We begin by rewriting the message and state computation formulas (3.1) and (3.2), using slightly different notation. The message from vertex to vertex is defined as (cf. (3.1))

1 1 1 M M 1 1 1 M M Fig. 17. The triangulation of the moral graph corresponding to the

parenthesization (( (

))

).

(5.1) and the state of vertex is defined as (cf. (3.2))
(5.2)

We first consider the single-vertex problem, supposing that

is the target. For each

, there is exactly one edge

directed from toward . We suppose that this edge is

.

To compute the message

as defined in (5.1) for a

particular value of requires9

additions and

multiplications, where is the degree

of the vertex . Using simplified but (we hope) self-explanatory

notation we rewrite this as follows:

additions, and

multiplications.

But there are

Fig. 18. The moral graph for Example 4.6, triangulated in two ways, and

the corresponding junction trees. The left junction tree corresponds to the

M M M parenthesization (

) , and the one on the right corresponds to

M M M (

).

possibilities for , so the entire message

re-

quires

additions, and

multiplications.

The total number of arithmetic operations required to send messages toward along each of the edges of the tree is thus

additions

multiplications.

plying a chain of matrices in the min-sum semiring. (This connection is explored in more detail in [4].)
V. COMPLEXITY OF THE GDL

When all the messages have been computed and transmitted, the algorithm terminates with the computation of the state at
, defined by (5.2). This state computation requires further multiplications, so that the total is
additions

In this section we will provide complexity estimates for the serial versions of the GDL discussed in Section III. Here by complexity we mean the arithmetic complexity, i.e., the total number of (semiring) additions and/or multiplications required to compute the desired objective functions.

multiplications.
N S 9Here we are assuming that the addition (multiplication) of elements of N 0 requires 1 binary additions (multiplications).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

338

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

Thus the grand total number of additions and multiplications is as in the single-vertex case, and, summed over all messages, re(5.3) quire

where if

is an edge, its “size” is defined to be

.

Note that the formula in (5.3) gives the upper bound

(5.4)

mentioned in Section III.

The formula in (5.3) can be rewritten in a useful alternative

way, if we define the “complexity” of the edge

as

(5.5)

With this definition, the formula in (5.3) becomes

(5.6)

For example, for the junction tree of Fig. 4, there are four edges and

so that

We next briefly consider the all-vertices problem. Here a mes-

sage must be sent over each edge, in both directions, and the

state must be computed at each vertex. If this is done following

the ideas above in the obvious way, the resulting complexity is

. However, we may reduce this by noticing that

if

is a set of numbers, it is possible to compute

all the products of

of the ’s with at most

multiplications, rather than the obvious

. We do this by

precomputing the quantities

,

,

,

, and

,

,,

,

using

multiplications. Then if denotes the product

of all the ’s except for , we have

,

,,

,

, using a further

multipli-

cations, for a total of

. With one further multiplication

(

), we can compute

.10

Returning now to the serial implementation of the all-vertex

GDL, each vertex must pass a message to each of its neigh-

bors. Vertex will have incoming messages, and (prior to

marginalization) each outgoing message will be the product of

of these messages with the local kernel at . For its

own state computation, also needs the product of all in-

coming messages with the local kernel. By the above argument,

all this can be done with at most

multiplications for each

of the values of the variables in the local domain at . Thus

the number of multiplications required is at most

.

The marginalizations during the message computations remain

10One of the referees has noted that the trick described in this paragraph is
itself an application of the GDL; it has the same structure as the forward–backward algorithm applied to a trellis representing a repetition code of length d.

additions. Thus the total number of arithmetic operations is no

more than

, which shows that the complexity of

the all-vertices GDL is at worst a fixed constant times that of

the single-vertex GDL. Therefore, we feel justified in defining

the complexity of a junction tree, irrespective of which objec-

tive functions are sought, by (5.3) or (5.6). (In [23], the com-

plexity of a similar, but not identical, algorithm was shown to be

upper-bounded by

. This bound is strictly

greater than the bound in (5.4).)

In Section IV, we saw that in many cases

and the

LD graph has more than one maximal-weight spanning tree. In

view of the results in this section, in such cases it is desirable

to find the maximal-weight spanning tree with

as small

as possible. It is easy to modify Prim’s algorithm to do this. In

Prim’s algorithm, the basic step is to add to the growing tree

a maximal-weight edge which does not form a cycle. If there

are several choices with the same weight, choose one whose

complexity, as defined by (5.5), is as small as possible. The tree

that results is guaranteed to be a minimum-complexity junction

tree [19]. In fact, we used this technique to find minimum-com-

plexity junction trees in Examples 4.1, 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5.

We conclude this section with two examples which illustrate

the difficulty of finding the minimum-complexity junction

tree for a given marginalization problem. Consider first the

local domains , , , and

. There is

a unique junction tree with these sets as vertex labels, shown

in Fig. 19(a). By (5.3), the complexity of this junction tree is

. Now suppose we artificially enlarge the local domain

to

. Then the modified set of local domains, viz.,

,

, , and

can be organized into

the junction tree shown in Fig. 19(b), whose complexity is

, which is less than that of the original tree as

long as

.

As the second example, we consider the domains

,

,

, and

, which can be organized

into a unique junction tree (Fig. 20(a)). If we adjoin the domain

, however, we can build a junction tree (Fig. 20(b))

whose complexity is lower than the original one, provided that

is much larger than any of the other ’s. (It is known that the

problem of finding the “best” triangulation of a given graph is

NP-complete [40], where “best” refers to having the minimum

maximum clique size.)

VI. A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE GDL
Important algorithms whose essential underlying idea is the exploitation of the distributive law to simplify a marginalization problem have been discovered many times in the past. Most of these algorithms fall into one of three broad categories: decoding algorithms, the “forward–backward algorithm,” and artificial intelligence algorithms. In this section we will summarize these three parallel threads

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

339

sum-product and min-sum semirings, and speculated on the possibility of further generalizations to what he called “universal algebras” (our semirings).
In an independent series of developments, in 1967 Viterbi [37] invented his celebrated algorithm for maximum-likelihood decoding (minimizing sequence error probability) of convolutional codes. Seven years later (1974), Bahl, Cocke, Jelinek, and Raviv [5] published a “forward–backward” decoding algorithm (see next bullet) for minimizing the bit-error probability of convolutional codes. The close relationship between these two algorithms was immediately recognized by Forney [11]. Although these algorithms did not apparently lead anyone to discover a class of algorithms of GDL-like generality, with hindsight we can see that all the essential ideas were present.

Fig. 19. Enlarging a local domain can lower the junction tree complexity.

• The Forward–Backward Algorithm
The forward–backward algorithm (also known as the -step in the Baum–Welch algorithm) was invented in 1962 by Lloyd Welch, and seems to have first appeared in the unclassified literature in two independent 1966 publications [6], [7]. It appeared explicitly as an algorithm for tracking the states of a Markov chain in the early 1970’s [5], [26] (see also the survey articles [30] and [32]). A similar algorithm (in min-sum form) appeared in a 1971 paper on equalization [35]. The algorithm was connected to the optimization literature in 1987 [36], where a semiring-type generalization was given.

• Artificial Intelligence

Fig. 20. Adding an extra local domain can lower the junction tree complexity.
• Decoding Algorithms
The earliest occurrence of a GDL-like algorithm that we are aware of is Gallager’s 1962 algorithm for decoding low-density parity-check codes [15] [16]. Gallager was aware that his algorithm could be proved to be correct only when the underlying graphical structure had no cycles, but also noted that it gave good experimental results even when cycles were present. Gallager’s work attracted little attention for 20 years, but in 1981 Tanner [34], realizing the importance of Gallager’s work, made an important generalization of low-density parity-check codes, introduced the “Tanner graph” viewpoint, and recast Gallager’s algorithm in explicit message-passing form. Tanner’s work itself went relatively unnoticed until the 1996 thesis of Wiberg [39], which showed that the message-passing Tanner graph decoding algorithm could be used not only to describe Gallager’s algorithm, but also Viterbi’s and BCJR’s. Wiberg too understood the importance of the cycle-free condition, but nevertheless observed that the turbo decoding algorithm was an instance of the Gallager–Tanner–Wiberg algorithm on a graphical structure with cycles. Wiberg explicitly considered both the

The relevant research in the artificial intelligence (AI) community began relatively late, but it has evolved quickly. The activity began in the 1980’s with the work of Kim and Pearl [20] and Pearl [29]. Pearl’s “belief propagation” algorithm, as it has come to be known, is a message-passing algorithm for solving the probabilistic inference problem on a Bayesian network whose DAG contains no (undirected) cycles. Soon afterwards, Lauritzen and Spiegelhalter [23] obtained an equivalent algorithm, and moreover generalized it to arbitrary DAG’s by introducing the triangulation procedure. The notion of junction trees (under the name “Markov tree”) was explicitly introduced by Shafer and Shenoy [33]. A recent book by Jensen [18] is a good introduction to most of this material. A recent unification of many of these concepts called “bucket elimination” appears in [10], and a recent paper by Lauritzen and Jensen [22] abstracts the MPF problem still further, so that the marginalization is done axiomatically, rather than by summation.
In any case, by early 1996, the relevance of these AI algorithms had become apparent to researchers in the information theory community [21] [28]. Conversely, the AI community has become excited by the developments in the information theory community [14] [38], which demonstrate that these algorithms can be successful on graphs with cycles. We discuss this is in the next section.
VII. ITERATIVE AND APPROXIMATE VERSIONS OF THE GDL
Although the GDL can be proved to be correct only when the local domains can be organized into a junction tree, the computations of the messages and states in (3.1) and (3.2) make

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

340

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

sense whenever the local domains are organized as vertex labels on any kind of a connected graph, whether it is a junction tree or not. On such a junction graph, there is no notion of “termination,” since messages may travel around the cycles indefinitely. Instead, one hopes that after sufficiently many messages have been passed, the states of the selected vertices will be approximately equal to the desired objective functions. This hope is based on a large body of experimental evidence, and some emerging theory.

Fig. 21. A junction tree for Lemma A.1.

• Experimental Evidence

It is now known that an application of the GDL, or one of its close relatives, to an appropriate junction graph with cycles, gives both the Gallager–Tanner–Wiberg algorithm for low-density parity-check codes [24], [25], [28] ,[39], the turbo decoding algorithm [21], [28], [39]. Both of these decoding algorithms have proved to be extraordinarily effective experimentally, despite the fact that there are as yet no general theorems that explain their behavior.

Fig. 22. A junction tree for Lemma A.2.

. We denote by

the function of the vari-

able list

obtained by “marginalizing out” the variables in

which are not in :

• Emerging Theory: Single-Cycle Junction Graphs
Recently, a number of authors [1]–[3], [12], [38], [39] have studied the behavior of the iterative GDL on junction graphs which have exactly one cycle. It seems fair to say that, at least for the sum-product and the min-sum semirings, the iterative GDL is fairly well understood in this case, and the results imply, for example, that iterative decoding is effective for most tail-biting codes. Although these results shed no direct light on the problem of the behavior of the GDL on multicycle junction graphs, like those associated with Gallager codes or turbo codes, this is nevertheless an encouraging step.

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THE SCHEDULING THEOREM

Summary: In this appendix, we will give a proof of the Scheduling Theorem 3.1, which will prove the correctness of the GDL. The key to the proof is Corollary A.4, which tells us that at every stage of the algorithm, the state at a given vertex is the appropriately marginalized product of a subset of the local kernels. Informally, we say that at time , the state at vertex is the marginalized product of the local kernels which are currently “known” to . Given this result, the remaining problem is to understand how knowledge of the local kernels is disseminated to the vertices of the junction tree under a given schedule. As we shall see, this “knowledge dissemination” can be described recursively as follows:

• Rule (1): Initially

, each vertex knows only its

own local kernel .

• Rule (2): If a directed edge

is activated at time

, i.e., if

, then vertex learns all the local

kernels known to at time .

The proof of Theorem 3.1 then follows quickly from these rules.

Lemma A.1: If

, then

Proof: (Note first that Lemma A.1 is a special case of the single-vertex GDL, with the following local domains and kernels.
local domain local kernel

The appropriate junction tree is shown in Fig. 21.)

To see that the assertion is true, note that the variables not

marginalized out in the function

are those indexed

by

. The variables not marginalized out in

are those indexed by

. But by the hypothesis

,

these two sets are equal.

Lemma A.2: Let

, for

be local kernels,

and consider the MPF problem of computing

(A.1)

If no variable which is marginalized out in (A.1) occurs in more

than one local kernel, i.e., if

for , then

Proof: (Lemma A.2 is also a special case of the singlevertex GDL, with the following local domains and kernels:
local domain local kernel

...

...

...

We begin by introducing some notation. Let

be a func-

tion of the variable list , and let be an arbitrary subset of The appropriate junction tree is shown in Fig. 22.)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

341

In any case, Lemma A.2 is a simple consequence of the distributive law: Since each variable being marginalized out in (A.1) occurs in at most one local kernel, it is allowable to take the other local kernels out of the sum by distributivity. As an example, we have
Fig. 23. Deleting the edge e breaks the junction tree into two components.

theorem proved for round, and consider

, we assume :

is updated in the th

Now we are ready to consider the dynamics of the GDL. Con-

sider an edge:

. Removing from the junction

tree breaks it into two components, and (see Fig. 23).

For future reference, we denote the vertex set of by , and

the edge set by .

Since is on the unique path between any vertex in and

any vertex in , it follows from the junction tree property that

any variable which occurs in a vertex in both components must

occur in both and . Thus the message , which may be

viewed as a message from to , is a function of exactly

those variables which occur in both components.

In what follows, for each index

we define

by (3.1)

by induction.

Any variable that occurs in two different messages

and

must also, by the junction tree property, occur

in , so we may apply Lemma A.2 to rewrite the last line as

and for each pair of indices

such that

, we

define

In words, represents the (indices of) the neighbors of , and

represents the (indices of) the neighbors of other than

.

Now let

be a schedule for a junction

tree, as defined in Section III, i.e., a finite list of subsets of ,

and let

be the value of the message after the th

round of .

Theorem A.3: The message

is the product of a subset

of the local kernels in , with the variables that do not occur

in marginalized out. Specifically, we have

Since a variable that occurs in one of the kernels in the above equation and also in must, by the junction tree property, also occur in , it follows from Lemma A.1 that this last expression can be simplified to
the last equality because of the definition (A.3). Corollary A.4: For all , the state has the value
(A.4)

(A.2) where the set

is defined by

where

is a subset of , the vertex set of . The sets

are defined inductively as follows:

(A.5)

and for

Proof: By definition (3.2)

if

if

(A.3)

Proof: We use induction on , the case

being simply

a restatement of the initialization rule

. Assuming the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

342

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000

(We know that

, since the kernel is by definition a

function only of the variables involved in the local domain .)

By Theorem A.3, this can be written as

(In words, knowledge of the vertices of the path following path from the message trellis from

must pass sequentially to through

.) In view of (A.6), we have the

to

in

to

:

(A.7)

But by the junction tree property, any variable that occurs in two of the bracketed terms must also occur in , so that by Lemma A.2

Conversely, suppose there is a path from

to

in

the message trellis. Then since apart from “pauses” at a given

vertex, this path in the message trellis must be the unique path

from to , Rule 2 implies that knowledge of the kernel

sequentially passes through the vertices on the path ,

finally reaching at time .

This completes the proof of Theorem 3.1.

by the definition (A.5)

REFERENCES

Theorem A.3 tells us that at time , the message from to

is the appropriately marginalized product of a subset of the

local kernels, viz.,

, and Corollary A.4

tells us that at time , the state of vertex is the appropri-

ately marginalized product of a subset of the local kernels, viz.,

, which we think of as the subset of local ker-

nels which are “known” to at time . Given these results, the

remaining problem is to understand how knowledge of the local

kernels is disseminated to the vertices of the junction tree under

a given schedule. A study of (A.5), which gives the relationship

between what is known at the vertex and what is known by

the incoming edges, together with the message update rules in

(A.3), provides a nice recursive description of exactly how this

information is disseminated:

• Rule (1): Initially

, each vertex knows only its

own local kernel .

• Rule (2): If a directed edge

is activated at time ,

i.e., if

, then vertex learns all the local

kernels previously known to at time .

We shall now use these rules to prove Theorem 3.1.

Theorem 3.1 asserts that knows each of the local kernels

at time

if and only if there is a path in the

message trellis from

to

, for all

.

We will now prove the slightly more general statement that

knows at time

if and only if there is a path in the

message trellis from

to

.

To this end, let us first show that if knows at

,

then there must be a path in the message trellis from

to

. Because we are in a tree, there is a unique path from

to , say

where

and

. Denote by the first (smallest)

time index for which knows . Then by Rule 2 and an easy

induction argument, we have

(A.6)

[1] S. M. Aji, “Graphical models and iterative decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation,

Cal. Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, 1999.

[2] S. M. Aji, G. B. Horn, and R. J. McEliece, “On the convergence of it-

erative decoding on graphs with a single cycle,” in Proc. 32nd Conf.

Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 1998.

[3] S. M. Aji, G. B. Horn, R. J. McEliece, and M. Xu, “Iterative min-sum

decoding of tail-biting codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Work-

shop, Killarney, Ireland, June 1998, pp. 68–69.

[4] S. M. Aji, R. J. McEliece, and M. Xu, “Viterbi’s algorithm and matrix

multiplication,” in Proc. 33rd Conf. Information Sciences and Systems,

Baltimore, MD, Mar. 1999.

[5] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear

codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[6] L. E. Baum and T. Petrie, “Statistical inference for probabilistic

functions of finite-state Markov chains,” Ann. Math. Stat, vol. 37, pp.

1559–1563, 1966.

[7] R. W. Chang and J. C. Hancock, “On receiver structures for channels

having memory,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-12, pp. 463–468,

Oct. 1966.

[8] J. W. Cooley and J. W. Tukey, “An algorithm for the machine calculation

of complex Fourier series,” Math. Comp., vol. 19, p. 297, Apr. 1965.

[9] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, and R. L. Rivest, Introduction to Algo-

rithms. Cambridge, MA: MIT–McGraw-Hill, 1990.

[10] R. Dechter, “Bucket elimination: A unifying framework for probabilistic

inference,” Artificial Intell., vol. 113, pp. 41–85, 1999.

[11] G. D. Forney Jr., “The Viterbi algorithm,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 61, pp.

268–278, Mar. 1973.

[12] G. D. Forney Jr., F. R. Kschischang, and B. Marcus, “Iterative decoding

of tail-biting trellises,” in IEEE Information Theory Workshop, San

Diego, CA, Feb. 1998, pp. 11–12.

[13] B. J. Frey, “Bayesian networks for pattern classification, data compres-

sion, and channel coding,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Toronto, Toronto,

ON, Canada, 1997.

[14] B. J. Frey and D. J. C. MacKay, “A revolution: Belief propagation in

graphs with cycles,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-

tems, M. I. Jordan, M. I. Kearns, and S. A. Solla, Eds. Cambridge, MA:

MIT Press, 1998, pp. 470–485.

[15] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[16]

, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,

1963.

[17] R. C. Gonzalez and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing. Reading,

MA: Addison-Wesley, 1992.

[18] F. V. Jensen, An Introduction to Bayesian Networks. New York:

Springer-Verlag, 1996.

[19] F. V. Jensen and F. Jensen, “Optimal junction trees,” in Proc. 10th Conf.

Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, R. L. de Mantaras and D. Poole,

Eds. San Francisco, CA, 1994, pp. 360–366.

[20] J. H. Kim and J. Pearl, “A computational model for causal and diagnostic

reasoning,” in Proc. 8th Int. Joint Conf. Artificial Intelligence, 1983, pp.

190–193.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

AJI AND MCELIECE: THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

343

[21] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes

by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.

[22] S. L. Lauritzen and F. V. Jensen, “Local computation with valuations

from a commutative semigroup,” Ann. Math. AI, vol. 21, no. 1, pp.

51–69, 1997.

[23] S. L. Lauritzen and D. J. Spiegelhalter, “Local computation with proba-

bilities on graphical structures and their application to expert systems,”

J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B, pp. 157–224, 1988.

[24] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse ma-

trices,” in Cryptography and Coding, 5th IMA Conf., ser. Springer Lec-

ture Notes in Computer Science No. 1025. Berlin, Germany: Springer-

Verlag, 1995, pp. 100–111.

[25]

, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity-check

codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, pp. 457–458, 1996.

[26] P. L. McAdam, L. R. Welch, and C. L. Weber, “M.A.P. bit decoding

of convolutional codes,” in Proc. 1972 IEEE Int. Symp. Information

Theory, Asilomar, CA, Jan. 1972, p. 91.

[27] R. J. McEliece, R. B. Ash, and C. Ash, Introduction to Discrete Mathe-

matics. New York: Random House, 1989.

[28] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J. -F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding

as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Select.

Areas Comm., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[29] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. San Mateo,

CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[30] A. M. Poritz, “Hidden Markov models: A guided tour,” in Proc. 1988

IEEE Conf. Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 1, pp. 7–13.

[31] E. C. Posner, “Combinatorial structures in planetary reconnaissance,” in Error Correcting Codes, H. B. Mann, Ed. New York: Wiley, 1968.
[32] L. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, pp. 257–285, 1989.
[33] G. R. Shafer and P. P. Shenoy, “Probability propagation,” Ann. Math. Art. Intel., vol. 2, pp. 327–352, 1990.
[34] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[35] G. Ungerboeck, “Nonlinear equalization of binary signals in Gaussian noise,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Technol., vol. COM-19, pp. 1128–1137, Dec. 1971.
[36] S. Verdú and V. Poor, “Abstract dynamic programming models under commutativity conditions,” SIAM J. Contr. Optimiz., vol. 25, pp. 990–1006, July 1987.
[37] A. J. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-13, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.
[38] Y. Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neural Comput., vol. 12, pp. 1–41, 2000.
[39] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs ,” dissertation no. 440, Linkoping Studies in Science and Technology, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[40] M. Yannakakis, “Computing the minimum fill-in is NP-complete,” SIAM J. Alg. Discr. Methods, vol. 2, pp. 77–79, 1981.
[41] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:25:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

