1818

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2000

Gallager Codes for CDMA Applications—Part II: Implementations, Complexity, and System Capacity
Vladislav Sorokine, Member, IEEE, Frank R. Kschischang, Member, IEEE, and Subbarayan Pasupathy, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We focus our attention on Gallager codes with parameters compatible with the IS-95 cellular radio standard. We
f 0 g discuss low complexity software and hardware implementations
of an iterative decoder for N; ; 3 Gallager codes. We estimate that by using Gallager codes, a factor of five improvement in the code-division multiple-access system capacity relative to an uncoded system can be achieved, equivalent to a factor of two improvement relative to state-of-the art orthogonal convolutional codes. Simulation results demonstrate the good performance of short-frame Gallager codes in the additive white Gaussian noise and certain fading channels.
Index Terms—Complexity theory, decoder architecture, information rates, low-density parity-check codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
C ODE-DIVISION multiple access (CDMA) is one of the three most popular approaches (along with time-division multiple access and frequency-division multiple access) for allocating the available signal space to multiple users. In the IS-95 CDMA standard, a particular type of CDMA called spreadspectrum multiple access is used. Briefly, the forward link of the system operates as follows. A binary data sequence is produced by a data source at the rate of 9.6 kbits/s (in digital speech transmission), spread by a factor of 128, modulated and transmitted in a communications channel. Spreading is used partly to combat the multiple-access interference and partly to combat the channel noise with forward error-correction.
The CDMA system capacity depends to a large degree on the efficiency of the error-control code. In the forward link, IS-95 uses a rate 1/2 convolutional code for error-protection.
A much larger portion of the total bandwidth expansion can be allocated to error-control coding. Better codes will increase the system capacity [1], [2]. However, other factors, such as the decoding complexity, may negate the positive effect.
Paper approved by W. E. Ryan, the Editor for Modulation, Coding, and Equalization of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received February 16, 1999; revised May 20, 1999 and August 31, 1999. This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council, Canada. This paper was presented in part at the 1997 Canadian Workshop on Information Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, June 1997, at the 1998 Information Theory Workshop, Killarney, Ireland, June 1998, and at the Ninth International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Communications (PIMRC’98), Boston, MA, September 1998.
V. Sorokine was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada. He is now with Qualcomm Inc., San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: vsorokin@qualcomm.com).
F. R. Kschischang and S. Pasupathy are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0090-6778(00)09883-4.

We will argue that the

, rate 1/8 Gallager

codes of [part I] are good candidates to provide an enhanced

error-protection scheme in CDMA systems. Good performance

in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and fading channels

makes them particularly suitable for mobile communications.

Moreover, one can devise low-complexity decoders for these

codes, an important consideration for hand-held radio units

where power consumption is at a premium.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give a

brief review of the sum–product decoding algorithm along with

most of the relevant equations that are used extensively in later

sections. In Sections III and IV, we discuss low complexity im-

plementations of the sum–product decoder both in software and

in hardware. In Section V, we discuss the computational com-

plexity of encoding and iterative decoding for the

,

rate 1/8 Gallager codes. In Section VI, we present simulation

results for Gallager codes for the AWGN and fading channels.

We use simulation results for the AWGN channel in a simpli-

fied analysis of the single cell capacity of a CDMA system in

Section VII, and show that Gallager codes provide a twofold in-

crease in the system capacity relative to state-of-the art orthog-

onal convolutional codes [4]. Finally, we present the discussion

of the results in Section VIII.

II. SUM–PRODUCT ALGORITHM

To decode Gallager codes, we use the sum–product algorithm

[5], [6], a version of which was described in the original work

of Gallager [7], and which is sometimes referred to as “belief

propagation” [8], [9]. The sum–product algorithm operates by

passing messages along the edges of a bipartite factor graph

[10] that describes the conditional joint probability mass func-

tion of the codeword symbols given the received channel output.

The sum–product algorithm is known by various names in spe-

cial cases and in different application areas. For example, in the

special case when the factor graph represents a trellis or hidden

Markov model, the sum–product algorithm is known (in coding)

as the BCJR algorithm [11] or (in signal processing) as the for-

ward/backward algorithm [12]; in statistics, it is an integral part

of the Baum–Welch algorithm. For a tutorial treatment of factor

graphs, the sum–product algorithm and applications, see [10].

MacKay [13] gives an excellent description of the sum–product

algorithm that is used to decode Gallager codes, and we adopt

his notation here.

As in Section II, Part I, let be a low-density parity-check

matrix for a Gallager code , let denote the transpose of

, and let

be a transmitted codeword. The

channel adds a noise sequence

to to pro-

duce the channel output

. Assuming 1 an-

0090–6778/00$10.00 © 2000 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOROKINE et al.: GALLEGER CODES FOR CDMA APPLICATIONS—II

1819

tipodal signaling, the decoder starts by quantizing the channel output, forming the hard-decision vector whose th component is
if otherwise.

Next, using

arithmetic, the syndrome

is

formed. If the syndrome evaluates to the zero vector, the decoder

produces as its output; otherwise, it tries to find an error-pat-

tern that has the same syndrome as . For this purpose, the

decoder performs a number of algorithmically identical steps

called iterations. This process is described next.

With the parity-check matrix we associate a sequence of

four real “message matrices”:

,

,

and

,

where 0 is the iteration index. Matrices

and

are computed from

and

. The el-

ements of these matrices represent the messages passed back

and forth between the symbol vertices and the check vertices

in the corresponding factor graph. Following [5] and [6], let

us call each received codeword symbol a site, and a row of

the parity-check matrix a check. Matrices

and

store site-to-check messages and matrices

and

store

check-to-site messages.

Let

,

,

,

and denote the elements

of matrices

,

,

,

and , respectively.

Elements

,

,

and

may assume nonzero

values only if

1. Since is sparse, so are the message ma-

trices. (Note that the subscript denotes here the row index of an

element and is different from the parameter in the

notation.)

The algorithm itself consists of the following steps [13].

1) Initialization. For each site (code symbol) of the re-

ceived sequence we initialize to the likelihood that

the noise vector has a one in position (i.e., it “flips” the

transmitted bit), and to the likelihood that the noise

vector has a zero in position . Elements

,

,

, and

are initialized to 1 if

1, other-

wise, to 0.

2) Iteration.

• Site-to-check propagation (Vertical Step). The al-

gorithm runs over the matrices

and

column-wise and computes elements of

and

(hence the name “vertical step”). Let

be the set of row indices of nonzero elements

in th column of . Then

(1)

and (2)

where

denotes the set with the element

excluded, and is a normalizing factor such

that

1. In factor graph terminology,

a site-to-check message passed on a given factor

graph edge, is computed at a site as the normal-

ized product of messages arriving on all other

edges at that site, in accordance with the general

sum–product rule [10].

• Check-to-site propagation (Horizontal Step). The

decoder runs over

and

row-wise and

computes the entries of

and

(hence the name “horizontal step”). Let be the

set of column indices of nonzero elements in the th

row of . Then

(3) and

(4)

where

denotes the set

with the ele-

ment excluded and is the probability of ob-

serving the th component of the syndrome given

the site values 0/1 and

(this

probability is either 0 or 1). In factor graph termi-

nology, a check-to-site message passed on a given

factor graph edge is computed at the check as the

product of messages arriving on all other edges at

that check, multiplied with a local indicator func-

tion , and then marginalized for the variable asso-

ciated with the given edge, all in accordance with

the general sum–product rule [10].

3) Termination. After the vertical and horizontal steps, the posterior probabilities and are computed as follows:

(5)

and (6)

If

then

0, otherwise

1. Let be

the tentative noise vector produced by the algorithm. If

has the same syndrome as , the decoder stops, reveals

and outputs

; otherwise it proceeds

with the next iteration step. An upper limit is placed on

the number of iterations and a decoder failure is declared

when this upper limit is reached without convergence to

the given syndrome.

An example of iterative decoding is shown in Fig. 1 where a

block of 256 bits (an 8 32 binary image) was encoded with a

rate 1/2 code (so the block length is 512) and transmitted over

a noisy Gaussian channel with noise level of

1.5 dB.

The iterations are arranged column-wise in Fig. 1, with only

information bits shown. The first image in the top-left corner

corresponds to the received codeword and the final image in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2000

Fig. 1. Instance of iterative decoding: iterations increase from top to bottom and from left to right.
bottom-right corner corresponds to the correctly decoded codeword. It took 11 iterations to achieve correct decoding. (Reference [13, Figs. 12 and 13] gives another interesting decoding example.)
As MacKay [13] points out, the horizontal step (computation of check-to-site messages) can be simplified by operating with the differences between the elements of the matrices. Writing

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) Forward pass. (b) Backward pass. Forward–backward passes for computing (1)–(4). Symbols A, B, C, D correspond to quantities p and q . Note that after the backward pass is completed [diagram (b)], the right part of each cell contains the product of quantities from the left parts of all other cells (excluding the cell itself).

Example: The matrix [part I: (2)] can be represented by the following two matrices.

and
yields a simple product-form that is easily computed, from which the desired values are recovered as

This simplification arises from the well-known fact [14] (see

[15] for a recent generalization) that APP (a posteriori proba-

bility) computation can be performed by processing the dual of

a given linear code taking the Fourier transforms of the symbol

probabilities used in decoding the primal code. In the binary

case, the Fourier transform matrix is 2 2 matrix that maps

to

, the first component of which

is unity when

represents a probability mass function.

Each check represents a simple parity-check code, the dual of

which is a repetition code with a trivial trellis structure.

III. SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF ITERATIVE DECODER
A software iterative decoder for Gallager codes can be implemented effectively if:
• it exploits the sparsity of the code’s parity-check matrix; • it pre-computes operations that are identical in every iter-
ation and accomplishes them by a low-cost table look-up in each decoding step.
We represent the parity-check matrix as two related lists and ; each list contains the location of the nonzero ele-
ments of . Matrices and describe column-wise and row-wise, respectively.

Similarly, matrices

and

are represented by

row-wise lists (the algorithm runs over these matrices in the

horizontal step), and matrices

and

are represented

by column-wise lists (these are used in the vertical step).

Since the algorithm alternates between the vertical and hori-

zontal steps, we create lists

and SORT

that estab-

lish a correspondence between the elements of and , and

and , respectively. These lists are computed only once for

a particular Gallager code.

In the vertical step, the sum–product algorithm runs through

the lists that are the column-wise representations of

and

. The results of the computations (1) and (2) are placed

in appropriate positions in the lists representing

and

by using list SORT. In the horizontal step, the al-

gorithm runs over the lists representing

and

. Ex-

pressions (3) and (4) yield values that are placed in appropriate

positions in the lists representing

and

by

using SORT .

Note that the products in (1)–(4) require computations over

sets

and

. An efficient way to do it is to run for-

ward–backward passes over the lists and as illustrated in

Fig. 2 [16].

Computations in the Logarithmic Domain: In the vertical

and horizontal steps, we compute products of certain local costs

(1)–(4). Multiplications are computationally expensive com-

pared with additions. It is possible to replace multiplications

with additions if one operates in the logarithmic domain. An

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOROKINE et al.: GALLEGER CODES FOR CDMA APPLICATIONS—II

1821

Fig. 3. Decoder’s architecture: PU—processor units, ICN—interconnection networks, MM—memory module (data buffer).

addition can be evaluated then by a table look-up procedure.

Such look-up table will have a very moderate size even if high

accuracy is required.

Example: If

and

, then [17]

(7)

The function

is tabulated for positive .

Since decays quickly as increases, a small look-up table

can provide high accuracy in evaluating the function [18].

IV. HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE OF ITERATIVE DECODER

In this section we shall discuss general hardware algorithms that could be used to implement the iterative decoder. We emphasize the algorithm’s inherent parallelism that could lead to low-cost hardware implementations.
The decoder consists of four processor units and three interconnection networks that form a pipeline design. A memory module is used as a data buffer. The schematic configuration that illustrates parallelism and pipelineability [19] of the decoder is shown in Fig. 3.
In Fig. 3 the processor unit PU computes the difference between matrices and rather than the matrices themselves, making use of the simplification explained in Section II.
Recall that the sum–product algorithm alternates between computing the elements of matrices and . Hence, if the decoder is dedicated to decoding of a single codeword at a time, only a fraction of circuitry will perform decoding operations at any given moment of the decoding cycle (iteration step). To increase the circuit utilization, we suggest simultaneous decoding of several received codewords. This calls for use of a data buffer to store these codewords and enter them into the decoder when a free slot is available. The tradeoff in

Fig. 4. Snapshots of decoder’s states. (b) Decoded codeword x exits the
decoder.
the proposed scheme is an additional decoding latency. (The decoder in Fig. 3 can contain five codewords in PUs and ICNs simultaneously so the total decoder’s latency is 20 ms 5 codewords 100 ms.)
Iterative decoding is generally characterized by a variable decoding effort. Usually the number of iterations performed by a decoder is hard-limited in order to avoid these variations. In our scheme, the decoder may perform a larger number of iterations for particularly noisy received codewords since the data buffer will damp such computational peaks. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.
The signal flow graph for the processor units PU is shown in Fig. 5. Processor units PU execute the vertical step of the sum–product algorithm. Recall that the number of nonzero elements in a column of is either 2 or 3. Thus, the processor unit consists of the top part a) (weight 2 columns) and the bottom part

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1822

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2000

Fig. 5. Implementing the vertical step of the algorithm—signal flow graph for
r q R Q q processor units PU . Variables , are the elements of and , are i tentative posterior probabilities, p are the likelihood functions for th received
codeword.

PU [that corresponds to Fig. 5(a) and (b)] to the row-wise struc-

ture of PU , and routes signals and to adjacent inputs of

PU . Interconnection networks ICN and ICN perform routing

from row-wise to column-wise arrangement of signals required

for PU and PU . These networks are programmed only once

for each Gallager code.

The networks ICN , ICN and ICN have global but static

connections. One possible realization of these networks is a pro-

grammable cross-bar switch such that every input to the network

can be connected to any output. This configuration is shown in

Fig. 8.

A better architecture for ICN , ICN and ICN is achieved by

using Banyan networks [20], [21]. An example of a three-stage

Banyan network is given in Fig. 9.

Let us denote the input (and output) size of a Banyan

network as . The number of stages required to route any

input to any output in a Banyan network is

. Hence, for

Gallager code

(4032)

12 stages are required. The complexity of an

Banyan

network is

cross points as compared with cross

points of a cross-bar switch. Hence, the complexity of a Banyan

network for a

Gallager code is 48 292 cross

points.

The most immediate problem that arises in a Banyan network

but not in a cross-bar switch, is message blocking. If two mes-

sages ( and ) try to arrive at the same output of a 2 2

cross-bar switch (the basic block in Fig. 9) then one message is

rejected. One way to circumvent this difficulty is to introduce a

small number of redundant paths into the Banyan network. An

alternative is to introduce a certain depth buffer at the network’s

input. Since the arrival of messages to the network’s input is not

random but fixed for any given Gallager code, pre-computed

routing of the messages through the network will allow to avoid

any possible message blocking.

A Fig. 6. Signal flow graph for the processor unit PU : CU—control unit;
PE—processor elements; processor element 3 computes syndromes of n^ and y, x is the decoded vector, p and p are the likelihood functions of a new vector y.

b) (weight 3 columns). Appropriate routing for this arrangement

is done by ICN and ICN .

Fig. 6 shows the processor unit PU . It performs the syn-

drome computation of the tentative noise vector and the re-

ceived vector and compares these syndromes. If they are iden-

tical, the control unit CU gives a command to output the decoded

vector and load new and (i.e., start decoding of a new

vector ). If the syndromes are not identical, PU computes the

difference

which is used in the next iteration for the

same .

The signal flow graph for the processor array PU is shown

in Fig. 7. Note that in our case is always 3, so PU has a

“uniform” structure (in contrast with processor units PU and

PU ).

The function of interconnection network ICN is twofold. It

switches signals from the column-wise structure of PU and

V. ENCODING AND DECODING COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY
In this section we discuss one of the most important issues that determines the feasibility of a practical coding scheme. Whereas there are many good block and convolutional codes whose performance is known to be good, a restricting factor in the practical implementation of these codes is the high complexity of software and hardware that is required to extract this good performance.
As we recall, Gallager’s motivation for studying low-density parity-check codes was precisely the existence of low-complexity decoders for such codes. Beside being amicable to low-complexity implementations, it is fortunate that Gallager codes also turned out to have many good properties that result in good performance in a variety of communications channels.
The possibility of implementing a coding scheme with low complexity is particularly important in the context of this work. In mobile cellular telephony it is next to impossible to implement expensive software or hardware algorithms on the mobile side because of a variety of severely restrictive factors, e.g., the need to maximize time intervals between battery re-chargings, to maintain small data delays, etc.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOROKINE et al.: GALLEGER CODES FOR CDMA APPLICATIONS—II

1823

Fig. 7. Implementing the horizontal step of the algorithm—signal flow graph for the processor unit PU . Variables d are the differences of q and q , z is the kth component of the syndrome, 
 is a normalization coefficient, and r are elements of R.

Fig. 8. Cross-bar switch for interconnection networks.

2 Fig. 9. An example of 8 8 Banyan network.

There are two major contributing factors to the complexity of the coding scheme based on Gallager codes, namely, the costs of encoding and decoding.

A. Encoding

Let us first discuss the encoding complexity for

,

, Gallager codes. The code’s generator matrix

has dimensions 192 1536. Unlike the corresponding parity-

check matrix, the generator matrix is not sparse. Hence, the en-

coder has to store the entire generator matrix. The storage space

required for the matrix is 192 1536/8 36 864 bytes. The

size of the storage space can be slightly reduced if the generator

matrix is in a systematic form, and the encoder needs to store

only the nonsystematic part. For

Gallager codes

this will save 192 192/8 4608 bytes.

Each bit of an output codeword is obtained by multiplying in

a bit-wise manner a length 192 binary vector of input data with a

column of the generator matrix and computing the overall parity.

The number of clock cycles required to accomplish such multi-

plication depends on the length of processor’s registers. For ex-

ample, if the processor’s word length is 32 bits then the operation

will require 192/32 6 cycles, and the total number of clock cy-

cles required for encoding is 6 1536 9216 (6 1344 8064

clock cycles if the matrix is in the systematic form).

A multiplier in a digital signal processing (DSP) chip does not

normally contain a circuit for the parity computation. However,

if this operation is done often (as in our case) such a circuit

can be easily implemented with exclusive-OR gates. Hence, the

cost of the parity computation is negligible in any application

specific hardware.

For comparison, encoding of a rate 1/2, constraint length 7

convolutional code will require (for information block length of

192) 192 6 198 register shifts and 198 2 396 bitwise

multiplications, with two multiplications for each register shift

(since the code rate is 1/2). The total number of clock cycles

required for encoding is 198 396 594. Hence, encoding

of a Gallager code is slower than encoding of a convolutional

code with parameters discussed above. Similar analysis applies

to turbo codes since in a turbo code component codes are recur-

sive convolutional codes of rate 1.

However, boolean operations bear a lower cost compared with

arithmetic operations required for decoding of the received code-

word. (By an arithmetic operation we mean either an addition or

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1824

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2000

multiplication of two floating or fixed point real numbers.) The overall encoding/decoding complexity is dominated by the decoding complexity since decoding requires thousands of arithmetic operations per frame for Gallager codes.

B. Decoding

Let us calculate the decoding complexity for the

Gallager codes. The computational complexity of the

sum–product algorithm is roughly proportional to the number

of nonzero elements in the parity-check matrix . In what

follows, we compute the number of arithmetic operations

(OPs) required for decoding (the number format could be either

floating or fixed point depending on the implementation), i.e.,

we consider operations of adding or multiplying two numbers

to have equal cost.

Consider a

,

Gallager code. We

start with the horizontal step of the algorithm.

To compute the total cost of the horizontal step we need to

take into account all parity-checks.

additions are required to compute the difference of and ,

which is necessary in the horizontal step [13]. Computation of

the elements of and requires two multiplications and one

addition per element which amounts to the total complexity is

12 096 OPs. Thus, the cost of the horizontal step is 16 128 OPs.

The vertical step involves computations of particular

elements and as well as computations of tentative

posterior probabilities and . Construction 2 produces

columns of weight 3 and

columns of weight 2 (for code rates

1). Substituting the

numerical values, we obtain 960 columns of weight 3 and 576

columns of weight 2.

For each weight 3 column a total of 5 multiplications is re-

quired to compute the quantities

or

.1

Suppose we need to compute the quantities , and .

We notice that

and

(a total of 3 multiplications); and

(two

additional multiplications). The normalization factor is con-

venient but not essential, and presently we do not take it into ac-

count. Therefore, 2 5 960 9600 OPs are required. For each

column with 2 nonzero elements only 1 multiplication is required

for so the complexity is 2 1 2 576 2304 OPs.

The computation of the tentative posterior probabilities (5)

and (6) will require only

OPs as these

can be obtained by multiplying (1) and (2) by an appropriate

column element and .

Thus, the total complexity of the sum–product algorithm per

iteration is 16 128 9600 2304 3072 31 104 OPs. The

complexity per information bit per iteration is then 31 104/192

162 OPs.

For comparison, iterative decoding of 16-state turbo codes

has a cost of 192 OPs per information bit per iteration [22]. [For

a turbo code the number of multiplications per information bit

is 12 , where is the state complexity of constituent codes.

Note that this expression is independent of code rate. We will

obtain the complexity of turbo-decoding at 192 OPs per infor-

1We thank one of the reviewers for pointing out available computational savings in this step.

mation bit per iteration if we assume that the state complexity of constituent codes is 16 (as in [23]).]
The overall decoding complexity of Gallager codes depends on the number of iterations required for decoding. The mean of this number depends in its turn on the channel SNR and also on the definition of the mean, i.e., if one computes the average over all decodings (in which case the average will also depend to a large degree on the maximum number of iterations the decoder is allowed to perform) or over only successful decodings. For higher channel SNR both definitions will yield approximately the same results as the number of unsuccessful (nonconvergent) decodings becomes small (but the computed averages may diverge significantly for these two definitions as SNR decreases). We observed in simulations (where we computed the average over all decodings) that the decoder requires on the order of ten iterations for signal-to-noise ratios in the range of 2.5–3.5 dB.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Performance of Gallager Codes in AWGN Channels
In this set of simulations we modeled the performance of the decoder based on the sum–product algorithm. The site likelihoods for AWGN channel and 1 antipodal signaling are [13]

(8) and
(9)

If the received signal component is negative then the ex-

pressions (8) and (9) for the conditional probabilities

and

should be exchanged. In our simulations

we ran the decoder on 5 10 frames for

2 dB and

10 frames for

2 dB. For both the AWGN and fading

channels, we observed that the decoder produces no undetected

errors, i.e., all decoding errors resulted from nonconvergent de-

coder’s behavior (we declare nonconvergence if the number of

iterations reaches the upper limit that in our simulations was

set at 2000 iterations). Similar result was observed for Gallager

codes with longer block lengths in [13].

Fig. 10 shows the performance of

,

Gallager code generated by Construction 2

in AWGN channel (while it is difficult to make a fully mean-

ingful comparison between the result of Fig. 10 and the results

reported in literature for other classes of codes due to different

code rates, decoding complexities etc., the reader may be

interested in [3] where certain results for short-frame turbo

codes are reported).

B. Performance of Gallager Codes in Fully Interleaved Flat Rayleigh-Fading Channels
We simulated the performance of the sum–product iterative decoder for short frame Gallager codes in fully interleaved flat Rayleigh-fading channels, i.e., we assumed that fading amplitudes at different time instants are independent Rayleigh random variables with a unit second moment. The assumption of fully interleaved Rayleigh-fading channel may be somewhat unrealistic in IS-95 systems since only a single code frame is inter-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOROKINE et al.: GALLEGER CODES FOR CDMA APPLICATIONS—II

1825

N 0 Fig. 10. Frame error rates for ( = 1536; K = 192; ) Gallager code with the sum–product decoder in the AWGN channel.

0 Fig. 11. Performance of (N = 1536, K = 192, ) Gallager code in flat Rayleigh-fading channels. The channel state information is made available to the decoder.

leaved. However, good code performance in this type of channels may be an indication of good performance in channels with correlated fading (and certainly warrants further investigation in this direction).
We considered 1 antipodal signaling. We assumed perfect synchronization at the receiver. Then the received signal is

where is the transmitted signal ( 1), is the white

Gaussian noise with variance and is a Rayleigh random

variable such that

is 1.

In the first set of simulations we assumed that channel state information (CSI) is available to the decoder; i.e., the decoder knows the fading amplitudes for each transmitted symbol. Fig. 11 shows the performance of the sum–product iterative decoder for Gallager codes in a flat Rayleigh fading channel (some results regarding the performance of turbo codes in fading channels can be found in [3] and, most recently, in [25]).
If the channel state information (Fig. 12) is not available to the decoder, the performance deteriorates by about 1 dB (we marginalize over to obtain an effective likelihood ratio [25], [26]).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2000

N = K = 0 Fig. 12. Performance of ( 1536,

192, ) Gallager code in a flat Rayleigh-fading channel with no channel state information.

Fig. 13. Data BER versus number of users in a cell for: (a) direct sequence (DS) CDMA that employs Gallager codes; (b) DS-CDMA with low rate orthogonal codes [4]; (c) uncoded DS-CDMA.

VII. CAPACITY OF A CDMA CELL
It is known [27] that the system capacity of the reverse CDMA link assuming single cell and perfect receiver synchronization, can be approximated as
(10)
where is the number of users, is the processing gain, and is signal-to-interference ratio.
We now use expression (10) to evaluate the CDMA cell capacity, i.e., the number of admissible users for a given bit-error

rate (BER). We assume coherent detection in both forward and reverse links. The system capacity can be computed by using bit-error probabilities for Gallager codes in AWGN environment. From Fig. 10 and (10) we obtain the CDMA cell capacity versus signal-to-interference ratio. The result is shown in Fig. 13.
Fig. 13 also compares the cell capacity of a CDMA system that uses Gallager codes, with other CDMA systems built on similar principles. Ormondroyd and Maxey [4] consider a CDMA system that uses very low rate orthogonal convolutional codes. In particular, they consider rate 1/64 orthogonal convolutional codes. To make a fair comparison with their

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOROKINE et al.: GALLEGER CODES FOR CDMA APPLICATIONS—II

1827

results we assumed that the processing gain is 64 in (10) (where 64 is formed is a product of the reciprocal of the code rate (1/8) and an additional spreading factor of 8). Note that the decoding complexity per information bit of rate 1/64 low rate orthogonal convolutional codes is comparable [27] with the decoding complexity (per information bit per iteration) of
1536, , 3 Gallager codes, but Gallager codes will typically require several iterations for decoding.
In digital speech transmission, typical data BERs that the system can tolerate are on the order of 10 . From Fig. 13, we observe that an uncoded CDMA system does not admit more than seven users without an increase in the data BER, i.e., without a reduction in quality of service. The CDMA system with orthogonal convolutional codes supports 16 users at BERs of 10 , and the CDMA system with Gallager codes supports 37 users. Hence, a CDMA system with Gallager codes achieves more than a twofold increase in the system capacity compared with [4], and more than a fivefold increase in the system capacity compared with an uncoded CDMA system.
VIII. DISCUSSION
In the present work we searched for good short frame codes that could be used in CDMA applications in digital speech transmission where processing delay constraints are critical. We were particularly interested in codes for which very efficient (hardware or software) decoding algorithms exist. Iterative decoding algorithms are the focal point of most recent research effort in the coding theory, and they were the primary objects of interest in our work.
We found a family of low rate Gallager codes that exhibits a good performance under the desired constraints. Theoretical results show that Gallager codes are good even for relatively short block lengths. CDMA systems that use Gallager codes could outperform other CDMA systems that use weaker errorprotection codes.
Gallager codes admit highly parallel software and hardware implementations that guarantee high speed data processing. Moreover, low complexity iterative decoders are readily available for Gallager codes.
We note that Richardson et al. [9], [28] have recently provided analysis and design guidelines for irregular Gallager codes (introduced by Luby et al. [29]) that perform remarkably well for long block lengths, coming even closer to the Shannon limit on AWGN channels than turbo codes do. It is conceivable that irregular Gallager codes might also provide some performance advantage for the relatively short block lengths considered here, but we have not investigated this possibility.
Since Gallager codes exhibit good performance in AWGN channels and, perhaps, more importantly, in fading channels that arise frequently in mobile communications, we conclude that Gallager codes could, perhaps should, become the error-control scheme of choice in future generations of CDMA systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank D. MacKay, B. Frey, and the anonymous reviewers for many helpful comments and suggestions.

REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Viterbi, “Very low rate convolutional codes for maximum theoretical performance of spread-spectrum multiple-access channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 8, pp. 641–649, May 1990.
[2] J. Chaib and H. Leib, “Benefits of error control coding for CDMA,” in Proc. 17th Biennial Symp. Communications, Kingston, ON, Canada, May 30–June 1, 1994, pp. 88–91.
[3] P. Jung, “Comparison of turbo-code decoders applied to short frame transmission systems,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 14, pp. 530–537, Apr. 1996.
[4] R. F. Ormondroyd and J. J. Maxey, “Performance of low-rate orthogonal convolutional codes in DS-CDMA applications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 46, pp. 320–328, May 1997.
[5] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–525, Sept./Oct. 1995.
[6] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[7] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[8] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[9] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.
[10] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum–product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[11] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, 1974.
[12] L. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, pp. 257–286, Feb. 1989.
[13] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[14] C. R. P. Hartmann and L. D. Rudolph, “An optimum symbol-by-symbol decoding rule for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-22, pp. 514–517, Sept. 1976.
[15] G. D. Forney Jr., “Codes on graphs: Generalized state realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory., to be published.
[16] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding, 5th IMA Conference, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, C. Boyd, Ed., 1995, vol. 1025, pp. 110–111.
[17] A. J. Viterbi, “An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 260–264, Feb. 1998.
[18] J. A. Erfanian, S. Pasupathy, and G. Gulak, “Reduced complexity symbol detectors with parallel structures for ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, pp. 1661–1671, Feb./Mar./Apr. 1994.
[19] S. Y. Kung, VLSI Array Processors. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall, 1988.
[20] L. Goke and G. Lipovski, “Banyan network for partitioning multiprocessor systems,” in Proc. ICC’73, 1973, pp. 21–30.
[21] H. S. Kim, “Asynchronous Transfer Mode Switch for Broadband ISDN,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. of Elect. Eng., Univ. of Toronto, 1990.
[22] B. J. Frey, “Bayesian networks for pattern classification, data compression and channel coding,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. of Elect. and Comput. Eng., Univ. of Toronto, 1997.
[23] G. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC’93), Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 2.1064–2.1070.
[24] S. W. Golomb, R. E. Peile, and R. A. Scholtz, Basic Concepts in Information Theory and Coding: The Adventures of Secret Agent 00 111. New York: Plenum, 1994.
[25] E. K. Hall and S. G. Wilson, “Design and analysis of turbo codes on Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 160–174, Feb. 1998.
[26] R. E. Blahut, Digital Transmission of Information. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1990.
[27] A. J. Viterbi, CDMA Principles of Spread Spectrum Communication. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995.
[28] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.
[29] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low density parity check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1828

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2000

Vladislav Sorokine (M’98) received the degree of Engineer–Physicist with honors from Moscow Engineering Physics Institute (MIFI) in 1985, and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1993 and 1998, respectively.
He is a Systems Engineer with Qualcomm, Inc., San Diego, CA. His research interests include the area of coding theory and wireless communications. He is currently involved in the design and performance analysis of third generation wireless systems.
Frank R. Kschischang (S’83–M’91) received the B.A.Sc. degree with honors from the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, in 1985, and the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, in 1988 and 1991, respectively, all in electrical engineering. During his graduate studies, he held a variety of scholarships and fellowships, including the IEEE Communications Society Scholarship. He is a 1999 recipient of the Province of Ontario’s Premier Research Excellence Award. He is an Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. His research interests include the area of coding theory, particularly in soft-decision decoding algorithms and codes defined on graphs. Dr. Kschischang is currently an Associate Editor for Coding Theory of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY. He served as Publicity Chair of the 1998 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory held in Cambridge, MA.

Subbarayan Pasupathy (M’73–SM’81–F’91) was born in Chennai (Madras), India, on September 21, 1940. He received the B.E. degree in telecommunications from the University of Madras in 1963, the M.Tech. degree in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India, in 1966, and the M.Phil. and Ph.D. degrees in engineering and applied science from Yale University, New Haven, CT, in 1970 and 1972, respectively.
He joined the faculty of the University of Toronto in 1973 and became a Professor of Electrical Engineering in 1983. He has served as the Chairman of the Communications Group and as the Associate Chairman of the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of Toronto. His research interests are in the areas of communication theory, digital communications, and statistical signal processing. Dr. Pasupathy is a Registered Professional Engineer in the Province of Ontario. He has served as a Technical Associate Editor for the IEEE Communications Magazine (1979–1982) and as an Associate Editor for the Canadian Electrical Engineering Journal (1980–1983). During 1982–1989, he was an Area Editor for Data Communications and Modulation for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS. Since 1984, he has been writing a regular column entitled “Light Traffic” for the IEEE Communications Magazine. He was elected Fellow of the IEEE in 1991 “for contributions to bandwidth-efficient coding and modulation schemes in digital communication.”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 09:28:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

