Next Generation Iterative LDPC Solutions for Magnetic Recording Storage

Kiran K. Gunnam1, Gwan S. Choi2, Mark B. Yeary3, Shaohua Yang1 and Yuanxing Lee1 1 Channel Architecture, Storage Peripherals Group, LSI Corporation, Milpitas, CA-95035
2Department of ECE, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX-77843 3School of ECE, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK-73019

Abstract— Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have recently received considerable attention as a next-generation coding technique for communication and storage channels. The recent developments in the hardware storage business include hard disk drives that support higher capacities and transfer rate credit to perpendicular recording. To meet the demanding error correction requirements at a lower silicon cost, most storage systems manufacturers have started adopting LDPC based error correction systems. This paper summarizes the recent research on low complexity LDPC decoder architecture with statistical buffer management for magnetic recoding channels that require data rates of over 5 Gbps, real time bit error rates in the order of 10-12, and quasi real time bit error rates in the order of 10-15.
Index Terms— low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, decoder architecture, layered decoding, statistical buffering, magnetic recording channel, turbo equalization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Perpendicular magnetic recording promises recording densities up to 2 Terabit per square inch. These high areal recording densities require sophisticated signal processing and coding schemes in order to preserve system reliability. The typical recording channel impairments are severe inter-symbol interference, colored Gaussian thermal noise, inter-track interference, thermal asperity, partial erasure, dropouts and signal-dependent transition noise (also called as media noise or jitter noise). These inter-symbol interference (ISI) channels are encountered not only in magnetic recording systems, but also in several communication including wireless communications and high-speed wire-line modem applications. Maximum a posteriori (MAP), and maximum likelihood (ML) algorithms are generally used for channel detection [1]. For ISI channels with data-dependent noise, pattern-dependent NPML detector (PD-NPML) was proposed by modifying the branch metric computation of ML algorithm and using data-dependent prediction filters. In general, both PD-NPML and pattern dependent noise prediction MAP detectors in conjunction with an iterative LDPC decoder (see [2-7] for more information on LDPC and decoders) in the turbo equalization system [1] improve the performance significantly especially when the media noise is severe.

Our research, see [3-4] and other references to our recent work there in, has introduced the following concepts to LDPC decoder implementation: block serial scheduling, value-reuse, scheduling of layered processing, out-of-order block processing, reconfigurable permuters, dynamic state, speculative computation. In addition, our research introduced the run-time application compiler which has the following concepts: support for different LDPC codes with in a class of codes such as IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16e, array, LDPC etc; off-line re-configurable for several regular and irregular LDPC codes; statistical buffering; run-time change of decoding schedules. All these concepts are termed as On-the-fly computation as the core of these concepts are based on minimizing memory and re-computations by employing just in-time scheduling. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the system model of turbo equalization that is valid for any communication system that is characterized by ISI channel or ISI channels with data dependent noise. Section III presents the system level design involving statistical buffer management based on queuing theory. Section IV presents how the proposed system level architecture is applicable for magnetic recording storage.

II. SYSTEM MODEL FOR TURBO EQUALIZATION

uk

xk

yk′

Lk (xk )
xk
Ek (xk )

Fig 1. System Model for Turbo Equalization
In the turbo equalization system as shown in Fig. 1, LDPC
codeword of length N , obtained by systematic encoding by appending N − K parity bits to the sequence of user information bits of length K . The k -th user information bit is denoted by uk and the k -th LDPC codeword bit is denoted
by xk . These code symbols are interleaved and the resulting
sequence is modulated and transmitted over an ISI channel that introduced additive white Gaussian noise and data-dependent

978-1-4244-2941-7/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

1148

Asilomar 2008

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:10:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

noise. At the output of a front-end timing and matched
filtering, the k′ -th received sample that corresponds to k -th

code word bit is denoted by yk′ (called y-sample). Note that k′ gives the index of the interleaver output sequence that

corresponds to the k -th input to the interleaver.

The performance of the soft-input soft-output (SISO) detection

algorithm can be greatly improved if good a priori information

is available. The SISO detector computes a posteriori
probability log-likelihood ratio LLR _ APP(xk′ ) or P(xk′ )

of each modulation symbol at each time epoch given the

{ } received sequence

yk′

N k′

−1 =0

and

the a priori probabilities from

the decoder (also called the extrinsic information from the

{ ( )} decoder), E xk′

N −1 k′=0

.

The

SISO

decoder

also

computes

a

posteriori probability log-likelihood ratios on a code-word

{ ( )} basis,

P xk

N −1 k =0

given the a priori probabilities from the

detector (also called the extrinsic information from the

detector or the channel likelihood ratios when viewed from the

{ ( )} LDPC

decoder

standpoint

of

view), L xk

N −1 k =0

.

The

relationship between these messages are given by

APP(xk′ ) = Pr(xk′ | ) yk′

(1)

P( xk ′

)

=

LLR

_

APPk

( xk ′

)

=

log

APP ( xk ′ APP ( xk ′

= =

0) 1)

(2)

P(xk′ ) = L(xk′ )+ E(xk′ )

(3)

The interleaver and de-interleaver structures are included into

the transmission and receiver systems to spread the burst errors

in channel over several modulation symbols and also to

disperse the direct feedback effect of iterative updates and can

be a global interleaver or local interleaver. Note that the most

of the SISO detectors (PDNP-MAP, PD-NPML) that are

commonly used operates at the symbol level and SISO LDPC

decoder operates at the codeword level. Turbo equalization

involves several passes of detection + decoding, each such

pass is referred as global iteration. The decoding in a global

iteration may involve several LDPC decoding iterations which

are referred as local iterations. The reliability messages used in

belief propagation (BP)-based offset min-sum algorithm in

LDPC decoding can be computed in two phases: 1. check-

node processing and 2. variable-node processing. The two

operations are repeated iteratively until the decoding criterion
is satisfied. For the ith iteration, Qn(im) is the message from variable node n to check node m , Rm(in) is the message from
check node m to variable node n , Μ(n) is the set of the

neighboring check nodes for variable node n , and Ν(m) is

the set of the neighboring variable nodes for check node m .

The message passing for based on OMS is described in the

following three steps as given in [2-4]:

Step 1. Check-node processing: for each m and n ∈ Ν(m) ,

( ) Rm(in)

=

δ

(i )
mn

max

κ

(i )
mn

−

β ,0

,

(4)

κ

(i)
mn

=

R(i) mn

=

n′

∈

min
Ν (m)

\

n

Qn(i′m−1)

,

(5)

where β is a positive constant and depends on the code

parameters . In general, for the irregular codes, we will also

apply the correction on variable node messages. The sign of
check-node message Rm(in) is defined as

∏ ( ) , δ

(i)
mn

=

§ ¨¨© n′∈Ν(m)\n sgn

Q(i−1) n′m

· ¸¸¹

Step 2. Variable-node processing: for each n and m ∈ Ν(n) ,

¦ Qn(mi) = L(n0) +

Rm(i′)n ,

(6)

m′∈Μ ( m ) \ m

where the channel log-likelihood ratio of bit n is L(n0) = L(xn )

and this is communicated from the detector for each global

iteration.

Step 3. Decision: for final decoding

¦ Pn = P(xn ) = L(n0) +

Rm(in) .

(7)

m∈M (n)

The extrinsic message is computed as follows,

¦ En = E(xn ) =

Rm(in) .

(8)

m∈M (n)

A hard xˆn = 1

decision is
if Pn (xn )

taken
< 0.

by If

setting xH T =

xˆn 0

= 0 if where

Pn (xn H is

)≥
the

0 , and
LDPC

parity check matrix, the decoding process is finished with xˆn

as the decoder output; otherwise, repeat steps (1-3) till

maximum number of iterations. The above equations describe

non-layered decoding. For the layered decoding [3-7], (7-8) is

updated after doing the check node updates in a block row or

layer of LDPC matrix and (6) for the next layer is computed

based on latest check node messages of the previous layer. At

the start of detection during the first global iteration, the

extrinsic message E from LDPC decoder is set to 0. The

E message from LDPC decoder is communicated to the

detector at the end of all the local iterations i.e. once per each

global iteration. The Final State (FS) in the LDPC decoder

contains the compressed information of check node messages

in the form of least minimum, second least minimum, index for

least minimum, cumulative sign of R messages and the sign

messages of R messages for each check node [3-4].

III. SYSTEM LEVEL ARCHITECTURE FOR TURBO EQUALIZATION
Fig 2. gives the proposed system level architecture for turbo equalization. The innovation here is the novel and efficient arrangement of queue structures such that we would get the performance of a hardware system that is configured to run h(which is set to 20 in the example configuration) maximum global iterations while the system complexity is proportional to the hardware system that can 2 maximum global iterations. The y-sample data for each arriving packet is buffered in Y queue. Since the data comes at deterministic time intervals in a real-time application, the arrival process is D and the interarrival time is T. The overall processing/service time for each packet is variable and is a general distribution G. Assume that 4 y-samples per clock in each packet are arriving and the

1149
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:10:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Lk yk′
Ek

xk xk′

Fig 2. Proposed System Level Architecture for Turbo Equalization

packets are coming continuously. In real-time applications, we need to be able to process 4-samples per clock though some latency is permitted. The primary data-path contains one SISO LDPC decoder and one SISO detectors. The LDPC decoder is designed such that it can handle the total amount of average iterations in two global iterations for each packet. The SISO detector is in fact two detector modules that operate on the same packet but different halves of the packet thus ensuring one packet can be processed in 50% of the inter-arrival time T. Each detector processes 4 samples per clock cycle. Thus both the detector and the LDPC decoder can sustain maximum of two global iterations per each packet if no statistical buffering is employed. In the last successful global iteration the LDPC decoder does the variable number of local iterations. The leftover LDPC decoder processing time is shared to increase the number of local iterations in following global iterations for the next packet. For each packet, at least one global iteration is performed and the distribution of required global iterations follows a general distribution that heavily depends on the signal to noise ratio.
The secondary data path contains the low complexity detector based on hard decision Viterbi algorithm, a hard decision interleaver followed by hard decision LDPC decoder that is sized for doing only one iteration. The secondary path thus does one reduced complexity global iteration and operates on the incoming packets immediately. The secondary path’s immediate preprocessing of incoming packets has two uses: 1) it can generate preliminary decisions immediately (with a latency equal to T) to drive the front end timing loops thus making the front end processing immune from the variable time processing in the primary data path 2) it can generate quality metrics to the queue scheduling processor. The low complexity detector is in the arrangement D/D/1/1 according to Kendall Notation [8]: the arrival times are deterministic, the processing time/service times are deterministic, one processor and one memory associated with the processor. For a good introduction on queuing theory and notations, please refer to [8]. The low complexity decoder is in the arrangement D/D/1/1+1 – this is similar to the low complexity detector except that there is one additional input buffer to enable the simultaneous filling of the input buffer while the hard decision iteration is being performed on a previous packet. Note that LDPC decoder needs the complete codeword before it can start the processing. The queue scheduling processor takes the various quality

metrics from the secondary reduced complexity data path as well as the intermediate processing from the primary data path. One example of a quality metric is the number of unsatisfied checks from LDPC decoder. All the queues in the primary data path are preemptive such that the packets are processed according to the quality metric obtained through preprocessing.
The LPQ memory in LDPC SISO decoder which is configured as layered decoder is used to buffer the L messages from the detector before the start of local iterations. The same buffer space is overwritten with the Q messages that are internal to the LDPC decoder during the decoding process. At the end of all the local iterations of a global iteration, the same buffer space is overwritten with the P messages that are internal to the LDPC decoding process. The LPQ memory is double buffered such that while the decoder uses one of the memories as Q memory for one packet, another packet’s L messages are being filled in another memory from the detector. Note that the bandwidth of this memory is dictated by the parallelization requirements of LDPC decoder and these memories are very wide and thus occupy more area and consume more power due to the large number of internal memory accesses in LDPC decoder. This is the reason why we can not afford statistical buffering on LPQ memory.
The LE and Y queues can hold several packets and this memory bandwidth is proportional to the number of samples processed by the SISO detector thus making it a good choice for statistical buffering. Assuming 4-samples per clock input rate, for the Y queue, the read bandwidth is 8 samples/clock and write bandwidth is 4 samples per clock. For the LE queue, the read bandwidth is 8 samples/per clock and the write bandwidth is 8 samples per clock from the de-interleaver on the detector side; the read bandwidth is 8 samples/per clock and the write bandwidth is 8 samples per clock from decoder. The LE memory holds the L values from the detector after the detection is over and this is preserved till the LDPC decoding is finished and the LPQ memory is updated with the P values. Now the E values are computed by subtracting L values from P values These E values overwrite the space occupied by L values if further global iteration(s) is necessary. The E values are supplied to the detector and preserved to compute L values while the detector computes its own update of P messages. The L computation is given by P-E. LE queues will hold either L or E message for a packet. If decoding is successful, the space for the packet in both LE and Y queue is released. Due to the

1150
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:10:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

condition that we always retain the slot till the decoding is sucessful, the only processor thar can can retire a packet from LE and Y queue is LDPC decoder. Thus the LE queue is modeled as G/G/1/1+m whose arrival time and serices times are general distibutuions, 1 indicates that there is one processor that can complete the service. Here m indicates the maximum number of packets paused and waiting to be resumed . The Y queue is modeled as G/G/1/1+n similar to LE queue and also goverened by general distributions(note that using G means general distribution and each queue has a unique general distriibution). Here n indicates the maximum number packets either in pause state waiting to be resumed or waiting to be processed for the first time.
The memory bandwidth of hard decision memory (HD memory) is proportional to the LDPC decoder’s parallelization and is large. So the HD memory is not a suitable candidate for statistical buffering. Instead we allocate double buffering for HD memory and do the statistical buffering on a lean (low bandwidth) HD queue. Note the write bandwidth is 4 bits/clock and the read bandwidth is also 4 bits/sec . While HD queue is filled by one of HD memories and another HD memory is being used internally for the decoder processing. The statistical buffering of HD memory is to enable keeping the packets that are already decoded as the packets may complete process outof-order The HD queue is thus characterized as G/D/1/1+h as the arrival process is a general distribution while the serving time (i.e. the supply of the decoded packets to the sink) is constant and deterministic in order to meet real-time requirements. Here h determines the maximum latency for processing a packet that is measured as the difference between arrival time of y-samples of a packet to the serving time of hard decisions to the sink by the HD queue. The FS queue is modeled as G/G/1/1+a as both the service time and arrival time are general distribution. 1 indicates one LDPC processor and 1+a indicates the number of additional packet that can have their Final state preserved. Thus the variable a indicates how many number of packets can be paused while being processed and can retain the final state from the previous processing. All the queues are preemptive such that the packets are processed according to the quality metric obtained through preprocessing.

rho is between 0 and 1. one minus rho represents 1-rho and is indicator of the system’s average availability.
Fig 3. Probability of packet rejection for different queue config. Prej is the probability that a customer finds upon arrival all of the waiting places occupied and thus is rejected (loss probability). Fig 3. gives the probability of packet rejection for different queue configurations. For c=Inf, n=Inf, the probability of packet rejection(Prej, probability of failure due to capacity limit) is zero and so the overall packet failure for this configuration(Pe) is thus dictated by the intrinsic system processing/decoding failures. Fig 4 gives the overall probability of packet failure(Pe) that includes both the intrinsic decoding failure and the probability of packet rejection (Prej) . Note the configuration c=1,n=12 meets the system requirement as it will

IV. AN EXAMPLE CONFIGUARION FOR TURBO EQUALIZATION

Having discussed the proposed system configuarion, we will explain one example configuarion for turbo equalization.We will take the requirements from a magnetic recoding channel, though the proposed configuration is applicable for all the turbo equalization systems. The main requirement is that rejection probability should be kept low. In the example configuration of y-queues D/G/c/1+n, c=1 as we have one LDPC processor that can complete the processing of packet, the number of additional y-buffers, k=n. Assume that all the other queues are optimized and have the values m=4,a=3, h=20. Here rho = lambda*E(S) where lambda is the average arrival rate and E(S) is the average service time. The performance measures are calculated under the assumption that lambda is 1/T (i.e. 1 packet is coming every T time units) and constant and the average service time E(S) (is less than or equal to T time units) varying based on the SNR. Thus the value of

Fig 4. Probability of overall packet failure (Pe) vs. queue type.
not introduce any failures due to the capacity limit and majority of the failures are due to the intrinsic system processing/decoding failures. The standard statistics in Fig 5, Fig 6 and Fig 7 include the following steady-state quantities: Prej: the probability that a packet finds upon arrival all of the waiting places occupied or insufficient processing power is available and thus is rejected or not given enough global iterations/required processing (loss probability), Pwait: the probability that an entering packet has to wait in the queue (delay probability), Pbusy: the probability that the server is busy at an arbitrary point in time, E(Wq), Std(Wq): the

1151
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:10:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

expected value and standard deviation of the waiting time of a packet in queue (excluding service time), E(Lq), Std(Lq): the expected number and standard deviation of packets in queue at an arbitrary point in time (excluding those in service), Utilization: the long-run fraction of time a given server is busy.

Fig 8. Probability of packet rejection vs. the processors

Fig 5. Standard system statistics for the configuration c=1,n=12 for varying rho
Fig 6. Effective utilization for different queue configurations for varying rho.
Fig 7. Probability of packet rejection (Prej, probability of failure due to capacity limit) by increasing the buffers

For the results shown in Fig 8, rho for each processor is now scaled down by c. By comparing Fig 7 and Fig 8, we can see that we can either increase the processing power by 3 times (which is more expensive) or increase the number of y-buffers in the system n to 12 to achieve identical results. Note that both the configurations in Fig 6 and 7 are still statistically buffered systems with m=4,a=3, h=20.If statistical buffering is disabled for other buffers in the system, then we need much higher number of processors up to 10 to gain the performance of a system that has no statistical buffering and needs to do the global iterations from 1 to 20. As the average number of global iteration varies from 1 to 2 based on the SNR and the required number of global iterations vary from 1 to 20, the system with 10 processors with no statistical buffering would be idle for most of the time the proposed system with statistical buffering needs to have only one processor and can do the global iterations from 1 to 20. In conclusion, we show that our novel statistical buffering scheme brings significant performance gains to the system while maintaining very low system complexity.
V. REFERENCES
[1] R. Koetter, A.C. Singer, and M. Tuechler, "Turbo Equalization," IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, invited paper, Special Issue on Graphical Models,Volume: 21 Issue: 1 , Pages:67 – 80, Jan. 2004. [2] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier and X. Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. on Communications, vol. 53, pp. 1288-1299, Aug. 2005. [3] K. Gunnam, W. Wang, E. Kim, G. Choi, and M. Yeary, “Decoding of quasicyclic LDPC codes using an on-the-fly computation,” Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, pp. 1192-1199, October 29 – November 1 2006. [4] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, M. Yeary, and M. Atiquzzaman, “VLSI Architectures for Layered Decoding for Irregular LDPC Codes of WiMax,” pp. 4542-4547, IEEE International Conference on Communications. Glasgow, June 2007. [5] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, "A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no.3, pp. 684- 698, March 2006. [6] H. Sankar and K.R. Narayanan, "Memory-efficient sum-product decoding of LDPC codes," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol.52, no.8pp. 1225- 1230, Aug. 2004. [7] M. Karkooti, P. Radosavljevic, and J. R. Cavallaro, “Configurable high throughput irregular LDPC decoder architecture: tradeoff analysis and implementation,” in the 17th IEEE International Conference on Applicationspecific Systems Architectures and Processors (ASAP), pp. 360-367, September 2006. [8] D. Gross ,J. Shortle,J.Thompson, C. Harris, Fundamentals of Queueing Theory, 3rd Edition, John Wiley, 1998.

1152
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:10:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

