Proceedings of APCC2008 copyright (c) 2008 IEICE 08 SB 0083
Improved Augmented Belief Propagation Decoding Based on Oscillation
Mu Zhou† Xiqi Gao†† National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory
Southeast University, Nanjing, P. R. China, 210096 Email: †zhoumu1301@gmail.com ††xqgao@seu.edu.cn

Abstract—The augmented belief propagation (ABP) decoding using previous node selection methods for low-density parity check (LDPC) codes with a large number of short cycles is investigated on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel in this paper. Based on the observations obtained from the investigation, a new node selection method is proposed. It is shown that oscillation plays an important role in the ABP decoding and needs to be controlled. It is also shown that the most possible variable nodes needed to stop oscillation in cycles should be selected and kept stable in correct values in the ABP decoding. A parallel decoding scheme is also proposed, which proves that a better method exists. Simulation results confirm that the new method outperforms the previous ones for short LDPC codes on the AWGN channel.
I. INTRODUCTION
The belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm is used for the decoding of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. The decoding performs iterative message passing on a Tanner graph [10]. If the graph has no cycles, the BP decoding can achieve the maximum a posterior probability (MAP) decoding. If there are cycles in the graph, the BP decoding becomes an approximate MAP decoding. A LDPC code with good distance properties has a large number of cycles, most of which are typically short, in the graph. For a long length LDPC code, the probability that short cycles are constructed is small. However, when the code length is short, short cycles make a noticeable degradation in the performance of the BP decoding compared with the maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding.
The reliability-based order statistic decoding (OSD) algorithm proposed in [8], combined with BP, is an efficient way to decrease the gap between the BP decoding and the ML decoding for short LDPC codes. The OSD is serially concatenated after the initial BP decoding to reduce the average number of BP iterations and achieve better performance. Due to the high order computation of Gaussian elimination and sorting, it is hard to implement the BP-OSD decoder for practical application.
The augmented belief propagation (ABP) decoding algorithm was proposed in [1] to replace the OSD decoding after initial BP iterations. Without Gaussian elimination and sorting, the ABP decoding greatly reduces the computation and achieves almost the same performance as that of the OSD. When the standard BP decoder fails, the serial concatenated ABP decoder does the rest decoding in a decoding tree formed by selected variable nodes. After a variable node is selected, the channel message on the selected variable node is forced to a saturated

value. The complexity of the ABP decoding algorithm is determined by the number of layers in the decoding tree. The performance of the ABP decoding algorithm is influenced by both the number of layers in the decoding tree and the node selection method. The key point of the ABP decoding algorithm is the node selection process.
A node selection method based on set of unsatisfied checks (SUC) was proposed in [4]. Several variable nodes are selected at a time based on the SUC degrees. Another method (NABP) appeared in [1] where the decoder input reliabilities are combined with the SUC degrees in the node selection process to get better performance. There is only one node selected in the latter method usually. It is shown that it is better to select only one node than several ones at a time [1].
In this paper, a new node selection method for the ABP decoding algorithm is proposed. We investigate the ABP decoding and find that the oscillation which mainly reduces the performance of the ABP decoding should be controlled. We use the flipping times to show the reliabilities of variable nodes. In the node selection process, the most oscillating variable node is selected. Simulation results show that the new method improves the performance of the ABP decoding. A parallel decoding scheme (PABP) is also proposed which proves that a better method exists.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give necessary definitions used in the entire paper. In Section III, we investigate the ABP decoding and propose a new method based on those observations. Section IV gives the decoding performance results and Section V concludes the paper.
II. DEFINITIONS
A LDPC code is defined by a sparse m × n parity check matrix H = [hij]m×n. The codeword x = [x0, x1, . . . , xn−1] is transmitted by BPSK modulation and through the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with zero-mean and the variance σ2. The received sequence is denoted by y = [y0, y1, . . . , yn−1]. The parity check vector is written as
b = [b0, b1, . . . , bm−1] = xHT .
In the kth iteration of the BP decoding, the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of a variable node vi is denoted by Qki . The edge message (extrinsic LLR) sent from a variable node vi to a check node cj is denoted by qikj. The hard decision

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:19:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of APCC2008 copyright (c) 2008 IEICE 08 SB 0083

is made by xˆki =

1, if Qki > 0 0, else

, 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1.

If bk = xˆkHT = 0 or k ≥ kmax, the BP decoding stops and xˆk is output as the codeword. Otherwise the decoding
continues.
Variable nodes are denoted by V . In the ABP decoding,
the selected variable nodes are denoted by Vsel, while the unselected ones are denoted by Vunsel. The number of the initial BP iterations is denoted by kB. After a variable node is selected, the number of ABP iterations needed is
denoted by kA. The flipping (oscillation) of a check node cj occurs when

bkj = bjk−1, k ≥ 1.

The flipping times of a variable node vi is defined by

Fv0i = 0,

Fvki =

FFvvkkii−−11

, if +

sign(Qki ) = sig 1, otherwise

n(Qik−1

)

,k ≥ 1

The maximum flipping times Fvki is defined by

Fvk,max

=

max
vi ∈V

Fvki

The flipping times of an extrinsic LLR qij is defined by

Fq0ij = 0,

Fqkij =

Fqki−j 1, ifsign(qikj ) = sign(qikj−1) Fqki−j 1 + 1, otherwise

,k ≥ 1

III. ABP DECODING ALGORITHM FOR LDPC CODES

A. Augmented BP decoding

The ABP decoding [1] process consists of two steps. In the first step, a variable node is selected. In the second step, the decoding continues in two branches where the channel information of the selected variable node is set to a saturated value either +S or −S. S is a value large enough to keep the selected node stable. The whole decoding routes form a tree which has J layers. Totally J different variable nodes are selected when the decoding goes along every route from the base node to a leaf node.

B. Types of ABP decoding errors
First, the error types of the BP decoding are reviewed [2]:
Error Type I: The decoder converges to an invalid vector. Error Type II: The decoder oscillates and no valid codeword reaches. Error Type III: The decoder converges to a valid codeword that is not the correct one. Several observations about Type I and Type II errors are obtained in the ABP decoding. Observation 1: Assume type I error occurs in an initial standard BP decoding. Oscillation appears in a successful ABP decoding (see Fig. 1(a)). The ABP decoding fails either in Type I or Type II error. If the ABP decoding ends in Type II error, it changes error types. If the ABP decoding ends in Type I error, there is no or only slight oscillation during the decoding (see Fig. 1(b)).

We give explanations to this observation. Oscillation plays an important role in the process of changing Type I errors into a successful decoding. Type I errors occur due to a large number of weak edge messages in the code graph which can not influence the variable nodes stable in error. The decoding stays in a wrong stable state. If the ABP decoding corrects some variable nodes in error, a part of the edge messages becomes large enough to influence variable nodes. The oscillation of these variable nodes starts and the decoding may trend to converge. If oscillation does not start, the decoding possibly fails in Type I error.
Observation 2: Assume Type II error occurs in an initial standard BP decoding. The ABP decoding possibly fails in the same errors. If oscillation is successfully controlled during the decoding, the ABP decoding converges (Fig. 1(c)).
We give explanations to this observation. Type II errors occur due to the fiercely flipping edge messages sent by a large number of weak variable nodes which influence each other greatly. If the ABP decoding keeps some weak variable nodes stable in correct values, the number of flipping edge messages decreases and the decoding may trend to converge. If oscillation is not successfully controlled, the decoding fails in Type II error.
Observation 3: Assume oscillation occurs in the ABP decoding. We find that most oscillating variable nodes are with most oscillating check nodes.
It is easy to understand that an unstable variable node sends unstable messages to the check nodes that it connects, and then these check nodes become unstable and influence other variable nodes whose channel messages are not reliable in these checks. Fig. 1(d) shows an example of Observation 3.
Fig. 1 in [2] shows that the Type II error becomes the dominant one among errors which can be detected in the medium and high SNR regions. The node selection methods based on SUC can not work well enough when Type II errors occur because stable checks are needed to indicate the variable nodes in error and the selected variable nodes may not be the most possible ones to stop the oscillation due to short cycles.

C. Proposed node selection methods

In our node selection process, the most oscillating variable node is selected and enforced a saturated value to stop the oscillation of the cycles which are connected by the selected variable node.
Node Selection Algorithm 1: Step 1: Perform k iterations of the BP or ABP decoding
and count the flipping times Fvki for all

vi ∈ Vunsel.

Step 2: Select the node vsel as

vsel

:=

arg

max
vi ∈Vunsel

Fvki .

The more oscillating variable nodes are selected, the more reliable information check nodes can provide. Algorithm 1 with J = 10 still achieves better performance than NABP with J = 11 (see Fig. 3). Under the same performance, Algorithm 1 has half the complexity of NABP.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:19:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of APCC2008 copyright (c) 2008 IEICE 08 SB 0083

TABLE I COMPARISON BETWEEN THE COMPLEXITIES OF NABP AND
ALGORITHM 1 UNDER THE SAME PERFORMANCE.

Method Ned Algorithm 1

Node Selection O(N ) N

Decoding Tree 2 × 2J − 1
2 × 2J−1 − 1

The comparison between the complexities of the two algorithms is shown in Table I. The statistic calculation for algorithm 1 can be easily added to the BP decoding and the calculation needed after the BP decoding is less than other algorithms.
According to observation 1, algorithm 1 may not perform well enough when there is no oscillation in the BP decoding. We use the parallel decoding scheme in which the two component decoders use different algorithms separately to obtain better performance benefited from the combination of different error correction abilities of different algorithms (see Fig. 2). It is shown that the performance of the scheme is almost the same to the best BP+OSD (with very high complexity) [12] (see Fig. 3) which proves that a better node selection method exists. However, the performance gain of the unfound method is very low compared with algorithm 1.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Fig. 3 shows performances of the standard BP decoding, algorithm 1, NABP, PABP, the Jiang BP-OSD [9] and the best BP+OSD for the (3, 6)-regular (504, 252) MacKay code on the AWGN channel. We set kB = 100, kA = 20. Algorithm 1 and NABP are performed without reinitialization for edge messages in the code graph after a variable node is selected. The curve of algorithm 1 with J = 11 is about 0.25dB better than NABP with J = 11 at frame error rate 1 × 10−5 and closer to the best BP+OSD than other algorithms. Algorithm 1 with J = 10 still achieves better performance than NABP with J = 11. The two curves of PABP with J = 11 and the best BP+OSD coincide.
V. CONCLUSION
We have investigated the ABP decoder with previous node selection methods. It is observed that oscillation appears in the ABP decoding trending to converge after an initial BP decoding with Type I errors. The previous node selection methods can work well under Type I errors but not well enough when Type II errors (oscillation) occur. In the proposed method, we use the flipping times to show the reliabilities of variable nodes. The most oscillating variable nodes which are considered to be the possible ones needed to stop oscillation in cycles are selected and kept stable in correct values in the ABP decoding. Simulation results show that new methods outperform the previous ones on the AWGN channel. It is shown that the parallel decoding scheme, which is considered to work well under Type I and Type II errors, achieves almost the same performance as the best BP+OSD. It proves that there is still a better node selection method unfound.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China under Grants 60572072 and
60496311, the China High-Tech 863 Plan under Grant
2006AA01Z264, and the Doctor Subject Foundation of
China under Grant 20060286016.
The authors acknowledge Professor Marc P. C. Fossorier
of the University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, for his
kind help in resource collection.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Varnica, M. P. C. Fossorier, and A. Kavcˇic´, “Augmented belief propagation decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1308-1317, Jul. 2007.
[2] G. Lechner, “Convergence of sum-product algorithm for finite length low-density parity-check codes,” Winter School on Coding and Information Theory, Feb. 2003.
[3] S. Gounai, T. Ohtsuki, and T. Kaneko, “Modified belief propagation decoding algorithm for low-density parity check code based on oscillation,” Pro. IEEE VTC 63rd Vehicular Technology Conf., vol. 3, pp. 1467-1471, 2006.
[4] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “Improved decoding algorithms for lowdensity parity-check codes,” presented at the 3rd Int. Conf. Turbo Codes Relat. Top., Brest, France, Aug. 2003.
[5] S. Gounai and T. Ohtsuki, “Decoding algorithms based on oscillation for low-density parity check codes,” IEICE Trans. Fund., vol. E88-A, no. 8, pp. 2216-2226, Aug. 2005.
[6] X. Zheng, F. C. M. Lau, C. K. Tse, and S. C. Wong, “Study of nonlinear dynamics of LDPC decoders,” Proc. ECCTD, Cork, Ireland, Aug. 2005.
[7] X. Zheng, F. C. M. Lau, C. K. Tse, and S. C. Wong, “Techniques for Improving Block Error Rate of LDPC Decoders,” IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, (ISCAS’06), Kos Island, Greece, May 2006.
[8] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of lowdensity parity check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 908-917, May 2001.
[9] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, E. Xu, and L. Zhang, “Reliability-based iterative decoding of LDPC codes using likelihood accumulation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 677-679, Aug. 2007.
[10] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533-547, Sep. 1981.
[11] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” Proc. ISCTA 2001, Ambleside, England, Jul. 2001.
[12] M. Isaka, M. P. C. Fossorier, and H. Imai, “On the suboptimality of iterative decoding of finite length codes,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jul. 2002.
[13] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[14] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, Mar. 1999.
[15] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:19:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Proceedings of APCC2008 copyright (c) 2008 IEICE 08 SB 0083
Fig. 1. Figure (a), (b) and (c) show the different cases of the number of error bits and flipping extrinsic LLRs versus iteration number in the ABP decoding for the regular (504, 252) MacKay code on the AWGN channel. Figure (d) shows the oscillation of the connected most oscillating check node c20 and variable node v314.
Fig. 2. Figure (a) shows PABP in which the two component decoders use different algorithms separately. Figure (b) shows the error correction abilities of the component decoders, A and B. Circle F denotes the whole codeword space. Circle A and Circle B denote the set of codewords that cannot be corrected by A and B, separately. The common area C of Circle A and Circle B denote the set of codewords that cannot be corrected by PABP.
Fig. 3. Frame error rate (FER) versus Eb/N0 for the regular (504, 252) MacKay code on the AWGN channel. Performances of the standard BP, algorithm 1, NABP, PABP, Jiang BP-OSD and the best BP+OSD are shown. The curves of the undetected FER of algorithm 1 and the FER of the same code rate turbo code are also shown.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:19:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

