2898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 9, OCTOBER 2008

Memory Efficient Decoder Architectures for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Yongmei Dai, Student Member, IEEE, Ning Chen, Student Member, IEEE, and Zhiyuan Yan, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we first propose parallel turbo-sumproduct (PTSP) and turbo-shuffled-sum-product (TSSP) decoding algorithms for partly parallel decoder architectures of quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Our proposed algorithms not only achieve faster convergence and better error performance than the sum-product (SP) decoding algorithm, but also need less memory in implementation. Then we propose a partly parallel decoder architecture based on our PTSP algorithm and implement it using FPGA. Our PTSP decoder architecture achieves significantly higher throughput and requires less memory than previously proposed decoder architectures with the same FPGA and LDPC code. Finally, to further reduce the memory requirement, we also propose a partly parallel decoder architecture based on our TSSP algorithm.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, quasicyclic (QC) codes, shuffled decoding, sum-product (SP) decoding, turbo decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes [1], [2] and their efficient implementations have been receiving a lot of attention due to their near-capacity performance when decoded iteratively. Various (fully parallel, fully serial, and partly parallel) decoder architectures (see, e.g., [3]–[19]) have been proposed. Implementation results show that random code structure is susceptible to implementation problems, whereas regular code structure tends to ease hardware implementation. Quasicyclic (QC) LDPC codes are thus of great interest because they not only have relatively good error performance [20], [21], but can also be conveniently encoded with shift registers (see, e.g., [22]) and efficiently decoded with partly parallel decoder architectures [7]–[13], [15]–[18].
The sum-product (SP) algorithm (see, e.g., [23]) is a widely used decoding algorithm for LDPC codes. An LDPC code can be represented by its Tanner graph [24], wherein the codeword bits and the parity check equations are represented as variable and check nodes respectively. Each iteration of the SP algorithm consists of two sequential subiterations: check node updates (CNUs) and variable node updates (VNUs). There is in-
Manuscript received January 2, 2007; revised December 17, 2007 and February 21, 2008. First published April 18, 2008; current version published October 29, 2008. This work was supported in part by Thales Communications Inc., and in part by a grant from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Community and Economic Development, through the Pennsylvania Infrastructure Technology Alliance (PITA). Part of the material in this paper was presented at GLSVLSI, Philadelphia, PA, May 2006. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor M. Stan.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh University, PA 18015 USA (e-mail: yod304@lehigh.edu; nic6@lehigh. edu; yan@lehigh.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2008.922024

herent parallelism among the CNUs and VNUs respectively in each iteration of the SP algorithm, but fully parallel decoder architectures [3], [4] require a large number of processing elements and are prone to congested routing network. Hence, partly parallel decoder architectures are often more feasible [3]–[19]. In particular, memory-bank-based partly parallel decoder architectures for QC LDPC codes based on direct implementation of the SP algorithm (see, for example, [9], [10]) have been intensively studied due to their efficiency. However, the performance of these decoder architectures is limited by several issues. One issue is high power consumption due to frequent memory access. To reduce memory access without sacrificing error performance, power-efficient architectures (see, e.g., [11]) have been proposed. Another issue is low throughput and low hardware utilization efficiency (HUE) resulting from the sequential operations of the check node function units (CNFUs) and variable node function units (VNFUs)—the two kinds of hardware units that implement the CNUs and VNUs, respectively. To overcome this problem, data interleaving, i.e., letting the CNFUs and VNFUs operate alternately on two different blocks of data at the same time [10], [17], is often used, but this approach doubles the memory requirement. A more efficient solution to this issue on the algorithmic level is overlapped SP (OSP) decoding algorithms [12], [13], which partially overlap the CNUs and VNUs. For QC LDPC codes, the decoder architecture based on the optimal OSP algorithm in [13], [25] improves throughput and HUE by up to 100% while achieving the same error performance and using the same amount of memory.
One disadvantage of the SP and OSP algorithms is their slow convergence. To improve the convergence rate, many variants and extensions of the SP algorithm (see, e.g., [15], [17], [26]–[28]), which essentially split and rearrange the CNUs and VNUs to expedite the message passing, have been proposed. Of particular importance are the turbo [15] and shuffled [27] decoding algorithms since many other algorithms (see, e.g., [17], [28]) can be viewed as variants or extensions of these two algorithms. Breaking one iteration of the SP algorithm into multiple serial subiterations, the turbo and shuffled decoding algorithms require up to 50% fewer iterations to converge and achieve better error performance than the SP algorithm while leading to significant memory savings in implementation [15]. One potential drawback of the turbo (or shuffled) decoding algorithm is that the multiple serial subiterations may offset its advantage in convergence rate and lead to limited decoding throughput. Thus, turbo-sum-product (TSP) and shuffled-sum-product (SSP) algorithms, both of which require only two serial subiterations, have been proposed in [28]. In comparison to the turbo and shuffled decoding algo-

1549-8328/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: MEMORY EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURES FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2899

rithms respectively, the TSP and SSP algorithms may achieve a better tradeoff between throughput and convergence rate improvement while saving the same amount of memory. Partly parallel decoder architectures implementing the tubo decoding algorithm have also been proposed [15], [16], [18], [19], [26]. For memory-bank-based decoder architectures, Shimizu et al. proposed a high-efficiency message-passing decoder [17] that implements a variant of the turbo decoding algorithm. However, their decoder architecture achieves faster convergence at the expense of more VNUs and doubling the memory requirement compared to the OSP decoder [13], [25].
In this paper, we focus on the decoding of QC LDPC codes assuming memory-bank-based partly parallel decoder architectures. Our goal is to design new partly parallel decoder architectures that achieve high throughput while requiring less memory. We achieve this goal by a joint algorithmic and architectural approach. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• First, we propose two decoding algorithms for partly parallel decoder architectures: parallel TSP (PTSP) algorithm and turbo-shuffled-sum-product (TSSP) algorithm. In comparison to the SP and OSP algorithms, our PTSP algorithm achieves faster convergence and better error performance, and requires less memory in implementation. Our TSSP algorithm essentially combines the advantages of the TSP and SSP algorithms, leading to more significant memory saving and faster convergence than the PTSP algorithm.
• Second, we propose a partly parallel decoder architecture based on our PTSP algorithm [29], and implement it using FPGA. Quantization schemes, pipeline schemes, and the implementation of parity check are all investigated to improve the performance of our PTSP decoder architecture. Our carefully designed pipeline schemes not only minimize the number of clock cycles per iteration while reducing critical path delay (and hence the clock period), but also maximize the access throughput of the memory. Our PTSP decoder architecture achieves higher throughput and requires less memory than the decoder architectures in [17], [25] which use the same FPGA and LDPC code. Furthermore, since more than 85% of the power consumption in memory-bank-based partly parallel decoder architecture is due to memory access [11], [30], our decoder architecture consumes less power in accessing memory than those in [17], [25] due to its reduced memory requirement.
• Finally, to further reduce the memory requirement and improve the convergence rate, we propose a partly parallel decoder architecture based on our TSSP algorithm.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. To make this paper self-contained, Section II briefly reviews QC LDPC codes and decoding algorithms for LDPC codes including the SP, turbo, shuffled, TSP, and SSP decoding algorithms. In Section III, we propose our PTSP and TSSP algorithms for partly parallel decoder architectures, and present simulation results to compare all the decoding algorithms. In Section IV, we propose a partly parallel decoder architecture based on our PTSP algorithm, and discuss various implementation issues. FPGA implementation results of our PTSP decoder are also

compared to those of previously proposed decoder architectures in Section IV. Section V proposes a partly parallel decoder architecture based on our TSSP algorithm. Finally, some concluding remarks are given in Section VI.

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. QC LDPC Codes

A subclass of

regular QC LDPC codes can be repre-

sented by a parity check matrix of block rows and block

columns

...

...

...

...

(1)

where denotes an

identity matrix with all the rows

cyclically shifted to the right by positions (

,

). We refer to the code defined by in (1)

as an

QC LDPC code, for which the total number of

parity check equations

, block length

, and

rate

.

B. SP Decoding Algorithm

Given an LDPC code represented by its parity check matrix

, we briefly review the SP algorithm. The SP

algorithm (see, e.g., [23]) is a multi-iteration procedure that iter-

atively exchanges the extrinsic information between check and

variable nodes until either the parity check equations are all sat-

isfied or a pre-set maximum iteration number is reached. Each

iteration of the SP algorithm consists of two sequential subit-

erations, CNUs and VNUs, and which subiteration starts first

depends on initialization. For

, let denote

the message from variable node to check node during the th iteration. Similarly, for
, let denote the message from check node

to variable node

during

the th iteration. Suppose a codeword

is modulated using BPSK modulation and transmitted over an

additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, and let

denote the received signals. The SP decoding

algorithm can be formulated as:

• Initialization: For

, calculate the intrinsic

log likelihood ratio (LLR) information obtained from

channel

, and

initialize

,

.

• Iteration

:

1) CNUs: For

and

,

where 2) VNUs: For

(2) .

and

,

(3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 9, OCTOBER 2008

Fig. 1. Message passing schedules during one iteration of various decoding algorithms. (a) SP; (b) Turbo; (c) TSP; (d) Group shuffled; (e) SSP.

For

, first compute the a posteriori where denotes the set of check nodes corresponding to

LLR

, and then set the hard

decision either to 0 if

or to 1 otherwise.

• Parity check: If either

or

the maximum iteration number is reached, stop the de-

coding. Otherwise, start the next iteration

.

The CNUs start first here since

. Alternatively, the

VNUs start first if we initialize

. For an

QC

LDPC code, each iteration of the SP algorithm requires roughly

additions per variable node for the VNUs as well as addi-

tions and evaluations of per check node for the CNUs

(see, e.g., [31]). Partly parallel decoder architectures based on

the SP algorithm require

memory units, each to store

one extrinsic LLR [12].

. As shown in Fig. 1(a), each iteration of the

SP algorithm consists of two serial subiterations: first passes the

messages from to all ’s

concurrently, and

then passes the messages from all ’s

to

concurrently. In the turbo decoding algorithm, each iteration be-

comes serial subiterations as shown in Fig. 1(b): first passes

the messages from to and from to , then passes the

messages from to and from to , and so on. Each

subiteration can be viewed as the decoding of one supercode.

Since within one iteration, one supercode can use the updated

and hence more reliable information from the preceding super-

codes, the turbo decoding algorithm requires up to 50% fewer

iterations and achieves better error performance than the SP al-

gorithm. Since the decoding of one supercode needs informa-

C. Variants of the SP Decoding Algorithm

To improve the convergence rate, many variants and exten-

sions of the SP algorithm (see, e.g., [15], [17], [26]–[28]) have

been proposed. In the following, we briefly review the turbo,

shuffled, TSP, and SSP decoding algorithms. Please refer to

[15], [27], [28] for more details.

1) Turbo Decoding Algorithm: For an

QC LDPC

code , the turbo decoding algorithm [15] splits row-wise

into submatrices:

. Each submatrix

tion from only the other supercodes and thus new information

from any supercode can overwrite old information from the suc-

ceeding supercode, this eliminates the need to store the extrinsic

information of one supercode and leads to a memory saving of

units for extrinsic LLRs. This memory saving, however,

comes at the expense of increasing the number of additions per

variable node for the VNUs roughly from to for each it-

eration.

2) TSP Decoding Algorithm: For an

QC LDPC

code, the TSP algorithm [28] splits row-wise into two sub-

is one block row in (1) and defines one

supercode , and

. Each satisfies

the constraint that there is at most one 1 in each column to save

memory. Let and denote the sets of check and variable

nodes respectively in the Tanner graph of . The breakup of

partitions into disjoint subsets:

,

matrices

, where is the top block row and

consists of the other block rows in (1). Only satisfies

the constraint that there is exactly one 1 in each column to save

memory. and define two supercodes and respec-

tively, and

. The breakup of partitions into

two disjoint sets and . In order to save memory and to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: MEMORY EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURES FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2901

exploit the turbo effects, each iteration of the TSP algorithm improve the memory-bank-based partly parallel decoder archi-

has only two serial subiterations, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c): first tectures.

passes the messages from to , from to , and from to ; then passes the messages from to . Same as the A. PTSP Decoding of QC LDPC Codes

SP algorithm, initialization determines which subiteration of the

TSP decoding in Fig. 1(c) starts first. Since the new messages

from are immediately passed to , there is no need to store

them, leading to the memory saving of

units for extrinsic

LLRs. The TSP algorithm leads to faster convergence and better

error performance than the SP algorithm, while having the same

computational complexity. Since the TSP algorithm exploits

the turbo effects of only two supercodes, it converges slightly

slower than the turbo decoding algorithm, but may achieve a

higher throughput due to its fewer subiterations.

3) Shuffled Decoding Algorithm: Essentially a column ver-

sion of the turbo decoding algorithm, the shuffled decoding al-

gorithm [27] splits column-wise into submatrices:

. Each submatrix

is one

block column in (1). Correspondingly, is partitioned into

disjoint subsets:

, where denotes the

set of variable nodes corresponding to

.

We may view each iteration of the SP algorithm as: first passes

the messages from to all ’s

concurrently,

and then passes the messages from all ’s

Similar to the non-overlapped SP decoding, the sequential

processing of subiterations 1 and 2 in the TSP algorithm leads

to low throughput and low HUE assuming memory-bank-based

partly parallel decoder architectures. To improve the throughput

and HUE, we propose the PTSP decoding algorithm, which es-

sentially parallelizes subiterations 1 and 2 of the TSP algorithm.

We illustrate the difference between the TSP and PTSP al-

gorithms during the th iteration in Figs. 2(a) and (b). To sim-

plify notation, in Fig. 2 we denote the set of messages from a

set of check nodes

to a set of variable nodes

during the th iteration of the TSP decoding as

, and that from to

as

. We denote those for

the PTSP decoding as and respectively. For the TSP

algorithm, we assume the memory banks are initialized with

channel intrinsic LLRs and hence subiteration 2 in Fig. 1(c)

starts first. At the th iteration of the TSP decoding, the de-

coding of uses the extrinsic information of the

th

iteration from and itself, i.e.,

is used when calcu-

to concurrently as shown in Fig. 1(a). In the shuffled decoding, each iteration becomes serial subiterations as shown in Fig. 1(d): first passes the messages from to and from to , then passes the messages from to and from to , and so on. The shuffled decoding algorithm also achieves better error performance and faster convergence than the SP algorithm. At the expense of increasing both the number of additions and the number of evaluations per iteration roughly from

lating

, and the decoding of uses the information of

the th iteration from , i.e.,

is used when calculating

. In the PTSP decoding, since the decoding of and

is performed simultaneously, the most recent information can be

exchanged during the decoding process. At the beginning of the

th iteration, the decoding of uses the extrinsic information

of the

th iteration from and itself, i.e.,

is used

to per check node for the CNUs, the shuffled decoding algo-

rithm leads to a memory saving of units for extrinsic LLRs

[27].

4) SSP Decoding Algorithm: The SSP algorithm [28] is

essentially a column version of the TSP algorithm. is split

column-wise into two submatrices

, where

when calculating , and the decoding of also uses the in-

formation of the

th iteration from , i.e.,

is used

when calculating

. As the decoding proceeds, when part

of the information of the th iteration from is available, the

decoding of can use it, i.e.,

is used when calculating

is the leftmost block column and consists of the other

. The decoding of can then use the more reliable infor-

block columns in (1). has exactly one 1 in each row to save memory. Correspondingly, is split into two disjoint sets and , which correspond to and respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 1(e), each iteration of our SSP algorithm also has only two serial subiterations: first passes the messages from to , from to , and from to ; then passes the messages from to . Compared with the SP algorithm, the SSP algorithm has the same computational complexity, and achieves better error performance, faster convergence, and a memory saving of units for extrinsic LLRs.

mation from , i.e.,

can be used when calculating .

Even more reliable information from is then produced and

passed to . Thus, in the PTSP algorithm, increasingly more

reliable information is exchanged between the two supercodes

as the decoding proceeds. However, each time only part of the

information exchanged is from the th iteration. Our simulation

results show that our PTSP algorithm converges slightly slower

than the TSP algorithm.

Finally, each iteration of the PTSP algorithm has the same

computational complexity as that of the SP and TSP algorithms.

III. DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR PARTLY PARALLEL DECODER ARCHITECTURES

The PTSP algorithm almost doubles the throughput of the TSP algorithm while leading to the same memory saving of units for extrinsic LLRs. Note that the number of memory units saved

In memory-bank-based partly parallel decoder architectures of QC LDPC codes [10], [12], [13], due to memory access limitation, the CNUs for the rows in one block row and the VNUs for the columns in one block column are both carried out se-

increases with , , and the code length, but the percentage of

memory saving is always for any

QC LDPC code.

Hence, the percentage of memory saving is more pronounced

for LDPC codes with smaller .

quentially. In this case, having multiple serial subiterations in each iteration as in the turbo or shuffled algorithm leads to low B. TSSP Decoding of QC LDPC Codes

decoding throughput. Hence, based on the TSP and SSP algo- To further improve the memory saving and convergence rate,

rithms, we propose the PTSP and TSSP algorithms to further we propose our TSSP algorithm by combining the TSP and SSP

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 9, OCTOBER 2008
TABLE I COMPARISON OF AVERAGE NUMBERS OF ITERATIONS FOR A (211, 3, 5) SFT CODE (MAXIMUM ITERATION NUMBER IS 50)

during the decoding process. As illustrated in Fig. 4, instead of

always using the information of the

th iteration,

and

, the most recently updated information of the th it-

eration,

and

, are used when they become available

during the decoding process. Consequently, our TSSP algorithm

leads to faster convergence than the TSP, SSP, and PTSP algo-

rithms. Our TSSP algorithm also has the same computational

complexity as the SP algorithm.

C. Simulation Results

Fig. 2. Message passing during the nth iteration of (a) TSP (b) PTSP decoding.

H Fig. 3. Split the parity check matrix for an (m; 3; 5) QC LDPC code both
row-wise and column-wise.

algorithms. Given an

QC LDPC code, we split its

both row-wise and column-wise into four submatrices as shown

in Fig. 3:

is the top block row and

consists of the other block rows;

is the

leftmost block column and

comprises the other

block columns. The breakup of partitions the set of check

nodes into two disjoint sets and corresponding to

and respectively, and partitions the set of variable nodes

into two disjoint sets and corresponding to and

respectively. has only one 1 in each column and has

only one 1 in each row.

As illustrated in Fig. 4, each iteration of our TSSP algorithm

consists of three serial subiterations: first passes the messages

from to ; then passes the messages from to , to

, and to ; finally passes the messages from to . It is

clear that subiterations 1 and 3 of the TSSP decoding combined

equal subiteration 1 of the TSP decoding, and subiteration 2 of

the TSSP decoding is the same as that of the TSP decoding.

Since we apply the TSP decoding algorithm between and

, we can save the memory corresponding to ( units).

Since we apply the SSP decoding algorithm between and

, we can further save the memory corresponding to

(

units). Hence, only the extrinsic information in

needs to be stored. Furthermore, similar to the PTSP de-

coding, more and more reliable information can be exchanged

We consider a (211, 3, 5) SFT code [20] with block length

and rate

. Fig. 5 compares the bit error rate

(BER) performance of the SP, OSP, turbo, shuffled, TSP, SSP,

PTSP, and TSSP algorithms after 5, 15, and 50 iterations respec-

tively. Setting the maximum number of iterations to 50, Table I

compares the average numbers of iterations all the algorithms

take to converge at different SNR values. Note that the OSP al-

gorithm has the same BER performance and requires the same

number of iterations to converge as the SP algorithm. The CNUs

are carried out according to (2) and we use floating point rep-

resentation of LLRs here. For the turbo decoding algorithm, we

assume 3 supercodes. For the shuffled decoding algorithm, the

five block columns are split into three groups with two, two, and

one block column respectively. Note that the shuffled decoding

cannot save memory with the assumed splitting. The turbo, TSP,

and PTSP algorithms can all save , 33% for this code, of the

total memory for extrinsic LLRs required by the SP algorithm.

The SSP and TSSP algorithms can save and

respectively, 20% and 46.7% respectively for this code, of the

total memory for extrinsic LLRs required by the SP algorithm.

Fig. 5 and Table I show that our PTSP and TSSP algorithms

achieve better BER performance and faster convergence than

the SP and OSP algorithms. At SNR of 2.5 dB, our PTSP and

TSSP algorithms require 25.4% and 35.8% fewer iterations

respectively than the SP algorithm. The faster convergence

of our PTSP and TSSP algorithms potentially leads to higher

throughput. Furthermore, although our PTSP algorithm con-

verges slightly slower than the TSP algorithm as shown in

Table I, it almost doubles the decoding throughput of the

TSP algorithm. Notice that our TSSP algorithm combines the

advantages of both the TSP and SSP algorithms, and achieves

faster convergence than the TSP, SSP, and PTSP algorithms.

We also performed simulations for other SFT codes and sim-

ilar observations can be made.

IV. PTSP DECODER ARCHITECTURE
Based on our PTSP decoding algorithm, we propose our PTSP decoder architecture and implement it using FPGA. In this section, we first present the details of our PTSP decoder architecture, and then compare its FPGA implementation results with previously proposed decoder architectures.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: MEMORY EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURES FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2903

Fig. 4. Message passing during the nth iteration of TSSP decoding.

used to generate the memory addresses. The units in cor-

respond to the 1’s in (

,

.

Each 1 in has a row number and a column number, and

hence each memory unit in has a row (memory) address

and a column address, between which the difference is .

The VCNFU, shown in Fig. 7, comprises one CNFU and

VNFUs, each of which consists of the components inside the

dashed rectangular boxes in Fig. 7. We refer to the CNFUs

outside the VCNFU as CNFU-

and the

CNFU inside the VCNFU as CNFU-0. CNFU-

performs the CNUs for the th block row, one row at each

step. We refer to the VNFUs inside the VCNFU as VNFU-

. VNFU- performs the VNUs for the th

block column, one column at each step. Each VNFU has two

parts, P1-VNFU and P2-VNFU, which consist of the compo-

nents inside the dotted rectangular boxes to the left and right

Fig. 5. BER performance comparisons for a (211, 3, 5) SFT code (dash line: 5 iterations; solid line: 15 iterations; dash-dot line: 50 iterations).

of CNFU-0 respectively in Fig. 7. The VCNFU has three components: P1-VNFUs performing the VNUs for , CNFU-0 performing the CNUs for , and P2-VNFUs performing the

VNUs for and making hard decisions. Hard decisions can be

A. Hardware Requirement and Decoding Schedule

obtained by simply taking sign bits, usually the most significant bits (MSB), of a posteriori LLRs. The VCNFU and the

For an

QC LDPC code, we propose a partly parallel CNFUs outside the VCNFU simultaneously implement subiter-

decoder architecture based on our PTSP algorithm. Our PTSP ations 1 and 2 shown in Fig. 1(c), respectively.

decoder uses one variable-check node function unit (VCNFU) Let

denote the row addresses of the

and

check node function units (CNFUs). Also, ,

memory banks for extrinsic LLRs on which the CNFUs op-

, and memory banks—labeled as

, erate in their respective block rows. Let

(

,

), and

denote the column addresses of the memory banks for hard de-

respectively—are used to store channel intrinsic LLRs, extrinsic cisions, intrinsic and extrinsic LLRs on which the VNFUs op-

LLRs, and hard decisions respectively. As mentioned before, erate in their respective block columns. Since the CNUs for

there is no need to store the information from . Hence, the are performed by CNFU-0 immediately after the VNUs for

memory banks for extrinsic LLRs correspond to . are performed by the VNFUs in the PTSP decoding, satisfies

Fig. 6 shows the proposed decoder architecture for an ( ,3,5)

. Thus, we can choose

QC LDPC code.

to maximize the information exchange be-

The three types of memory banks differ in the number of ports tween the two supercodes. However, our simulation results show

and wordlength. The

memory banks for extrinsic LLRs that different values for have only marginal effects on error

are dual-port while the memory banks for intrinsic LLRs are performance and convergence rate. Hence, we choose

single-port. The number of ports for the hard decision memory

for simplicity of implementation. The parity

banks depends on the implementation of the parity check, and check matrix shown in Fig. 8 illustrates the starting addresses

extra hard decision memory banks may be needed for fast imple- for an ( , 3, 5) QC LDPC code, where each box, also labeled

mentation of the parity check. Each unit of the memory banks

(

,

), corresponds to one

for hard decisions has exactly one bit, while the wordlength

. Note that the diagonal line inside the box labeled as

for the memory banks for intrinsic and extrinsic LLRs depends denotes the position of 1’s in . We need to store only the ex-

on quantization schemes, which are discussed in Section IV-B. trinsic LLRs that correspond to for

. The bold

Each memory bank consists of units, labeled with addresses dots denote the LLRs CNFU-1 and CNFU-2 are updating, and

(not shown in Fig. 6)

. Modulo- counters are the squares denote the LLRs the VCNFU is updating. The bold

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2904

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 9, OCTOBER 2008

m Fig. 6. Our PTSP decoder architecture for an ( ,3,5) QC LDPC code.

dots and the squares are updated simultaneously at each step.

in Fig. 7. CNFU-0 takes

As the decoding proceeds, for example, when is increased to

as input, and performs the

the square with column address , the decoding of starts

CNUs. Then the VNUs for are performed. The

to use the most recent information from . Similarly, when

updated extrinsic LLRs are written back to the

is increased to the bold dot with row address , the decoding

same memory units

(

,

of starts to use the most recent information from . As

), and hard decisions are written

and continuously increase, more most recent information can

back to the memory units with the column ad-

be exchanged between the two supercodes. Finally, since the

dress in the th memory bank for hard decisions,

VCNFU performs the VNUs first and the CNFUs outside the

denoted as

in Fig. 7.

VCNFU perform the CNUs, and they are updating different ex-

(ii) CNFU-

simultaneously reads

trinsic LLRs in the memory banks simultaneously, the memory

one LLR from each of the memory units with

banks for extrinsic LLRs need to be properly initialized. That is,

row address in the memory banks for extrinsic

in each bank we initialize the memory units on which CNFU-1

LLRs in the th block row, performs the CNUs,

and CNFU-2 operate first with channel intrinsic LLRs, and the

and writes the updated LLRs back to the same

memory units on which the VCNFU operates first with 0’s.

memory units.

PTSP Decoder:

(iii)

,

1) Initialization: Set

and

.

. For the memory bank (

, 3) Stop if either all parity checks are satisfied or the maximum

), initialize the memory units with row

iteration number is reached. Otherwise, go to 2 and start the

addresses from 0 to

, the shaded part

next iteration

.

shown in Fig. 6, with channel intrinsic LLRs, and initialize Note that 2(i) and 2(ii) are referred to as VCNFU and CNFU

the other memory units, the unshaded part shown in Fig. 6, processing steps, respectively, and they are carried out in par-

with 0’s.

allel. Hence, the memory banks for extrinsic LLRs are dual-

2) Iteration

: Repeat (i), (ii), and (iii) for times: port: one port is dedicated to the CNFUs while the other to the

(i) VCNFU: First, VNFU-

simul- VCNFU. At each step, the CNFUs outside the VCNFU read

taneously reads one LLR from each of the

and write the memory banks through one port, and at the same

memory units with column address in the

time the VCNFU reads and writes the memory banks through

memory banks for extrinsic LLRs in the th block the other port. For the extrinsic LLRs in the shaded part shown

column, denoted as

in in Fig. 6, the CNUs are performed first, and for those in the un-

Fig. 7. VNFU-

also reads one shaded part, the VNUs are performed first. Each iteration of the

intrinsic LLR from the memory unit with column PTSP decoding consists of CNFU processing steps and

address in the th memory bank for intrinsic VCNFU processing steps. The CNUs and VNUs are performed

LLRs, denoted as

in Fig. 7. VNFU-

exactly once for each extrinsic LLR in each iteration.

then performs the VNUs for , and Finally, note that the same decoder architecture can also be

produces the LLRs corresponding to the row ad- used to implement the TSP algorithm. Since subiterations 1

dress in the top block row, denoted as

and 2 shown in Fig. 1(c) are to be carried out sequentially, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: MEMORY EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURES FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2905

m Fig. 7. VCNFU for an ( ,3,5) QC LDPC code.

algorithm, the min-sum (MS) algorithm (see, e.g., [31]), is often used for finite precision implementations. In the MS algorithm, the VNUs are the same as in the SP algorithm, and the CNUs in (2) become
(4)

The MS algorithm can be directly applied to all the variants of

the SP algorithm. For our PTSP algorithm, when the approxi-

mation in (4) is used, we refer to it as the PTSP-MS algorithm.

We assume both extrinsic and channel intrinsic LLRs are rep-

resented by bits, and as in [17], [25], we consider

. For

the SP and PTSP algorithms, we consider two types of quan-
m Fig. 8. Starting addresses of PTSP decoding for an ( ,3,5) QC LDPC code. tization schemes: uniform and non-uniform [32]. For the MS

and PTSP-MS algorithms, we consider only uniform quantiza-

memory banks for extrinsic LLRs are all initialized to channel intrinsic LLRs and only single-port memory banks are required for extrinsic LLRs.

tion schemes. Let

denote a -bit uniform quantiza-

tion scheme with one sign bit, fractional bits, and

integer bits. Let

denote a -bit non-uniform quan-

tization scheme with one sign bit and one flag bit. The num-

bers of fractional and integer bits depend on the flag bit: when B. Quantization Schemes, Pipeline Schemes, and Parity Check the LLR magnitude is at least 1 and hence the flag bit is set to

To demonstrate the advantages of our PTSP decoder archi- 1, fractional bits and

integer bits are used; other-

tecture, we implement it using FPGA. Quantization schemes, wise the flag bit is set to 0,

fractional bits and no integer

pipeline schemes, and parity check are all carefully designed to bits are used. The BER performance and average iteration num-

improve the performance of our PTSP decoder architecture. In bers of different quantization schemes are compared with their

order to make a fair comparison with the decoder architectures floating point counterparts for different algorithms in Figs. 9 and

in [17], [25], we present the details of quantization schemes, 10 respectively. Note that the maximum iteration number is set

pipeline schemes, and parity check assuming the same (256, 3, to 20 in all simulations. For each quantization type (uniform

6) QC LDPC code used in [17], [25] although they can be easily or non-uniform), we present the simulation results for only the

adapted to any QC LDPC code.

quantization scheme that has the best BER performance or the

1) Quantization Schemes: The quantization scheme is crit- smallest iteration number for each algorithm.

ical since it affects not only area and power consumption of de- As can be seen from Figs. 9 and 10, for both floating point

coder architectures, but also error performance. The func- and fixed point simulations, our PTSP and PTSP-MS algo-

tion in the SP algorithm is usually implemented by look-up ta- rithms always achieve better BER performance and require

bles (LUTs). Since is a non-linear function sensitive to fewer iterations than the SP and MS algorithms, respectively.

quantization noise, a low-complexity approximation of the SP For both SP and PTSP algorithms, non-uniform quantization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2906

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 9, OCTOBER 2008

Fig. 9. BER performance for the (256,3,6) QC LDPC code.

Fig. 11. One CNFU implementing the MS algorithm for the (256, 3, 6) QC LDPC code.

Fig. 12. Pipeline scheme for CNFU-1 and CNFU-2.

2) Pipeline Schemes: As seen above, the PTSP-MS algo-

rithm leads to faster convergence and hence requires fewer iter-

ations than the MS algorithm. Since each iteration of the PTSP

decoding consists of CNFU or VCNFU processing steps, the

decoding throughput is determined by three factors: the average

iteration number, the number of clock cycles per processing

step, and the clock period. Thus, it is necessary to pipeline the

CNFU and VCNFU carefully so as to minimize the latter two

Fig. 10. Average numbers of iterations for the (256, 3, 6) QC LDPC code.

factors, thereby maximizing the throughput. Since each CNFU (or VCNFU) processing step involves one memory read and one

memory write, the number of clock cycles per processing step

is also constrained by memory access. Since only one port is

schemes lead to slightly better BER performance and faster available for the CNFU (or VCNFU), each CNFU (or VCNFU)

convergence than uniform quantization schemes. Same as the processing step requires at least two clock cycles. To achieve

SP algorithm, our PTSP algorithm is also sensitive to quantiza- high memory throughput and to reduce the number of clock cy-

tion noise and its BER performance starts to show error floors cles per processing step, pipelined memory access is necessary.

at BER around

for both the uniform and non-uniform In the following, we propose our pipeline schemes that achieve

quantization schemes.

exactly two clock cycles per processing step while reducing the

In comparison to the SP and PTSP algorithms, the MS and critical path delay.

PTSP-MS algorithms are less sensitive to quantization noise and In the PTSP decoder shown in Fig. 6, the VCNFU and the

no error floors are observed for both algorithms at BER below CNFUs outside the VCNFU work concurrently and access

. For both the MS and PTSP-MS algorithms, the BER per- the memory banks for extrinsic LLRs concurrently through

formance using fixed point is better than that using floating point different ports. Since the VCNFU is more complex than the

at high SNR. Note that similar observations have been made in CNFUs, we need different pipeline schemes for this two kinds

[31], [33]. Also, for both algorithms, the average iteration num- of hardware components.

bers obtained using fixed point are almost the same as those ob- CNFU-1, CNFU-2, and CNFU-0 (inside the VCNFU) imple-

tained using floating point. At SNR of 4.5 dB, the MS algo- ment the CNUs in (4). Direct implementation of the CNUs in

rithm requires an average of 3 iterations to converge while our (4) introduces substantial delay since it needs to find, among

PTSP-MS algorithm requires an average of 2.3 iterations, which numbers, first the minimum and then the second minimum. Our

is 23% faster than the MS algorithm. Based on our simulation re- implementation of the CNUs, shown in Fig. 11, uses 12 MIN

sults, our PTSP decoder architecture implements the PTSP-MS units (essentially comparators) and 12 XOR gates for this (256,

algorithm, and also uses the (8:3)u quantization scheme as in 3, 6) code to find the minimum among numbers directly for

[17], [25].

each node. The 12 comparators and XOR gates are organized as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: MEMORY EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURES FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2907

Fig. 13. (a) Critical path in the VCNFU. (b) Pipeline scheme for the VCNFU.

a tree of

levels, which is the min- Fig. 13(b), where

, - for

, and

imum number of levels required for numbers. The tree struc-

denote the memory read, computations required

ture in Fig. 11 facilitates the pipeline schemes for the VCNFU in - for

, and the memory write respectively

and the CNFUs, and reduces critical path delay. Furthermore, at the th step of the VCNFU processing. At every odd clock

the 3-level comparator tree is split into two parts, MS1 and MS2, cycle,

,-

,-

, and -

are

consisting of one-level and two-level comparator trees respec- carried out in parallel. At every even clock cycle,

,

tively as shown in Fig. 11. The pipeline scheme for CNFU-1 -

,-

, and -

are carried out in par-

and CNFU-2 is shown in Fig. 12, where

,

, allel. As seen from Fig. 13(b), the memory is occupied by either

and

denote the memory read, the opera- a read or a write operation for each clock cycle after pipelining.

tions required in MS1, the operations required in MS2, and the Thus, the access throughput of the memory is maximized, and

memory write respectively at the th CNFU processing step. each step of the VCNFU processing also takes 2 clock cycles,

At every odd clock cycle,

and

are car- ignoring the time to fill and to drain the pipeline.

ried out in parallel. At every even clock cycle,

and 3) Parity Check: Our PTSP decoding algorithm stops when

are carried out in parallel. After pipelining, each step either the parity check equations are all satisfied or the max-

of the CNFU processing takes 2 clock cycles, ignoring the time imum iteration number is reached. As seen in Fig. 6, in our PTSP

to fill and to drain the pipeline. Since for each clock cycle the decoder, hard decisions are made by the VCNFU and written to

memory is occupied by either a read or a write operation to the the hard decision memory banks. Since the VCNFU makes hard

same port, the access throughput of the memory is maximized. decisions according to the addressing scheme shown in Fig. 8,

The VCNFU essentially combines the function of CNFU-0 the parity check for the rows in the top block row is done

and VNFUs. Each VNFU is split into P1-VNFU and immediately after the hard decisions have been made at each

P2-VNFU, each of which consists of two adders. In each VCNFU processing step. Hence, only the parity check for the

VCNFU processing step, each incoming extrinsic LLR to the bottom two block rows needs to access hard decision memory

VCNFU goes through the signal path shown in Fig. 13(a). banks. The pipeline scheme for the parity check for the bottom

We store the extrinsic and intrinsic LLRs in memory banks two block rows is shown in Fig. 14, where

and

using sign-magnitude (SM) and two’s-complement format,

denote the memory read and parity check opera-

respectively. Since two’s-complement representation of LLRs tion for the th processing step in the th block row. At every

is more convenient for the VNUs and SM representation of odd clock cycle,

and

are carried

LLRs is more convenient for the CNUs and, two sign-mag- out in parallel. At every even clock cycle,

and

nitude-to-two’s-complement (SM - 2’s) conversion blocks

are carried out in parallel. Since for each clock cycle

and two two’s-complement-to-sign-magnitude (2’s - SM) the memory is occupied by a read operation, the memory access

conversion blocks are used in the VCNFU. Since the VCNFU throughput is maximized and the parity check for one row can

involves more computations, we propose a different pipeline be finished in one clock cycle after pipelining. Since the parity

scheme for the VCNFU to reduce the critical path delay while check for one row is twice as fast as one step of the CNFU

minimizing the number of clock cycles per step. To reduce the processing after pipelining, the parity check for the two rows

critical path delay, the computations required in the VCNFU CNFU-1 and CNFU-2 are updating are carried out one after an-

is split into 6 pipeline stages, as shown in Fig. 13(a), where other by accessing the same hard decision memory banks twice.

-

denotes the th stage for the computa- Hence, the parity check for the bottom two block rows shares

tions, and the dashed lines indicate the places where we insert the same addresses with CNFU-1 and CNFU-2, and does not

pipeline registers. The computations required in all pipeline require extra address generation units. For our PTSP decoder

stages are roughly balanced in terms of delays. Each step architecture, two sets of single-port memory banks are used

of the VCNFU processing takes 8 clock cycles as shown in to store hard decisions. At the th iteration, the VCNFU writes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2908

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 9, OCTOBER 2008

TABLE II IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF THE (256, 3, 6) QC LDPC CODE ON XILINX VIRTEXII XC2V6000-5FF1152 FPGA

requires 36 dual-port memory banks1 for extrinsic LLRs. In con-

trast, our PTSP-MS decoder only requires

dual-port memory banks for extrinsic LLRs, saving 6 and 24

memory banks for extrinsic LLRs in comparison to the OSP-MS

Fig. 14. Pipeline scheme for the parity check.

and HEMS decoder architectures respectively. In addition to the extrinsic memory banks, our PTSP-MS decoder also needs

single-port memory banks for intrinsic LLRs, and

the hard decisions of the th iteration into one set of memory

banks, and at the same time the parity check for the bottom two

block rows accesses the other set of memory banks to check

whether the hard decisions of the

th iteration satisfy the

parity check equations. The VCNFU and the parity check for

the bottom two block rows alternate between the two sets of

memory banks. Since the parity check for the bottom two block

rows are checking the hard decisions of the previous iteration,

the decoding latency caused by the parity check is one iteration.

single-port memory banks for hard decisions. Totally, our PTSP-MS decoder architecture requires 30 memory banks as shown in Table II. Taking all memory banks into account, our PTSP-MS decoder architecture requires roughly 24% fewer bits of memory than the OSP-MS decoder architecture. Also, according to [11], [30], more than 85% of the power consumption in memory-bank-based partly parallel decoder architectures is due to memory access. The MS, OSP-MS, and our PTSP-MS decoder architectures access memory banks equally frequently, while the HEMS decoder accesses memory banks for extrinsic

LLRs times as often as the other three decoders for the VNUs

C. Implementation Results

since it performs VNUs in parallel with one step of the CNUs. Thus, among all four decoder architectures, the HEMS archi-

In order to make a fair comparison to the decoder architectures in [17], [25], we have implemented our PTSP decoder architecture using the same FPGA in [17], [25]: a Xilinx Vertex II xc2v6000-5ff1152 FPGA, which has 33792 slices and 144 block RAMs (each block RAM is 18 K bits). The synthesis and implementation are carried out using Xilinx ISE Version 8.1. In Table II, we compare the numbers of occupied slices, flip flops, 4-input LUTs, and block RAMs as well as critical path delays, average iteration numbers, and estimated decoding throughput with those from [17], [25]. Note that all four decoder architec-

tecture has the highest memory power consumption, and our PTSP-MS architecture has the lowest memory power consumption due to its reduced memory requirement.
From Table II, it can be seen that our PTSP-MS decoder architecture achieves higher throughput than all the other three decoder architectures. Assuming clock cycles are required to initialize the memory banks and one additional iteration is required for the parity check as in [25], the decoding throughput of our PTSP-MS decoder can be estimated in the same way as in [25] by

tures in Table II are implemented using the same FPGA, and are

all based on the MS algorithm with the same (8:3)u quantiza-

(5)

tion scheme. The implementation details of the two decoder ar-

chitectures in [17] are reproduced from [17, Table I]. These two

architectures, referred to as MS and HEMS architectures respec-

tively, are based on the MS algorithm and the high-efficiency

min-sum (HEMS) algorithm [17], respectively. The implemen-

tation details of the OSP decoder architecture implementing the

MS algorithm, referred to as the OSP-MS decoder, are repro-

duced from [25, Table I]. The last row shows the FPGA im-

plementation results for our PTSP-MS decoder architecture de-

scribed in Sections IV-A and IV-B.

Comparing all four decoder architectures, it is clear that our

PTSP-MS decoder architecture requires less memory than all

the other three decoder architectures. Each memory bank for in-

trinsic and extrinsic LLRs is

bits and each

memory bank for hard decisions is

. The OSP-MS

decoder requires

dual-port memory banks for extrinsic

LLRs. The MS decoder architecture in [17] uses data inter-

leaving to double the throughput, hence requires 36 single-port

memory banks for extrinsic LLRs. The HEMS decoder [17] also

where is the clock frequency, is the average iteration

number, and is the number of clock cycles required for one

step of processing after pipelining. is approximated by the

inverse of the critical path delay as in [17], [25]. For both the

OSP-MS and our PTSP-MS decoders, we have

. For the

MS and HEMS decoders,

and it is assumed that the

parity check can be finished in clock cycles. Hence, the equa-

tion in [17, (8)] used to estimate throughput is slightly different

from (5). Due to careful architectural design, our PTSP-MS de-

coder architecture achieves higher throughput than the HEMS

decoder architecture, but requires more combinational logic.

Due to faster convergence and careful architectural design, our

PTSP-MS decoder achieves higher throughput than the MS

and OSP-MS decoder architectures. Since our pipeline scheme

1In [34], the total numbers of block RAMs for the MS and HEMS decoder architectures are changed from 102 to 48, among which the number of block RAMs for extrinsic LLRs is still 36. Both numbers are still significantly larger than ours.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: MEMORY EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURES FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2909

m Fig. 16. CVCNFU for an ( , 3, 5) QC LDPC code.

node function unit (CVCNFU) and ,

, and

memory banks—labeled as

,

(

,

), and

respectively—to store channel intrinsic LLRs, extrinsic LLRs,

and hard decisions respectively. Fig. 15 shows the proposed

decoder architecture for an ( , 3, 5) QC LDPC code. As men-

tioned before, there is no need to store the LLRs corresponding

to the top block row and the leftmost block column in Fig. 3,

thus the

memory banks for extrinsic LLRs

correspond to in Fig. 3.

The CVCNFU, shown in Fig. 16, comprises one VCNFU

shown in Fig. 7 and

CNFUs, each of which consists of the

components inside the dashed boxes in Fig. 16. The CVCNFU

has three components: a network of adders and

imple-

menting subiteration 1, a VCNFU implementing subiteration 2,

and a network of adders (subtractors) and implementing

subiteration 3. The two networks of adders and combined

together constitute

CNFUs.

Let and denote the row and column addresses of the

m Fig. 15. Our TSSP decoder architecture for an ( , 3, 5) QC LDPC code.

CNFUs and VNFUs respectively. Since subiteration 2 of the TSSP decoding is essentially the VCNFU processing, still

satisfies

. Since

the VNUs for the extrinsic LLRs in the memory banks corre-

for the VCNFU requires extra registers to store intermediate sponding to is performed immediately after the CNUs for

data, our decoder requires more flip-flops than the OSP-MS the extrinsic LLRs in the memory banks corresponding to ,

decoder architecture, but less than the MS and HEMS decoder satisfies

.

architectures. Note that the throughput of all four decoder Setting to 0, the parity check matrix shown in Fig. 17 illus-

architectures can be improved by increasing the parallelizing trates the starting addresses for an ( , 3, 5) QC LDPC code,

factor (see, e.g., [34], [35]).

and we need to store only the extrinsic LLRs that corresponds

to

. The bold dots de-

V. TSSP DECODER FOR QC LDPC CODES

note the LLRs CNFU-1 and CNFU-2 are working on, and the squares denote the LLRs the VCNFU are working on. In

For applications with stringent memory requirements, we and , dots and squares coincide. Since the VCNFU per-

propose a partly parallel decoder architecture that requires even forms the VNUs first, and the CNFU-1 and CNFU-2 perform

less memory based on our TSSP algorithm. For an

QC the CNUs, and they are updating different extrinsic LLRs in

LDPC code, our TSSP decoder uses one check-variable-check the memory banks at each step, the memory banks for extrinsic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2910

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 9, OCTOBER 2008

LLRs need to be initialized in a similar way as for the PTSP de-

coder architecture.

TSSP Decoder:

1) Initialization: Initialize

,

and

. For the memory bank (

,

, initialize the memory units with row

addresses from to

, the shaded part

shown in Fig. 15, with intrinsic LLRs, and initialize the

other memory units, the unshaded part shown in Fig. 15,

with 0’s.

2) Iteration

: Repeat (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv) for

times:

(i) CNFU-

simultaneously reads

one LLR from each of the

memory units

with row address in the

memory banks

for extrinsic LLRs in the th block row, denoted

as

(

,

)

in Fig. 16, performs the CNUs for the extrinsic

LLRs in the memory banks corresponding to

and produces the

LLRs corresponding to

address in the first block column, denoted as

in Fig. 16.

(ii) VCNFU: VCNFU simultaneously reads one LLR

from each of the

memory units with column

address

in the

memory

banks for extrinsic LLRs in the th block column,

denoted as

(

,

) in Fig. 16. VCNFU also reads one LLR

from each of the memory units with column

address in the memory banks for intrinsic

LLRs, denoted as

in Fig. 16.

Together with the output from step 2(i),

, VCNFU then performs the

VNUs for , the CNUs for , and the VNUs for

. The updated LLRs corresponding to

(

,

) are written back

to the same memory units, and the updated LLRs

corresponding to

are

fed to step 2(iii). Hard decisions are written back

to the memory units with column address in

the th memory bank for hard decisions, denoted

as

in Fig. 16.

(iii)

takes as input

and performs the CNUs for the ex-

trinsic LLRs in the memory banks corresponding

to . The updated LLRs are written back to the

same memory units

(

,

).

(iv)

,

.

3) Stop if either all parity checks are satisfied or the maximum

iteration number is reached. Otherwise, go to 2 and start the

next iteration

.

Note that 2(i), 2(ii), and 2(iii) are to be performed sequentially,

and each iteration of the TSSP decoding hence takes more

time than the PTSP decoding. Similar to our PTSP decoder

described in Section IV, careful considerations for quantization

schemes, pipeline schemes, and parity check are required to

achieve high throughput for our TSSP decoder architecture.

m Fig. 17. Starting addresses of TSSP decoding for an ( , 3, 5) QC LDPC code.
Interested readers should have no difficulty filling in the details.
The advantage of our TSSP decoder is that it leads to faster convergence and more significant memory saving than the PTSP decoder, as we have shown in Section III.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose PTSP and TSSP decoding algorithms for memory-bank-based partly parallel decoder architectures of QC LDPC codes, which achieve better BER performance and faster convergence than the SP algorithm while requiring less memory in implementation. We then propose a partly parallel decoder architecture based on our PTSP algorithm and implement it using FPGA. Our implementation shows that our PTSP decoder architecture achieves higher throughput and requires less memory in comparison to the decoder architectures in [17], [25] with the same FPGA and LDPC code. To further reduce the memory requirement, we also propose a partly parallel decoder architecture based on our TSSP algorithm.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the authors of [17] for providing the parity check matrix of the (256, 3, 6) QC LDPC code used in [17].
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mw 1-Gbps 1024-b rate-1/2 lowdensity parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[4] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Block-interleaved LDPC decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74–78, Jan. 2008.
[5] E. Liao, E. Yeo, and B. Nikolic, “Low-density parity-check code constructions for hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2004, vol. 5, pp. 2573–2577.
[6] S. Kang and I. Park, “Loosely coupled memory-based decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1045–1056, May 2006.
[7] L. Yang, H. Liu, and C.-J. R. Shi, “Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892–904, Apr. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DAI et al.: MEMORY EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURES FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

2911

[8] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[9] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Joint (3,k)-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1065–1079, Apr. 2004.
[10] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Low power VLSI decoder architecture for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Low Power Electron. Design (ISLPED), Aug. 2002, pp. 284–289.
[11] Y. Li, M. Elassal, and M. Bayoumi, “Power efficient architecture for (3,6)-regular low-density parity-check code decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2004, vol. 4, pp. 81–84.
[12] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[13] Y. Dai and Z. Yan, “Optimal overlapped message passing decoding for quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Global Telecomun. Conf. (Globecom), Dec. 2005, vol. 4, pp. 2395–2399.
[14] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “VLSI architectures for iterative decoders in magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 748–755, Mar. 2001.
[15] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[16] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced compelxity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), 2004, pp. 107–112.
[17] K. Shimizu, T. Ishikawa, N. Togawa, T. Ikenaga, and S. Goto, “Partially-parallel LDPC decoder based on high-efficiency message-passing algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput.Design (ICCD), Oct. 2005, pp. 503–510.
[18] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[19] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, J. Tousch, and J. Danger, “Generic description and synthesis of LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2084–2091, Nov. 2007.
[20] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[21] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[22] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Global Telecomun. Conf. (Globecom), Dec. 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1205–1210.
[23] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[24] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 9, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[25] N. Chen, Y. Dai, and Z. Yan, “Partly parallel overlapped sum-product decoder architectures for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), Oct. 2006, pp. 226–231.
[26] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architecture,” in Proc. Global Telecomun. Conf. (Globecom), Nov. 2001, vol. 5, pp. 3019–3024.
[27] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Nov. 2002, vol. 1, pp. 8–15.
[28] Y. Dai, Z. Yan, and N. Chen, “High-throughput turbo-sum-product decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. CISS 2006, Mar. 2006, pp. 839–844.
[29] Y. Dai, Z. Yan, and N. Chen, “Parallel turbo-sum-product decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. ACM Great Lakes Symp. VLSI (GLSVLSI), May 2006, pp. 312–315.

[30] T. Ishikawa, K. Shimizu, T. Ikenaga, and S. Goto, “High throughput decoder for low-density parity-check code,” in Asia and South Pacific Conf. Design Autom., Jan. 2006, pp. 112–113.
[31] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X. Hu, “Reduced-compelxity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[32] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2001, vol. 4, pp. 202–205.
[33] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[34] K. Shimizu, T. Ishikawa, N. Togawa, T. Ikenaga, and S. Goto, “Partially-parallel LDPC decoder achieving high-efficiency message-passing schedule,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals, vol. E89-A, pp. 969–978, Apr. 2006.
[35] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2003, vol. 4, pp. 2708–2712.
Yongmei Dai received the B.S. degree from Peking University, Beijing, Chinain 1998, and the M.Eng. degree from National University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2001. She is currently working toward the Ph.D degree at Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA.
From 2001 to 2004, she was with the Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), Singapore, working on MIMO-OFDM systems. Her research interests are in error control coding and signal processing for wireless communication systems.
Ning Chen received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in electrical engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2001 and 2004, respectively. Currently, he is working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA.
His research interests include design of VLSI architectures and circuits of digital signal processing and communication systems, with the emphasis on error-correcting coding.
Zhiyuan Yan (S’00-M’03–SM’08) received the B.E. degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1995 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees, both in electrical engineering, from the University of Illinois, Urbana, in 1999 and 2003, respectively.
During summer 2000 and 2002, He was a Research Intern with Nokia Research Center, Irving, TX. He joined the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department of Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, as an Assistant Professor in August 2003. His current research interests are in coding theory, cryptography, wireless communications, and VLSI implementations of communication and signal processing systems. He is a member of the IEEE Information Theory, Communications, and Computer Societies.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:12:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

