IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 69, NO. 3, MARCH 2022

999

Area- and Energy-Efficient LDPC Decoder Using Mixed-Resolution Check-Node Processing
Sangbu Yun, Member, IEEE, Byeong Yong Kong , Member, IEEE, and Youngjoo Lee , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A practical min-sum algorithm is associated with tree-based comparison units for the check-node operation, being a major bottleneck in designing low-cost and energy-efficient lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) decoders. In this brief, we present a cost-effective LDPC decoder architecture by changing its internal computing resolution for the power-hungry check-node processing. The proposed mixed-resolution comparison offers significant advantages in terms of both area and energy, while achieving error-correcting performance within 0.3 dB of the previous normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm for a (1644, 1408) quasi-cyclic LDPC code of the 5G New Radio specifications. Compared to the baseline NMS architecture, the proposed decoder in a 65nm CMOS technology reduces the hardware complexity and the power consumption by 28.4% and 23.1%, respectively, enhancing the area efficiency by more than 88.2%.
Index Terms—Error-correction code, LDPC decoding, costeffective, energy-efficient, wireless communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have been widely considered promising for various communication and storage systems [2]–[4]. To remove computationally intensive hyperbolic computations from the traditional belief propagation (BP) decoding, recent decoders have been implemented based on the min-sum (MS) decoding algorithm [5]–[7] in which a simplified check-node unit (CNU) performs the row operation. The memory size can be significantly reduced by identifying only the first two minima among input messages from a variable-node unit (VNU) [8]. Even in this memoryreduced decoder architecture, the hardware complexity caused by the MS-based CNU processing is still considerable, as we typically employ massively parallel decoding units to achieve
Manuscript received July 26, 2021; accepted September 2, 2021. Date of publication September 8, 2021; date of current version March 15, 2022. This work was supported in part by the NRF Grant funded by the Korean Government (MSIT) under Grant 2019R1F1A1060767; in part by the Information Technology Research Center Support Program under Grant IITP2021-2020-0-01461; and in part by Grand ICT Research Center Program supervised by the Institute for Information and Communications Technology Planning and Evaluation under Grant IITP-2021-2020-0-01612. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor G. J. Dolecek. (Corresponding author: Youngjoo Lee.)
Sangbu Yun and Youngjoo Lee are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang 37673, South Korea (e-mail: youngjoo.lee@postech.ac.kr).
Byeong Yong Kong is with the Division of Electrical, Electronic, and Control Engineering, Kongju National University, Cheonan 31080, South Korea (e-mail: bykong@kongju.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSII.2021.3110953.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2021.3110953

high throughput and low latency stipulated by the recent specifications. For the searching operation for the first two minima, which dominates the complexity of CNU processing, the prior researches have demonstrated that the tree-based comparison network achieves low hardware cost [9]–[11].
To sustain the error-correcting performance, it is well known that the searching module at an LDPC decoder should exploit a sufficient computing resolution, naturally limiting the cost reduction by the MS-based decoding scheme [12], [13]. To make a cost-effective LDPC decoder, in this brief, we present a set of optimization techniques by manipulating the resolution of CNU processing. The proposed mixed-resolution approach successfully enables the low-complexity approximate computing at the baseline normalized-MS (NMS) decoding with the optimized processing sequences. Without significant loss of algorithm-level performance, as a result, the proposed LDPC decoding architecture utilizes the reduced amount of resources with increased throughput and reduced total power. Targeting the latest 5G New Radio (NR) specification, a prototype LDPC decoder is realized in a 65-nm CMOS process to validate the proposed mixed-resolution schemes, improving the area efficiency by 88.2% compared to the baseline NMS design. Moreover, it is possible to reduce the energy efficiency by 41.4%, leading to the cost-effective LDPC decoding architecture for the next-generation wireless communications.
The rest of this brief is organized as follows. Section II describes the previous works, and Section III presents the proposed CNU designs. In Section IV, simulation and implementation results are analyzed and compared with the previous architectures. Concluding remarks are made in Section V.
II. PREVIOUS WORKS
A. Baseline Min-Sum Decoding
An (N, K) LDPC codeword protects K-bit user data by appending M(= N −K) parity bits, where the iterative decoding steps are schematized by a bipartite graph that connects N variable nodes (VNs) and M check nodes (CNs) according to the parity-check matrix H [1]. Substituting the comparison networks for complex nonlinear functions at the theoretical BP decoding [5], the cost-effective MS-based algorithms have been prevalently adopted in the contemporary decoders [14]–[17]. Let αp,q and βq,p denote the message from the p-th VN to the q-th CN and that from the q-th CN to the p-th VN, respectively. V(q) is the set of VNs related to the q-th CN, and V(q)\p is V(q) excluding the p-th VN. Similarly, C(p) stands for the set of CNs related to the p-th VN, and C(p)\q is the set excluding

1549-7747 c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1000

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 69, NO. 3, MARCH 2022

the q-th CN from C(p). The MS algorithm starts with the first
αp,q initialized by the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the p-th received bit, γp. Then, the CN processing (CNP) calculates check-to-variable messages βq,p as

βq,p =

sgn αp ,q × ν × min |αp ,q| (1)

p ∈V(q)\p

p ∈V(q)\p

where sgn(·) returns the sign of the input value. Note that the normalizing factor ν is predetermined to compensate for the overestimated βq,p by selecting the minimum value. ν is set to 1.0 for the MS algorithm, and to an arbitrary value in [0, 1.0]
for the NMS algorithm. The following VN processing (VNP) computes variable-to-check messages αp,q by properly adding the received messages to the initial LLR as

Fig. 1. Conventional partially-parallel MS LDPC decoder architecture.

αp,q = γp +

βq ,p

(2)

q ∈C(p)\q

Similarly, a posteriori probability (APP) of each VN, denoted as γ˜p, can be computed in parallel to the VNP as

TABLE I AREA DISTRIBUTION OF A CONVENTIONAL MS DECODER

γ˜p = γp +

βq,p

(3)

q∈C(p)

The decision vector xˆ = [x0, x1, . . . , xN−1]T is then obtained by setting xp = 1 if γ˜p > 0, and xp = 0 otherwise. In the baseline MS decoding [5], a series of the CNP
and the VNP is repeated until at least one of the stopping criteria is fulfilled: 1) xˆ is a valid codeword such that Hxˆ = 0; 2) the number of iterations reaches its maximum Imax.

B. Baseline MS Decoder Architecture
In the practical realization of CNP in (1), instead of calculating minp ∈V(q)\p(|αp ,q|) individually, a searching module (SM) is utilized to find the first two minima of |αp,q|p∈V(q) once, and exploit the second one only if the message under consideration is associated with the index of the first one [11]. Layered scheduling method guarantees faster convergence since incoming messages incorporate the contribution of the CNs from the previous layers. Furthermore, the design guarantees significant memory reduction compared to flooded-scheduling solutions [8].
According to the conventional designs [18], Fig. 1 illustrates the baseline partially-parallel decoder, which supports a layered MS processing with two register-based memories: APP MEMs to store the APPs and Beta MEMs to hold βq,p messages. The shuffle/de-shuffle networks rearrange the APPs so that they can be adequately processed according to the current processing layer. Note that the memories are implemented with register-based on-chip buffers which act like single-port synchronous SRAMs. Inside of the CNU architecture taking up to dc variable-to-check messages, where dc represents the maximum CN degree of a given LDPC codeword, we design the tree-structure SM for finding two minima (M1 and M2) as well as the index vector t identifying the position of the first minimum [11]. To be specific, the SM module used in this BG1 5G NR code has dc = 19 and requires 25 comparators and 12 MUXs, i.e., compare and select (CAS) units, and therefore 37 CAS units in total based on the tree-based architecture [11].

Considering the error-correcting performance, all the values in the baseline decoder are based on 8-bit fixed-point numbers. The complexity of the baseline decoder operating at 244 MHz in a 65-nm CMOS process is summarized in Table I. In accordance with the previous studies [8], the components computing CN messages occupy the most considerable portion. Hence, developing a cost-effective CNU is indeed of great importance in designing LDPC decoders.
III. PROPOSED CNU ARCHITECTURE
A. Naive Approach for Mixed-Resolution Computing
The key idea of the proposed work is to reduce the bit width of the messages processed at CNUs in several different ways. For the sake of simplicity, let us focus on the processing of a single CNU whose input messages are denoted as α0, α1, . . . , αdc−1. Fig. 2 illustrates the proposed CNU architecture adopting the naive approach, which is denoted as CNUN. It simply compares the input messages with the reduced computing resolution to relax the complexity of SM. The windowing operation is applied to the messages with F front bits and B back bits to generate the low-resolution messages, representing the amount of truncated bits from MSB and LSB, respectively. If any of F bits from the MSB side is one, we use the saturated value for maintaining the significance of input messages by taking L-bit all-one value at SAT module. When the baseline decoder in Fig. 1 utilizes Q bits for representing the magnitude of each variable-to-check message, as a result, the messages of L = Q−(F +B) bits are employed as input signals to the corresponding searching module SML in Fig. 2, generating the first and the second minima of L bits denoted as M1L and M2L, respectively. Similarly to the conventional design in Fig. 1, SML produces a 1 × dc one-hot selection vector t denoting the index of the first minimum. As utilizing M1L may degrade the error-correcting performance due to the reduced resolution, in the naive CNUN architecture,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: AREA- AND ENERGY-EFFICIENT LDPC DECODER USING MIXED-RESOLUTION CHECK-NODE PROCESSING

1001

Fig. 2. Detailed architecture of the proposed CNUN.

Fig. 4. Proposed Mixed-resolution SM for the fully-optimized CNUP2.
TABLE II COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT CNU ARCHITECTURES

Fig. 3. Detailed architecture of the proposed CNUP1.
we recover the resolution of M1 to denote the original minimum by employing a dc-to-1 (Q − L)-bit multiplexer. More specifically, we simply concatenate an L-bit result M1L from SML and (Q − L) bits from the original message to make a full-bit M1 message as depicted in Fig. 2. Without selecting the exact second minimum, on the other hand, we directly use M2L value to set the check-to-variable message identified by t as the second minimum is only used for the edge delivered the first minimum. In other word, to reduce the additional hardware overheads for the large-size multiplexer, we simply add F and B zero bits at the left-side and rightside of the L-bit M2L value, respectively, making the Q-bit second minimum at the zero-padding (ZP) module as shown in Fig. 2. Even utilizing the reduced computing resolutions, simulation results show that CNUN architecture successfully provides an error-correcting performance comparable to that of the baseline MS decoding, which will be carefully analyzed in the following section. However, the delay overheads to exploit the extra multiplexer for the high-resolution first minimum becomes considerable, demanding more aggressive approaches.
B. Using the Low-Resolution Minimums
In order to further relax the computational costs of LDPC decoders, we apply an advanced optimization method to the proposed CNU architecture, denoted as CNUP1, whose internal configuration is shown in Fig. 3. Note that CNUP1 eliminates the overheads arising from dc-to-1 multiplexer that chooses the high-resolution first minimum (M1) according to the index vector t. Similarly to the way of constructing M2 value at the mixed-resolution CNU architecture with the naive approach, i.e., CNUN, the proposed CNUP1 in Fig. 3 adds zero values to M1L to make the first minimum without selecting the original Q-bit value. As we remove the time-consuming selection in the naive architecture, the hardware cost of realizing multiple CNUP1 for a high-throughput LDPC decoder can be drastically relaxed. Compared to the original CNU architecture in

Fig. 1, in addition, the critical delay along the CN processing is accordingly reduced by using the low-resolution first minimum, enhancing the decoding efficiency. However, it is still limited to minimize the complexity with the reduced computing resolution from CNUP1 as we cannot aggressively reduce L due to the severe degradation of error-correcting capability.
C. Mixed-Resolution SM Architecture
To improve CNUP1 further, we finally present a more aggressive architecture CNUP2. It can find the first and the second minima of low resolution without degrading the errorcorrecting performance. Based on the low-cost architecture in [11], in CNUP2, comparison units in the tree-based SM architecture are divided into three different stages, as depicted in Fig. 4. In the figure, a CAS unit is a primitive unit of the first two stages, which is basically composed of one comparator and two 2-to-1 multiplexers to determine both the larger and smaller inputs. The proposed CNUP2 gradually narrows the resolution in its stages. More specifically, (L − 1)-bit outputs are computed from L-bit inputs in stage I, and (L − 2)-bit outputs are computed from (L−1)-bit inputs in stage II. Then, the final M1L−2 and M2L−2 are computed from (L − 2)-bit inputs at the last stage III. As shown in Fig. 4, as a result, candidates for the first two minima are of reduced resolution compared to the previous approaches. The following ZP modules then add zeros to make the final Q-bit messages.
Instead of directly reducing the internal resolution, which is prone to erroneous results in the first comparison stage, the proposed mixed-resolution SM design is relatively better in sustaining the accuracy of the first two stages, and prevents the faulty decision of position and value of the first two minima as much as possible. As we aggressively truncate F + 2 MSBs of the original messages, moreover, utilizing the low-resolution M1L−2 can be interpreted as the result from the normalization (or offset) operation at the prior studies [5]. Before activating the beta decision process, therefore, it is possible to totally remove the shift-add step for making the normalized minimum values in the baseline NMS decoder architecture. Table II

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1002

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 69, NO. 3, MARCH 2022
TABLE III COMPARISON OF STATE-OF-THE-ART ASIC DESIGNS FOR LDPC DECODERS

Fig. 5. The BER performance of different LDPC decoding algorithms in (a) (1664,1408) 5G NR code and (b) (1800,1200) protograph LDPC code.
summarizes the hardware cost and the path delay of the baseline and proposed designs. Consequently, the advantage further reduces implementation resources required for relaxation process. As tabulated again, the fully area-optimized version, i.e., CNUP2, successfully minimizes both the critical-path delay and the sequential-logic area, leading to the cost-effective decoder architecture.
IV. SIMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
A. Error Correcting Performance
In order to confirm algorithmic advantages of the proposed resolution-manipulating schemes, we measured the error rate for the three proposed decoding methods realized by using the dedicated CNU designs, i.e., CNUN, CNUP1, and CNUP2, where L = 4 and (F, B) = (1, 2). For fair comparisons, we additionally evaluated the conventional MS and NMS decoding algorithms, where the normalizing factor for the NMS decoding is ν = 0.75. During the simulation, we used a practical (1664, 1408) LDPC code from the 3GPP 5G NR of which the bit-error rate (BER) is illustrated in Fig. 5(a) where the maximum number of iterations, Imax, was limited to 10. Considering the practical decoder realization, in addition, we adopted the layered decoding processing where the

internal computing steps are based on the 8-bit fixed point numbers [12]. Note that the BER curves using CNUN and CNUP1 architectures are only less than 0.1 dB away from the baseline MS algorithm to achieve a target BER of 10−6. Moreover, the fully-optimized CNUP2 design even improves the BER performance due to the aggressively-suppressed messages compensating the overestimation of MS decoding, which is now comparable to the previous NMS decoding algorithm as depicted in Fig. 5(a). According to previous studies, LLR messages tend to diverge as they go through more iterations [13]. Since typically less iterations are required at higher SNR, the relaxation effect stands out at high SNR condition.
To investigate the scalability of the proposed techniques, we further used a (1800, 1200) protograph LDPC code of which the bit-error rate (BER) is illustrated in Fig. 5(b) where the maximum number of iterations, Imax, was limited to 10 [24]. Simulation results show that the BER curves of CNUN and CNUP1 architectures are less than 0.1 dB away from the baseline MS algorithm as in the 5G NR code. The CNUP2 design improves the BER performance and is only less than 0.5 dB away from the baseline NMS algorithm at high SNR. Note that L = 4 and (F, B) = (1, 2) were used for the analysis.
B. Implementation Results
To evaluate the hardware cost of the proposed architecture, we implemented prototype LDPC decoders in RTL and synthesized under a 65-nm CMOS technology. The prototype designs are based on the 64-parallel layered structure in Fig. 1, and they differ only in the CNU architectures which are based on distinct MS-based decoding schemes. Table III summarizes the implementation results of different LDPC decoders, and also compares the proposed approaches to the previous state-of-theart designs. By applying further aggressive approximations, from CNUN to CNUP2, we can gradually reduce the criticalpath delay for allowing the high-speed operations, whereas the previous NMS decoding with additional normalization units leads to a slow realization. The fully-optimized decoder prototype including CNUP2 architecture operates at the speed of 323 MHz, offering an average throughput of 19.9 Gbps. By reducing the computational costs with mixed-resolution

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YUN et al.: AREA- AND ENERGY-EFFICIENT LDPC DECODER USING MIXED-RESOLUTION CHECK-NODE PROCESSING

1003

Fig. 6. Efficiency comparisons of different LDPC decoders.

hardware units (L = 4), note that the required area is significantly reduced to 0.83 mm2, saving the energy consumption by 23.1% compared to the baseline NMS decoding. To measure the efficiency of LDPC decoding we compute the normalized throughput-to-area ratio (NTAR) and the normalized energy efficiency (NEE) as follows.

NTAR = (Throughput/Area) × Imax

(4)

NEE = (Power/Throughput) / Imax

(5)

As a result, the proposed LDPC decoder based on CNUP2 achieves an NTAR of 62.3 Gbps/mm2/iter and an NEE of 2.01 pJ/bit/iter, remarkably enhancing the decoding efficiencies. When compared to the previous state-of-the-art works, including the synthesis work targeting the same 5G NR system [19], for example, the proposed work clearly provides attractive efficiencies as summarized in Table III.
In order to fairly highlight the effectiveness from the proposed approaches, Fig. 6 compares different LDPC decoders [8], [19]–[23] in terms of the area and energy efficiencies, where all the values are normalized to the 65-nm CMOS technology. Note that the proposed fully-optimized architecture clearly offers the most attractive performance, enhancing the area efficiency while consuming a similar amount of energy compared to the other works. In addition, the proposed mixed-resolution CNU processing can be applied to any kind of MS-based decoding architectures, leading to the cost-effective LDPC decoder architecture for the high-throughput 5G NR specification.

V. CONCLUSION
We have presented an advanced LDPC decoder that reduces the implementation cost, area, and energy consumption while offering an attractive error-rate performance. The proposed mixed-resolution method allows the different computing resolutions on CNU processing, reducing hardware costs of the conventional MS-based decoders. The implementation results have shown that the proposed fully-optimized scheme has successfully saved the area and energy efficiencies by 1.88 and 1.71 times compared to the baseline NMS decoder, which even surpasses the recent state-of-the-art solutions.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[2] IEEE Computer Society LAN MAN Standards Committee; Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, ANSI/IEEE Standards 802.11-1999, 1999.
[3] IEEE 802.16 Working Group; IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed BroadBand Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Standards 802.16-2004, 2004.
[4] Y. Fang et al., “Design guidelines of low-density parity-check codes for magnetic recording systems,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1574–1606, 2nd Quart., 2018.
[5] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[6] Q. Lu, Z. Shen, C.-W. Sham, and F. C. M. Lau, “A parallel-routing network for reliability inferences of single-parity-check decoder,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Technol. Commun., 2015, pp. 127–132.
[7] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pac. Conf. Circuits Syst., 2012, pp. 475–478.
[8] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, Aug. 2009.
[9] C.-L. Wey, M.-D. Shieh, and S.-Y. Lin, “Algorithms of finding the first two minimum values and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3430–3437, Dec. 2008.
[10] L. G. Amarù, M. Martina, and G. Masera, “High speed architectures for finding the first two maximum/minimum values,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2342–2346, Dec. 2011.
[11] Y. Lee, B. Kim, J. Jung, and I.-C. Park, “Low-complexity tree architecture for finding the first two minima,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 61–64, Jan. 2015.
[12] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[13] Y. Yao, W. Liang, F. Ye, and J. Ren, “Memory efficient LDPC decoder design,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pac. Conf. Postgrad. Res. Microelectron. Electron., 2011, pp. 127–130.
[14] Y. Liu, W. Tang, and D. G. M. Mitchell, “Efficient implementation of a threshold modified min-sum algorithm for LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 1599–1603, Sep. 2020.
[15] H. Cui, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “An efficient post-processor for lowering the error floor of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 397–401, Mar. 2019.
[16] A. Verma and R. Shrestha, “Hardware-efficient and high-throughput LLRC segregation based binary QC-LDPC decoding algorithm and architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 2835–2839, Aug. 2021, doi: 10.1109/TCSII.2021.3071804.
[17] S. Yun, D. Kam, J. Choe, B. Y. Kong, and Y. Lee, “Ultra-lowlatency LDPC decoding architecture using reweighted offset min-sum algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2020, pp. 1–5.
[18] R. Zarubica, S. G. Wilson, and E. Hall, “Multi-Gbps FPGA-Based low density parity check (LDPC) decoder design,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2007, pp. 548–552.
[19] H. Cui, F. Ghaffari, K. Le, D. Declercq, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Design of high-performance and area-efficient decoder for 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 879–891, Feb. 2021.
[20] R. Ghanaatian et al., “A 588-Gb/s LDPC decoder based on finitealphabet message passing,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 329–340, Feb. 2018.
[21] S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, “High-throughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1421–1430, May 2015.
[22] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[23] H. Lopez et al., “A 75-Gb/s/mm2 and energy-efficient LDPC decoder based on a reduced complexity second minimum approximation minsum algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 926–939, Apr. 2020.
[24] Y. Fang, G. Bi, Y. L. Guan, and F. C. M. Lau, “A survey on protograph LDPC codes and their applications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1989–2016, 4th Quart., 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:04:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

