IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 3, MARCH 2022

485

Error Floor Analysis of LDPC Column Layered Decoders

Ali Farsiabi and Amir H. Banihashemi , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this letter, we analyze the error floor of column layered decoders, also known as shuffled decoders, for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes under saturating sum-product algorithm (SPA). To estimate the error floor, we evaluate the failure rate of different trapping sets (TSs) that contribute to the frame error rate in the error floor region. For each such TS, we model the dynamics of SPA in the vicinity of the TS by a linear state-space model that incorporates the information of the layered message-passing schedule. Consequently, the model parameters and the failure rate of the TS change as a result of the change in the order by which the messages of different layers are updated. This, in turn, causes the error floor of the code to change as a function of scheduling. Based on the proposed analysis, we then devise an efficient search algorithm to find a schedule that minimizes the error floor. Simulation results are presented to verify the accuracy of the proposed error floor estimation technique.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, error floor, error floor analysis, trapping sets, layered decoding, column layered decoding, shuffled decoding, message-passing schedules.
I. INTRODUCTION AND PRELIMINARIES
T HE error floor analysis of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes has been the subject of extensive research in recent years, see, e.g., [1]. In [1], the error floor of row layered sum-product algorithm (SPA) over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel was theoretically analyzed. The analysis was performed by developing a linear state-space model for trapping sets (TSs) that incorporates the layered nature of the decoding algorithm.
In this letter, we extend the linear state-space model of [1] to column layered decoders, also known as shuffled decoders [2]. Undertaking such an analysis is important as column layered decoders are often implemented in practical applications, particularly those involving high-rate LDPC codes. The extension of the linear model of [1] to column layered decoders involves a number of non-trivial steps including the derivation of the

In this work, we consider QC-LDPC codes, where the Tanner graph of the code is constructed based on a cyclic p-lifting of a smaller Tanner graph, known as base graph. The mb ×nb bi-adjacency matrix, Hb, of the base graph is referred to as base matrix. As a result of cyclic lifting, the parity-check matrix of the QC-LDPC code H consists of an mb × nb array of p × p circulants or all-zero matrices, depending on whether the corresponding element in Hb is one or zero, respectively. The cyclic lifting thus imposes a structure on the Tanner graph of QC-LDPC codes such that the variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs) can be grouped into nb and mb different types, respectively, where each type corresponds to one row or column block of the parity-check matrix. Type-i VNs are connected to Type-j CNs by a cluster of edges if the corresponding element at column i and row j of Hb is 1.
In a column layered decoder, the VNs of a QC-LDPC code are divided into nb subgroups (layers), each corresponding to one column block of H. The messages within an iteration are sequentially updated, one layer at a time, and based on the order in which the layers are scheduled to be updated. For each layer, based on the incoming messages from the adjacent CNs, the total log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) of the corresponding VNs of the current layer are updated. The incoming messages from the adjacent CNs, themselves, are calculated based on the extrinsic LLRs received by such CNs from the VNs of other layers.
Leafless elementary TSs (LETS) are known to be the main culprits in the error floor region of LDPC codes over the AWGN channel [1], [3]. These are TSs whose induced subgraphs have only CNs of degrees 1 or 2, and in which, each VN is connected to at least two CNs of degree 2. Degree-1 and -2 CNs are referred to as unsatisfied and missatisfied, respectively. If a TS has a VNs and b unsatisfied CNs, it is said to belong to the (a, b) class.

model parameters. In addition to developing the model to analyze the failure rate of a TS, we also use the proposed model to optimize the error floor performance of column layered decoders.
In this letter, we use the same channel model and decoding algorithm as in [1] (BI-AWGN channel and box-plus implementation of SPA). The only difference is in the message-passing schedule (column layered vs. row layered). For terminology, definitions and notations, we also closely follow [1].

II. STATE SPACE MODEL OF COLUMN LAYERED DECODERS

A. General Model

The linear state-space model of a LETS in the (a, b) class for a column layered decoder is given by:

x˜(0,j) = 0 for 1 ≤ j ≤ J

(1)

x˜(,j) = for  ≥ 1, 1 ≤ j ≤ J

Gj()

Aj

x˜ (−δj1

,j−1+J δj1

)

+Bj

Ł

+


Bex,j

Ł(ex−1)


+ Bex,j

Łe(x)

.

Manuscript received November 23, 2021; revised December 14, 2021; accepted December 15, 2021. Date of publication December 21, 2021; date of current version March 10, 2022. This work was supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through the Discovery Grant of Amir H. Banihashemi. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was A. Balatsoukas-Stimming. (Corresponding author: Amir H. Banihashemi.)
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: alifarsiabi@ sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2021.3137203

(2) In the above equations, the vector x˜(,j) is of size ms and contains the state variables (messages passed over different
edges of the LETS subgraph) at layer j of iteration . The vectors Ł, Ł(ex−1) and Łe(x) are the inputs of the model from the channel, and from unsatisfied CNs at iterations  − 1 and , respectively. We note that Ł(e0x) = 0. The symbol J denotes the total number of layers involved in the LETS subgraph.
While for a row layered decoder, this is determined by the

1558-2558 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:05:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

486

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 3, MARCH 2022

in column layered decoders, the two incoming messages to a

specific missatisfied CN are updated at two different layers.

This is one of the main differences between column layered

decoders and row layered decoders, in which the incoming

messages of a missatisfied CN are updated in the same layer.

This is further explained in the following example.

Example 1: The QC Tanner (155, 64) code has 5 column

layers, i.e., nb = 5. The VNs involved in the (5, 3) LETS of

Fig. 1. A (5, 3) LETS of the Tanner (155, 64) code, in which all the state variables (internal messages) are labeled. The VNs, missatisfied CNs and unsatisfied CNs are shown by black circles, white squares and gray squares, respectively. The messages related to L1, L2 and L3 are represented by red (dotted line), blue (dashed line) and purple (dash-dotted line), respectively.

this code, shown in Fig. 1, belong to 3 different layers, i.e., J = 3. These layers are L1 = L1, L2 = L3 and L3 = L5. For each of the three layers, the corresponding VNs and the
internal messages that are updated in that layer are shown by
different colors and line types. For example, all the dotted red
arrows are the messages that are updated at the first layer.
In the linear state-space model of a LETS, density evolu-

number of layers in which the missatisfied CNs of the structure
are involved, for a column layered decoder, this parameter is
determined by the number of layers to which the VNs of the
structure belong. The updating rules for the state variables that are updated in layer j are governed by the ms × ms transition matrix of this layer, denoted by Aj. This matrix is equal to an ms × ms identity matrix in which the rows that correspond to the state variables of the jth layer are replaced with vectors that represent the message-passing mechanism of layer j (how the state variables of the jth layer are a function of other state variables). Matrix Bj is an ms × a matrix that indicates the contribution of channel LLRs in the calculation of the state variables of the jth layer. Similarly, matrices Bex,j and Bex,j are defined to account for the contribution of Ł(ex−1) and Łe(x) in updating the state variables within the j-th layer, respectively. Also, δj1 is the Kronecker delta function which is equal to 1 when j = 1 and is zero, otherwise. Equation (2) implies that at the first layer of every iteration, the state vector is
updated based on the last layer of the previous iteration while
in the other layers, the updated states are a function of the
state vector at the previous layer within the same iteration. The effect of missatisfied CNs within a given layer j at iteration  is modeled by the iteration dependent gain matrix Gj(). This is an ms × ms identity matrix whose diagonal elements that correspond to the state variables of layer j are replaced with
the average gains obtained from the linear approximation of
the missatisfied CN operation impacting those state variables.
In the model presented here, when a layer is updated,
the VNs of the layer receive messages from their adjacent
CNs. These messages are computed at the CNs based on the
messages received from the VNs of other layers. The number
of VN layers in an LETS is generally less than or equal to the total number of column layers of the code, i.e., J ≤ nb. We use the notation Li (i = 1, . . . , nb) to denote the i-th column layer of the code. (The column layers are updated in
the increasing order of their indices.) Similarly, the layers of a TS are denoted by Lj (j = 1, . . . , J).
Following the extrinsic message-passing mechanism in col-

tion (DE) is used to obtain the distribution of external messages entering the LETS subgraph from the rest of the Tanner graph via missatisfied and unsatisfied CNs. For QC-LDPC codes, the probability distribution of messages can be obtained based on the base graph of the code. In other words, the edges of the base graph are representatives of the cluster of edges between different types of VNs and CNs. In the base graph of a QC-LDPC code, within column layer j of iteration , Type-i CN to Type-j VN distribution denoted by ψ[j←i] is obtained based on the distribution of messages passed to Type-i CNs from other VNs with types k ∈ N (i)\j. Depending on the type of these VNs as well as the updating order of the code layers, the VN types k ∈ N (i)\j are partitioned into two groups: 1) Those that have already been updated in the previous layers of the current iteration . This group pass the updated messages with distribution ψ[k→i] to Type-i CNs. 2) Those that belong to the subsequent layers of iteration  and have not been updated yet. This group pass messages calculated at iteration  − 1 with distribution ψ[k−→1 i]. Following the procedure just described, the probability distribution of messages between different types of VNs and CNs at various iterations and layers are numerically calculated.
In layered decoders, the failure rate of a LETS structure depends not only on the topology of the structure but also on the location of the TS within the Tanner graph of the code. The latter would affect the assignment of LETS’s internal VNs to different layers (types), as well as the layer assignment of different external VNs connected to missatisfied and unsatisfied CNs of the LETS. In addition, a change in the location of a TS within the code’s Tanner graph can change the type of the internal CNs of the TS. The collective information of layer (type) assignment of VNs and the types of CNs, just described, is referred to as TS layer profile (TSLP) [1]. TSLP affects both the matrices in the state-space model of the LETS, and the distribution of the external messages entering the TS subgraph.
B. Linear Gain of Missatisfied CNs
In the state-space model of layered decoders, the impact

umn layered decoders, at each layer, certain internal messages of external connections of each missatisfied CN on the corre-

of the TS incoming to some missatisfied CNs are updated. sponding two state variables is modeled by a linear gain. These

These missatisfied CNs are those adjacent to the VNs of the gains form the diagonal elements of the gain matrix, discussed

current layer, and the updated messages are those from the in Section II-A. While for the row layered decoders, the gain

VNs of other layers that are adjacent to the said missatisfied for both state variables corresponding to each missatisfied CN

CNs. In the following, we refer to these updated messages as is the same, for column layered decoders, the two gains can

the state varAiaubthloersizeodflicthenesecdoursreeslipmoitenddtion:gYolnasyeei Ur.nIivt. Disownnoloteaddedthoant,Juneb2e4,2d0i2ff6earte1n3t:0a5s:51dUisTcCufsrsoemdIEiEnEtXhpelofreo.llRoewstirnicgtio.ns apply.

FARSIABI AND BANIHASHEMI: ERROR FLOOR ANALYSIS OF LDPC COLUMN LAYERED DECODERS

487

Fig. 2. Two virtual VNs (vk and vk ) representing the effect of external VNs of the TS with respect to a missatisfied CN (from Fig. 1). The virtual
VN depends on which output message of the CN inside the TS is updated: (a) vk is used when message from cj to v4 is updated (in L1), (b) vk is used when message from cj to v1 is updated (in L3).

For simplicity, suppose that the external connections of each
missatisfied CN at each layer is represented by a virtual VN,
as shown in Fig. 2. Consider the case in Fig. 2(a), where this virtual variable node is denoted by vk , and we are interested in calculating the linear gain affecting the message labeled by k, as it is passed from cj to v4 in the first layer of decoding. Then, the linear gain, g¯k(), averaged over the probability density function ψˆ[k →j] of the message from vk to cj at iteration , can be calculated by [1]:

g¯k() =

∞ −∞

tanh(

λ 2

)ψˆ[k

→j](λ)dλ.

(3)

Similar to [1], [3], Equation (3) is further modified by adding a polarity inversion effect into the model:

g¯k() = (1 − Pi[nkv→ , j])g¯k() ,

(4)

where

0

Pi[nkv→ , j] =

ψˆ[k →j](λ)dλ .

(5)

−∞

In the following, we present an alternate approach to cal-
culate the average gain of (3). The new approach simplifies
the calculations required for optimization of layers’ order to
minimize the error floor of column layered decoders. Consider the case where a state variable xi is updated in a
specific layer, and suppose that xi is the incoming message to a missatisfied CN cj, and that we wish to calculate the linear gain imposed on xi as cj passes it to an adjacent internal VN vi . For this scenario, let the indices of external VNs to cj whose information have been updated at iterations  − 1 and  be denoted by the sets, τi and τi, respectively. The message from cj to vi is given by

L[i ←j] =

2

tanh−1

tanh

(

xi 2

)

tanh

L[k−11→j] 2

tanh

L[k2→j] 2

. (6)

k1 ∈τ i

k2 ∈τ i

Considering the right hand side of the above equation as a function f (xi) of xi, to obtain the linear gain, one needs to compute the first derivative of f (xi) at xi = 0 (fx(0)), and then take the expected value of such a derivative. We have

fx(0) =

tanh L[k−11→j] 2

tanh L[k2→j] . 2

(7)

k1 ∈τ i

k2 ∈τ i

The expected value of (7), assuming that the external mes-

sages entering the missatisfied CNs are independent, is given

by

g¯i() =

()
θk1

()
θk2 ,

(8)

k1 ∈τ i

k2 ∈τ i

()

()

where the partial VN to CN gains, θk1 and θk2 , are defined

as

()
θk1 =

∞ −∞

tanh(

λ 2

)ψ[k−11→j] (λ)dλ,

k1 ∈ τi ,

(9)

()
θk2 =

∞ −∞

tanh(

λ 2

)ψ[k2 →j] (λ)dλ,

k2 ∈ τi .

(10)

Functions ψ[k−11→j] and ψ[k2→j] are the VN to CN probability density functions corresponding to different external

connections of a given missatisfied CN at iterations  − 1 and

, respectively (they are different from the distribution of
messages from virtual VNs, ψˆ[k →j]). Equation (8) will be used in section III to simplify the

column layer scheduling optimization problem. To carry out

the optimization, we use an approximate DE technique to

reduce the complexity. However, changing the order of layers would affect the sets τi and τi of each of the missatisfied CNs.

As a result, if one were to use (3) to calculate the gains, a new

distribution would need to be calculated each time. To tackle

this problem, we first calculate the partial gains (9) and (10)

in advance, and then use them in and τi, to calculate the gains of

(8) in accordance with τi different missatisfied CNs.

We note that, for a specific VN to CN message, we have

() (−1)
θk = θk .

(11)

Example 2: Suppose that the external VNs of CN cj in
Fig. 2 are labeled with the same indices of their corresponding layers as v2 , v4 , and v5 . Then the VN to CN distributions ψ[2−→1 j], ψ[4−→1 j] and ψ[5−→1 j] are needed to calculate the virtual VN message distribution ψˆ[k →j]. Also, the VN to CN distributions ψ[2→j], ψ[4−→1 j] and ψ[5−→1 j] are used to calculate the virtual VN message distribution ψˆ[k →j]. Correspondingly, the partial VN to CN gains for xk and xk are obtained as

g¯k()

=

() () ()
θ2 θ4 θ5 ,

g¯k()

=

() () ()
θ2 θ4 θ5 ,

where τk = {2, 4, 5}, τk = ∅, τk = {4, 5} and τk

(12) (13) = {2}.

C. Failure Probability
The general steps for calculating the failure probability of a TS for a column layered decoder are similar to those of a row layered decoder, as explained in [1]. First, the non-recursive form of the state vector as a function of model inputs is derived. The resulted equation, then, is used to obtain an error indicator function. Finally, using Gaussian approximation, the failure probability of the TS is estimated. For the details, the interested reader can see [4].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:05:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

488

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 3, MARCH 2022

In the non-recursive equation of state variables and conse- corresponding distributions within column layer Lj. These

quently in the error indicator function, the product of scaled transition matrices Gj()Aj of different layers j = 1, . . . , J, plays an important role. As the iterations tend to infinity, the linear gains tend to 1, and as a result the matrix A˜ J→1 =Δ AJ AJ−1 . . . A1, referred to as the transition matrix of the layered decoder, plays a crucial role in determining the
growth rate of erroneous messages within the LETS subgraph. In particular, the larger the dominant eigenvalue r˜ of A˜ J→1, the more harmful the TS would be. (For more information on spectral properties of A˜ J→1, the reader is referred to [4].)
In order to estimate the error floor, we first identify the
LETS classes that may have non-negligible contribution to
the error floor. We then partition the LETSs within each class
into subsets of isomorphic TSs. Finally, we partition the TSs
within each subset into groups in accordance with their TSLP,
i.e., all TSs within a TSLP group are isomorphic and have the
same TSLP. Using the union bound, we then estimate the error
floor as

Pf ≈ ΥiPe(Si),

(14)

average distributions are then used to represent all the CN to

VN and VN to CN distributions in the jth layer of decoding

regardless of the schedule.

In the next step, by using the average distribution of VN
→
to CN messages for each layer j, ψ¯j, a partial VN to CN gain for that layer can be obtained using an equation similar

to (9) and (10). Then, based on the TSLP of a LETS, for a

specific permutation of column layers, equation (8) can be uti-

lized to obtain the multiplicative gains of various missatisfied

CNs. To further reduce the complexity, the polarity inversion

coefficient is not considered in the gain calculations for the

optimization process. We note that the advantage of using

(8) is that the partial gains related to different layers can

be computed prior to the optimization process and different schedules would only affect the parameters τi and τi related

to different state-variables passing through various missatisfied

CNs. With respect to unsatisfied CNs, the average CN to VN

←

←

distributions ψ¯j or ψ¯j−1 are used to compute the unsatisfied

CN input parameters.

i

Example 3: Consider the (155, 64) Tanner code and its

where Si is the representative of the i-th TSLP group whose size is Υi.
III. OPTIMIZATION OF COLUMN LAYERED SCHEDULE
Generally, changing the column layered schedule by modifying the order in which different column layers are updated in each iteration of the decoding process would change the TSLP of a LETS. As a result, the state-space model matrices, in general, and the transition matrix A˜ J→1, in particular, would change. In addition, by the change in TSLP, the distribution of external messages entering the TS would change. Modifying the column layered schedule therefore can change the failure rate of a LETS as well as the error floor of the code. In this section, we use the state-space model developed in the previous section to study the effect of column layered schedule on the error floor and to find a schedule that minimizes the error floor.

(5, 3) LETS in Fig. 1. This code has five column layers,

→

with
→

the
→

corresponding

→

→

average

VN

to

CN

distributions

ψ¯1,

ψ¯2, ψ¯3, ψ¯4 and ψ¯5. Based on these distributions, for each

column layer, a VN to CN partial gain is computed. In relation

to the missatisfied CN of the LETS shown in Fig. 2, the

obtained partial gains are plugged into (12) and (13) to derive the corresponding gains at layers L1 = L1 and L2 = L3, respectively.

Now, consider the unsatisfied CN c2 in Fig. 1. The CN

to VN message from c2 to v4, is used in the model when

the state variables labeled 9 and 12 are updated. These state

variables are updated in the column layers L2 = L3 and

L3 = L5, respectively. As both of these layers are updated

after

L1

=

L1,

which
←

is

the
←

column

layer

of

v4,

the

aver-

age distribution ψ¯1 (not ψ¯1−1) is used within the model to

obtain the unsatisfied input parameters (mean and variance)

One of the most computationally expensive tasks in using
the state-space model to estimate the error floor is the imple-
mentation of DE, based on which the inputs of the model are determined. Consider a QC-LDPC code with an mb × nb base matrix. For such a base matrix, there exist nb! different column

corresponding to c2. In QC-LDPC codes, we often have nb > mb, and nb! 
mb!. This implies that for column layered decoders, unlike the row layered decoders, an exhaustive search among different
column layer permutations may not be feasible. In [1], it was

permutations, each corresponding to a different column lay- shown that the failure probability of a LETS structure, on aver-

ered schedule. In the search for an optimal schedule, it would age, decreases with the reduction of the dominant eigenvalue

thus be too complex to find the error floor of each candidate of the transition matrices corresponding to different schedules.

schedule based on an accurate implementation of DE, which We have observed a similar trend in column layered decoders.

involves the computation of probability distributions of CN To reduce the size of the search space, we thus focus on

to VN and VN to CN messages passing on different edges of schedules that result in the smallest dominant eigenvalue for

the base graph. To simplify the search among the nb! different transition matrices of the most dominant LETS structure of the

column layered schedules, rather than the accurate derivation code. We then perform a search among such candidate sched-

of the above distributions for each schedule, we select one ules by using the approximate DE, described above, to find

arbitrary schedule, say the one corresponding to the original a few that have lower error floors. We then apply the exact

order of the columns, and then at each iteration  and for each DE within the linear state-space model to these few candidate

layer j, we only derive the distributions of CN to VN messages schedules to find the one that has the lowest error floor.

and VN to CN messages for that schedule. Subsequently,

←

we

take
→

the

average

of

such

distributions,

denoted

by

ψ¯j

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS In this section, the performance of our proposed model

and ψ¯j, respectively, where the average is taken over all the is investigated via simulations. We consider the same two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:05:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FARSIABI AND BANIHASHEMI: ERROR FLOOR ANALYSIS OF LDPC COLUMN LAYERED DECODERS

489

QC-LDPC codes, C1 and C2, used in [1]. Code C1 is a rate0.3 variable-regular (640, 192) code with dv = 5 and irregular CN degrees, and C2 is a rate-0.75 irregular (576, 432) code used in WiMAX standard. The exponent matrices of both codes are provided in [1]. Code C1 has 10 column layers, each layer corresponding to one of the column blocks of the paritycheck matrix. We label these column blocks with numbers 1 to 10 based on their original order in [1]. Different schedules can then be represented with different permutations of numbers from 1 to 10.
The dominant LETS of C1 is a (5, 5) structure with multiplicity 64. All the 64 instances of the (5, 5) LETS have the same TSLP. The total number of possible column layer permutations for C1 is 10! = 3628800. These permutations result in different transition matrices for the (5, 5) LETS within the state-space model. However, unlike the row layered schedules
of this code presented in [1] where different row schedules produced 8 different dominant eigenvalues, all the column layered schedules of this code result in transition matrices whose dominant eigenvalues are equal to r˜ = 16.9536. By using a single application of approximate DE, we approximate the failure rate of the (5, 5) LETS for different schedules. We then choose a few schedules that resulted in the lowest error rates for the (5, 5) LETS, and apply our estimation technique based on accurate DE to the chosen schedules to find one with the
lowest error floor. The simulation and estimation results of this schedule, corresponding to the permutation Π1, along with those of one of the worst schedules, corresponding to Π2, and the results for the original schedule Π3 are presented in Fig. 3.
For comparison, we have also presented the FER of different
row layered schedules, including the best and the worst
schedules, as reported in [1], in Fig. 3. As can be seen, all the
estimation results match with the corresponding simulations
rather closely. The results show that, unlike the row layered
schedules where there is a substantial difference between the
error floor of the best and the worst schedules, the difference
in the error floor of the best and the worst column layered
schedules is rather small (less than an order of magnitude).
This can be attributed to the fact that the dominant eigenvalues
of transition matrices of various column layered schedules are
the same, and thus the difference in the error floor performance
is mainly only due to the difference in the distribution of
external messages entering the LETS subgraph. We also note
that the dominant eigenvalue of different column layered schedules, r˜ = 16.9536, is larger than the maximum dominant eigenvalue among all row layered schedules, i.e., 16.125. One thus expects the column layered decoding to perform, on average, worse than the row layered decoding for C1.
The dominant class of LETSs for C2 is the (7, 1) class. This class has 8 different non-isomorphic structures that are partitioned into 10 TSLP groups, each of size 24. Due to the large number of layer permutations for this code (24!), we need to reduce the search space to be able to find a schedule with
low error floor. Our experiments show that for the original order of column layers, i.e., (1, 2, 3, . . . , 23, 24), one of the ten (7, 1) TSLP groups, denoted by (7, 1)10 in [1], is the most harmful group. The dominant eigenvalue of the transition
matrices of the LETSs in this group under the original schedule is r˜ = 7.3547. The number of column layers involved in

Fig. 3. Simulation and estimation results of C1 and C2 under SPA with different column layered schedules. The saturation level and the maximum number of iterations are 15.75 and 30, respectively.
LETSs of (7, 1)10 is J = 7. Therefore, there exist 7! = 5040 different permutations of layers within these TSs. These permutations result in transition matrices with 10 different dominant eigenvalues ranging from 6.757 to 13.877. Also, there are 854 different permutations (out of 5040) whose corresponding transition matrices have the minimum dominant eigenvalue of r˜ = 6.757. For each of these 854 layer permutations of (7, 1)10, we generate 100 random column layer permutations of the whole parity check matrix such that the corresponding order of layers in the (7, 1)10 group is preserved. We then examine the resulted 85400 column layer schedules to find one with the best error floor. The process just described reduces the size of the search space by a factor of 24!/85400 ≈ 7.3 × 1018.
By using a single application of DE, the total failure rate of (7, 1) LETSs for different schedules is approximated. Then a handful of schedules with the lowest failure rates are examined by the application of accurate DE in the state-space model to obtain one with the lowest error floor. The simulation and estimation results of this schedule, corresponding to Π4, as well as the schedule corresponding to the original order of column layers are presented in Fig. 3. It can be seen that the error floor performance of the optimized schedule is slightly better than that of the original column permutations. In fact, the original order of column layers, itself, is among good schedules for C2 in terms of the error floor performance. It is worth mentioning that for C2, the error floor performance of the best row layered schedule [1], and that of the best column layered schedule found here are practically identical.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Farsiabi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error floor analysis of LDPC row layered decoders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 5804–5826, Sep. 2021.
[2] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[3] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.
[4] A. Farsiabi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Error floor analysis of LDPC column layered decoders,” 2021, arXiv:2107.11479.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:05:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

