2024 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops) | 979-8-3503-0405-3/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCWORKSHOPS59551.2024.10615375

WS09 IEEE ICC 2024 4th Workshop on Satellite Mega-Constellations in the 6G Era

Graph Neural Network Pooling for BCH Channel Decoding in Software Defined Satellites
Swetha Varadarajulu, Victor Monzon Baeza, Jorge Querol, Marcele O. K. Mendonca, and Symeon Chatzinotas Interdisciplinary Centre for Security Reliability and Trust (SnT), University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg Email: {swetha.varadarajulu, victor.monzon, jorge.querol, marcele.kuhfuss, symeon.chatzinotas}@uni.lu

Abstract—This paper delves into the transformative impact of Deep Learning (DL) techniques on decoding tasks at the physical layer onboard regenerative software-defined satellites, reshaping traditional error correction methodologies. Specifically, we focus on the integration of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for channel decoding, which offers a fresh perspective by adeptly handling graph-structured data and effectively modelling intricate interference and channel dependencies. The study systematically explores the potential performance trade-offs that arise from modifying the graph structure. Furthermore, we extend our investigation by implementing the message-passing algorithm with GNN, employing a topk pooling method following pick, prune, and link optimization strategies. This strategic approach aims to mitigate computational complexity and minimize latency, by 30 to 35 % which is particularly advantageous for decoding BCH codes. This advancement promises to enhance the efficiency of communication systems significantly.
Index Terms—GNN; DL; channel decoding; BCH codes
I. INTRODUCTION
In the evolving field of satellite communications, the use of General Purpose Processors (GPPs) like GPUs for efficient Physical Layer (PHY) functions is a significant scientific advancement towards the implementation of ultra-flexible regenerative software-defined satellites. Decoding algorithms, such as Bose, Chaudhuri, Hocquenghem (BCH) codes [1], are crucial for error correction, forming a vital part of the Physical Layer in satellite communications. However, the implementation of these decoding algorithms on GPPs, results in an inherent increase in computational complexity and data needs due to error correction and storage requirements.This underscores the urgent need for the development of efficient on-board error correction methodologies.
Traditional methods for executing PHY functions often face the dual challenges of high computational complexity and latency, particularly in decoding BCH codes through iterative processes. As shown in [2], [3], [4] with a Fast Forward Error Correction Toolbox that aligns with PHY function requirements in satellites, such challenges can be addressed by incorporating GNNs into the PHY functions of softwaredefined satellites, simplify decoding, enhance adaptability, and enable codec updates, leveraging superior computational resources and decoding accuracy. The GNNs, with their varied graph structure and potential, enhance error correction and channel decoding capabilities, particularly in BCH codes as studied in [5]. They reduce computational complexity while increasing decoding accuracy, making them significant in satellite communications (satcom) where power, processing resources, and latency are critical. Research on the DVBS2(X) standard in [6], [7] showed that running PHY functions on GPUs improves performance due to parallel processing. Furthermore, this approach enables a beneficial trade-off between error performance and decoding efficiency, a crucial

balance in designing robust and efficient satcom systems. The resilience and effectiveness of GNNs, coupled with the power of GPPs like GPUs, provide a comprehensive solution that not only meets but exceeds the parameters of modern satellite communication systems, as discussed in [8] and [9].
In this paper, our investigation, inspired by [10], [11], [12], explores the balance between performance and complexity in BCH codes by altering the graph structure using GNNs and the PPL pooling method from [13]. The goal is to minimize computational complexity while maintaining performing error correction and decoding in line with satcom standards, potentially strengthening the advantages of software-defined satellite systems. Traditional decoding algorithms like BP are limited in scalability and memory-intensive. GNN-based code representations are essential for managing graph-structured data, but they have linearly scaling computational complexity. Despite Neural Networks’ success, their effectiveness in decoding tasks remains under scrutiny. Satellites in global communication systems need efficient strategies due to limited onboard coding resources compared to terrestrial networks.
The rest of this paper is organized in the following manner: Section II examines the BP algorithm for BCH codes. Section III presents the proposed GNN using PPL Pool with Topk algorithm for enhanced BCH decoding. Section IV details the training process and hyper-parameter tuning optimizations. Section V applies the GNN with PPL Pool Topk architecture to various code lengths, providing training results and BLER, BER, and Timing Complexity analyses. Finally, Section VI contains conclusion remarks and potential research directions.
II. BACKGROUND ON BELIEF PROPAGATION IN BCH CODES
The end-to-end system designed for BCH code decoding, depicted in Fig.1, establishes a comprehensive digital communication pipeline. It begins with a parity-check-matrix (PCM) that converts binary messages into codewords and uses a graph-based method with PPL-Pool and Top-k strategy for decoding by transforming the PCM into an adjacency matrix for GNN operations. For simplicity, the channel model [12] uses an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, the GNN model’s resilience is boosted by adding controlled noise to node features, allowing it to adapt to various channel conditions. The transmitter modulates encoded messages using binary phase shift keying (BPSK), and demodulates received symbols into log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). These LLRs are decoded using a GNN-based decoder for efficient error correction. The procedure includes binary data generation, noise variance computation, encoding, padding, mapping to modulation symbols, and transmission via the AWGN channel.

979-8-3503-0405-3/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

1328

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WS09 IEEE ICC 2024 4th Workshop on Satellite Mega-Constellations in the 6G Era

A. Mathematical Definitions and LLR Transformation

As a baseline for this paper, we select two binary linear
block codes C(q, p), specifically BCH codes, with parameters
(63,45) and (127,106), corresponding to code rates of 0.714
and 0.835, respectively. This code is determined by paritycheck matrix Pϵ{0, 1}(q−p)×q, where q denotes variable nodes
that symbolize codeword bits, while p = q − k signifies
check nodes associated with parity-check equations respectively. Given a message mϵ{0, 1}p, its codeword w is given by PwT = 0. Assuming BPSK modulation, the transmitted signal
s of w over an AWGN channel is s = 1 − 2w. The received
signal r is r = s + e, where e is the noise vector with power η2, ei ∼ N (0, η2). The SNR in dB is γ = 10 log10(1/η2). At the receiver, the decoder processes r to produce an estimate
wˆ, with a decoding error occurring when wˆ ≠ w. The tanner
graph representation for the binary linear block code C(q, p) is
depicted by G(A, B, L), where A = {h1, . . . , hq}, represents variable nodes, B = {c1, . . . , cp} represents check nodes, and L denotes edges based on the non-zero entries of the
parity-check matrix P. If Pji = 1, the variable node hi is connected to the check node cj. The method of Belief Propagation (BP) decoding employs LLRs from the channel, which are assigned for the codeword w as s in Rn. Under
BPSK modulation over an AWGN channel, the LLR for bit
wi is computed as si as follows:

si

=

ln

P (ri|wi P (ri|wi

= =

0) 1)

=

2ri η2

(1)

with ri being the received signal and η2 the noise power.

B. Node Update Mechanisms in BP Decoding for BCH Codes

Employing the Tanner graph of the BCH codes with pa-
rameters (63,45) and (127,106), the Belief Propagation (BP)
algorithm is configured to iteratively revise messages, thereby
providing a higher code rate. The process starts with the initialization of the LLR messages µ(c0j)→hi from the channel statistics, specifically the received signal ri and noise power η2. At each iteration t, the update rules are as follows:
1) Message Update from Check Nodes to Variable Nodes: The message µ(ctj)→hi is updated for each check node cj and connected variable node hi based on the incoming messages from other variable nodes connected to cj, excluding hi:

 µ(ctj)→hi = 2 tanh−1 

tanh

 

µh(t→−1cj)

 

(2)

2

h∈M (cj )\hi

2) Message Update from Variable Nodes to Check Nodes:
For every variable node hi linked to a check node cj, the computation of the message µ(hti)→cj takes into account the received LLR si and the messages from all check nodes associated with hi, with the exception of cj as follows:

µ(hti)→cj = si +

µ(ct→) hi

(3)

c∈M (hi)\cj

3) A Posteriori LLR Update: Upon the completion of each iteration, the a posteriori LLR Lh(ti) for every variable node hi undergoes an update. This update is the cumulative result

of the received LLR si and all incoming messages from the check nodes linked to it that is given as follows:

Lh(ti) = si +

µ(ct→) hi

(4)

c∈M (hi)

The iterative procedure persists until either a state of convergence is achieved or the maximum iteration count, denoted as T , is met. The codeword estimate wˆ is derived from the final a posteriori LLRs, with wˆi = 0 if L(hTi ) > 0, and wˆi = 1 otherwise.

III. PROPOSED GNN USING PPL POOL WITH TOPK ALGORITHM FOR ENHANCED BCH DECODING
A. Preliminary Validation and Transformation
For a BCH code with a parity-check matrix P, the decoding process begins by creating a bipartite graph representation. This is key for applying GNNs in the BP decoding algorithm. The graph initialization process includes the following steps:
1) Matrix Validation: The parity-check matrix (P) is checked to confirm that no rows or columns are completely zero, a crucial step for preserving the graph structure’s integrity.

Validity(P) = 1 if ∄i, j Pij = 0 and ∄j, i Pij = 0 0 otherwise (5)
2) Edge Index Extraction: The edge index E, which links the variable nodes V and check nodes C, is derived from the matrix P at locations where Pij = 1.

E = {(i + |V |, j) | Pij = 1}

(6)

3) Adjacency Matrix Construction: Using the edge index E, a non-symmetric adjacency matrix A is formed. In this matrix, Aij = 1 signifies a link from node i to node j, maintaining the bipartite characteristic of the graph.

Aij =

1 0

if (i, j) ∈ E otherwise

(7)

B. Node Feature Initialization
4) Degree Computation: For every node hi in the variable set V and cj in the check set C, calculate their degrees d(hi) and d(cj), respectively, which reflect the number of connections to other nodes.

d(hi) = Pij and d(cj) = Pij

(8)

j

i

5) Feature Vector Assignment: Every node is allocated a feature vector. The degree serves as the feature for variable nodes, while check nodes, initially zero, are later updated to include their degrees.

fhi = d(hi) · 1 and fcj = d(cj) · 1

(9)

6) Node Masking: A masking procedure is used to zero out the feature vectors of nodes with zero degree. This regularization technique removes the need to handle nodes not participating in the decoding process.

fh′ i =

0 fhi

if d(hi) = 0 and otherwise

fc′j =

0 fcj

if d(cj) = 0 otherwise

(10)

1329
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WS09 IEEE ICC 2024 4th Workshop on Satellite Mega-Constellations in the 6G Era

Fig. 1. End-to-End System overview for GNN with PPL-Pool Topk Strategy

7) Feature Augmentation: To complete the node features, a minor disturbance in the form of random noise is added to the feature vectors. Controlled noise introduction to node features in the GNN model simulates diverse operational scenarios, enhancing its robustness, adaptability, and promoting generalization across varying channel conditions.

fh′′i,cj = fh′ i,cj + ϵ

(11)

where ϵ ∼ U(0, α), and α is a small scalar. The initialization process precisely establishes the graph structure and node features following BCH codes. This method leverages GNNs’ capacity to understand complex node inter-dependencies, possibly improving decoding efficiency to align with 5G standards.

C. Optimization Algorithm for Custom PPL Pooling with Topk Strategy
Pooling, a key element in GNN decoding optimization, boosts accuracy and efficiency. The optimization is driven by the PPL-Pool with Topk strategy, simplifying the architecture while retaining informative node properties. It serves three main roles:
Error Spread Reduction: By focusing on key nodes, the system lessens the influence of less significant nodes, reducing error propagation across GNN’s iterative layers.
Speed and Efficiency Enhancement: The optimization that reduces graph size speeds up processing time, crucial in realtime decoding scenarios where speed is key.
Complex Data Simplification: As the GNN navigates, pooling breaks down the complex data structure, aiding the GNN in understanding complex patterns.
These traits highlight the important role of pooling in GNN-based decoding, underscoring its significance in ensuring efficient and accurate data processing.
8) Top-K Node Selection: The process begins by creating a bipartite graph that mirrors the inherent structure of BCH codes. This graph, with the establishment of set variable node denoted by V and set check node denoted by C, we lay the groundwork for subsequent modifications in the graph.

Graph Initialization ≡ Bipartite Graph(V, C) (12)

The top-k node selection, a key step, is based on the nodes degrees in BCH codes, which relate to their decoding reliability. The selection ratio ρ is used to calculate k, the number of nodes to be kept, which is calculated as, k = ⌈ρ · |V |⌉, in this context, |V | denotes the aggregate node count in the graph structure. The topk nodes, distinguished by their degree scores,

are chosen due to their substantial impact on the decoding procedure.The nodes are chosen as follows:

topkS = {hi ∪ cj | d(hi) or d(cj) is among the top k values}. (13)
9) Node Feature Pick: This process refines the initial feature matrix F ′ by identifying significant features through a top-k operation, yielding indicesprimary from F ′. The unique
selection of indices is denoted as selected nodes, is given as
follows:

selected nodes = unique(topk ∪{hi ∪cj | fh′ i,cj is significant}) (14)
The pruned feature matrix F ′′, obtained from F ′ using
selected nodes, is subsequently utilized for GNN processing. 10) Node Feature Prune: After the node features picked
in the GNN framework for BCH codes, the pruning phase
begins. This step is crucial for the efficiency of GNN decoding,
involves ∀i ∈ topk, i < |V |, |V | signifies the aggregate count of variable nodes in the graph G. The Fp′r′uned denotes the reduced feature matrix, retaining only the most significant
features as per the top indices, top indices, is given by

Fp′r′uned = F ′[:, top indices]

(15)

This process effectively minimizes computational load and
accentuates important features. 11) Node Feature Link: After picking and pruning node
features, sparse connectivity is adjusted. This involves masking
edges E to keep those connected to selected nodes S, forming E′. The resulting graph G′ = (V, C) with E′ and updated properties P ′ is optimized for decoding. In essence, E′ =
{e ∈ E | mask(e) = 1}, where mask(e) denotes connection to nodes in S, and P ′ = P |E′ .The graph’s adjacency matrix is adjusted based on the edge index E′, preserving the graph’s
sparse, bipartite structure for efficient GNN processing.

A′ = sparse connect(A, E′)

(16)

12) Graph Pooling Operation: Pooling operations in GNNs for BCH codes optimize the sparse feature matrix F ′′ and adjacency matrix A′. This involves verifying the sparsity of

F and A, densifying for pre-processing if needed, and re-

sparsifying after adjustments. Top indices guide the sparsitypreserving reduction of F ′′ to Fpool and the refinement of A′
to Apool:

Fpool ← gather sparse(F ′, top indices)

(17)

Apool ← sparse connect(A, top indices)

(18)

These steps maintain the graph’s sparsity, concentrating on key features and connections for effective GNN functioning.

1330
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WS09 IEEE ICC 2024 4th Workshop on Satellite Mega-Constellations in the 6G Era

here Wi and bi are the respective weights and bias of the i-th layer, and σi is the activation function. The GNN integrates pooling operations for enhanced expressiveness in iterative BP decoding. Node embeddings hcn and hvn are refined iteratively and selected via a pooling strategy prioritizing significant nodes. Embeddings are updated each iteration t following
certain rules.

hc(tn+1) = MLPcn h(ctn), Aggregate({h(vtn)}) (20)
hv(tn+1) = MLPvn hv(tn), Aggregate({h(ctn)})

Fig. 2. GNN based decoder with PPL Pool Topk strategy incorporated
Algorithm 1 : Graph Neural Network-Aided Decoding for BCH Codes
1: Inputs: d, G, P , η2, T1 2: Output: wˆ 3: Initialize wˆ(0) with LLRs computed from y using Eq. (1) 4: Construct bipartite graph G(V, C) from P using Eq. (13) 5: Compute degree for V and C using Eq. (8) 6: Assign feature vectors fV and fC using Eq. (9) 7: Validate parity-check matrix P using Eq. (5) 8: If Validity(P ) = 0, terminate the algorithm 9: Initialize the GNN with fV and fC 10: for m = 0 to T1 do 11: Apply BP decoding to update wˆ using Eq. (2)-(4) 12: Identify top-k nodes using Eq. (14) 13: Select features from F using Eq. (16) 14: Prune and augment the graph G using Eqs. (19)-(20) 15: Use GNN Pooling to obtain Fpool, Apool 16: Apply Dynamic MLP to update embeddings using Eqs.
(22)-(24) 17: Transform embeddings back to LLRs 18: Increment m 19: end for 20: return wˆ (Decoded output)

D. Adaptive GNN Architecture for PPL Pool with Topk strategy
The Dynamic MLP layer in the GNN architecture dynamically adjusts to changes in input sizes due to pooling operations, allowing it to adapt to alterations in graph topology without the need for manual adjustments, allowing the same infrastructure for different rate codecs. It enhances flexibility and efficiency by enabling block reuse without manual reconfiguration. The Dynamic MLP layer’s operation, given an input X ∈ RB×d, where B is the batch size and d symbolizes the dimensionality of the feature, the operation of the Dynamic MLP layer can be mathematically defined by the following transformation:

Fi(X) = σi(WiX + bi)

(19)

The Aggregate function aggregates messages from neighboring nodes, either by summing or averaging. After pooling, embeddings are converted back to log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) for belief propagation. The update embeddings layer handles message computation, aggregation, and embedding updates. Updated embeddings are derived from input tensors hfrom (transmitting vertices) and hto (receiving vertices).
hto new = DynamicM LP (hto ⊕ AggregateM essages(hfrom, hto))
(21)
where ⊕ indicates the concatenation of tensors, and AggregateMessages is a function that compiles incoming messages from the edges of the graph, utilizing either summation or averaging. In essence, the GNN uses a Dynamic MLP to calculate messages for the Tanner graph’s edges and update embeddings from aggregated messages. Transmitting (hfrom) and receiving (hto) vertices form a feature tensor, processed to create edge messages. These messages are aggregated based on graph connectivity, resulting in updated vertex embeddings (hto new), crucial for BCH code decoding.
IV. TRAINING PROCESS
Our GNN architecture employs the PPL Pooling with TopK algorithm shown in Algorithm 1 and Glorot uniform distribution to enhance the graph representation of BCH codes. It initiates by building a bipartite graph from the BCH code’s PCM, validates it, and establishes node features according to connectivity.
1) Hyperparameter Optimization: The suggested GNN decoder enhances performance with optimized hyper-parameters. It functions under diverse SNR conditions (2 dB to 9 dB), uses a Monte Carlo framework for reliable statistical evaluation, and includes 20 dimensional message embeddings and 40 hidden units across 3 layers. The GNN undergoes 8 iterations with a mean aggregation function, manages pooled node embeddings with a training batch size of 256, and sets learning rates at 10−3, 10−4, and 10−5 for comprehensive optimization. Our GNN decoder, with optimized hyper-parameters, handles complex channels effectively. Its superior adaptability and performance outshine traditional decoders, primarily designed for AWGN channels.
2) Loss function and Optimization Strategy: It employs a tailored Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) loss function, adjusted for the pooled node embeddings from the PPL Pool with

1331
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WS09 IEEE ICC 2024 4th Workshop on Satellite Mega-Constellations in the 6G Era

TopK algorithm. The BCE loss considers the iterative belief propagation decoding process, expressed as:

1

Niter −1 n−1

L=−

n × Niter it=0 i=0

wi log(σ(ˆlit,i))

(22)

+ (1 − wi) log(1 − σ(ˆlit,i))

here the sigmoid activation function, denoted as σ(x), is

defined

as

1 1+e−x

,

(ˆlit,i)

denotes

the

estimated

LLR

output

by

the GNN at the (ith) iteration for the (ith) example, and (wi)

represents the true label of the codeword bit.LLR estimates are

obtained from the final pooled embeddings, integrating channel

traits and belief propagation updates, expressed as:

ˆlit,i = si +

µ(ct→) hi

c∈M(hi )

(23)

with (si) being the initial LLR from the received signal, and (µc(t→) hi ) representing the message from check node (c) to variable node (hi) at iteration (t). Iterative update equations for messages between nodes adhere to standard BP rules, guaranteeing precise LLR estimates. The BCE loss function is attuned to the multi-iteration decoding process, aligning with the SNR range and BCH codes’ characteristics. The Adam optimizer’s adaptive learning rate is set relative to training iterations per learning rate, offering a broad search space for optimal parameters. The GNN decoder refines LLR estimates iteratively, resulting in codeword estimation. Node embeddings are pooled during BP operations, boosting the GNN’s efficiency. Dynamic MLP layers manage message computation and aggregation.

TABLE I HYPER-PARAMETERS OF THE PROPOSED GNN FOR BCH CODES

Parameter
SNR range (γmin, γmax) Monte Carlo batch size Monte Carlo iterations Target block errors GNN embedding dimensions GNN message dimensions GNN hidden units GNN layers GNN iterations GNN activation function GNN reduction operation Training batch size
Learning rates Training iterations per learning rate

Value
2 dB to 9 dB 10000 100 2000 20 20 40 3 8 tanh mean 256
10−3, 10−4, 10−5 35000, 300000, 300000

V. RESULTS
Performance assessment was carried out, as depicted in Fig. 3 using simulations on an Intel(R) Xenon(R) Gold 6230 processor with 20 cores and a turbo boost up to 3.9GHz. The computational tasks were expedited using a dual NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU setup, each having 48GB of memory. The GNNPPL Pool with Topk algorithm was trained using TensorFlow, with hyper-parameters listed in Table I.
Besides the standard BLER and BER, the model’s efficiency is gauged by the runtime metric, aiding GNN’s adaptability. The Decoding Time Per Bit metric, measures bit decoding speed for a specific Eb/N0 value. Despite aiming for lower runtime, various factors affect this metric. The inclusion of a

custom pooling layer can impact decoding time by reducing graph complexity. The time taken to decode a bit is given as follows:

T ime per bit =

Runtime(s)

(s/bit)

T otal number of bits processed

(24)

BER Performance comparison: As seen in Fig.3 (a) & (b),

in the BER analysis of BCH (63,45) and BCH (127,106)

codes, the GNN without PPl-Pool performs slightly better

at lower Eb/N0 levels (around 2 dB), making it suitable

for URLLC applications. It maintains this edge at mid-range

Eb/N0 levels (4-5 dB), handling moderate noise efficiently.

At higher Eb/N0 levels (6-9 dB), the GNN with PPl-Pool

performs comparably to the non-pooled GNN, highlighting its

scalability, especially for decoding larger blocks in software-

defined satellites without significant performance loss. This

makes it a robust choice for various SNR conditions. The

careful choice of hyper-parameters ensures the GNN’s ef-

fectiveness for both BCH code scenarios.Our GNN decoder,

optimized for diverse SNR conditions, is a groundbreaking

solution in satcoms. It not only meets but potentially exceeds

stringent BER thresholds, crucial for URLLC. Its performance

across various conditions overcomes ARQ latency challenges,

making it a robust solution for evolving satcom demands.

BLER Performance comparison: In the BLER analysis for

BCH (63,45) and (127,106), as shown in Fig.3 (c) & (d) the

non-pooled GNN decoder exhibits a slight advantage at low

Eb/N0 levels, particularly at 2 dB, suggesting its suitability

for harsher SNR environments where precise error correction

is paramount. As the SNR increases, both GNN architectures

display substantial performance gains, with the non-pooled

GNN maintaining a slender lead. However, this lead narrows

substantially at higher SNR levels (6-9 dB), where the GNN

with PPl-Pool demonstrates scalable efficiency, achieving near-

equivalent BLER to the non-pooled GNN for both code sizes.

This trend highlights the pooled GNN’s capacity for general-

ized and computationally efficient error correction, indicating

its potential for robust performance in the varied operational

conditions of software-defined satellites.

Time complexity performance analysis: In the analysis of

time per bit for BCH (63,45) and BCH (127,106), in Fig. 3 (e)

& (f) the GNN with PPl-Pool consistently surpasses the non-

pooled GNN, achieving a decoding speed increase of 30-35%

across the evaluated Eb/N0 range. The PPL-Pool enhances

GNN performance through a Pick-Prune-Link strategy: ’Pick’

isolates key nodes based on their error-correcting potential,

’Prune’ eliminates less vital nodes to streamline computation,

and ’Link’ reconnects crucial nodes to maintain decoding

accuracy. This method optimizes GNN topology for faster,

efficient decoding. This significant efficiency boost is vital for

software-defined satellites where computational resources are

scarce and decoding latency has a direct impact on system

performance. The pooling feature in the GNN not only ensures

error correction but also considerably quickens the decoding

process, a dual benefit that is essential for the high-throughput

requirements of contemporary satellite communications.

Strategic Implications:In 5G RAN architecture, BCH coded

GNN models excel for URLLC applications. The non-pooled

GNN provides consistent performance across SNRs, ideal for

critical URLLC tasks. The GNN with PPL-Pool, favored in

1332
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WS09 IEEE ICC 2024 4th Workshop on Satellite Mega-Constellations in the 6G Era

Fig. 3. BER performance of GNN for [a] BCH (63,45), [b] BCH(127,106) code of BPSK modulation, BLER performance of GNN for [c] BCH (63,45), [d] BCH(127,106) code of BPSK modulation, Time complexity performance of GNN for [e] BCH (63,45) and [f] BCH(127,106) code of BPSK modulation

high Eb/N0 scenarios, is adaptable and aids in resource allocation in software-defined satellites, especially under fluctuating conditions. The model choice depends on application needs, and their strengths can enhance a complex 5G RAN’s features, ensuring robust, scalable, and low-latency communication.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This work innovatively uses GNNs for decoding tasks in future software-defined satellite systems, demonstrating a good trade-off between complexity and performance when compared to classical implementation and non-optimized GNNbased implementations. The strategic incorporation of pooling operations in the proposed method decodes 30 to 35 percent faster manages computational complexity, thereby enhancing efficiency and performance in satellite communications. This holistic and iterative approach signifies a new era in communication systems. Future research should extend these methodologies to Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, potentially revolutionizing error correction for satellite communications. The exploration of neuromorphic processors, which simulate neural activities, could significantly enhance the power budget reduction onboard satellites when combined with the proposed approach, improving efficiency in resourcedemanding operations like channel decoding. This is crucial for achieving energy-efficient, high-performance processing in future regenerative satellite systems.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Shen, J. Zhang, S. Song, and K. B. Letaief, “Graph neural networks for wireless communications: From theory to practice,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 2022.

[2] G. Li, X. Yu, Y. Luo, and G. Wei, “A bottom-up design methodology of neural min-sum decoders for ldpc codes,” IET Communications, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 377–386, 2023.
[3] K. Han, G. Shen, and J. Hu, “A novel stochastic decoder for extended bch code based turbo product codes,” in ICC 2023-IEEE International Conference on Communications. IEEE, 2023, pp. 2964–2969.
[4] A. Cassagne, O. Hartmann, M. Leonardon, K. He, C. Leroux, R. Tajan, O. Aumage, D. Barthou, T. Tonnellier, V. Pignoly et al., “Aff3ct: A fast forward error correction toolbox!” SoftwareX, vol. 10, p. 100345, 2019.
[5] K. Tian, C. Yue, C. She, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic, “A scalable graph neural network decoder for short block codes,” in ICC 2023-IEEE International Conference on Communications. IEEE, 2023, pp. 1268–1273.
[6] J. Krivochiza, J. Duncan, J. Querol, and S. Chatzinotas, “End-to-end performance evaluation of slp waveforms,” IEEE Access, 2023.
[7] A. Cassagne, M. Leonardon, R. Tajan, C. Leroux, C. Je´go, O. Aumage, and D. Barthou, “A flexible and portable real-time dvb-s2 transceiver using multicore and simd cpus,” in 2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding (ISTC). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[8] G. Li and X. Yu, “The impact when neural min-sum variants meet ordered statistics decoding of ldpc codes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07129, 2023.
[9] Q. Wu, B. K. Ng, C.-T. Lam, X. Cen, Y. Liang, and Y. Ma, “Shared graph neural network for channel decoding,” Applied Sciences, vol. 13, no. 23, p. 12657, 2023.
[10] X. Zhang, Y. Qiu, W. Kong, J. Cui, and Y. Liu, “Bp flip decoding algorithm of polar code based on convolutional neural network,” in 2022 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC Workshops). IEEE, 2022, pp. 444–449.
[11] K. Niu, J. Dai, K. Tan, and J. Gao, “Deep learning methods for channel decoding: A brief tutorial,” in 2021 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC). IEEE, 2021, pp. 144–149.
[12] S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, F. A. Aoudia, and A. Keller, “Graph neural networks for channel decoding,” in 2022 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2022, pp. 486–491.
[13] D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, F. M. Bianchi, and C. Alippi, “Understanding pooling in graph neural networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/2110.05292, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05292

1333
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:18:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

