2024 8th International Symposium on Innovative Approaches in Smart Technologies (ISAS) | 979-8-3315-4010-4/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISAS64331.2024.10845577

Methods of Multi-Threshold Decoders Use in Mimo Systems And Methods of Assessing Their Performance

Gennady Ovechkin Department of Computational and
Applied Mathematics Ryazan State Radio Engineering
University, Ryazan, Russia 0000-0001-6887-2217
Gulmira Danenova Department of Information Technology
and Security Abylkas Saginov Karaganda Technical
University Karaganda, Kazakhstan 0000-0003-3301-7282

Dina Satybaldina Research Institute of Information
Security and Cryptology L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National
University Astana, Kazakhstan satybaldina_dzh@enu.kz 0000-0003-0291-4685
Nurlan Tashatov Department of Information Security L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National
University Astana, Kazakhstan 0000-0002-3271-2163

Zhuldyz Sailaukyzy Department of Information Technology
and Security Abylkas Saginov Karaganda Technical
University Karaganda, Kazakhstan 0000-0001-7605-7634

Abstract—This paper discusses use of multi-threshold decoders in the Multiple Input Multiple Output systems with fading radio channels. The main attention is paid to the problems of implementation of the multi-threshold decoders and performance, with a focus on preserving low complexity, which is critically important for achieving high speed of decoding. In modern communication systems, where data communication rates reach dozens and hundreds of Gbit/sec, decoding efficiency becomes a determinant in ensuring stable and reliable information transfer. The obtained results have shown that multi-threshold decoders due to its ability to almost optimally decode even very long codes with low computational complexity ensures high efficiency in channels with different types of fading, including multipath channels with intersymbol influence, when it is used jointly with the orthogonal frequency division multiplexing. Under these conditions, many noiseresistant codes are unfit for service due to their small length, which highlights the multi-threshold decoders advantages. These results confirm the possibility of multi-threshold decoders application in modern high-speed systems of digital data communication with complex nature of errors.
Keywords—channel coding, communications, decoding, error correcting codes, Multiple Input Multiple Output, multithreshold decoders, Rayleigh and Rician channels
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern wireless communication systems develop rapidly, which requires continuous improvement of data communication methods to increase their performance and reliability One of the key directions is use of technologies with Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO) that allows for significant increase in channel capacity and noise resistance due to spacedivision multiplexing of signals. In combination with Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM), MIMO systems are widely used in modern communication standards, such as LTE, Wi-Fi and 5G.

To ensure a high level of noise resistance and data communication correctness in such complex radio channels, it is important to use effective encoding and decoding methods. Currently, there are many noise-resistant codes, such as BoseChaudhuri-Hocquenghem block codes [1], Reed-Solomon codes [1], convolutional codes [1], Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [2], polar codes [3], turbo codes [4], and others. Not only corrective abilities of a code are of importance for system developers, but also producibility of its implementation, in particular, simplicity and possibility of high-speed operation encoder and, especially decoder. One of such methods is multi-threshold decoders (MTD) that demonstrate high performance under the conditions of limited resources and complex communication channels. These methods has been developed since 1970-s [5]. MTD have advantage of higher operation rate and performance with low noise level, which makes them especially useful for the OFDM systems.
This paper discusses methods of using multi-threshold decoders in MIMO systems to improve data communication under the conditions of complex fading radio channels. Special attention is paid to the assessment of fading radio channel characteristics and development of optimal algorithms to improve the communication quality under the conditions of actual operation. Different fading types are simulated, such as Rayleigh and Rician channels, which allows for suggesting solutions adjusted for real wireless systems with multipath propagation and signal fluctuations.
Multi-threshold decoding methods proved themselves to be effective and correctly operating ones under the conditions of fading channels, which is especially important for MIMO systems, where signal multipath propagation and complex noises can significantly decrease the communication quality [6-8]. Due to their noise resistance and ability to effectively correct errors with low computational complexity, MTD are widely studied and used to increase reliability of data

979-8-3315-4010-4/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

communication in such channels [9-15]. Their use in Multi Input Multi Output systems allows for improving performance, while ensuring stable communication even under the conditions of significant signal fading [16, 17]. It is worth noting that modern communication networks operate in significantly more complex conditions, including Doppler shift and other factors impacting the data communication quality [16, 17]. Doppler shift caused by movement of signal sources and receivers results in changes of radio frequencies, which can significantly impair communication. In combination with multipath propagations and fading channels that are characteristic of the MIMO systems, these factors significantly interfere with stability and reliability of data communication. It is under these conditions when multithreshold decoders demonstrate their efficiency by correct processing of signals and provision of high noise resistance.
The purpose of this paper is to research the use of multithreshold decoders in MIMO systems with fading radio channels. An important aspect is preservation of low complexity of MTD implementation, which is critical for achieving high decoding rates required in modern communication systems where data communication rates reach dozens and hundreds of Gbit/sec.
II. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Multi-threshold decoders for a block self-orthogonal code
Multi-threshold decoders are an effective instrument for decoding binary linear systematic block or convolutional selforthogonal codes (SOC). SOC are distinguished by that the structure of the checks, which control the informational character, are already orthogonal in relation to this character. This feature makes them especially resistant to errors when communicating data via noisy channels.
SOC Characteristics: Generator Polynomial: Usually, SOCs are defined using generator polynomials g(x), whose differential triangles (a set of differences between all degrees with non-zero coefficients) do not contain identical elements. This excludes recurrent dependencies between the characters and increases error-correcting capabilities of the code. Code Distance: The code distance d in SOC equals the number of non-zero components forming the polynomial increased by 1. This distance defines the minimal number of errors, which cab be detected and corrected by the code. Number of the Information Characters k: In block SOC with code rate R=1/2, number of information characters k depends on maximal degree of generator polynomial m. Minimal value k is calculated as 2m+1. Code Length n: Code length n is such systems equals 2k, which reflects the balance between the number of information characters and number of check characters.
An example of a block SOC encoder is shown in Fig. 1 [18]. This code is characterized by the parameters of n=26, k=13, R=1/2, d=5, g(x)=1+x+x4+x6.
The multi-threshold decoder is an iterative method for decoding self-orthogonal block or convolutional codes [18]. The algorithm of a multi-threshold decoder is shown in Table 1.
In Figure 2, the step-by-step symbol inversion process in the multi-threshold decoder is illustrated. Each line represents the change in the value of individual symbols (0 or 1) during the decoding iterations. The symbols are inverted based on the

sum of neighboring values and the threshold decision at each step.

Fig. 1. Graph of Binary Block Self-Orthogonal Code Encoder

TABLE I.

THRESHOLD DECODER ALGORITHM

Step
Step 1: Initialization
Step 2: Calculation of Check Sums
Step 3: Threshold Decision
Step 4: Symbol Inversion
Step 5: Update the Difference Register
Step 6: Move to the Next Symbol
Step 7: Check Iteration
Completion Step 8: Output the
Decoded Data

Description Input the initial data: information symbols uk (bitstream). Initialize the registers: syndrome
register and difference register. For each symbol, calculate the sum of checks with neighboring symbols: Lk=∑Sm+rk where Sm are the syndromes, and rk is the value from the
difference register. If the sum Lk>T (where T is the threshold), the symbol is inverted. If Lk≤T, the symbol remains
unchanged. The symbols that pass the threshold decision are
inverted (changed from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 0). If a symbol was inverted, the difference register is updated to track this, and it will influence the
following iterations. Move to the next symbol and repeat the steps of
calculating the check sums and inverting the symbol if needed.
If the maximum number of iterations is reached, the process ends. If not, go back to Step 2 for the
next iteration. After all iterations are completed, the final
decoded data is output.

Fig. 2. Symbol Inversion Process in a Multi-Threshold Decoder
As it is seen from the diagram, each iteration of a multithreshold decoder differs from the standard threshold decoder, which is the basis for the diagram, only by presence of a differential register. This register records information characters changed by a threshold element. It is important to note that solutions for the threshold element saved in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

differential register are used by other threshold elements at the next stage of decoding.
B. Methods of Using the Multi-Threshold Decoders in Fading MIMO Systems
Under the conditions of wireless data communication systems, such as MIMO systems, the signal communicated via the channels is subjected to multiple impacts that may cause fading. For accurate simulation and analysis of these phenomena, mathematical models of fading based on statistical distribution are often used. The basic models are Rayleigh and Rice distribution that assist in simulating various scenarios of multipath propagation and fadings in the communication channels.
To assess the performance of a multi-threshold decoder under the conditions of fading, such as uncorrelated Rayleigh and Rician channels, it is important to take into account error probabilities that describe the system behavior depending on the conditions of the signal propagation.
For the uncorrelated Rayleigh and Rician channel, where the signal is subjected to multipath propagation under the non-line-of-sight (NLOS) conditions, probability of a bit error P is expressed as follows:

= 1−

/,

(1)

/

where E /N is a character-coded (dimensionless) signal/noise ratio (SNR). This expression is applied to a transfer using binary phase shift keying (BPSK), amplitude shift keying with bitmap envelope (AWGN), and with zero Doppler shift Fd = 0. This supposes idealized situation when there is no any additional impact of Doppler effects on the signal.
Error Probability in the Channel with Rician Fading. In case when the channel is damaged by Rician fading, it means there is both a line-of-sight(LOS), and multipath components, error probability varies depending on the channel parameters. Bit error probability for a Rician channel with the Rice coefficient k is set by the following expression:

=

/,

(2)

/

where k is the Rice coefficient that reflects the ratio of the direct signal power to the multipath signals power, to calculate the error probability, integral Q(x), erfc() is used, which is an error function complement. This function describes errors distribution depending on the noise intensity in the channel.
Based on the expressions for error probability in the Rayleigh and Rician channels, the graphs are built for the dependency of th bit error probability Pb on the signal/noise ratio, where Eb/N0 is energy per bit, and N0 is spectral noise density. Figures 3 and 4 present curve 3 that shows how bit error probability changes depending on the noise level in the channel.

P
b

2

3

10-2 1

10-4

4

1) practMTD

2) practP0

3) theorP0

4) theorOD

10-6

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8 E /N , dB

b0

Fig. 3. Analytical Estimation of Error Probability and Simulation Results for Multi-Threshold Decoder in the Rayleigh Channel

P
b

2

3

10-2 1

10-4 4

1) practMTD 10-6 2) practP0
3) theorP0 4) theorOD

0

1

2

3

4

5

Eb/N0, dB

Fig. 4. Analytical Estimation of Error Probability and Simulation Results for Multi-Threshold Decoder in the Rician Channel

Given that MTD is able to operate almost as an optimal decoder even at high noise level in the channel, we substitute expression (1) and, having made an assumption that the minimum code distance d is odd, we obtain the lower estimate for the bit error probability for the MTD in the Rayleigh channel:

= ∑ %( )/

!

1−

" !

#

$1 −

1−

"

)
/ ( (3)
/

Similarly, under the same conditions and with the same assumptions, the bit error probability in the Rician channel is calculated as follows:

= ∑ %( )/ * +

/ , 1−*+
/

)
/ , (4)
/

These expressions were used to assess the lower estimates of the MTD error probabilities in the uncorrelated Rayleigh and Rician channels, the results of which are shown in Fig. 3 and 4 by curve 4.
The analysis of operation of the MIMO systems that are simulated in the Rayleigh and Rician channels using multithreshold decoder (MTD) is shown in the table II.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II.

TABLE OF THE ANALYSIS OF OPERATION OF THE MIMO
SYSTEMS

Parameters Encoding Use

Rayleigh Channel (curve 1)
Block Self-Orthogonal Code

Rician Channel (curve 4)
Block Self-Orthogonal Code

Codeword Length Codeword Length
Code Rate Minimum Code
Distance Error Rate without
Coding Error Rate with
MTD Start of MTD Performance Improvement Coherence of the
Analytical Assessment
Conclusion on the MTD Performance
Conclusion

20,000 bit 20,000 bit
R=2/4
d=9
Significantly Higher (curve 2)
Significantly Lower (curve 1)
With Eb/N0 = 5 dB
Accords well with the simulation results
MTD is able to approach optimal decoder performance
with multipath propagation
High efficiency of the MTD in MIMO
systems with Rayleigh fading

20,000 bit 20,000 bit
R=2/4
d=9
Significantly Higher (curve 2)
Significantly Lower (curve 4)
With Eb/N0 = 2 dB
Accords well with the simulation results
MTD is able to approach optimal decoder performance with line of sight
presence High efficiency of the
MTD in MIMO systems with Rician
fading

C. Simulating multi-threshold decoder (MTD) in MIMO systems
Next, we consider the process of simulating multithreshold decoder (MTD) in MIMO systems using Rayleigh and Rician channels, and present the simulation results.
Fig. 5 shows a diagram of the data communication system model for the Rayleigh or Rician channels in MIMO configuration used when obtaining the results. Unlike Unlike the Gaussian channel, a multiplicative noise component appears in fading MIMO systems, which is caused by multipath propagation and different signal trajectories that are received by multiple antennas. This component requires the demodulator to make not only hard decisions, but soft decisions for accurate decoding of the received bits.

Fig. 5. Structural model of the system for data communication via Rayleigh and Rician channels
In this model of the data communication system, effects of multiplicative noise was removed in the demodulator, and then standard demodulation was applied similar to that used in the Gaussian channel. At the same time, more complex demodulation algorithms that could have ensured receipt of more soft solutions with higher accuracy were not considered.

To obtain the presented characteristics, we used multithreshold decoder for self-orthogonal code with code rate R=8/16 and parallel cascading. The code had maximal code distance d=17 and length of approximately n=32000 bit. System modulation belonged to QPSK type, and the demodulator formed only hard solutions in relation to the received bits. MTD parameters were adjusted to the channel features and the code used to achieve the optimal performance.
III. RESULTS
All simulation results were obtained using the specially developed software tools for data communication system modeling.
On Fig. 6, curve 1 illustrates dependence of the bit error probability Pb of the multi-threshold decoder on the signal/noise ratio (Eb/N0) in the channel with additive white Gaussian noise, where there are no fading. This graph is the base line for further comparison with the results of simulation in the MIMO systems operating under the conditions of fading.
Curves 2 and 3 in this graph show the MTD characteristics in the MIMO systems with Rayleigh fading and Doppler frequency Fd=50 and 100 Hz, respectively. In these systems, signal on the receiving side comes only through reflected paths, which indicates non-line-of-sight (NLOS) between the transmitter and receiver. Unlike the Gaussian channel, Rayleigh fading significantly impairs the system performance. Although, with higher Doppler frequencies (fast fading), MTD in MIMO systems demonstrates higher fault tolerance.
The reason for this consists in that slow fading often disrupt entire sequences of adjacent bits, which causes serious problems for error correction in the code block. Both MTD, and other correction methods do not cope with such large number of erroneous bits.
To improve the MTD performance in the MIMO systems with slow fading, a longer interleaver can be used, which allows for interrupting long erroneous bit stream. For efficient interleaver operation, its length shall amount to about hundreds of thousands of bits; this improves error correction and increases reliability of data communication.

P
b 10-1
1 10-2 10-3

2 3

5

4

6 7

1) AWGN 2) Rayleigh Fd=50 3) Rayleigh Fd=100 4) Rician K=1, Fd=150 5) Rician K=2, Fd=100 6) Rician K=2, Fd=150 7) Rician K=5, Fd=100 8) Rician K=5, Fd=150 9) Rician K=5, Fd=200 10) Rician K=10, Fd=100

10-4

10

8

9

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14 Eb/N0, dB

Fig. 6. MTD performance under the ponditions of a fading channel

To analyze the MTD operation in Rician fading channels, various combinations of Rice coefficient (K) and Doppler frequencies (Fd) were studied. This parameters impact the data communication quality, especially under the conditions of multipath propagation and fading. The below table III

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

describes the main characteristics of each variant of the model, their impact on the system performance and conclusions made based on the results obtained.

TABLE III. TABLE OF THE ANALYSIS OF THE RICE COEFFICIENT AND DOPPLER FREQUENCIES IMPACT ON THE MTD OPERATION

Curve 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Rice Coefficient
(K) 1
2
2
5
5 5
10

Doppler Frequency
(Fd) 150 Hz
100 Hz
150 Hz
100 Hz
150 Hz 200 Hz
100 Hz

Characteristics and Conclusions

Low Rice coefficient

demonstrates weak line-of-

sight.

The

system

performance is significantly

lower is compared to higher

coefficients K.

When the Rice coefficient is

increased up to 2 and the

Doppler frequency is

decreased,

data

communication stability

improves, although the

system is still subjected to

fading.

Frequency growth results in

some improvement of the

correcting ability. Faster

fading is easily compensated

by the MTD.

Growth of K up to 5

significantly improves noise

resistance. Line-of-sight

becomes dominating, which

leads to better results,

although there is still a loss

amounting 2 dB if compared

to the Gaussian channel.

Higher Doppler frequencies

decrease the probability that

the a significant part of the

code block will be damaged,

which improves the MTD

operation.

High fading frequency and

strong line-of-sight lead to

better characteristics. MTD

copes with the error

correction more efficiently.

Direct signal superiority over

the reflected signal is 10-fold.

Despite this, about 2 dB are

lost if compared to the

Gaussian channel, but in

general the system operates

consistently under the

difficult conditions.

In Fig. 7, curves 2, 4 and 6 show simulation results for Rician and Rayleigh fading with sequential bit communication. In this case, the same MTD and code were used as in Fig. 7. Simulation results for the parallel communication fo the bits are shown by curves 1, 3, and 5.

P
b 2

10-2

6 3

14

10-4

1) rayleighByCol, Fd=150

5

10-6 2) rayleighByRow, Fd=150 3) ricianByCol, K=1, Fd=150

4) ricianByRow K=1, Fd=150

5) ricianByCol, K=5, Fd=100

6) ricianByRow K=5, Fd=100

10-8

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 E /N , dB

b0

Fig. 7. MTD performance in a fading channel with serial and parallel bit communication

IV. CONCLUSION
During the research, we discussed methods of MTD use in MIMO systems to improve data communication under the conditions of complex fading radio channels. MTD operation was analyzed both in Rayleigh, and Rician channels, which allowed for obtaining detailed assessment of their performance under the conditions of multipath propagation of the signal and Doppler effects.
Simulation results showed that the MTD can approach the optimal decoder performance under the conditions of fading, especially in the channels with the line-of-sight, such as Rician channels. In the Rayleigh channels, MTD starts to demonstrate high performance with Eb/N0 = 5 dB, and in the Rician channels – already with Eb/N0 = 2 dB. This confirms that MTD excellently copes with the task of error correction under the conditions of both slow, and fast fading.
Special attention was paid to assessing radio channels, where it was important to take into account impact of the fading on the data communication efficiency. The analysis demonstrated that to improve the communication quality under such conditions, it is necessary to adjust the decoder parameters and apply methods of data interleaving, which allows for decreasing negative consequences of long erroneous bit sequences
Thus, using the multi-threshold decoders in fading MIMO systems is a way forward solution for ensuring reliable data communication in complex radio channels, which opens opportunities for further improvement of these technologies.
This research is funded by the Science Committee of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan (Grant No АР19679505).

REFERENCES
[1] M. Fossorier, D. Declerq, E. Biglieri, and others, Channel Code: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications. Academic Press Library in Mobile and Wireless Communications, Elsevier, 2014.
[2] D.J. MacKay and R.M. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes”, Electron. Lett, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645– 1646, 1996.
[3] E. Arikan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans Inf Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[4] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P.Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon Limit Error-Correcting Coding and Decoding: Turbo-Codes”, Proceeding of ICC’93, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1064–1070, May 1993.
[5] V.V. Zolotarev, A device for linear convolutional codes decoding, Inventor's certificate of the USSR no.492878, Bulletin of inventions, no.43, 1975.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[6] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes”, IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol.8, no.1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[7] V.V. Zolotarev and G.V. Ovechkin, “Algorithm of multithreshold decoding for Gaussian channels”, Automation and Remote Control, no.69, pp.1086–1100. 2008.
[8] V.V. Zolotarev, Y.B. Zubarev, and G.V. Ovechkin, “Optimization Code Theory and Multithreshold Algorithms”, ITU, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.itu.int/pub/S-GEN-OCTMA-2015
[9] V.V. Zolotarev, G.V. Ovechkin I.V. , Chulkov P.V. , Ovechkin, S.V. Averin, D.Zh. Satibaldina, and V.T. Kao, “Review of achievements in the optimization coding theory for satellite channels and Earth remote sensing systems: 25 years of evolution”, Sovremennye Problemy Distantsionnogo Zondirovaniya Zemli iz Kosmosa, vol.14, no.1, pp.924, 2017.
[10] V. Zolotarev, G. Ovechkin, D. Satybaldina, N. Tashatov, A. Adamova, and V. Mishin, “Efficiency multithreshold decoders for self-orthogonal block codes for optical channels”, International Journal of Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing, vol.8, pp. 487–495, 2014.
[11] Zolotarev V., Ovechkin G., Satybaldina D., Tashatov N., and
Egamberdiyev E., “Divergence coding for convolutional codes”,
MATEC Web of Conferences, 2017, [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1051/matecconf/201712505009
[12] V. Zolotarev, G. Ovechkin, P. Ovechkin and E. Egamberdiyev, “Usage of divergence within concatenated multithreshold decoding convolutional codes”, Proc. of int. conf. “Advances in Wireless and Optical Communications (RTUWO)”, pp. 112–116, January 2017.

[13] V.V. Zolotarev, G.V. Ovechkin, P.V. Ovechkin, and A.N. Pilkin, “The Application of Modulo q Check Codes to Increase the Efficiency of Non-Binary Multithreshold Decoders Over q-ary Symmetric Channel”, Proceedings of Moscow Workshop on Electronic and Networking Technologies (MWENT), pp.1-5, March 2018.
[14] V.V. Zolotarev and G.V. Ovechkin “Efficient Multithreshold Decoding of Nonbinary Codes”, Journal of Communications Technology and Electronics, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 302–306, 2010.
[15] D.Z., Satybaldina, V.V., Zolotarev, G.V., Ovechkin and Zh. Sailau kyzy, “New concatenation schemes based on the multithreshold decoders of convolutional self-orthogonal codes for gaussian channels,” Eurasian Journal of Mathematical and Computer Applications, vol. 9(4), pp.51-62, December 2022.
[16] Zh. Sailaukyzy, D. Satybaldina, G. Danenova, M. Kokkoz, and Tashatov N., “Design of Majority Decoded Codes and Decoding Algorithm Based on Error Propagation Analysis”, 7th International Symposium on Innovative Approaches in Smart Technologies, pp. 6670, Now. 2023.
[17] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communication. Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[18] S. Giosic, Advanced wireless communications. 4G technologies. Wiley & Sons, 2004.
.

This research is funded by the Science Committee of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan (Grant No АР19679505).
G. Ovechkin is with the Department of Computational and Applied Mathematics, Ryazan State Radio Engineering University, Ryazan, Russia (e-mail: g_ovechkin@mail.ru).
D. Satybaldina is with the Research Institute of Information Security and Cryptology, L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University, Astana 010008, Kazakhstan, (e-mail: satybaldina_dzh@enu.kz).
N. Tashatov is with the Department of Information Security, L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University, Astana 010008, Kazakhstan, (e-mail: tash.nur@mail.ru).
Zh. SailaAukuythzoyr,izGe.dDliacennenseodvauasreeliwmiitthedDteop: aYrotmnseenitUonfiIvn.fDoormwantloioandeTdecohnnJoulongey2a4n,2d0S2e6cautr1it5y:,1A7:b3y2lkUaTsCSafrgoimnoIvEKEEarXagpalonrdea. TReecshtrnicictiaolnUs naipvpelrys.ity, Karaganda, Kazakhstan, (e-mail: zhuldyzsailaukyzy@gmail.com).

