40

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Utilizing Multi-Body Interactions in a CMOS-Based Ising Machine for LDPC Decoding

Eslam Elmitwalli , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Zeljko Ignjatovic , Member, IEEE, and Selçuk Köse , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Ising machines have shown great promise in solving combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) using nature-inspired computation with higher speed and efficiency over traditional von Neumann computing systems. CMOS-based implementations combine the maturity and scaling ability of CMOS with the efficacy of Ising machines. In this paper, a lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) decoding solution is implemented with a CMOS-based resistively-coupled Ising machine known as (QuBRIM), using multi-body interactions among CMOS-based Ising machine nodes for the first time. State-of-the-art CMOSbased Ising implementations currently utilize order reduction to solve problems with higher-than-quadratic terms. In this paper, a new mechanism is proposed to implement higher-thanquadratic terms on Ising machines without the need for order reduction. The proposed methodology is implemented and verified with CMOS technology using 45 nm Generic PDK (GPDK). High accuracy rates are reported for the LDPC decoder based on the proposed methodology, comparable to Normalized Min-Sum, Offset Min-Sum, and Layered Belief-Propagation decoders, with a bit error rate (BER) as low as 4×10−8 at a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 4dB. Furthermore, the proposed LDPC decoder attains a normalized energy efficiency (NEE) of 1.29 pJ/bit/iteration, surpassing the state-of-the-art decoders by a minimum factor of 2.4 and as much as 7.6 times.
Index Terms— Combinatorial optimization problems, Ising machine, LDPC decoding, multi-body interaction.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE Ising model was originally proposed to study the interactions between magnetic dipoles, also known as spins, in ferromagnetism [1]. The interactions between the coupled spins in a ferromagnetic material affect the dynamics of the system, which naturally minimizes the system energy represented by the Ising Hamiltonian [2]. While finding the minimum of the Ising Hamiltonian using conventional algorithms for large problems is challenging, physical systems naturally minimize their own Hamiltonian with relative ease. However, of particular interest, is that many non-deterministic
Manuscript received 20 April 2023; revised 7 August 2023; accepted 26 September 2023. Date of publication 13 October 2023; date of current version 12 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) QuantumInspired Classical Computing (QuICC) Program through the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) under Contract FA8650-23-C-1034. This article was recommended by Associate Editor R. Garg. (Corresponding author: Eslam Elmitwalli.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14620 USA (e-mail: eelmitwa@ur.rochester.edu; zeljko.ignjatovic@rochester.edu; selcuk.kose@ rochester.edu).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSI.2023.3322325.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2023.3322325

polynomial time (NP) hard combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) can be modeled using the Ising Hamiltonian [3]. As a result, physical implementations of Ising machines are attracting increased interest for their potential to solve COPs with high efficiency. Several implementations of such Ising machines exist, such as D-wave’s quantum-based annealers [4], [5] and coherent Ising machines based on optical cavities [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11].
Despite the improved efficiency of Ising machines, scaling such systems is challenging. Recently, more focus has been shifted towards CMOS-based Ising machines to improve scalability and cost-efficiency. For example, coupled oscillator networks have been used to implement Ising machines [2], [12], [13]. One such implementation uses a system of coupled oscillators, that have been shown to minimize the Ising Hamiltonian when the oscillator phases are binarized using second order sub-harmonic injection locking (SHIL) [2]. However, this design uses bulky LC oscillators, and the proposed implementation requires externally supplied injection locking signals.
Bistable Resistively-coupled Ising Machine (BRIM) [14] is an all-to-all CMOS-based Ising machine design. In BRIM, the spins are generated using bistable nodes, each designed as a capacitor controlled by a feedback circuit. The spins are represented as voltage values rather than phases of an oscillator. A modified design has been proposed in QuBRIM [15], which uses quantized nodal interactions, further reducing the design complexity and allowing for more straightforward node interactions.
Another family of Ising machines is based on simulated annealing where spins are represented as bits in memory [16], [17], [18]. In these designs, the Ising model is implemented using algorithms rather than physical interactions. The randomness in these systems is exploited to implement the annealing process. For a more detailed introduction to Ising machines and a compilation of various implementations, the reader is kindly referred to [14].
Despite the significant potential of Ising machines, preliminary research has focused mostly on Max-Cut problems, which are easily mapped to an Ising machine [2], [14], [15]. Similarly, LDPC [19] decoding can be treated as a COP [20] and mapped to Ising machines. Since LDPC decoding is an NP-complete problem, conventional computational methods do not guarantee exact solutions to LDPC decoding for long codewords (or large number of variables). However, by mapping the LDPC decoding problem to the energy landscape of an Ising machine, exact solutions can be obtained when the

1549-8328 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELMITWALLI et al.: UTILIZING MULTI-BODY INTERACTIONS IN A CMOS-BASED ISING MACHINE

41

Ising Hamiltonian is minimized [21]. Therefore, using Ising

machines to solve LDPC decoding can provide higher quality

solutions than existing methods, and with potentially better

scalability.

The primary challenge in the Ising machine formulation is

that it is limited to functions quadratic to the spin variables.

In the quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) formulation of an LDPC COP, higher order terms exist that cannot be directly mapped to an Ising machine. A methodol-

Fig. 1. Illustration of the working principal of a QuBRIM node. The currents from the other nodes are summed through a current conveyor. The summed current is mirrored and charges the node capacitor.

ogy has previously been proposed in [21] to convert the LDPC

decoding COP into a QUBO problem for Ising machines by implementing order reduction for products that are higher than quadratic. The order reduction adds significant overhead both

In the case of Max-Cut problems, the maximum cut can be defined as

to the hardware implementation and speed of the algorithm. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first
work describing and employing multi-body interactions in electronics based Ising machines. In this work, a framework for implementing multi-body interactions is presented using the QuBRIM architecture. This extends the applicability of the Ising machines from well-known QUBO problems to those that include cubic, quartic, and higher cost terms in the optimization function. The extension of Ising machines to multi-body makes it suitable (and practical) for not only LDPC decoding applications but other NP-complete problems such as Boolean Satisfiability problems (e.g., 3-SAT), Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), etc. Multi-body interaction in

arg max

Wi j

(3)

V +∈P(V ) (i, j)∈E;

i

∈V

+
;

j∈V −

where V ∈ V +, V − represents the vertices of a graph with edges E, and Wi j represents the weight of the each edge. The maximum cut equation in (3) can be easily mapped to the Ising equation (2). Then, by minimizing the resulting Ising Hamiltonian to the ground state, the solution to the NP-hard problem of Max-Cut can be obtained. Such solutions are not guaranteed to be the most optimal, however, high quality solutions are obtained significantly faster than by using conventional computation.

QuBRIM is enabled by quantizing internal analog states to

a binary value prior to coupling, multiplication of which is carried out by simple logic gates. The proposed methodology allows solving binary optimization problems with higher-thanquadratic cost terms directly without order reduction.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A brief background on QuBRIM is provided in Section II. The proposed LDPC implementation methodology is demonstrated in Section III. An overview of the circuit-level implementation is offered in Section IV. In Section V the results are sum-

B. QuBRIM
For the case of QuBRIM, the dynamics of the system can be explained by first referring to the QuBRIM node, as shown in Fig. 1, which represents a single node v1. In this figure, the currents from the neighbouring nodes are summed, then mirrored into the node capacitor, charging it into the spin voltage vi . The spin voltage vi is quantized as Q(vi ) through a comparator where

marized followed by discussions. Conclusions are offered in Section VI.

II. BACKGROUND
A brief background on the Ising model is described in Section II-A, the QuBRIM architecture is detailed in Section II-B, the realization of the multi-body interactions using QuBRIM is explained in Section II-C, and the basics of LDPC and corresponding decoding technique are offered in Section II-D.

A. Ising Model

The Hamiltonian H (σ ) for an Ising model can be written as [2]

H (σ ) = − Ji j · σi σ j − hi · σi ,

(1)

i, j

i

where Ji j represents the coefficient of coupling interaction between the spins σi and σ j , σ ∈ {−1, 1}, and hi is the coefficient of the external magnetic field. In the absence of
an external magnetic field, the Hamiltonian becomes

Q (vi ) =

−1, 1,

vi < 0 vi ≥ 0

(4)

The quantized spin voltage Q(vi ) is then coupled back to the neighbouring nodes through the resistors Ri j which controls the coupling weight and can be written as

R

Ri j =

, Ji j

(5)

where R is a constant scaling term. In this system, the polarity of Q(vi ) represents the spin value σ ∈ {−1, 1}, and the sign of Ji j controls whether the coupling is negative or positive. Due to quantization of the node voltages, the polarity of the coupling sgn Ji j can be implemented with a simple inverter gate, or the lack thereof.
The current i going into the node capacitor C with voltage vi can be expressed as

dvi 1 =

sgn Ji j ∗ Q v j

(6)

dt C
j ̸=i

Ri j

H (σ ) = − Ji j · σi σ j .

(2) Due to current mirroring, the current from neighbouring nodes

i, j

v j̸=i does not depend on vi , but only on the quantized voltages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

42

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

For example, consider the following objective function for a system of 4 nodes

H = − J123σ1σ2σ3 − J124σ1σ2σ4 − J134σ1σ3σ4 − J234σ2σ3σ4, (10)

Fig. 2. High level block diagram of QuBRIM system containing 3 nodes for the sake of brevity. Reproduced from [15].

Q(v j̸=i ). By substituting (5), (6) becomes

dvi 1 dt = τ

Ji j ∗ Q v j .

(7)

j ̸=i

where τ = RC. From (7), a Lyapunov function exists of the form

H (v) = − Ji j Q (vi ) Q v j .

(8)

i<j

This Lyapunov function in (8) has the same form as the Ising Hamiltonian in (2). Furthermore, carrying out Lyapunov stability analysis as in [15], demonstrates that the time derivative of (8) is

d H (v) = −τ

dvi d Q (vi ) ∗

≤ 0,

(9)

dt

dt dt

i

which is a non-positive value, therefore the Ising machine represented by (8) evolves toward equilibrium by lowering the system Hamiltonian H (v).
The block diagram of the QuBRIM system is shown in Fig. 2. The QuBRIM nodes are labelled as Ni , and the coupling units (CUs) controlling the interactions between neighbouring nodes (i.e., the coupling resistors) are labelled as CUi j . Auxiliary and control circuit blocks are also shown in the figure.

C. Multi-Body Interaction Through QuBRIM
In QuBRIM, multi-body interactions are carried out by multiplication of the node variables. Because the node variables are quantized into Q(vi ), the multiplication is carried out by using either XOR or XNOR gates. The choice of logic gate depends on the number of spin variables in each term and the polarity of the term. For terms with an even number of spin variables, their multiplication is carried out with an XNOR gate, while for terms with an odd number of spin variables, an XOR gate is used. This is readily verifiable with a truth table with the assumption that ‘logic 0’ represents negative spin (−1), and ‘logic 1’ represents positive spin (1). The negative and positive sign in front of each term represents the polarity of the coupling coefficient. The sign is implemented by the presence (or lack of) an inverter following the logic gate to implement negative (positive) coupling. A negative coupling will convert an XOR to XNOR and vice versa.

where each term is cubic and represents multi-body interaction between 3 spins. In order to minimize the objective function H , a QuBRIM system can be constructed from

C dvi =

X N O R Q(v j ), Q(vk) − VC M , (11)

dt
j̸=i k̸= j

Ri jk

where Ri jk = R/Ji jk, X N O R(a, b) is a 2-input XNOR logic

gate with ‘logic 0’ and ‘logic 1’ outputs of 0V and Vdd ,

respectively, and VC M is a common-mode voltage typically

equal to the half of the power supply voltage Vdd . Note that the

numerator term under the double summation in (11) takes only

two discrete values ±Vdd /2 (i.e., ±1 times a constant) and its

similarity with the numerator term in the set of differential

equations in (6).

The QuBRIM construction process (i.e., construction of (11)

from (10)) is carried out by using the following construction

rule: Q(vi

)dd,vtias=fu−rtτh1 e∂∂rσHie,x1pl≤aini e≤d

n followed in detail in

by substituting σi with Section III. Objective

functions including terms higher than cubic, or even a mix

of different order-terms, can be minimized using the same

approach.

D. LDPC
In the communication system considered, the signals are represented as base-band signals under binary phase-shift keying, where each bit xi is represented as xi ∈ {+1, −1}. The received signal r is received from an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel where bits are distorted according to

ri = xi + ni ,

(12)

where ni is the noise component following a normal distribution.
An (n,k) LDPC is an error-correcting code in which a codeword w of length n is generated from a message v of length k. The codeword is generated with a number of parity bits m = n − k. For the error-correcting mechanism of the LDPC code, an m-by-n parity matrix P is defined such that the summation of certain bits (mod 2) of the codeword is always zero, as stated in matrix format

Pw = 0.

(13)

In order to generate codewords that satisfy this condition, a k-by-n generator matrix G is defined such that

PGT = 0m×k .

(14)

The codeword w is obtained from the message v according to

w = GT v.

(15)

The goal of LDPC decoding is to obtain the codeword w that best satisfies (13) given the received noisy message r. The process of obtaining the codeword with the highest probability

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELMITWALLI et al.: UTILIZING MULTI-BODY INTERACTIONS IN A CMOS-BASED ISING MACHINE

43

of being sent is known as maximum likelihood decoding. The decoding of LDPC using maximum likelihood is a problem known to be NP-hard [22], [23]. As a result, alternative methods such as those based on belief-propagation or its derivatives [24], [25], are employed. While these approximate algorithms have historically been easier to implement in practical circuits, these algorithms do not provide an exact solution and lacks theoretical guarantees [26].

Fig. 3. Tanner graph for the LDPC code represented by the parity matrix in (23).

III. PROPOSED DESIGN: QUBRIM-BASED LDPC DECODER
For the purpose of implementing the LDPC decoder on the QuBRIM Ising machine, the constraint on the mod 2 operation can be expressed as

m−1 n−1

Pj,i wi mod 2 = 0.

(16)

j=0 i=0

Let us associate a spin si to each bit in a codeword w such that

si =

−1, 1,

wi = 0 wi = 1

(17)

A vector s j,i of length l( j) containing the elements of the multiplication of wi by the non-zero terms of Pj,i is defined. The constraint in (16) can be written as the following Lyapunov
function

m−1 l( j)−1 

Hconst. = 

s j,i  ∗ (−1)l( j)+1.

(18)

j=0 i=0

Equation (18) always gives −1 for even terms in the summation, ensuring that the lowest energy level satisfies the parity condition set by the parity matrix. To complete the Lyapunov function, an objective term is added that depends on the received noisy message

Hobj. = α (si − ri )2 ,

(19)

i

where α is a scale factor and ri is the received message bit signal. The Lyapunov function for the LDPC code then becomes

m−1 l( j)−1 

H (s) = 

s j,i  ∗ (−1)l( j)+1 + α

(si − ri )2 .

j=0 i=0

i

(20)

It is clear from (20) that if we find a system that can be described with this Lyapunov function, the system would exhibit stable local minima whose corresponding spin state would satisfy the condition in (16). This system is determined by calculating partial derivatives of H with respect to each spin and using the following relationship

d si dt

=

−k

∂

H (s ∂ si

)

,

(21)

where k is some constant. A set of differential equations can be written, describing the system that satisfies (20) and (21), where vi is a capacitor voltage corresponding to the spin si

d vi dt

∂ H (v) = −k ∂vi

(22)

The previous methodology is applied on an example LDPC code for clarification. Consider a (6,3) LDPC with a parity matrix P, where

1 1 1 1 0 0

P = 0 0 1 1 0 1.

(23)

100110

The Tanner graph for this code shown in Fig. 3 with 6 bit nodes and 3 check nodes. The codeword for this LDPC is of the form

v = v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 T .

(24)

The Lyapunov function that has local minima for the permitted codewords is

H (v) = −v1v2v3v4+v3v4v6 + v1v4v5 + α (vi − ri )2 .
i
(25)

By

equating

d vi dt

=

−k

∂

H (v) ∂ vi

,

in

the

case

of

v1

we

get

d v1 dt

=

k (v2v3v4

− v4v5) + kαr1,

(26)

where kα = 2kα and k = 1/RC. The same operation is repeated for v2 : v6 to obtain a system of differential equations. Although this system of differential equations minimizes the energy H (v) in (25), it does not guarantee that the stable solution will have nodal voltages vi that are at the vertexes, e.g. +1/−1 V. Additionally, the multiplication operation of
continuous values in (26) in analog electronics is a challenging
and expensive task. Both of these challenges are resolved by
quantizing all nodal states to the nearest value of +1 and −1
before they are applied in all of the multiplicative terms, as in

v2v3v4 → Q(v2)Q(v3)Q(v4),

(27)

resulting into a set of differential equations describing a QuBRIM system where Q (vi ) is as in (4). Once the states are quantized to +1/−1, the multiplication operation representing multi-body interactions are implemented using XOR logic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

44

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

gates. The system of differential equations then becomes

d v1 dt

=

k(Q(v2)Q(v3)Q(v4) −

Q (v4 ) Q (v5 ))

+

kαr1

d v2 dt

=

k ( Q (v1 ) Q (v3 ) Q (v4 ))

+

kαr2

d v3 dt

=

k(Q(v1)Q(v2)Q(v4) −

Q (v4 ) Q (v6 ))

+

kαr3

d v4 dt

=

k(Q(v1)Q(v2)Q(v3) −

Q (v3 ) Q (v6 )

−Q(v1)Q(v5)) + kαr4

d v5 dt

=

k (− Q (v1 ) Q (v4 ))

+

kαr5

d v6 dt

=

k (− Q (v3 ) Q (v4 ))

+

kαr6

(28)

The choice of XOR gates follows the discussion in Section II-C. In the LDPC system of equation in (28), all the positive terms contain odd number of variables, which are implemented with XOR gates. All the negative terms contain an even number of variables. Although terms with an even number of variables can be implemented with XNOR gate, an inverter will be needed to implement the negative coupling. This inverter will convert the XNOR gates to XOR gates. Therefore, all terms in (28) are implemented with XOR gates to account for the number of variables and the polarity of the coupling. A summary of the LDPC decoding algorithm on QuBRIM is shown in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 QuBRIM LDPC Decoding Summary

Input: Received signal r

Output: Decoded codeword w

1 Initialize weights {k, kα}

2 for Iteration i = 1 to 10 do

3 Initialize nodes’ v with received signal r

4 Update node values:

vi =

r ows l

col s j (l)

k

Q(v

j

̸=i

)

+ kαri dt

5 Perform annealing: e.g., random node flips

6

Hard decision wi =

0, 1,

vi < 0 vi > 0

7 Check condition if Pw = 0 then

8

Terminate early

IV. CIRCUIT LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION

The circuit level implementation for the QuBRIM LDPC

decoder design is presented in this section. The diagram of a QuBRIM node for node v1 in the system described by (28) is shown in Fig. 4. As a reference, the differential equation for node v1 is

d v1 dt

=

k (Q(v2)Q(v3)Q(v4) −

Q(v4)Q(v5)) + kαr1.

(29)

The first two products in (29) are implemented using XOR gates to represent the mod 2 constraint of the parity matrix. The XOR gates are connected to the current summing node through coupling resistance Rc. The last term kαr1, hereon referred to as a bias term, is a function of the noisy received

Fig. 4. Illustration of Node 1 of the QuBRIM system for LDPC decoding. Note that this illustration represents equation (29).
signal r1. The bias term is implemented as a binary-weighted current-steering DAC, whose design is adopted from [27] with modifications described below. Unlike the design in [27] that drives a resistive load producing a voltage output, the proposed design in this work is a current-output DAC steering output currents into a virtual ground resulting in much reduced power and increased linearity (e.g., for the peak output current of 14µ A and VC M = Vdd /2 = 0.55V , the static power of each DAC in this design is only 15.4µW ). Another modification from [27] is the use of programmable unit/reference current to enable an annealing schedule with time-varying kα as described in V-B and shown in Fig. 14.
The remaining nodes in the system described by (28) are implemented similar to node v1. The system diagram containing the XOR network for all nodes is shown in Fig. 5. Note the similarity between the XOR network in Fig. 5 and the parity matrix P in (23). The general methodology for converting a parity matrix to an XOR network in QuBRIM is as follows. For each bit ‘1’ in column i and row j of the parity matrix P, place an XOR gate with its output connected to the input of node N i. The inputs of this particular XOR gate are the outputs of the nodes located at the positions of bit ‘1’ in row j where the column index is ̸= i. Based on the previous discussion, the column degree col◦ (number of 1’s in a column) of each column i determines the number of XOR gates connected to each node N i. The row degree r ow◦ of each row j determines the size of XOR gates in that row, where the size of each XOR gate is r ow◦j − 1. If there is a row with degree 2, then the gates become simple inverters or buffers depending on the polarity of the coupling.
The current summing circuit for the QuBRIM node is implemented as a class AB current conveyor formed by the transistors M1 − M8, as shown in Fig. 6. Contrary to the original QuBRIM implementation [15], a single-ended node design is used in this work. This saves roughly half the area required for the QuBRIM implementation. In the current conveyor, the biasing voltages for M1, M4 are set by the current sources with current IB. Using current mirrors, the same amount of current passes in the branches M1, M4 and M5, M2, M3, M7. The input current is then mirrored to the output branch M6, M8, and stored in the capacitor at node Z . Since Node X is fixed at Vdd /2 and node Y is a virtual ground, the current from the connected XOR gates depends only on the neighbouring nodes. Class AB current conveyor is originally chosen for this circuit due to its high slew-rate capability. Additionally, it allows the input and output currents

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELMITWALLI et al.: UTILIZING MULTI-BODY INTERACTIONS IN A CMOS-BASED ISING MACHINE

45

Fig. 6. Circuit design of a single-ended QuBRIM node, which includes a class-AB current conveyor, node capacitor C, and comparator circuit.

Fig. 5. Simplified QuBRIM diagram for the LDPC decoder represented by the parity matrix (23) and the system of equations (28). Note that coupling resistors Rc at the output of each XOR gate are omitted for brevity.

to be higher than the bias current, which is suitable in case of

a large fan-in to the QuBRIM input.

Fig. 7. Resistance used in the coupling units of the QuBRIM system using

Since the output current has the opposite polarity of the PMOS gates.

input current, the comparator/quantizer is implemented as an

inverter to obtain Q(vi ) from (−vi ). A 3-stage tapered inverter

chain is used to ensure full voltage swing when driving the

XOR gates. The rise and fall times are balanced through proper

gate sizing. One can easily obtain (−Q(Vi )) from the second

stage of the 3-stage inverter if needed.

The coupling resistance between the XOR gates and

QuBRIM nodes is designed as shown in Fig. 7. Two PMOS

transistors are connected together forming a programmable Fig. 8. QuBRIM LDPC decoder system diagram. pseudo-resistor [28] which is more area efficient than physical

resistors. The resistance value of the coupling resistors are set by Vctrl which is programmed with a Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC). Because the voltage magnitude across the terminals of the pseudo-resistor is fixed at Vdd /2, the resistor exhibits good linearity. Thanks to the current coupling mode of the QuBRIM design, large voltage swings across the terminals of the pseudo-resistor are avoided which would otherwise

termination signal can be easily produced by NORing the outputs of all the XOR gates. Additionally, an annealing control block is needed to carryout the annealing schedule discussed later in Section V-B. The annealing block contains random number generators (RNGs) that can be implemented as linear feedback shift registers.

cause non-linearity errors. The system diagram for the complete QuBRIM decoder is
shown in Fig. 8. The decoder contains QuBRIM nodes, as in Fig. 4, with their number equal to the code length n. There is an XOR gate and a CU block for each bit ‘1’ in the parity matrix. Because all CUs have the same resistance value, only one DAC is needed to program all CUs.
As mentioned at the beginning of this section, the bias terms are implemented as current-steering DACs, one for each node. The same array of DACs may also be used to set the initial state of the spin capacitors, by integrating the output current from corresponding DACs onto the nodal capacitors for a fixed time interval. For the purpose of this work and proof

V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The details of the circuit-level simulations are described in Section V-A. The circuit-level implementation is intended as a proof of concept and to evaluate effects of PVT variations and mismatch on the decoder’s performance, therefore smaller designs are considered with no annealing circuit. The results of the high-level simulations are discussed in Section V-B, where the system is implemented on a more practical and larger LDPC problem. The annealing process is implemented in the high-level model to showcase the full potential of the proposed algorithm. A comparison with several standard algorithms and state-of-the-art implementations is provided in Section V-C.

of concept, we assume 8-bit resolution DACs with settling time of 1ns, adding an acceptable 4% overhead to the overall A. Circuit-Level Simulation

decoding time.

To validate the proposed LDPC QuBRIM methodology and

An early termination signal can be implemented by check- design, the corresponding circuit is implemented on Cadence

ing the parity condition of the QuBRIM decoder. The global Virtuoso Analog Design Environment (ADE) in 45 nm generic

minimum is satisfied when all the parity checks implemented PDK provided by Cadence. LDPC parity matrices are gener-

by the XOR gates result in an output of 0. The early ated using the software provided in [29]. The generated parity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

46

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 9. QuBRIM internal node voltages for (128,32) LDPC decoding with SNR = 4 dB.

Fig. 10. Histograms of the time required for different QuBRIM LDPC implementations to reach a stable state. The results are obtained for 100 different codewords. Vertical dashed lines represent the mean.

matrices are converted to circuit schematics using SKILL script to automate component placement. The implemented LDPC parity matrices are uniform with fixed column and row degrees of 3 and 4 respectively, and a coding rate of 1/4.
To estimate performance metrics of QuBRIM-based LDPC decoder under both PVT variations and mismatch meaningfully (e.g., Bit Error Rate, or BER, for a large SNR value of 4d B under different process corners), a large set of decoding problems need to be tested. Circuit-level simulations are time-consuming in this regard, therefore, for the purpose of verification and to improve simulation time, some simplification steps are taken. First, only small LDPC matrices are implemented using circuit-level simulation. Although small LDPC matrices may not serve a practical purpose in communication, they are used for the verification of the QuBRIM decoding algorithm. A larger LDPC decoding problem is tackled later on in the high-level simulations in Section V-B. Since programmable PMOS resistors are used mainly for area saving and are not essential to the operation of the QuBRIM LDPC, poly resistors are used instead to further improve the simulation efficiency. Additionally, each current-steering DAC is replaced with a bias voltage source with Vbi = ri and connected to the current summing input of node Ni through a bias resistor Rb, such that the resulting current is equal to that of the corresponding DAC. The resistors Rb are implemented as poly resistors to capture the effects of PVT variations and mismatch in DACs. The bias sources Vbi are also used to charge the node capacitors Ci to an initial condition proportional to the magnitude of the received noisy signal ri . Finally, the circuit-level results are reported with no annealing mechanism in-place to escape the local minima. The lack of annealing will result in a deteriorated BER, nonetheless the BER is expected to be higher than the uncoded case. MATLAB is used to generate sets of 100 randomly generated noisy codewords, each with a Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of 4 dB. Each noisy signal is then loaded into the QuBRIM schematic as the initial condition for the node capacitors, and on the voltage source connected to the current summing node through the resistance Rb. The QuBRIM nodes then interact with each other and their states evolve toward their stable values representing a minima. The final settling values of the QuBRIM nodes are then compared with the correct non-noisy message sequence.
The LDPC QuBRIM is simulated using 32, 64 and 128-bit LDPC parity matrices with a coding rate of 1/4 and SNR of 4 dB. The result from one such run on the (128,32) LDPC matrix is shown in Fig. 9 where the voltage of the node capacitor vi (before quantization) is plotted as a function of

TABLE I RESISTANCE VALUES FOR 32, 64 AND 128-BIT QUBRIM LDPC
time. The initial condition for each node capacitor is set as the received noisy signal ri . The QuBRIM node voltages then evolve towards the minima located around the initial condition. Given the analog nature of this design, the time it takes for the circuit to become stable after starting from each of the different initial condition varies. The histogram of the settling time for 100 different codewords for the 32, 64 and 128-bit QuBRIM LDPC implementations is shown in Fig. 10. Despite the difference in the sizes of the LDPC problems implemented, they all reach stable states within about 3ns. This shows that the proposed QuBRIM LDPC decoder scales well for larger code lengths. However, this finding should not be interpreted as a guarantee that QuBRIM system will continue scaling with the same trend as the code length further increases and more detailed study at even larger code lengths is warranted.
The histograms in Fig. 10 are obtained after sweeping the values of the resistors Rc and Rb for each LDPC problem size. The final values are selected in order to optimize the BER as well as the maximum and mean delay for the 100 codewords simulated. The optimized resistance values are tabulated in Table I. A comparison between the implementation of the three different LDPC sizes is shown in Table II. The throughput is estimated based on the worst-case delay from Fig. 10, which is almost the same for each of them. However, since larger LDPC decoders contain more message bits k, the throughput scales with k and is higher for larger decoders. The Energy Efficiency (EE) improves slightly for 64-bit LDPC compared to the 32-bit version. For the 128-bit implementation, the EE shows more improvement, however, it is worth noting that the average delay is higher for this larger sized decoder. The results, again, show promising scaling potential for the proposed QuBRIM LDPC.
The QuBRIM LDPC is tested under mismatch and process variations using the (32,8) LDPC matrix. The 100 messages used in the results for Table II are simulated across 100 Monte Carlo samples, and the histogram for the change in BER is reported in Fig. 11. The mean BER is 0.62% which is close to the nominal BER of 0.59%. The standard deviation is 0.1325%. These results show no significant change under mismatch and process variations.
An LDPC code with a variable row degree results in an Ising Hamiltonian with mixed-order terms. These mixed-order

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELMITWALLI et al.: UTILIZING MULTI-BODY INTERACTIONS IN A CMOS-BASED ISING MACHINE

47

Fig. 11. Change in BER across 100 Monte Carlo samples for (32,8) LDPC QuBRIM. Mean = 0.6225, standard deviation = 0.1325.
TABLE II
QUBRIM LDPC DECODER PERFORMANCE SCALING FOR DIFFERENT LDPC CODE LENGTHS N USING 45NM GPDK

terms require XOR gates of different sizes. The unequal delays from these XOR gates may prolong the settling time of the QuBRIM nodes, and can potentially push the state of the QuBRIM further away from the correct global minima leading to a high error rate. This issue can be solved by using equally sized XOR gates for all terms and then grounding the unused input terminals to obtain lower order XOR gates. Additionally, it is possible to increase the size of the node capacitor, which slows down the charging and discharging rate of all nodes. This increases the stability of the circuit since the gate delay is no longer the dominating factor, leading to faster QuBRIM settling time and higher result accuracy.
B. High-Level Simulation
1) Model Setup: In order to show the annealing process, a MATLAB-based high-level model of QuBRIM is implemented. The results from the high level model are compared with the circuit-level results in Table II and their consistency is verified. A 1/2 coding rate (672,336) LDPC matrix based on IEEE802.11ad standard is used with the high-level model. The high-level model used does not account for signal propagation delays. In the high-level model, two mechanisms of perturbation are applied in the annealing process. First, an error term with normal distribution σthermal noise is introduced in the comparator stage. This term reflects the presence of a noisy comparator. The second mechanism is carried out by flipping random spin bits as the QuBRIM is reaching equilibrium, as shown in Fig. 12. In the top plot, the voltage of all QuBRIM nodes is shown as the system seeks equilibrium. In the middle plot, the Hamiltonian of the same system is shown. In the Hamiltonian plot, zero represents the level where all polarity checks are satisfied coinciding with the global minimum. The QuBRIM reaches equilibrium within 20 time steps signified by no change in the Hamiltonian, however, since the Hamiltonian is higher than zero, the system is stuck at a local minima. A small number of randomly selected spin bits are then flipped to push the QuBRIM outside the local minima, and the process is repeated several times, as shown in the bottom

Fig. 12. Demonstration of the annealing schedule using bit flips and thermal noise to decode one message.
plot of Fig. 12. In this example, the QuBRIM nodes reach the ground level at the end of the graph, where all polarity checks are satisfied and the decoded message matches the original message.
2) Annealing: For the annealing process, a notable difference between the Max-Cut problem and the LDPC decoding problem is present. In a Max-Cut problem, more than one global minimum exists and all of them are considered as equally correct solutions. In LDPC decoding problem, all correct codewords are global minima in the energy landscape, however, only one of them is the correct solution. Fortunately, for the LDPC problem using the noisy received signal as the initial condition places the system closer to the correct global minimum, while for Max-Cut the initial condition is usually random. A possible annealing schedule for Max-Cut is to use high perturbations in the beginning that is later tuned down until the system settles to its final state. In the case of LDPC decoding, too much perturbation would push the system towards the vicinity of an incorrect global minimum, resulting in a poor solution quality.
The number of flipped bits is optimized to obtain high solution quality determined by BER. It is worth noting that the optimization process is based on trial and error. There are many optimization parameters, however, to the best of the authors’ knowledge there is no known optimization methodology for annealing that guarantees the best solution quality which is a topic of ongoing research. While several optimization parameters are discussed below, this is still not an exhaustive list. One optimization parameter is the number of bits flipped. If the number of flipped bits is too small, the QuBRIM may not be able to escape the local minima. However, if the number of flipped bits is too high, the QuBRIM state may jump further away from the vicinity of the correct global minimum. In this case, the final solution will

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

48

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 13. BER vs. SNR for 1/2 coding rate (672,336) LDPC.

have high BER even if all polarity checks are satisfied. Another parameter is the frequency of bit flips. In Fig. 12, the system is allowed to reach a stable state before each subsequent bit flipping event. This can be described as low-frequency bitflipping. Low-frequency bit-flipping can be combined with a higher number of bits flipped without pushing the QuBRIM too far away from the targeted global minimum, as in the case of Fig. 12, where ∼ 4% of bits are flipped each time. The frequency of perturbation can be increased by applying bit flips before the system reaches a stable state. In this case, the ratio of bits that could be flipped while keeping the QuBRIM within the range of the targeted global minimum is lower. After exhaustive simulations, it was determined that with higher frequency bit flips, the system can reach the global minimum faster. Once the system reaches the global minimum, further bit flips have lower probability of pushing the QuBRIM outside the minima. The annealing schedule could be further optimized by exploring flipping a variable number of bits during the annealing process. For simplicity, only a fixed number of bits are flipped in our experiment while their frequency and quantity are optimized.
The LDPC decoding results for BER vs. SNR using the QuBRIM with different annealing conditions are shown in Fig. 13. From the figure, using random bit flips significantly improves BER. In standard LDPC algorithms, accuracy is further improved through iterations. Each iteration incrementally improves the accuracy of the decoded message. In QuBRIM, the results could be further improved through repeated sampling. Each sample is a rerun of the decoding process where the spin capacitors’ initial condition is set to the received noisy message. The difference between samples is the random thermal noise generated in the system that influences the equilibrium seeking process. Additionally, the bit flip signal generated from the random number generator is different for repeated samples. The QuBRIM LDPC system then detects if a sample reaches global minima by performing a parity check. The repeated samples for the same message in QuBRIM are henceforth referred to as QuBRIM iterations. The results in Fig. 13 are obtained using a maximum of 10 iterations per message based on the annealing schedule in Fig. 12. A well optimized annealing schedule will result in an improved BER while requiring a lower number of maximum iterations. An improved annealing schedule is shown in the bottom plot of Fig. 14. In the first 25 steps, a reduced value of k and kα (refer to (29)) is used to slow down the system, while no bit flips are taking place. After 25 steps, k and kα are increased and bit flip perturbations are enabled at a higher frequency and lower bit number per flip than in Fig. 12. Using this annealing schedule,

Fig. 14. Improved annealing schedule with higher frequency bit flips. Top plot shows the steps taken before the early termination signal is triggered for each received message. Bottom plot shows the annealing schedule.
100K random noisy messages are decoded with an SNR of 4dB. In the top plot of Fig. 14, a histogram of the number of steps needed to reach the global minima within one iteration is shown. An average of 190.1 steps are consumed by the QuBRIM system to determine the majority of the codewords. If the accuracy is not sufficient, the remaining codewords can be re-attempted in the next iteration. The BER results for this annealing schedule is further discussed in Section V-C.
C. Comparison
Using high-level modeling, a 1/2 coding rate (672,336) LDPC decoder is implemented with several decoding algorithms from literature. The results using QuBRIM (QB) with the annealing schedule in Fig. 14 are compared with Normalized Min-Sum (NMS), Offset Min-Sum (OMS) [30], Propagation Belief (BP) [31] and Layered Propagation Belief (LBP) [32], using (1) and (4) iterations for each, as shown in Fig. 15. The accuracy for QuBRIM using one iteration is significantly higher as compared to the remaining algorithms. Using 4 iterations, the QuBRIM accuracy improves, however, the accuracy of LBP, NMS, and OMS rapidly catches up, and slightly surpasses QuBRIM. It is worth noting that for QuBRIM, each iteration is an independent sample and can be run concurrently. Therefore, the QuBRIM iterations could be implemented in parallel on different QuBRIM modules, creating a trade off between throughput, area, and power.
The implementation of the QuBRIM LDPC decoder is compared with various state-of-the-art decoders from literature in Table III. The parameters used for QuBRIM are based on circuit-level simulations and estimates. The plots in Fig. 10 are reproduced for the (672,336) LDPC decoder using circuit-level and high-level simulations. The circuit- and high-level implementations are both optimised for BER, and the average time in the circuit-level histogram is equalised with the average simulation step in the high-level simulation. Based on this assumption, each simulation step is estimated to be 106ps. The average throughput of QuBRIM with early termination is estimated to be 8.32Gbps based on Fig. 14, as
n Throughput = (avg. # of steps) ∗ (time per step) ∗ Imax ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELMITWALLI et al.: UTILIZING MULTI-BODY INTERACTIONS IN A CMOS-BASED ISING MACHINE

49

TABLE III COMPARISON WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART LDPC DECODERS

Fig. 15. BER comparison for 1/2 coding rate (672,336) LDPC between the proposed design QuBRIM (QB) and other LDPC algorithms using (1) iteration and (4) iterations for each.
where n is the code length 672, and Imax is the maximum number of iterations. The average power is estimated from the circuit-level simulation. The normalized energy efficiency (NEE) is normalized to 45nm CMOS technology according to [37], as shown in Table III. In the comparison, 1-QuBRIM refers to a single module implementation where each iteration is carried out in series. The parameters for 1-QuBRIM with a maximum iteration of one is included in the comparison due to its high accuracy making it relevant. 4-QuBRIM refers to a potential implementation with four QuBRIM modules working in parallel, each decoding the same message. Each module would carry out one iteration with a different seed for the random number generator responsible for bit flips. If one of the 4 modules triggers the early termination signal for satisfying the parity checks, the system chooses the decoded word from that module and terminates the decoding process. This implementation would have the same throughput as the single iteration QuBRIM, but with more accuracy, power, and area.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel LDPC decoder using QuBRIM Ising machine is proposed. The methodology for mapping the

LDPC decoding problem into Ising machine is discussed using multi-body interactions among CMOS-based Ising machine nodes. To the extend of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first work to implement multi-body interactions using a CMOS-based Ising machine. The proposed methodology allows mapping objective functions with higher-than-quadratic terms with arbitrary and mixed-order terms. The multi-body interaction is implemented using simple logic gates thanks to the quantization property of the QuBRIM design. The theoretical basis for the new methodology is explained by relating the QuBRIM equations to the LDPC equations. Circuit simulations using 45 nm Generic PDK are carried out for verification proposes on small-sized LDPC decoding problems, and an accuracy rate of higher than 99% is reported. High-level behavioral simulations on a QuBRIM-based LDPC decoder using larger and more practical code length are carried out and compared with state-of-the-art. The proposed methodology exhibits high potential for expanding the capabilities of Ising machines to the LDPC decoding problem.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Ising, “Beitrag zur theorie des. ferromagnetismus,” Zeitschrift für Physik, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 253–258, Feb. 1925.
[2] T. Wang and J. Roychowdhury, “OIM: Oscillator-based Ising machines for solving combinatorial optimisation problems,” 2019, arXiv:1903.07163.
[3] A. Lucas, “Ising formulations of many NP problems,” Frontiers Phys., vol. 2, p. 5, Feb. 2014.
[4] Z. Bian, F. Chudak, W. G. Macready, and G. Rose. The Ising Model: Teaching an Old Problem New Tricks. Accessed: Mar. 14, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.dwavesys.com/media/vbklsvbh/weightedmaxsat_v2.pdf
[5] What is Quantum Annealing?—D-Wave System Documentation. Accessed: Feb. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://docs.dwavesys.com/docs/latest/c_gs_2.html#getting-started-qa
[6] H. Takesue, T. Inagaki, K. Inaba, T. Ikuta, and T. Honjo, “Large-scale coherent Ising machine,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., vol. 88, no. 6, Jun. 2019, Art. no. 061014.
[7] T. Inagaki et al., “A coherent Ising machine for 2000-node optimization problems,” Science, vol. 354, no. 6312, pp. 603–606, Nov. 2016.
[8] Y. Yamamoto et al., “Coherent Ising machines—Optical neural networks operating at the quantum limit,” NPJ Quantum Inf., vol. 3, no. 1, p. 49, 2017.
[9] P. L. Mcmahon et al., “A fully programmable 100-spin coherent Ising machine with all-to-all connections,” Science, vol. 354, no. 6312, pp. 614–617, Nov. 2016.
[10] K. Takata et al., “A 16-bit coherent Ising machine for one-dimensional ring and cubic graph problems,” Sci. Rep., vol. 6, no. 1, p. 34089, Sep. 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

50

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

[11] F. Böhm, G. Verschaffelt, and G. Van der Sande, “A poor man’s coherent Ising machine based on opto-electronic feedback systems for solving optimization problems,” Nature Commun., vol. 10, no. 1, p. 3538, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1038/S41467-019-11484-3.
[12] S. Dutta et al., “An Ising Hamiltonian solver based on coupled stochastic phase-transition nano-oscillators,” Nature Electron., vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 502–512, Jul. 2021.
[13] W. Moy, I. Ahmed, P.-W. Chiu, J. Moy, S. S. Sapatnekar, and C. H. Kim, “A 1,968-node coupled ring oscillator circuit for combinatorial optimization problem solving,” Nature Electron., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 310–317, May 2022.
[14] R. Afoakwa, Y. Zhang, U. K. R. Vengalam, Z. Ignjatovic, and M. Huang, “BRIM: Bistable resistively-coupled Ising machine,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High-Performance Comput. Archit. (HPCA), Feb. 2021, pp. 749–760.
[15] Y. Zhang, U. K. R. Vengalam, A. Sharma, M. Huang, and Z. Ignjatovic, “QuBRIM: A CMOS compatible resistively-coupled Ising machine with quantized nodal interactions,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput. Aided Design (ICCAD), Oct. 2022, pp. 1–8.
[16] M. Yamaoka, C. Yoshimura, M. Hayashi, T. Okuyama, H. Aoki, and H. Mizuno, “24.3 20k-spin Ising chip for combinational optimization problem with CMOS annealing,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2015, pp. 1–3.
[17] T. Takemoto, M. Hayashi, C. Yoshimura, and M. Yamaoka, “2.6 a 2 ×30k-spin multichip scalable annealing processor based on a processing-in-memory approach for solving large-scale combinatorial optimization problems,” in IEEE Int. Solid- State Circuits Conf., Feb. 2019, pp. 52–54.
[18] K. Yamamoto et al., “STATICA: A 512-spin 0.25M-weight annealing processor with an all-spin-updates-at-once architecture for combinatorial optimization with complete spin–spin interactions,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 165–178, Jan. 2021.
[19] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[20] A. Hareedy, C. Lanka, N. Guo, and L. Dolecek, “A combinatorial methodology for optimizing non-binary graph-based codes: Theoretical analysis and applications in data storage,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 2128–2154, Apr. 2019.
[21] M. Tawada, S. Tanaka, and N. Togawa, “A new LDPC code decoding method: Expanding the scope of Ising machines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. (ICCE), Jan. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[22] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems (corresp),” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, May 1978.
[23] J. Bruck and M. Naor, “The hardness of decoding linear codes with preprocessing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 381–385, Mar. 1990.
[24] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[25] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[26] A. Riazanov, Y. Maximov, and M. Chertkov, “Belief propagation min-sum algorithm for generalized min-cost network flow,” in Proc. Annu. Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), Jun. 2018, pp. 6108–6113.
[27] W.-T. Lin and T.-H. Kuo, “A 12b 1.6GS/s 40mW DAC in 40 nm CMOS with >70dB SFDR over entire Nyquist bandwidth,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2013, pp. 474–475.
[28] E. Guglielmi et al., “High-value tunable pseudo-resistors design,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 2094–2105, Aug. 2020.
[29] R. Neal. (Feb. 11, 2012). Software for Low Density Parity Check Codes. [Online]. Available: http://radfordneal.github.io/LDPC-codes/
[30] J. Chen, R. Tanner, C. Jones, and Y. Li, “Improved min-sum decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2005, pp. 449–453.
[31] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2005.
[32] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Jul. 2004, pp. 107–112.

[33] H. Lopez, H.-W. Chan, K.-L. Chiu, P.-Y. Tsai, and S. J. Jou, “A 75Gb/s/mm2 and energy-efficient LDPC decoder based on a reduced complexity second minimum approximation min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 926–939, Apr. 2020.
[34] M. Milicevic and P. G. Gulak, “A multi-Gb/s frame-interleaved LDPC decoder with path-unrolled message passing in 28-nm CMOS,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1908–1921, Oct. 2018.
[35] S. Ajaz and H. Lee, “Multi-Gb/s multi-mode LDPC decoder architecture for IEEE 802.11ad standard,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst. (APCCAS), Nov. 2014, pp. 153–156.
[36] M.-R. Li, C.-H. Yang, and Y.-L. Ueng, “A 5.28-Gb/s LDPC decoder with time-domain signal processing for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 592–604, Feb. 2017.
[37] R. Ghanaatian et al., “A 588-Gb/s LDPC decoder based on finitealphabet message passing,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 329–340, Feb. 2018.
Eslam Elmitwalli (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in nanotechnology and nanoelectronics engineering from the Zewail City of Science and Technology, 6th of October City, Giza, Egypt, in 2018. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering with the University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA. His research interests include hardware security, Ising machines, and emerging computing paradigms.
Zeljko Ignjatovic (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Novi Sad, Serbia, in 1999, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA, in 2001 and 2004, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor of electrical and computer engineering with the University of Rochester. His research interests include analog and mixed-signal circuit design, development of analogto-digital converters, image sensors, CMOS-based Ising machines, radar and ultrasound imaging techniques, and related signal processing methods.
Selçuk Köse (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electrical and electronics engineering from Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey, in 2006, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA, in 2008 and 2012, respectively.
He was with TÜBÍTAK, Ankara; Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA; and Freescale Semiconductor, Tempe, AZ, USA. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Rochester. Prior to joining the University of Rochester, he was an Associate Professor with the University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA. His current research interests include integrated voltage regulation, 3-D integration, hardware security, graphene nanoribbon transistors, and cryogenic electronics. Dr. Köse was a recipient of the NSF CAREER Award, the Cisco Research Award, the USF College of Engineering Outstanding Junior Researcher Award, and the USF Outstanding Faculty Award. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, Nature Computer Science (Springer), and Microelectronics Journal (Elsevier). He has served on the technical program and organization committees for various conferences.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:08:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

