596

IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, VOL. 31, 2024

High-Performance QC-LDPC Layered Decoder Based on Shortcut Updating
Zhongyong Wang , Zhaoyan Xie , Kexian Gong , Jin Yan , and Lianghui Chen

Abstract—Quasi-cyclic low density parity check (QC-LDPC) is widely used in various modern communication standards due to its excellent performance and convenient hardware implementation, but its commonly used pipelined layered decoder faces update conflicts that lead to performance degradation. This letter proposes a shortcut-based decoder to mitigate this problem. When the conflicts occur, we avoid the read/write operations of the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) and abandon the use of the barrel shifters, and feed those LLRs directly to the next layer. we also attempt to utilize the latest messages for inevitable conflicts. Moreover, the proposed architecture significantly reduces the possibility of conflicts by reordering the base graph matrix (BGM) with a shorter update interval of LLRs, which can achieve maximum utilization in the updated messages. Compared to the state-of-the-art approach in the case of DVB-S2, the proposed architecture can deliver up to 0.25 dB performance gain with faster convergence.
Index Terms—Layered decoder, pipeline conflicts, quasi-cyclic LDPC, shortcut updating.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW density parity check (LDPC) codes [1] is used as a forward error correct (FEC) code with an excellent performance near the Shannon limit [2]. Due to the irregularity of its parity check matrix (PCM), the conventional LDPC requires massive memory consumption in hardware implementation, especially for long code lengths. To address this issue, the quasicyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) is invented whose PCM is designed to keep the non-zero elements at regular positions. Till now, QC-LDPC has been widely adopted in several communication standards, such as 5G NR [3], WiMAX [4], DVB-S2 [5], etc.
More specifically, the PCM of QC-LDPC can be divided into different groups (also called layers), and the corresponding layered decoding algorithm allows each layer to utilize the messages from the previous layer, thus doubling the convergence speed [6].
However, the pipelined QC-LDPC layered decoder suffers from performance degradation due to the conflicts caused by overlapping of the same elements in adjacent layers of the base graph matrix (BGM) [7]. To minimize this effect, the authors in [8] reduce the parallelism of the PCM by dividing it into
Manuscript received 24 October 2023; revised 5 January 2024; accepted 28 January 2024. Date of publication 5 February 2024; date of current version 13 February 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61901417. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. YeongLuh Ueng. (Corresponding author: Lianghui Chen.)
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China (e-mail: iezywang@zzu. edu.cn; zyxie@gs.zzu.edu.cn; kxgong@zzu.edu.cn; yanjin@gs.zzu.edu.cn; cliangh@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LSP.2024.3362194

several small sub-matrices. However, the low parallelism leads to an exponential decrease in decoding throughput. In [9], [10], [11], the BGM is reordered to greatly reduce the occurrence of conflicts. However, these methods are unable to completely eliminate the conflicts. In [12], the residual update method is proposed to retain and reload the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) when conflicts start and end, respectively. Unfortunately, when conflicts occur continuously, this algorithm cannot take full advantage of the conflicting layers messages. To solve this problem, the authors in [13] store the LLRs in the conflicting layers twice, which can be exploited to renew them immediately. Nevertheless, the outdated LLRs may also bring the performance loss. In [14], the double update queues method is proposed to improve the percentage of updated LLRs per iteration but still requires many cycles in the whole processing. Overall, [12], [13], [14] tries to compensate for losses caused by conflicts, and we still need to reduce the probability of conflicts substantially.
Basically speaking, a major cause of conflicts is the high latency of the LLRs update operations. In this letter, we propose a shortcut-based decoder to address this issue. The main contributions of the proposed decoder can be summarized as follows:
1) The proposed architecture can reduce the overall LLRs update delay by avoiding the LLRs read/write operations and the barrel shifters pipeline time. It also significantly reduces the possibility of conflicts by reordering the BGM with a shorter update interval.
2) By evaluating the different states of the posterior LLRs, the proposed decoder can flexibly switch different decoding strategies, allowing the decoder to maximize using the latest messages to achieve higher decoding performance.
3) We conduct numerical simulations to show that the proposed architecture can achieve up to 0.25 dB performance gain with a faster convergence compared to the the stateof-the-art approach.

II. LAYERED QC-LDPC DECODING
Typically, QC-LDPC usually decoded using the normalized minimum sum (NMS) algorithm [15], which is an approximation of belief propagation (BP) [16]. In this section, we will briefly introduce the system model and NMS algorithm and its hardware implementation architecture.
Firstly, assuming that the i-th transmitting signal and the receiving signal are denoted as xi and yi, respectively, our system model can be expressed as

yi = xi + wi,

(1)

1070-9908 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:13:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIGH-PERFORMANCE QC-LDPC LAYERED DECODER BASED ON SHORTCUT UPDATING

597

node messages are added together in (5) at the posterior LLR update unit group (LUG) to obtain the posterior LLRs. Note that the posterior LLRs are sent to the other barrel shifter for reverse shifting to recover the original LLRs order, which are then written into the RAM. In this way, we complete one iteration of the layer, but the latency of the entire posterior LLRs update is relatively high due to the insertion of pipeline stages.

Fig. 1. Conventional layered decoder architecture.

III. LAYERED QC-LDPC DECODING BASED ON SHORTCUT UPDATES
As stated above, we should avoid the conflicts as much as possible by minimizing the latency in updating the LLRs. In this section, we will introduce the proposed QC-LDPC decoding architecture based on the shortcut technique.

where wi is additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with zero mean and noise variance σ2, and we assume binary phase shift key modulation (BPSK) is adopted such that xi ∈ {−1, 1}.
For the NMS algorithm, it is usually assumed that the variable
nodes are initialized by the channel information as

LLRinit

=

log

Pr(xi = 1|yi) Pr(xi = −1|yi)

=

2yi σ2

,

(2)

here P r(xi = 1|yi) and P r(xi = −1|yi) are the conditional probabilities that xi = 1 and xi = −1 when yi is received,
respectively. In the sequel, we update the variable node by

Qni,,jit = LLRim,it − Rjn,,iit−1,

(3)

where Qni,,jit denote the external message propagated from the i-th variable node to the j-th check node in the n-th layer at the it-th iteration. We note that Qin,,jit in the m-th layer is updated by the posterior LLRs in the n-th layer for certain m and n.
NMS introduces a decay factor α ∈ [0, 1] to compensate for the approximation from BP to NMS, and α is usually set to
be 0.75, 0.875, etc. Moreover, the check node function can be
reached by

Rjn,,iit = α ·

sgn

i ∈Cj\i

Qin,,jit

· min
i ∈Cj\i

Qni ,,jit

,

(4)

where Rjn,,iit denote the external message propagated from the jth check node to the i-th variable node in the n-th layer at the it-th iteration. Cj\i represent the set of variable nodes participating in the j-th check equation, excluding the i-th variable node.
Finally, we obtain the posterior LLRs of the i-th variable node in the n-th layer at the it-th iteration via

LLRin,it = Qni,,jit + Rjn,,iit.

(5)

The conventional decoder architecture is shown in Fig. 1. Since different positions of non-zero elements in the BGM have different shift values, the LLRs of the channel or random access memory (RAM) are shifted with the barrel shifter to maintain a consistent order. The shifted LLRs are passed to the variable node unit group (VNG), and the variable node messages are then updated using (3). In addition, they are also cached into the first in first out (FIFO) for the next iteration. Next, the check node unit group (CNG) updates the check node messages using (4). Finally, the latest variable node messages and the check

A. Offline Reordering of the PCM With Reduced Update Interval

In the offline PCM reordering algorithm, a smaller interval for the conflicting positions can be used once we adopt the shortcut-based architecture. The reordering of the BGM can be transformed into the famous traveling salesman problem (TSP), where optimization algorithms are used to minimize the total number of overlaps of the BGM. The typical optimization algorithms include genetic algorithm (GA) [17], ant colony optimization (ACO) [18], and simulated annealing (SA) [19]. In this paper, we leverage GA for the reordering of the PCM. Notably, to avoid stall cycles caused by changes in PCM row weights, the first layer after reordering must be the one with the largest row weight [13].
For some specific QC-LDPC codes, i.e., DVB-S2 LDPC short lengths with 1/2, 2/3, and 11/15 code rates, etc., there are still many conflicts with the conventional decoder’s posterior LLRs read/write interval for reordering. The conflict-free RAM read/write interval can be expressed as

ε = Dv + 2 · Dbs + Dvng + Dlug + 2,

(6)

where Dbs, Dvng, and Dlug are barrel shifter, VNG, and LUG delays respectively, Dv is the maximum row weight and 2 is the RAM read and write delay. The proposed shortcut-based
architecture can bypass two barrel shifters and RAM, such that the total interval can be reduced to Dv + Dvng + Dlug.

B. The Proposed Shortcut-Based Architecture
The architecture of the proposed shortcut-based decoder is shown in Fig. 2. when there is a conflict, the output LLRs from the LUG are passed through two barrel shifters and a RAM, then feed directly into VNG for the next layer update. By doing this, the conflicting LLRs of the previous layer save many cycles to be sent to the next layer, thus avoiding the use of outdated LLRs.
According to the existence of conflicts, the proposed LLRs update strategy can be divided into the following 3 scenarios, as shown in Fig. 2: 1) When there is no conflict, the conventional decoder architecture with the regular posterior LLRs read/write interval is applied. 2) When conflicts happen, the proposed shortcut-based architecture with the reduced posterior LLRs read/write interval is leveraged, which will be elaborated on later. 3) The proposed architecture can avoid most of the conflicts. For certain inevitable conflicts, we note that the latest Qin,,jit of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:13:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

598

IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, VOL. 31, 2024

TABLE I RESOURCE UTILIZATION OF THE PROPOSED DECODER AND THE EXISTING
DECODER

Fig. 2. Shortcut-based layered decoder architecture.

the n-th layer in (5) is calculated using (3) by m-th layer. In order to retain as much contribution as possible from the check nodes [12], we modify the posterior LLRs in (5) as

LLRin,it = LLRim,it −Rjn,,iit−1 + Rjn,,iit .

(7)

ΔRjn,i

This approach is also called residual updating. The conflicting posterior LLRs need to be stored for “patch”. The number of conflicts is different under different code rates. In this paper, we set that the depth of the LLR FIFO is greater than the maximum number of conflicts for all considered code rates.

C. Detailed Illustration of Shortcut Update
To better illustrate the procedure of the proposed architecture, we show the timing diagram of a certain example in Fig. 3, where the read addresses correspond to the indices of the BGM. We use hexagons with different lines and fill colors to denote different operations.
For the same index of BGM or read/write address, conflicts happen when the read operation in the next layer precedes the write operation in the current layer. The conventional decoder, for example, inserts 5 stall cycles to make the read operation of “address 1” in the 2nd layer happen after the write operation of “address 1” in the 1st layer. The residual-based decoder accumulates the check node contributions of the conflicting locations and uses them when there is no conflict. However, in the example in Fig. 3, where “address 1” appears in all layers, the LLRs in “address 1” are never renewed. To solve this, the hybrid scheduling decoder uses a double-write to “patch” the LLRs of the same address in the next layer, eliminating the delayed update of the LLRs.
To further improve the performance of the above decoders, the proposed shortcut-based architecture passes the LLRs in “address 1” of the LUG from the first layer to the VNG of the second layer because of the bypassing operation. For the inevitable conflicts of the proposed approach, like “address 7” in the third layer, we turn to the hybrid decoder with “patch” technique for help to compensate the losses caused by the outdated LLRs.

IV. SIMULATION PERFORMANCE AND HARDWARE
IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we perform Monte Carlo simulations to verify the proposed architecture. We adopt the LDPC with code length 16200 under coder rate 11/15 and 2/3, respectively, from the DVB-S2 standard. Moreover, BPSK modulation and AWGN channel are considered over 1000000 codewords. In addition, the CNG in Fig. 3 is realized by the NMS with the normalization factor of α = 0.875, and the quantization bit widths of the LLRs from the posterior, variable nodes, and check nodes are 8 bits, 8 bits, and 6 bits, respectively, and we set the number of pipeline stages to be 10. For the legend of the figures, we use “layered”, “hybrid”, and “shortcut” to denote the ideal conflict-free layered decoder, the hybrid schedule decoder [13], and the proposed shortcut-based decoder, respectively.
We show the frame error rate (FER) under code rate 11/15 in Fig. 4, where the conflict-free decoder and the hybrid decoding [13] are compared. Here we see that the proposed schedule outperforms the hybrid schedule by about 0.25 dB and 0.1 dB at FER = 10−5 under 10 and 20 iterations, respectively, and it can closely follow the conflict-free algorithm. We attribute the excellent performance of the proposed architecture to the fact that it can take full advantage of the latest LLRs. We also note that, although the conflict-free schedule shows the best FER performance, it consumes massive stall cycles, leading to a low throughput. Furthermore, the FERs under a 2/3 code rate are plotted in Fig. 5, where we can observe similar tendencies.
In addition, we show in Fig. 6 the convergence performance of the investigated decoders in the case of code rate 2/3 and code length 16200 at SNR = 4.5 dB. Here we can see that due to the numerical approximation from the quantization of the hardware implementation, the FERs of all approaches drop sharply after 6 iterations at the beginning. Moreover, the proposed decoder takes about 20 iterations to converge while the hybrid decoder takes about 25 iterations. Furthermore, the proposed decoder costs only 3 iterations more than the optimal layered decoder. We note that the proposed architecture can beat the hybrid one in FER as shown in Figs. 4–6.
We also show the hardware resource consumption in the Vertex-7 family of devices of the proposed schedule in the Table I, where the three most significant resources, look-up tables (LUTs), flip-flops (FFs), and RAM blocks (BRAMs) are listed. The normalized throughput Tnorm represents the throughput for one decoding iteration. As shown in Table I, the proposed architecture consumes slightly more resources compared to the hybrid one [13] and achieves comparable throughput. Moreover,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:13:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIGH-PERFORMANCE QC-LDPC LAYERED DECODER BASED ON SHORTCUT UPDATING

599

Fig. 3. Detailed illustration of decoding timing for conventional decoder, residue-based decoder, hybrid scheduling decoder, and shortcut-based decoder.

Fig. 4. FER comparison versus SNR under coder length 16200 and code rate Fig. 6. FER comparison versus iteration index under coder length 16200 and

11/15.

code rate 2/3 at SNR=4.5 dB.

strategies. Furthermore, the bit-width in the barrel shifters of the shortcut schedule is larger than that of the hybrid one, which also consumes more LUTs. To improve the throughput, we need to enable the continuous decoding of the proposed architecture, thus we adopt a double-buffered structure [11] for memory cells. The above operation doubles the BRAM consumption.

Fig. 5. FER comparison versus SNR under coder length 16200 and code rate 2/3.
the proposed algorithm costs about 10.2 %, 10.8 % and 7.5 % in LUTs, FFs, and BRAMs, respectively, compared to the conventional one.
For LUT consumption, the shortcut schedule utilizes additional control logic units to switch different update

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we design a shortcut-based decoder where we significantly reduce the possibility of conflicts by reordering the BGM with a shorter update interval of LLRs. Specifically, we try to avoid the read/write operations of the RAM and abandon the use of the barrel shifters. By flexibly switching between three decoding strategies to achieve maximum utilization in the updated messages and dramatically reduce the update latency of the LLRs. Finally, we perform numerical simulations to verify the validity of the proposed schedule. Simulation results show that the proposed decoder architecture can gain 0.25 dB performance over the previous decoder architecture and have a faster convergence speed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:13:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

600

IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, VOL. 31, 2024

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance mof low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical specification group radio access network; NR; multiplexing and channel coding, Document 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Sophia Antipolis, France, Tech. Specification 38.212, V16.1.0 (2020-03), 2020.
[4] Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Standard 802.162004, 2004.
[5] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications; Part 2: DVB-S2 Extensions (DVB-S2X), Standard ETSI EN 302307– 2V.1.1.1 (2014–10), ETSI, Sophia Antipolis, France, 2014.
[6] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Work. Signal Process. Syst., Austin, TX, USA, 2004, pp. 107–112.
[7] C. Condo, A. Baghdadi, and G. Masera, “Reducing the dissipated energy in multi-standard turbo and LDPC decoders,” Circuit Syst. Signal Process., vol. 34, pp. 1571–1593, May 2015.
[8] C. Marchand, J.-B. Dore, L. Conde-Canencia, and E. Boutillon, “Conflict presolution for pipelined layered LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., 2009, pp. 220–225.
[9] X. Zhao, Z. Chen, X. Peng, D. Zhou, and S. Goto, “DVB-T2 LDPC decoder with perfect conflict resolution,” Inf. Media Technol., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 584–592, Feb. 2012.
[10] Z. Wu, D. Liu, and Y. Zhang, “Matrix reordering techniques for memory conflict reduction for pipelined QC-LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC Int. Conf. Commun., 2014, pp. 354–359.

[11] Z. Wu and K. Su, “Updating conflict solution for pipelined layered LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Signal Process. Commun. Comput., 2015, pp. 1–6.
[12] O. Boncalo, G. Kolumban-Antal, A. Amaricai, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, “Layered LDPC decoders with efficient memory access scheduling and mapping and built-in support for pipeline hazards mitigation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Regular Papers, vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 1643–1656, Apr. 2019.
[13] V. L. Petrovic´, M. M. Markovic´, D. M. E. Mezeni, L. V. Saranovac, and A. Radosševic´, “Flexible high throughput QC-LDPC decoder with perfect pipeline conflicts resolution and efficient hardware utilization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Regular Papers, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5454–5467, Dec. 2020.
[14] Y. Li, Y. Li, N. Ye, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and J. Zhang, “High throughput priority-based layered QC-LDPC decoder with double update queues for mitigating pipeline conflicts,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 9, Apr., 2022, Art. no. 3508.
[15] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[16] P. Sun, Z. Wang, R. W. Heather, and P. Schniter, “Joint channelestimation/decoding with frequency-selective channels and few-bit ADC,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 899–914, Feb. 2019.
[17] P. Larranaga, C. M. H. Kuijpers, R. H. Murga, I. Inza, and S. Dizdarevic, “Genetic algorithms for the travelling salesman problem: A review of representations and operators,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 129–170, 1999.
[18] M. Dorigo and L. M. Gambardella, “Ant colony system: A cooperative learning approach to the traveling salesman problem,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 53–66, Apr. 1997.
[19] S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, and M. P. Vecchi, “Optimization by simulated annealing,” Science, vol. 220, pp. 671–680, 1983.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:13:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

