IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

385

Low Complexity State Metric Memory Reduction for Turbo Decoding With Stochastic Quantization
Shuai Hu , Kaining Han , Member, IEEE, and Jianhao Hu

Abstract—The size of the state metrics cache (SMC) has a predominant impact on the overall hardware consumption of the Turbo decoder. This brief presents a low complexity SMC reduction algorithm based on the proposed stochastic quantization (SQ) technique, which reduces the size of the SMC by randomly quantizing the state metrics to different small bit-width numbers. The selection of the random source and the updating method of the extrinsic information are further explored to minimize the performance loss caused by bit-width reduction. The simulation and synthesis results show that the proposed algorithm can achieve the best bit error rate (BER) performance with the lowest hardware consumption among the compared SMC reduction algorithms.
Index Terms—Turbo decoder, SMC reduction, stochastic computing, MAP decoding.

Fig. 1. (a) Overall block diagram of Turbo encoding and decoding process; (b) Block diagram of MLM algorithm.

I. INTRODUCTION

The core idea of our algorithm is to reduce the bit-width of

T URBO code was introduced by Berrou et al. in 1993 [1] and has been adopted in many communication standards, such as CDMA2000, WiMax, and 3GPP LTE standards. A Turbo code is based on the concatenation of two convolutional codes with interleaved inputs, and is usually decoded by two component decoders, which iteratively generate and exchange interleaved soft extrinsic information from each other. Each component decoder performs max a posteriori (MAP) algorithm, which can be simplified to Max-Log-MAP (MLM) algorithm with significantly reduced calculation complexity.
Although the MLM Turbo decoder has relatively low calculation complexity, it is memory-intensive due to the recursive calculation nature of the MLM algorithm. Usually, the state metrics memory has a dominant impact on the total area

the stored state metrics by randomly quantizing them to different small bit-width numbers. We further analyse the selection of the random source for SQ to improve the representation precision of the stochastic quantized numbers. We also find that the successive relaxation (SR) updating method [5], which is widely used in Low-Density Parity-Check(LDPC) decoding to improve decoding performance but is proved to have no benefit in Turbo decoding [6], can efficiently improve the performance of our SQ based Turbo decoding. Simulation and synthesis results for a 3GPP LTE Turbo code show that the proposed method can achieve almost no performance loss compared with floating-point decoding with only 4 bits stored state metrics, and the introduced complexity is trivial with respect to the saved SMC.

and power dissipation of the MLM Turbo decoder. So, many researches are devoted to reducing the size of the SMC.

II. PRELIMINARIES

However, they either introduce high extra calculation complexity for reverse calculation [2] or suffer from performance degradation caused by bit-width saving [3], [4], which limit the advantage of SMC reduction.
This brief presents a low complexity SMC reduction method based on the proposed stochastic quantization (SQ) technique.

A Turbo code is based on the concatenation of two convolutional codes with interleaved inputs. A Turbo decoder consists of two component decoders, where each decoder processes MLM decoding and generates the extrinsic information for each other. Fig. 1(a) gives the overall block diagram of a general Turbo code decoding process. Fig. 1(b) illustrates the

Manuscript received 11 December 2022; revised 22 February 2023 and 6 June 2023; accepted 25 July 2023. Date of publication 1 August 2023; date of current version 8 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62001277, and in part by the National Key Research and Development Plan under Grant 2020YFB1807401. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor J. Lin. (Corresponding author: Kaining Han.)
The authors are with the National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Communications, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu 611731, China (e-mail: hkaining2014@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2023.3300304

block diagram of the MLM algorithm processed in each constituent decoder. For binary phase shift keying modulation and the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with noise variance σ 2, the branch metrics are firstly calculated by the Branch Metric Unit (BMU) according to

γk(z)(sj1,k−1, sj2,k)

=

Lc 2

xks yks + xkpykp

+

(z) apr,k

(uk),

(1)

where parity

xks and xkp denote the transmitted bit respectively at time slot k.

information ysk and ypk

bit and denote

1549-7747 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

the corresponding received soft messages from channel. γk(z)(sj1,k−1, sj2,k) is the branch metric between the state sj1,k−1 and sj2,k, where j ∈ 0, 1, . . . , NSM is the index of the state metrics, uk = z,z ∈ 0, 1 are the information bits. Lc = 2/σ 2. Then, the forward and backward state metrics are recursively calculated in forward recursion unit and backward recursion unit according to

αk sj2,k

= max
sj1 ,k−1

αk−1

sj1,k−1

+ γk(z) sj1,k−1, sj2,k

,

(2)

and

βk sj1,k

= max
sj2 ,k+1

βk+1

sj2,k+1

+ γk(+z)1 sj1,k, sj2,k+1

, (3)

respectively. Since the forward and backward recursive calculations are in different direction, a Last-In-First-Out (LIFO) SMC is required to temporarily store the forward state metrics, which dominates the area and power consumption of the whole decoder. In order to minimize the size of SMC and reduce the bit-width of subsequent calculation, a normalization is usually performed by calculating αˆ j,k = αj,k −maxj {αj ,k}. Finally, the a posteriori information apo and the extrinsic information
ext are calculated in the a posteriori information calculation (PIC) module and the extrinsic information calculation (EIC) module according to

(z) apo,k

(uk

)

=

max

sj1,k−1,sj2,k ,uk =1

αk−1 sj1,k−1

+ γk(z) sj1,k−1, sj2,k

+ βk sj2,k

− max
sj1,k−1,sj2,k ,uk =0

αk−1 sj1,k−1

+ γk(z) sj1,k−1, sj2,k

+ βk sj2,k

, (4)

and

e(zx)t,k(uk) =

(z) apo,k

(uk)

−

(z) apr,k

(uk)

−

(z) in,k

(uk

),

i(n0,)k(uk) = 0 (in1,)k(uk) = Lcyks

(5)

respectively. The performance of the MLM can be efficiently improved
by the extrinsic information scaling scheme, which multiplies a scaling factor δ to the extrinsic information as [7]

(z) ext,k

(uk

)

=

δ

·

(azp)o,k(uk) − (azp)r,k(uk) − i(nz),k(uk) . (6)

III. STOCHASTIC QUANTIZATION BASED MAX-LOG-MAP DECODING
In this section, we propose a low complexity SMC reduction algorithm based on the proposed SQ technique. Fig. 2(a) illustrates the block diagram of the proposed SQ-based MLM (SQ-MLM) algorithm. During the forward recursion, the forward state metrics are quantized to smaller bit-width numbers by the SQ module introduced in Section III-A to reduce the size of the SMC. Then in the backward recursion, the forward state metrics are recovered by left shifting the corresponding stored metrics. A random number generator (RNG) is responsible to generate the random source for SQ, which will be detailed in Section III-B. Besides, the calculated extrinsic information is updated by the SR updating module introduced in Section III-C to further improve the decoding performance.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of (a) the SQ-MLM algorithm; (b) the SQ module; (c) the SR updating module.

A. Stochastic Quantization

We slightly abuse the word ‘quantization’ to represent a high

precision (big bit-width) number by a low precision (small bit-

width) number. Such quantization can be simply realized by

directly abandoning the last few bits of the fixed-point num-

ber, called a floor quantization (FQ), or to represent it by the

closest quantization level, called a round quantization (RQ), to

minimize the quantization error. While in this brief, we present

the SQ technique to eliminate the quantization error from the

perspective of expectation, which can efficiently reduce the

performance loss caused by bit-width reduction in iterative

decoding.

The SQ is inspired by the stochastic computing [8], where

the number is represented by stochastic bit stream with

its expectation equal to its value. The SQ follows a sim-

ilar representation methodology but extends the stochastic

bits to different fixed-point numbers. Let x denote a high

precision number represented by a bh bits fixed-point num-
ber, {q1, q2, . . . , qN} is the set of the quantization levels of a bl bits number, where q1 < q2 < · · · < qN, N = 2bl . Then the

SQ is defined as, for every possible x, a discrete probability

dabisitlritiybuPtiixontoPb(xe)q=ua{nPti1xz,ePd2xt,o.

. . , PxN } is xq = qi, i

set and x ∈ [1, N].

has a If for

proball x,

P(x) satisfy

N

x = Pxi qi,

(7)

i=1

then this SQ is called an unbiased SQ. Generally, the FQ and RQ can all be seen as a specific
case of the SQ with only one nonzero entry(which is equal to 1) in P(x), and obviously they are all biased because a high precision number x will be fixedly quantized to xq with a constant quantization error. While for SQ, the same number x will be quantized to different quantization levels in each quantization process, and with properly selected P(x) to satisfy (7), it can eliminate the quantization error from the perspective of expectation. We will only consider unbiased SQ in the follows, which will be simply referred as SQ.
In practical situation, the selection of P(x) requires both accuracy and simplicity consideration. The simplest way is to set a two entries P(x) = {0, 0, . . . , Pix−1, Pxi , . . . , 0, 0} with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: LOW COMPLEXITY STATE METRIC MEMORY REDUCTION FOR TURBO DECODING WITH SQ

387

TABLE I AN EXAMPLE OF SQ COMPARED WITH FQ AND RQ

qi−1 ≤ x ≤ qi, that is, x will be randomly quantized to its closest two quantization levels. Let x l = qi−1 and x l = qi denote the closest two quantization levels of x when quantized
to bl bit numbers, then

Pxi = (x − x l)/( x l − x l), Pix−1 = 1 − Pxi ,

(8)

is set to satisfy unbiased condition. Table I gives an example of such SQ. When x =
11, represented by 4 bits binary number 1011, is quantized to 2 bits binary number with quantization levels {0(00)2, 4(01)2, 8(10)2, 12(11)2}, where ()2 denotes the corresponding binary number. The last significant 2 bits are omitted since they are all supposed to be 00. According to (8), it has probability (11 − 8)/(12 − 8) = 3/4 to be quantized to 12(11)2 and probability 1 − 3/4 = 1/4 to be 8(10)2. As shown in Table I, FQ and RQ both have constant quantization error in each quantization process, which leads to biased E(xq). While for SQ, the quantization error changes and although it has higher absolute error in some quantization processes than RQ, it has no error from the perspective of expectation.
Actually, the representation precision of the stochastic quantized numbers increases with the number of the quantization processes, which is equivalent to extend the bit-width of them. Let bs = log2(Ns) denote the equivalent bit-width increased by Ns quantization processes, then the real bit-width of the stochastic quantized numbers is br = bl + bs. When only one quantization is processed, the SQ is equivalent to RQ, and when bl = 1, the stochastic quantized number is equivalent to stochastic bit stream.
The convergence nature of SQ makes it possible to be efficiently applied in iterative decoding algorithms, which also accomplish decoding through a convergence process. We find that although the quantization error in each iteration increases due to smaller bit-width numbers, the average error decreases as the number of iterations increases, which leads to almost no decoding performance loss. This is because unlike RQ, which has fixed biased error, the quantization error of SQ in one iteration may be compensated by quantization error in other iteration if they have opposite directions. Therefore, the overall quantization error in decoding process is decreased.
Fig. 2(b) illustrates the block diagram of the SQ module. The bl = bh−bs to guarantee br = bh. The number represented by the last bs bits of the forward state metric α, which is supposed to be α − α l, is compared with a bs bits random

number R from the RNG according to

c=

0 1

α− α−

α α

l l

≤R >R

,

(9)

where c is the comparison result, which will be added to
the number represented by the first bl bits of the α as the
quantization result. When the random number R is generated uniformly from range [0, 2bs − 1], the c will have a probability (α − α l)/2bs to be ‘1,’ and the quantization result has a probability (α − α l)/2bs to be x l, which satisfies (8). In order to avoid overflow in the adder, the forward state metric α
bl bs
requires to be saturated by (2bl − 1) · 2bs = (11..1 00..0)2. The quantized αsq will be stored in SMC and when the backward recursion is processed, the quantized αq will be recovered from αsq by bs bits left shifting.

B. Random Source Selection for SQ-MLM
In this section, we explore the selection of the random source, which is crucial to achieve high decoding performance and low complexity RNG at the same time. In stochastic computing, the representation precision of the stochastic bit stream is determined by the variance of it, that is, how fast it converges to its expectation. The stochastic bit stream is usually modeled as a Bernoulli sequence, which can be generated by comparing the expectation value of it with random numbers independently generated from a uniform distribution in [0,1]. Although it has been found that specific random sources, such as Sobol sequence, can be used to improve the representation precision of the stochastic bit streams [9], it has trouble to satisfy the independent condition required in stochastic computing. While for SQ, we only focus on the representation precision of the stochastic quantized numbers and need not to care about the correlation condition among them. So, we can use the same random source for all state metrics to achieve the simplest RNG, and specific random source can be chosen to improve the representation precision.
Now we explore the selection of the random source. Three kinds of sequences, including Bernoulli sequence, linear feedback shift register (LFSR) sequence, and Sobol sequence, are considered. The Bernoulli sequence is a little abused here to represent the random source where each R is independently generated from [0, 2bs −1] with equal probability. Although the SQ with Bernoulli sequence can satisfy the unbiased condition, it converges slowly with the number of iterations increases, and thus is actually biased when the number of iterations is limited. The LFSR sequence is a kind of pseudo random sequence and a bs-register LFSR sequence traverses all numbers in [0, 2bs − 1] with a shuffled order. Therefore, the SQ with LFSR sequence can satisfy the unbiased condition when the number of iterations equals to 2bs . Sobol sequence is also traversed, and the distribution of the numbers in Sobol sequence is more uniform (see [9] for more details about Sobol sequence).
Fig. 3(a) shows the representation precision comparison of the SQ with different random source, which is characterized by the mean-absolute-error (MAE) between x and E(xq) in every iteration. The bh = 7, bl = 4, and bs = 3. The results

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 3. (a) Convergence of the SQ with different random source; Fig. 4. (a) Optimal η and δ searching; (b) BER performance improvement

(c) Performance comparison of SQ-MLM with different random source.

with SR updating module.

are normalized in [0, 1] to calculate the MAE. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the RQ has a constant error. While for the SQ, the error decreases as the number of iterations increases. Due to slow convergence, the SQ with Bernoulli sequence still has quantization error after 8 iterations, where the other two random sources can achieve unbiased SQ. Sobol sequence has the smallest MAE when the number of iterations is the power of 2.
Fig. 3(b) gives the performance comparison of SQ-MLM with different random sources. The max number of iterations is set as Ns = 8, so the bs = 3. Other parameters of the decoder will be detailed in Section IV. As shown in Fig. 3(b), both LFSR sequence and Sobol sequence achieve the best bit error rate (BER) performance, which demonstrate that the unbiased SQ can efficiently improve the decoding performance of MLM with reduced bit-width state metrics. While the Sobol sequence achieves slightly better BER performance than LFSR sequence in the low signal-noise ratio (SNR) region. The SQ with Bernoulli sequence, although has quantization error after 8 iterations, still outperforms RQ, which further verifies that reducing the quantization error from the perspective of expectation can improving the decoding performance.

the SR updating module. In practice, the parameter η · δ can be unified to one parameter. Since the multiplier for extrinsic information scaling and the extrinsic information memory are already included in the previous decoder, the extra hardware for SR updating module is only a constant multiplier and an adder for each extrinsic information, which is trivial to the overall decoder. We search the optimal η and δ through extensive simulation in the low SNR region to achieve the best BER performance and we find that the optimal η and δ obtained in low SNR region also work well in high SNR region.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the SR updating method in SQ-MLM, we apply it to decode a 3GPP LTE Turbo code. The detailed information about the decoder will be described in Section IV. The optimal η and δ are searched at Eb/N0 = 0.9dB as shown in Fig. 4(a). When no SR updating module is used, that is η = 1, the optimal δ = 0.7. While when SR updating module is considered, the optimal combination of the η and δ appears to be 0.8 and 0.8, respectively. Fig. 4(b) gives the BER performance comparison with and without SR updating module. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the SR updating module can efficiently improve the decoding performance of SQ-MLM.

C. Successive Relaxation Update of the Extrinsic Information

When considering the iterative decoding as a fix-point problem, it is possible to update the extrinsic information by some alternative numerical method, such as Gauss-Seidel’s method, successive relaxation method, and damped substitution method. It has been found that the SR update can efficiently improve the decoding performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) code decoding [5]. However, the results in [6] verify that the SR update has no use for Turbo decoding, which means that the extrinsic information in previous iteration has no help to the current updated extrinsic information. While for the SQ-MLM, since the value is represented from a perspective of expectation, we find that the SR update can efficiently improve the performance of the SQ-MLM.
The SR update of the extrinsic information is expressed as

t ext

=

(1

−

η)

·

t−1 ext

+

η

·

δ

·

ext ,

(10)

where ext denotes the extrinsic information from EIC, t denotes the iteration number, and η is referred as relaxing
factor. Fig, 2(c) depicts the corresponding block diagram of

IV. PERFORMANCE AND COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we compare the performance and complexity of the proposed SQ-MLM with SMC reduction technologies based on bit-width saving, including the saturated metrics (SM) [10], the nonlinear quantization (NLQ) [3] and the Walsh–Hadamard Transform (WHT) based NLQ [4]. The Turbo code comes from 3GPP LTE standard with information length K = 800 and rate 1/3. We follow the same quantization bit-width selection as in [4] except for the forward state metrics, where we apply the saturation schedule in [10] to saturate 9 bits forward state metrics to 7 bits, which has been verified in [4] to achieve nearly no performance loss. The iteration is set as Ns = 8, so the bs = 3. The scaling factor δ and the relaxing factor η are set according to Section III-C and the Sobol sequence is used as the random source. The performance analysis is in Section IV-A and the complexity analysis is in Section IV-B.
A. Performance Analysis
Fig. 5 give the BER performance comparison of SQ-MLM with compared SMC reduction technologies. As shown in Fig. 5, at least 7 bits saturated forward state metrics are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: LOW COMPLEXITY STATE METRIC MEMORY REDUCTION FOR TURBO DECODING WITH SQ

389

Fig. 5. BER performance comparison with state-of-the-art SMC reduction algorithms in AWGN channel.
TABLE II COMPLEXITY COMPARISON WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART SMC
REDUCTION TECHNOLOGIES

with SM, but has the smallest bit-width of the state metrics, which achieve the smallest overall area consumption and critical path (CP).
To be noticed, the SQ can save fixed number of bits according to the iteration number, while the NLQ-based compression methods can save the bit-width in terms of logarithm. This means that the NLQ-based method may achieve higher bitwidth reduction when the initial bit-width is very big. On the other hand, this also gives us a new possible approach that to achieve extremely high compression rate by firstly using nonlinear quantization to compress a large bit-width number to small bit-width and then using stochastic quantization to further reduce its bit-width.

required when employing saturation schedule in [10] to achieve a near float-point BER performance. While when applying the SQ, the bit-width of the stored state metrics can be reduced to only 4 bits with almost no performance loss, which outperforms RQ by about 0.1dB. The SQ achieves this performance gain by extremely low complexity. The 4 bits NLQ and 5 bits WHT NLQ achieve slightly worse BER performance compared with SQ-MLM with much higher logic overhead, which will be detailed in Section IV-B.
B. Complexity Analysis
To compare the complexity of hardware implementation of different SMC reduction technologies, we implement our algorithm and the technologies in [3], [4], [10] in VHDL and synthesize them on a 130-nm standard cell technology with Synopsys Design Compiler imposing a clock frequency of 200 MHz. The corresponding memories are generated with a 130-nm RAM generator as double-port RAMs. The area and timing results are shown in Table II.
As shown in Table II, although NLQ and WHT+NLQ save the memory area compared with SM due to smaller bit-width of the state metrics, they require relatively high logic overhead and additional critical path, which limits the overall hardware save. The WHT+NLQ method even has higher overall area than SM due to complex transform logic overhead. While for the SQ, we has extremely simple extra logic compared

V. CONCLUSION
In this brief, we propose the stochastic quantization technique and apply it in MLM Turbo decoding to reduce the size of SMC. Specific random source selection strategy and extrinsic information updating method are employed to improve the performance of proposed SQ-MLM. The simulation and synthesis results suggest that the SQ-MLM can achieve the best performance among existing bit-width saving SMC reduction techniques with the smallest area consumption.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes. 1,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 2, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] M. Zhan, Z. Pang, K. Yu, and H. Wen, “Reverse calculation-based low memory turbo decoder for power constrained applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 2688–2701, Jun. 2021.
[3] J.-H. Kim and I.-C. Park, “Double-binary circular turbo decoding based on border metric encoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 79–83, Jan. 2008.
[4] M. Martina and G. Masera, “State metric compression techniques for turbo decoder architectures,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1119–1128, May 2011.
[5] S. Hemati and A. H. Banihashemi, “Dynamics and performance analysis of analog iterative decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 61–70, Jan. 2006.
[6] P. Moqvist and T. Aulin, “Turbo-decoding as a numerical analysis problem,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2000, p. 485.
[7] J. Vogt and A. Finger, “Improving the max-log-MAP turbo decoder,” Electron. Lett., vol. 36, no. 23, pp. 1937–1939, 2000.
[8] B. R. Gaines, “Stochastic computing systems,” in Advances in Information Systems Science. Boston, MA, USA: Springer, 1969, pp. 37–172.
[9] S. Liu and J. Han, “Energy efficient stochastic computing with Sobol sequences,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibition (DATE), 2017, pp. 650–653.
[10] H. Liu, J.-P. Diguet, C. Jego, M. Jezequel, and E. Boutillon, “Energy efficient turbo decoder with reduced state metric quantization,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., 2007, pp. 237–242.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:19:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

