380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Adaptive Differential Wearing for Read Performance Optimization on High-Density NAND Flash Memory
Yunpeng Song , Yina Lv , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and Liang Shi , Member, IEEE

Abstract—With cost reduction and density optimization, high-density NAND flash memory has been widely deployed in data centers and consumer devices. However, this trend has significantly degraded the read performance and lifetime of highdensity NAND flash memory during the last decade. Previous works proposed to optimize flash lifetime with wear leveling (WL) and optimize read performance with reliability improvement. Although WL can improve flash lifetime, it leads to the reliability of all blocks in 3-D NAND flash decreasing simultaneously. The reliability and read performance will be degraded with flash wearing. To solve this problem, an adaptive differential wearing (ADWR) scheme is proposed to optimize the read performance and lifetime in this work. The basic idea of ADWR is to determine the size of the high-reliability area to serve hot reads based on workload characteristics. Specifically, first, a differential wearing scheme is proposed to construct different reliability areas based on the characteristics of the data. Second, a lifetime model is constructed for the ADWR to clarify the lifetime impact. Based on this, a lifetime optimization scheme is proposed to improve the flash lifetime. Finally, a differential refresh scheme is proposed to reduce the impact of read disturbance on read performance. The experiments on real-life workloads show that ADWR achieves encouraging read performance optimization with negligible impacts on the lifetime of 3-D TLC NAND flash memory.
Index Terms—3-D NAND flash memory, read performance, wear leveling (WL).
I. INTRODUCTION
W ITH cost reduction and density optimization, 3-D NAND flash memory has been widely adopted as storage systems in personal computers and data centers [4], [22]. During the past decades, the manufacturing process of flash memory has advanced in the following ways. First, flash memory storage cells have gone from initially storing 1 bit per cell to recently storing 5 bits per cell [20]. The increases in bit density have led to increases in capacity. Second, flash memory manufacturing technologies have recently reached 10 nm [2]. The size of flash memory will be further reduced. Third, 3-D NAND flash memory further expands capacity by stacking storage cells [19], [22], [36], [49]. The number of
Manuscript received 7 February 2023; revised 25 May 2023; accepted 5 July 2023. Date of publication 21 July 2023; date of current version 26 December 2023. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant 62141213 and Grant 62072177, and in part by the Shanghai Science and Technology Project under Grant 22QA1403300. This article was recommended by Associate Editor P. Gupta. (Corresponding author: Liang Shi.)
The authors are with the Software/Hardware Co-Design Engineering Research Center, Ministry of Education, and the School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China (e-mail: lshi@cs.ecnu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2023.3297971

stacked layers has grown from 24 to the recent 144 layers [24]. It is expected that the number of stacked layers of flash memory will exceed 256 next year [49]. However, lifetime and performance degradation hold back their further development. To solve these issues, previous works proposed to use wear leveling (WL) for lifetime optimization [11], [33], [47]. Their basic idea is to wear the flash memory evenly to maximize the lifetime. However, with the device wearing, the reliability is degraded [35]. In addition, flash memory wearing is irreversible. For example, for the state-of-the-art high-density 3-D NAND flash memory, the maximal number of program/erase (P/E) cycles is around 1000 [28]. When the P/E cycles of flash memory exceed the upper limit, it can no longer be used. The reliability degradation will significantly impact the read performance. To ensure data integrity, flash memory uses an error correction code (ECC) to provide fault tolerance [8]. Previous work presented that high-density 3-D NAND flash adopts low-density-parity-check code (LDPC) as ECC to optimize reliability [50]. LDPC has several characteristics as follows.
1) LDPC has a limited error correction capability (i.e., the number of errors that can be corrected) [50]. When the reliability of the data exceeds the error correction capability of the LDPC, the reference voltage needs to be adjusted and the data read again [7], [9]. This process is also called read retry [35].
2) One critical characteristic of LDPC is that its access performance is highly correlated with the reliability of data [27]. For data with low reliability, it needs a long latency to retry the data and vice versa. In this case, it leads to low-read performance of the flash memory. This work will propose a scheme to reduce the read latency induced by device wearing.
Previous works proposed improving flash lifetime by utilizing P/E cycles as much as possible. The current WL scheme on flash memory is proposed to wear the flash evenly. Once the first flash block reaches the upper limit of P/E cycles, the rest of the flash blocks will also approach the upper limit of P/E cycles. Thus, the lifetime of the flash memory is maximized. However, the read performance will be degraded with the wearing. On the other hand, previous works proposed to optimize the LDPC of flash memory for read performance optimization [25], [26], [27], [31], [39], [40]. LDPC is designed to correct data based on the sensed information from the memory cells. If the information is out of error correction capability, it needs to retry the information with different voltages. Most of them proposed to retry the data as accurate as possible with carefully selected sensing voltages during

1937-4151 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: ADWR FOR READ PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

381

the retry. Others proposed to optimize read performance by designing the data placement method [32], [38]. As the reliability of high-density 3-D NAND flash memory decreases, previous work has also proposed to improve read performance by optimizing the process of read retries. While read retry is critical to ensuring the reliability of NAND flash memory, it comes at the cost of significant performance degradation. With the reliability degradation of flash memory, the read latency still increases, which cannot be solved by the above schemes.
In this work, an adaptive differential wearing (ADWR) approach is proposed to improve the read performance and lifetime of high-density 3-D NAND flash memory. The basic idea is to physically partition the flash memory into two areas with different wearing speeds.
1) One area is worn with a low-speed and hot read data are placed in the area, which is called the low-wearing area (LWA).
2) The other area is used for write operations, which is called high-wearing area (HWA). It will gather write operations in the HWA, avoiding wearing the LWA.
Based on the hot and cold data identification scheme at the host-side (e.g., multistream solid state drives (SSDs) [23] and flash-friendly file system (F2FS) [1]), a new tag transfer scheme is proposed to transfer hot and cold tags to SSDs. Then, we decide which area (i.e., HWA or LWA) to finally write to based on the tags of the data. With this approach, the read performance can be optimized. A least recently used (LRU)-based approach is proposed to manage the data in LWA. The hottest data is always kept in LWA to realize the read performance optimization.
One important concern for the above design is the lifetime of flash memory. The wearing speeds of LWA and HWA are different. When the blocks in the HWA exceed the upper limit of P/E cycles, the P/E cycles of the LWA remain at a low level. This will lead to the early ending of the lifetime. To solve this problem, we analyzed and optimized the lifetime loss caused by the differential wearing scheme.
1) We construct a lifetime model to clarify the impact of the proposed scheme on flash lifetime.
2) A lifetime optimization scheme is proposed to improve the lifetime.
In addition, a differential refresh (DR) scheme for ADWR is proposed to reduce the impact of read disturbance on read performance. Through real workloads evaluation, the ADWR scheme achieves encouraging read performance optimization with negligible impacts on the lifetime. The following contributions are made to this work.
1) A collaborative data placement scheme is proposed to determine the areas for the data. The placement scheme is designed to determine which area to schedule based on the hot and cold tags of the data. For LWA, it will serve hot read data for read performance optimization.
2) A data management optimization scheme is proposed to optimize read performance by storing the hottest reads in the LWA.
3) A lifetime model is constructed to clarify the impact of the proposed scheme on the lifetime. Meanwhile, adaptive capacity allocation and progressive capacity adjustment schemes are proposed to improve performance

Fig. 1. Typical architecture of SSD.
and lifetime according to the characteristics of different workloads. 4) A DR scheme is proposed to reduce the impact of read disturbance on read performance under differential wearing. 5) Through careful design and real workloads evaluation on a 3-D triple-level-cell (TLC) NAND flash-based simulator, experimental results show that ADWR can achieve significantly read performance optimization at most life stages with negligible lifetime impacts.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Solid State Drives and Wear Leveling
Fig. 1 shows an architecture for flash-based SSDs. SSD usually consists of two parts: 1) the flash translation layer (FTL) and 2) the flash chip array (FCA). A flash memory device usually consists of several chips. Each chip contains multiple dies, and a die contains multiple planes. Multiple blocks form a plane, and a block contains a fixed number of pages. The read unit is a flash page, the program unit is a flash page or wordline for 3-D NAND flash memory, and the erase unit is a flash block. Flash memory is an out-of-place update media. As a result, after writing a page, you need to wait for the entire block to be erased before writing again. In order to reclaim the space occupied by invalid pages, SSD has designed a garbage collection scheme. Meanwhile, a page is logically divided into two parts: 1) user space and 2) spare space. The user space is used to store user data, while the spare space is used to store the rest of the information, such as ECCs. The FCA provides basic read, program, and erase operations for the FTL. The FTL controls the underlying flash chip through the flash interface layer. The FTL typically contains three components, an allocator, garbage collector and wear leveler, to overcome several limitations inherent to flash memory.
Flash memory employs WL schemes to improve lifetime. Two types of WL schemes have been popularly adopted in current SSDs, including dynamic and static WL [10], [11], [33], [47]. Dynamic and static WL is normally used in combination. Dynamic WL (DWL) always selects the free block with the least number of P/E cycles during block allocation. It ensures a WL in the free blocks. Differently, static WL (SWL) will further distribute the P/E cycles evenly among all blocks through data migration. It ensures a WL in all blocks. Fig. 1 shows the flow of SWL.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 2. VTH distribution of 3-D TLC flash cell.
❶ When some flash blocks are excessively erased, SWL is triggered. Existing SWL schemes typically keep the maximum and minimum P/E cycles of the blocks within a fixed threshold. SWL is triggered when the P/E cycles of a block exceed the threshold.
❷ Then, the SWL algorithm selects blocks with low-P/E cycles and cold data as erasure targets.
❸ The valid data needs to be migrated to the previously erased flash block with the highest-P/E cycle before erasing the victim block. Meanwhile, after the victim block is erased, it will be further used as a free block.
❹ Finally, the virtual block address to the physical block address mapping table (VBT) for the migrated data needs to be updated. With the above approaches, the whole blocks can be worn evenly to achieve lifetime improvement.
B. Read Operation on High-Density Flash Memory
NAND flash memory cell uses a floating gate (FG) or charge trap (CT) to store charges. Fig. 2 shows the probability density function (PDF) of the threshold voltage distribution for a TLC-based NAND flash memory. The number of voltage states S depends on the number of bits n stored in a memory cell, where S = 2n. In the TLC flash with 3 bits in one cell, namely, the most-significant bit (MSB), the center-significant bit (CSB), and the least-significant bit (LSB), 8-voltage states are needed to differentiate these bit information. Initially, all flash cells without storing charges are in the erase state E. During the programming process of injecting charges into a flash cell, seven voltage states, P1 to P7, are defined from low to high. To distinguish the total 8 states, we need 7 reference voltages.
Flash memory uses gray code [30] to encode the bit information in a flash cell and map them to the voltage states. The gray code is characterized by the fact that only a one-bit difference between two adjacent voltage states (i.e., P1(011) and P2(001) in Fig. 2). There are various types of gray code supported in high-density flash (e.g., 2-3-2 and 1-2-4 are used in TLC flash) [30]. For different gray codes, the number of reference voltages used to read the LSB/CSB/MSB in TLC flash is different. For example, for gray code, 1-2-4, we need one reference voltage to read the LSB, two for CSB, and four for MSB. Although there are differences between the gray codes, the read process is the same. When reading a page, one bit of information is extracted from each flash cell. For understanding whether the flash cell stores 1 or 0, we need to know which voltage state the flash cell is in. As shown in Fig. 2, take LSB as an example. A reference voltage VREF3, is added to differentiate the voltage states (P3 and P4). If the voltage state is lower than the reference voltage, the value of LSB is 1. Otherwise, the value of LSB is 0. The CSB and MSB are read

Fig. 3. VREF adjustment in the read retry operation. (a) Retention loss. (b) Read retry: adjusting VREF.
in the same way. For each page, the reference voltage between two adjacent state bits is used to distinguish the information stored in the flash cell. For example, the CSB is 1 in the P1 state and 0 in the P2 state. Therefore, VREF1 is one reference voltage for the CSB. With all the reference voltages of a page, we can get the data on this page. Since only one read reference voltage can be tested at a time, the reference voltage is increased from VREF0 to VREF6 to complete a read operation.
C. Impact of Reliability on Read Performance
As the number of P/E cycles increases, the reliability of flash memory cells gradually decreases, and the phenomenon of retention loss occurs as the data retention time increases [35]. To solve the reliability issue, high-density NAND flash memory commonly adopts two main approaches.
1) High-density NAND flash memory uses the LDPC as ECC to provide fault tolerance. LDPC has a limited error correction capability (e.g., 72 bits per 1-KiB codeword [3]).
2) When the data is not correctly decoded by LDPC, a read retry operation is issued to read the data again for decoding.
Fig. 3(a) shows the retention loss leading to an overlapping area. The overlapping area overlaps with the reference voltages, resulting in the data failure decoded [See Fig. 3(a)]. In this case, the read operation reads the data again with a different VREF value [e.g., VRRi in the ith read retry step in Fig. 3(b)]. The VOPT is gradually approached so that the correct data can be read or not by adjusting the VREF. The read operation needs to acquire the state information multiple times until LDPC can correct the errors. When the reliability is poor, the number of retries will be significantly increased. In this case, the read latency will be significantly increased. For highdensity NAND flash memory, the reliability degradation caused by wearing will result in severe performance degradation.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
From the above discussions, the read performance is highly correlated with the reliability of flash memory. WL can effectively improve the lifetime of 3-D TLC NAND flash memory that rapidly decreases endurance. However, many state-of-theart WL schemes specify a fixed threshold for the number of P/E cycles of the blocks. With the WL schemes, flash blocks will be erased uniformly. All blocks have the similar reliability, which leads to a simultaneous decrease in the reliability of the flash blocks. The reduced reliability of the flash blocks will trigger frequent read retries. In this case, the above WL

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: ADWR FOR READ PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

383

Fig. 5. Footprint percentage of hot read data with the real-life workloads.

Fig. 4. Impact of wear on read performance with the real-life workloads.

schemes will induce the read performance degradation with the simultaneous wearing of flash memory.
To understand the characteristics of the performance degradation with flash wears, the read performance is evaluated under different wearing degrees. LDPC is used as the default ECC, and SWL and DWL are used as the default WL algorithms. Ten widely used workloads from MSR [15] are selected to show their read performance along the flash wearing. Detailed configurations are presented in Section IX. Fig. 4 shows the normalized average read latency through wear across the flash with different wearing degrees, from 20% to 80% of the total P/E cycles. From the results, the read latency is significantly increased along with the wearing by 3.8× to 6.1×. This reflects that the read performance degradation with flash wears is a critical issue, and this motivates us to propose a new design where not all flash blocks wear out uniformly.
Before the design, we first analyzed the characteristics of the real-life workloads from MSR. In this article, hot read data is defined as data that is read more than three times [42]. When the data is updated, the read count of the data is reset to 0. To understand how much storage space is needed for hot read data, we analyzed the footprint percentage of hot read data. The footprint percentage is defined as the ratio of the footprint of the hot read data to the footprint of all data. Fig. 5 shows the footprint percentage of the hot read data for the workloads. The results show that the footprint percentage of hot read data varies for different workloads. Allocating different sizes of space to hot read data will lead to different results.
1) If too much space is allocated for hot read data, the loss of flash lifetime will be very serious.
2) If too little space is allocated for hot read data, the optimization of read performance will be reduced.
The size of the space for hot read data should be adaptive to the characteristics of the workloads. The above results motivate us to propose a new design that adaptively allocates space according to the space requirements of hot read data for various workloads. With this design, we can achieve optimal lifetime and read performance.
IV. OVERVIEW
In this section, an ADWR scheme is designed to optimize the read performance of high-density NAND flash memory.

Fig. 6. Overview of ADWR.
Fig. 6 shows the architecture of ADWR, which is implemented as a module, namely, adaptive differential wear leveler, so as to prevent spending lots of effort on integrating the ADWR design into different state-of-the-art FTL designs. The adaptive differential wear leveler contains three parts, differential wearing, lifetime optimization, and DR. The differential wearing scheme is designed to partition the flash memory into two areas: 1) the LWA and 2) the HWA. LWA is used to store hot read data to optimize read performance. HWA is used to store other data, avoiding the wearing of LWA. With the above design, the read performance of high-density NAND flash memory will be optimized.
There are several challenges for the above design, which are listed as follows:
1) The traditional WL technology guarantees a simultaneous decrease in the reliability of the blocks. To achieve differential wearing, we need to design a new data placement scheme to form differential wearing.
2) Differential wearing contains two areas: a) HWA and b) LWA. Hot read data in LWA is related to the read performance optimization effect. The data management scheme of LWA should be low overhead and accommodate as much hot read data as possible.
3) The high-wearing speed of HWA generates bad blocks prematurely, which leads to a reduced lifetime of flash memory. Differential wearing needs to avoid the damage caused to flash lifetime while improving performance.
4) The read performance of hot read data will be affected by read disturbance. Traditional refresh schemes cannot adapt to the characteristics of differential wearing, which leads to performance degradation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

V. DIFFERENTIAL WEARING
A. Differential Wearing for High-Density Flash Memory
The differential wearing is designed to physically partition the flash memory into two areas. One for hot read data, i.e., LWA, and one for write data, i.e., HWA. LWA is defined as holding hot read data that is not frequently updated, while HWA is defined as holding all data except hot read data. During accesses, write operations are processed in HWA in priority. HWA wears fast due to the large number of write operations it is subjected to. The data in LWA are frequently read data and harvest the optimization of read performance. As we know from Section III, hot read data is defined as data that is read frequently and is rarely updated. As a result, the LWA has a low-wearing speed and high reliability. In order to differential wearing, a crucial question is where to allocate space for LWA. As shown in Section II, the organization of flash memory is similar to a tree structure. The largest parallel unit is the channel and the smallest parallel unit is the plane. These two areas are partitioned into planes to avoid the impact on parallelism, since the planes are the smallest parallelism level for flash-based storage devices. The page allocation algorithm maps the read data evenly to all planes, thus maximizing the parallelism of read operations [44]. This also means that the footprint of the hot read data in each plane is the same. Therefore, in this article, the size of the LWA in each plane is the same. The flash memory has process variation (PV) [37]. The PV is represented by the fact that some blocks have a higher-wear count than the manufacturer’s nominal P/E cycles. The PV between blocks can be detected by the manufacturer or obtained by existing methods [37]. Considering the PV, the LWA in each plane consists of some blocks with the highest-P/E cycles. Moreover, there are some works that focus on optimizing the cross-layer PV of 3-D flash [18], [48]. These works are orthogonal to this article. The bottom of Fig. 6 shows that each plane is physically partitioned into HWA and LWA. With this approach, read performance can be optimized without impacting parallelism.
B. Host-Side Guided Data Placement
To address the read performance degradation caused by flash wearing, we propose a host-side guided data placement scheme. Rather than randomly mixing and storing all data transparently in the flash array, one natural idea is that the frequently read data should be preserved in LWA, thereby, the read performance can be optimized by flash with relatively high reliability. To realize it, the critical challenge is that the data identification should be accurate and high efficiency with little overhead. Thus, we will think of a question “How to obtain more information and assist the device to place data in the proper area?” Previously, some new architectures for SSDs support tagging, such as Open Channel SSD [6], multistream SSD [23], and ZNS SSD [5]. For example, multistream SSDs divide data into multiple streams according to hot and cold tags from the host-side. The data in each stream reach invalidation at similar times, thus optimizing the efficiency of garbage collection. In addition, some existing file systems (e.g., F2FS [1]) mark data as hot or cold and pass it to the device. Based on the fueling of the above technologies, the

Fig. 7. Overview of host-side guided data placement.
data characteristics (e.g., hot or cold) can be obtained on the host-side. After that, the tags need to be passed to the SSD to guide the placement of the data. A new tag transfer method is proposed to pass the tags. The details are as follows:
1) The host-side can tag all the hot read data due to that the application clearly knows the access characteristics of the data.
2) The tags can be passed to the SSD through the logical address. ADWR uses the highest bit of the logical address to represent the hot and cold of the data.
3) The SSD parses the logical address in the request to get the hot and cold information of the data.
In summary, with the assistance of host-side data tags, more information can be obtained to guide the data to be placed in the right area. This not only improves the read performance but also reduces the number of migration triggers to minimize migration overhead.
We use these tags to place the data among LWA and HWA, which consists of two stages. Fig. 7 shows the host-side guided data placement scheme. The execution flow is as follows. First, when the flash is at the new stage, and the hot read data is placed in the LWA as much as possible. We will describe the flash lifetime stages in detail in Section IX. Only when the LWA is full, the hot read data will be placed in the HWA. Since the reliability of HWA and LWA is similar at this time, there is no performance loss for hot read data in HWA. The hot read data in the HWA is migrated to the LWA according to the data management scheme in Section V-C. Second, when the flash is not at the new stage, hot read data will always be placed in the LWA. If the LWA is full, the LWA will acquire free space according to the data management method in Section V-C. Note that the hot read data passed down from the host-side will always have the highest priority to be placed in the LWA. With the above design, migration overhead is reduced and read performance is optimized.
C. LRU-Based Data Management for LWA
If the space of the LWA is less than the footprint of the hot read data, some hot read data will overflow into the HWA. In this case, the performance optimization of hot read data is reduced. To solve the above problem, we propose the LRUbased data management scheme to optimize read performance by keeping the hottest read data in the LWA. The LRU-based data management scheme can be divided into the following two parts.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: ADWR FOR READ PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

385

Fig. 8. Data migration for hot read data. (a) Migration with internal or host updates. (b) Migration with host read requests.
1) Hot Read Data Migration: First, for migrating the hot read data from HWA to LWA, we propose a simple hot read data migration scheme. The basic idea is that if the data in HWA are read for NR times and they are retried due to LDPC, they should be migrated to LWA for read performance optimization. The reason for the above settings is that only the data which are read multiple times and retried in HWA have an impact on the read performance. Note that the hotness of the data is provided on the host-side, and only the hot tag is passed to the device side to inform whether the data is hot data without knowing the specific access frequency. Therefore, ADWR proposes to record the access count of data during request processing, which does not require the host-side to manage the hotness of the data.
For the design, one important parameter is NR. For a large NR, it may introduce limited read performance optimization, and with few migrations and vice versa. In the experiments, NR will be discussed in detail. With the above design, the hot reads in the HWA have a second chance to get optimized for read performance. The migration process requires reads and writes to HWA and LWA, which is a high cost for high-density NAND flash. To optimize the cost, we propose to migrate the data as follows. The first case is to migrate data with the internal mechanism of SSD and host data updates. ❶ When GC or WL is performed in HWA, the hot reads that are iterated during these processes are migrated to LWA [as shown in Fig. 8(a)]. Besides, ❷ when the data is updated, it will be written to LWA if the data is hot reads. The second case is to migrate data actively. ❶ If the data are accessed and satisfy the above conditions, they will be cached in the SSD controller first and migrate to LWA with a one-pass programming process [as shown in Fig. 8(b)].
2) LRU-Based Data Management: To manage the data in LWA, an LRU-based data management scheme is proposed to reduce migration overhead and optimize read performance. The basic idea is to store the hottest data in the LWA to obtain the optimal read performance. The indexes of the blocks in the LWA are organized in a linked list. If a block in the LWA is accessed, the index of that block is moved to the head of the linked list. The tail of the linked list always holds the coldest data in the LWA. The block at the end of the linked list is always selected as the victim block every time the LWA needs to reclaim space. The average read count of a block is defined as the total number of reads of a block divided by the total number of pages of a block. The minimum average number of reads in the LWA is used as a threshold to limit the migration of hot read data from the HWA. Based on the above

Fig. 9. Data management for LWA. (a) LWA with free blocks. (b) LWA without free blocks.

design, the hottest reads are stored in the LWA to optimize read performance and reduce migration overhead.
The detailed execution flow is as follows. 1) When there are free space in the LWA, the hot read data
is always placed in the LWA [see Fig. 9(a)]. 2) When the LWA is full, hot read data in the HWA are
migrated to the LWA if the number of reads is greater than the minimum average number of reads for all blocks in the LWA [see Fig. 9(b)]. By this limitation, the hottest read data is always stored in the LWA. 3) If a block in the LWA is accessed by a read request, the average number of reads for that block is updated.

VI. LIFETIME OPTIMIZATION
A. Lifetime Model Construction
In Section III, the size of HWA is critical to the lifetime of SSD. To understand the loss of flash lifetime due to differential wearing, a lifetime model is constructed to quantify the lifetime. The flash lifetime is related to two factors, one is the upper limit of P/E cycles (PEMAX) and the other is the write amplification factor (WAF). The upper limit of P/E cycles is decided by the flash manufacturer. WAF is defined as the amount of data actually written to flash divided by the amount of data written by the host-side. Some symbols are defined as follows. WAFi represents the WAF of workload i. AvePEHWA and AvePELWA represent the average P/E cycles of all blocks in HWA and LWA, respectively. AvePEflash represents the average P/E cycles of all blocks in the whole flash without differential wearing. CAPSSD represents the capacity of the SSD. The maximum lifetime of a traditional SSD is calculated as shown in

Lifetime_max(i) = CAPSSD × PEMAX/WAFi.

(1)

The Lifetime_max(i) represents the maximum lifetime that the flash memory can achieve under the workload i. The real lifetime of a SSD is calculated as shown in

Lifetime_real(i) = CAPSSD × AvePEflash/WAFi. (2)

The Lifetime_real(i) represents the real lifetime that the flash can achieve under the workload i. The Lifetime_real(i) is less than the Lifetime_max(i). This is because not all blocks will reach the PEMAX. For differential wearing, the real lifetime is calculated as shown in (3). x% represents the capacity
percentage of LWA

Lifetime_real(i) = (x% × AvePELWA + (1 − x%) × AvePEHWA) × CAPSSD/WAFi. (3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

To get the Lifetime_real(i) of differential wearing, we first calculate the lifetime of HWA and LWA. The loss of the lifetime for differential wearing can be obtained by (2) minus (3). Assume that the CAPSSD is 10 GB, the AvePEflash and AvePEHWA are 900, the WAFi is 2, the AvePELWA is 300, and the x% is 20%. With (2) minus (3), the lifetime of the flash memory is reduced by 13.3%. With the above equations, we can clearly model the lifetime loss of differential wearing. The following two schemes are proposed to optimize the lifetime.
B. Adaptive Capacity Allocation for Differential Wearing
To automatically match the capacity ratio between HWA and LWA for workloads with different characteristics, we propose an adaptive capacity allocation scheme for performance and lifetime optimization. However, realizing the above idea is not easy. We need to solve two key challenges.
1) The access characteristics of the workloads are complex and changeable.
2) During area adjustment, we should determine the basis for delimiting the size of the LWA.
To tame the first challenge, we define an adjustment window to record the number of requests processed since the last adjustment. When the number of requests in the adjustment window is larger than a threshold (e.g., 10 000), the area adjustment will be triggered. To tame the second challenge, we define an adjustment step to determine the amount of capacity increase or decrease in LWA. When increasing the LWA space, blocks in the HWA will be transferred to the LWA. When decreasing the LWA space, blocks in the LWA will be transferred to the HWA. By the evaluation of real workloads, optimal performance is achieved with the length of the adjustment window being set to 10 000 requests and the size of the adjustment step being set to 2%.
Algorithm 1 shows the execution flow of the adaptive capacity allocation scheme. Initially, the capacity ratio of HWA and LWA is set to 4:1 according to the Zipfian distribution [16]. With the adaptive capacity allocation scheme, the size ratio of LWA and HWA is automatically adjusted according to the workload characteristics. For example, when the workload has a 10% footprint of hot read data, the size ratio of LWA and HWA is adaptively adjusted to 9:1. Note that the footprint refers to the accessed data set. There are three parameters as the input of the algorithm, including Footprinttotal, Footprinthotread, and Counter. Among them, Footprinttotal means the total accessed data set, while Footprinthotread means the read data set. Counter refers to the request counter. Initially, the value of these three parameters is set to 0. The specific execution processes are as follows.
1) When a request is issued to the device, Counter is added by 1 and compared with the adjustment window (line 1). If the request counter exceeds the adjustment window (line 2), the LWA capacity adjustment is triggered and the request counter is set to 0 (lines 9–10), going to the third step (lines 11–18). Otherwise, go to the second step (lines 3–8).
2) The corresponding footprint values will be updated. 3) The LWA space is adjusted according to the recorded
value of Footprinthotread.

Algorithm 1 Adaptive Capacity Allocation Algorithm

Input: The total footprint of the workload, Footprinttotal; Input: The footprint of the hot read data, Footprinthotread; Input: The current request counter, Counter;

1: Counter = Counter + 1;

2: if Counter < 10000 then

3: if the request is a write request for the first time then

4:

Footprinttotal = Footprinttotal + the number of pages for the

request;

5: end if

6: if The request is a hot read request then

7:

Footprinthotread = Footprinthotread + the number of pages for the

request;

8: end if

9: else

10: Counter = 0;

11: if Footprinthotread / Footprinttotal + the adjustment step < the size of LWA then

12:

the size of LWA = the size of LWA - the adjustment step;

13: else if Footprinthotread / Footprinttotal < the size of LWA and the size

of LWA - Footprinthotread / Footprinttotal < the adjustment step then

14:

No adjustment of the LWA size;

15: else

16:

the size of LWA = the size of LWA + the adjustment step;

17: end if

18: end if

The footprint percentage of the hot read data is equal to Footprinthotread/Footprinttotal. If the reduction condition is satisfied (line 11), the LWA space is reduced according to the adjustment step (line 12). When reducing the LWA space, the coldest blocks will be transferred to the HWA. If the constant condition is satisfied (line 13), the size of the LWA remains the same (line 14). By this method, the LWA always has enough space to store the hot read data. Otherwise, the space of LWA is increased according to the adjustment step (lines 15–17).
C. Progressive Capacity Adjustment for Differential Wearing
A progressive capacity adjustment scheme is proposed to optimize lifetime. Since flash wearing is irreversible, the adaptive capacity allocation scheme can only be activated in the new stage. We will describe the flash lifetime stages in detail in Section IX. The HWA will prematurely generate bad blocks resulting in loss of lifetime. Thus, the progressive capacity adjustment scheme is needed to improve the lifetime. From the lifetime model, flash lifetime degradation is caused by the under-utilization of the P/E cycles of LWA. This motivates us to optimize the lifetime by improving the utilization of the P/E cycles of LWA. The basic idea is to gradually adjust the blocks of LWA to HWA until the size of LWA is 0. HWA uses WL algorithms to manage internal blocks. When blocks belonging to the LWA are adjusted to the HWA, the WL algorithms of the HWA will include this part of the blocks in the wearing management. The P/E cycles of the blocks adjusted from LWA to HWA will be utilized to optimize the lifetime. The remaining blocks in the LWA are still being used to serve hot read data. As LWA capacity decreases, more and more blocks will be adjusted to HWA to optimize lifetime. With this approach, the lifetime of the flash memory is improved. According to the above design, a critical parameter is the time point of the lifetime optimization being activated. Assume that the total remaining P/E cycles of LWA and HWA are PELWA and PEHWA, respectively. In the worst case, PELWA reaches

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: ADWR FOR READ PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

387

Fig. 10. Flow of progressive capacity adjustment.

0 requiring HWA to reserve the same PEHWA to perform WL. Thus, when PEHWA is equal to PELWA, the progressive capacity adjustment scheme needs to be activated. The ternary expression in (4) shows the time point for optimizing the lifetime

PELWA ≥ 98% ∗ PEHWA ? Yes: No.

(4)

Yes or No means whether progressive capacity adjustment scheme is enabled. We set aside a 2% bound because PEHWA and PELWA are not always equal. Then, two parameters are how often the LWA size is adjusted and how much is adjusted at a time. The P/E cycles of flash blocks are linearly related to reliability [34]. For the first parameter, the PEHWA was divided equally into n steps based on the remaining P/E cycles or reliability of HWA. The effect of n on lifetime is explored in the experimental section. The LWA is adjusted when the HWA changes from one step to another (As shown in Fig. 10, step 1 to step 2). For the second parameter, the size of each adjustment is the number of blocks contained in the LWA divided equally to n − 1 times, rounded upward. Assume that LWA contains 100 blocks and n is 10. The number of blocks for each adjustment is 12. The last step is used to perform WL and thus increase the lifetime. At each adjustment, those blocks at the tail of the LRU are selected for allocation to the HWA without data migration. With the LRU-based management approach, the hottest reads are still stored in the LWA. With this approach, the lifetime is improved and the performance has not deteriorated.
One drawback that ADWR has not considered is the footprint inflation of hot read data. There is a temporal locality hotness of data for some workloads. When some hot read data becomes cold, the footprint of hot read data should be reduced. However, with the adaptive space allocation scheme, the footprint of hot read data gets bigger and bigger. If the LWA has too much space, it will cause the HWA to wear out faster, thus ending the read performance optimization earlier. To solve the above problem, we propose two solutions.
1) The first solution is to invert the flag bit and notify the SSD when the host-side knows that the hot read data becomes cold. The SSD reduces the footprint of the hot read data according to the flag bit. The host-side can use periodic scanning of the data access time to know whether the hot read data becomes cold. The disadvantage is that modifications are required on the host-side to support periodic scanning.
2) The second solution is to reset the footprint of the hot read data periodically to recount the hotness of the data. It was used to the experimental part. The periodicity of the reset can be specified by the user.

VII. DIFFERENTIAL REFRESH
A. Read Disturbance and Refresh
When a page in a wordline is read, the other wordlines in a block are added to the VPass voltage. The wordlines are injected with electrons, which leads to an increase in the voltage of the memory cell. This phenomenon is called read disturbance [29]. As the number of reads increases, more and more electrons are injected into the wordline. This leads to a gradual increase in the raw bit error rate (RBER) of the data. The increase in RBER will trigger read retry operations, which will affect read performance. Due to the inherent characteristics of flash memory, read disturbance is inevitable. Existing works propose to reduce the impact of read disturbance on read performance by periodically refreshing the data [29]. Refresh is the periodic reading of data and writing after error correction. By doing this, the RBER of the data can be reset, thus reducing the impact of read disturbance on read performance.
The traditional refresh scheme is not suitable for differential wearing. This is because the traditional refresh scheme ignores the characteristics of LWA and HWA. First, based on the design of differential wearing, LWA is used to serve hot read data. The hot read data in a block can have read disturbance with each other. As the number of reads in a block increases, the large amount of read disturbance can affect the read performance. The hot read data is stored in a highly reliable LWA, which improves the reliability of the hot read data. However, this may not eliminate the impact of read disturbance on read performance. Thus, the LWA should increase the refresh frequency to reduce the impact of read disturbance on read performance. Second, HWA is used to store data other than hot read data. This means that the impact of read disturbance on HWA is minimal. Therefore, HWA should reduce the refresh frequency to reduce the impact of refresh on the lifetime of the flash memory.
B. Differential Refresh for Differential Wearing
Based on the above observations, a DR scheme is proposed to adjust the refresh frequency according to the characteristics of the data served by LWA and HWA. The basic idea is to determine the refresh frequency based on the strength of the read disturbance to the LWA and HWA. LWA is used to serve hot read data, so read disturbance is increased. For LWA, refresh at a high frequency to reduce the impact of read disturbance on read performance. HWA is used to serve other data, so read disturbance is reduced. For HWA, refresh at a low frequency to reduce the impact of refresh on lifetime. In addition, DR reduces the amount of data that needs to be refreshed with differential wearing. Without differential wearing, the hot read data will be randomly distributed among all blocks. In this case, cold read data will be disturbed by hot read data. When the refresh operation is triggered due to read disturbance, the cold read data also needs to be refreshed. With differential wearing, the hot read data is stored in the LWA without causing read disturbance to other cold read data. This reduces the amount of data that needs to be refreshed.
Fig. 11 shows the execution flow of the DR. The refresh management of LWA and HWA is independent, which is based on the refresh frequency. In this article, the refresh frequency

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 11. Flow of DR. CR refers to refresh condition.
of LWA is set to one month and that of HWA is set to four months. Then, during the refresh process, the number of retry operations is used as the condition. LWA has higher-data reliability than HWA, then the condition of LWA is set larger than that of HWA, i.e., five retries for LWA and 11 retries for HWA. The valid data in the block is checked one by one to see if the refresh conditions are met. If the refresh condition is met, the corrected data will be written back. Based on the refresh direction, blocks are checked one by one until all blocks in an area are checked. In addition, with flash wears, the reliability of both areas is degraded, then, the flash lifetime stages defined in Section IX are also considered. Note that data refreshes are performed within the area it belongs to.
VIII. IMPLEMENTATION AND ANALYSIS
To implement ADWR, there are two modifications as follows. First, tags for hot read data need to be provided on the host-side. Some file systems or applications that already support tags do not need to be modified (e.g., F2FS and multistream SSDs, etc.). SSDs can use existing tags directly. File systems or applications that do not support tags are updated as follows. One bit is required to identify whether the data is a hot read. We use the highest bit of the logical address to identify the hot read data. 1 means it is a hot read, and 0 means it is not. Any of the hot read data identification schemes can be used on the host-side, such as based on access frequency [38] or the number of accesses [1], [31]. Second, the FTL in the SSD controller is updated as follows. For differential wearing, the flash plane is partitioned into two areas. In this work, we use a linked list to record the indexes of all blocks in the LWA. If the index of a block is not in the linked list, it means that the block belongs to HWA. The linked list is a plane-level data structure. For data writes, we need to maintain two write points in HWA and LWA, respectively. For the hotness comparison, each page needs a counter to record the number of reads. Four free bits in the mapping table to record them. If the hot read data in HWA is accessed, the counter of the data page is checked for migration. If the value of the counter is larger than NR and a retry happens, check the conditions of the migration. ADWR needs to maintain an LRU linked list to record the blocks of LWA. Assume the size of LWA is 20% of the total capacity and the size of a block is 8 MB. For a 256-GB SSD, the space overhead required for the LRU linked list is 19.2 KB. This will decrease as the block gets large. For page read counts, four free bits in the mapping table are used to record the number of reads. This does not require additional space overhead. The thresholds used are defined as global variables. And, ADWR does not require complex data structures. In conclusion, the memory and computation costs are negligible.

Different from the existing WL works that globally unify the wear of all blocks, the implementation of ADWR should independently manage the WL algorithms inside the area. For each area, we can directly apply the existing WL algorithms, including SWL and DWL [37], [47], local WL, and global WL [11], [33]. SWL can unify the wear of blocks in the SSD background management, while DWL is applied in the host request process. Take WL management in the LWA as an example. The SWL is used to limit the difference between the maximum and minimum P/E cycles of the blocks in the LWA. The DWL is used to select the block with the smallest P/E cycles as the active block to serve writes. Also, local and global WL algorithms can be selected to combine with ADWR. Local WL unifies the wear of blocks in a local storage area. Global WL executes the WL among all blocks in the flash memory. In this article, ADWR uses local WL in each plane of LWA, and uses global WL to ensure equal wear among different planes of LWA. The WL management of HWA is the same as that of LWA. To this end, the overhead of ADWR combined with existing WL algorithms is negligible.
IX. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Experiment Setup
ADWR is evaluated with a popular SSD simulator, SSDsim [17]. The storage is simulated with a 3-D TLC NAND flash memory. The details are as follows: The SSD is 256 GB with eight channels. Each channel includes two chips, and each chip includes two planes. The size of the plane is 8 GB, the size of the block is 8 MB and the size of the page is 16 KB. The maximal number of P/E cycles is set to 1000 [35]. Ten workloads from MSR traces [15], which are widely used in previous works in the studies of SSD performance [14], [31]. Two workloads from [46] are selected for evaluation, which are collected from RockDB running on EXT4 file system. Table I(a) shows the configuration of the 3-D TLC NAND flash-based high-density SSD and (b) shows the workload characteristics, including footprints, reads, and writes. The size of SSD used by each workload is configured based on their footprints. The latency configuration is presented at the bottom of Table I(c), which complies with the work in [35]. SSD was adopted as 2-3-2 gray code. The page read latency is 114 µs for LSB, 153 µs for CSB, and 114 µs for MSB. The number in () is the average number of retries. To evaluate the benefit of ADWR during the whole lifetime, the flash lifetime is partitioned into three stages based on the reliability characteristics: 1) new; 2) middle; and 3) old. These three stages are determined based on the retry information under different P/E cycles from [35]. The three stages are defined as follows: For the new stage, both HWA and LWA have good reliability, where both of them are worn with only a little number of P/E cycles. There is no difference in reliability between HWA and LWA. The read performance of the data in both areas is good. For the middle stage, HWA is worn with several hundreds of P/E cycles and LWA is still worn with only a little number of P/E cycles. Therefore, the reliability of HWA is weaker than that of LWA. The read performance of the data in LWA is optimized. For the old stage, HWA is worn approaching the wearing limit and LWA is also worn with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: ADWR FOR READ PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

389

TABLE I EVALUATED 3-D TLC NAND FLASH CHIP CONFIGURATION. (a) SSD PARAMETERS. (b) CHARACTERISTICS
OF EVALUATED WORKLOADS. (c) READ LATENCY AND RETRY NUMBER

(a)

(b)

(c)

hundreds of P/E cycles. The reliability of both HWA and LWA decreases, but the reliability of HWA decreases more severely. The difference in reliability between HWA and LWA further increases. The read performance of the data access in LWA can be further optimized. The number of retries is presented in Table I(c). The number of retries is used to represent the conditions under which the DR was triggered. For example, for the middle stage, the refresh condition for LWA and HWA is that the number of retries is greater than or equal to 5 and 11, respectively.
To evaluate the benefit of ADWR, four schemes are evaluated and compared in the experiment.
1) SWL: SWL represents the traditional SWL [33] method with a fixed P/E threshold for blocks. Under SWL, the utilization of all blocks will increase, but the reliability will decrease simultaneously.
2) Progressive WL (PWL): PWL represents a progressive way to perform WL. This scheme refers to [47] that gradually accelerates the triggering of SWL by dynamically reducing the P/E threshold. As the device is used, the threshold for WL is gradually reduced, thus optimizing the flash lifetime.
3) Fixed Partition-Based Differential Wearing (DWR): DWR represents the differential wearing under a fixed size partition. This scheme refers to [42] that takes a fixed size LWA to store hot read data. Under DWR, the size of the LWA for any workload is 20%. Hot read data in the LWA is managed using a first-in-first-out (FIFO) scheme. The NR is 5 for the new stage, 4 for the middle stage, and 3 for the old stage [42].
4) Adaptive Capacity Allocation-Based Differential Wearing (ACADWR): ACADWR represents the adaptive capacity allocation scheme under differential wearing. ACADWR adaptively determines the size of LWA according to the demand of the workload. The NR is set to 3, for simplicity.
B. Experimental Results
1) Performance: Fig. 12 shows the normalized average read latency in different life stages. The average read latency is normalized to SWL. For the new stage, the performance among the five evaluated schemes is similar. This is because,

at this stage, all blocks are reliable and no read retry operation occurs.
For the middle stage, PWL achieves 10% read performance optimization. This is because PWL performs WL with a relaxed threshold and some blocks are highly reliable, thus optimizing read performance. The random nature of data placement in PWL leads to limited read performance optimization. DWR further reduces the read latency by 33% due to the migration of hot read data into LWA. DWR migrates the identified hot read data to LWA, which can effectively guarantee the reliability of hot read data. ACADWR further reduces read latency by 12%. The difference is that ACADWR determines the size of the LWA based on the footprint of hot read data. Compared to DWR with the fixed LWA size, ACADWR optimally divides the space and improves the garbage collection efficiency of HWA. ADWR further reduces read latency by 4%, achieving optimal read latency under all workloads. This is because ADWR always places the hot read data in the LWA. This further reduces read retry-induced performance degradation.
For the old stage, the read performance is further improved compared with SWL. PWL optimizes read performance by 12%. Compared with SWL and PWL, DWR reduces the read latency by 45% and 33%, respectively. Compared to DWR, ACADWR further reduces read latency by 15%. ADWR further reduces the read latency by 8%. The hot read tag on the host-side can guide ADWR in data placement, thus optimizing read performance.
To understand the drawbacks of DWR, two workloads from RockDB were chosen to evaluate read performance. Fig. 14 shows the normalized average read latency in the middle and old stages under TRACE-0 and TRACE-1. TRACE-0 and TRACE-1 do not contain hot read data. For the middle stage, DWR leads to a deterioration of read performance. DWR fixes the size of LWA to 20%, thus wasting 20% of the space. This affects the size of HWA, raises the frequency of garbage collection. This will indirectly lead to deterioration of read performance. Workloads that are sensitive to garbage collection, such as TRACE-1, have seen a 3.8× increase in read latency. For the old stage, the performance deterioration caused by DWR is even more severe. For TRACE-0, the read latency increases by 1.1×. ACADWR and ADWR do not cause deterioration in read performance. This is because

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 12. Normalized average read latency in different stages. (a) New stage. (b) Middle stage. (c) Old stage.

Fig. 13. Normalized migration cost in different stages. (a) New stage. (b) Middle stage. (c) Old stage.

under workloads like TRACE-0 and TRACE-1, the adaptive space allocation scheme adjusts the size of the LWA to 0. In this case, ACADWR and ADWR degenerate to the baseline, i.e., SWL or PWL. Thus, even in the worst case, ACADWR and ADWR do not cause a deterioration in read performance.
2) Migration Cost: To understand the migration cost for the proposed scheme, the migration cost for DWR, ACADWR, and ADWR are collected, respectively. Fig. 13 shows the results compared with total host requests. From the results, we have the following observations.
1) The migration overhead of DWR in the new stage is 0. This is because the reliability of HWA and LWA is the same in the new stage and DWR does not trigger migration.
2) The migration costs of ACADWR and ADWR are the same in the new stage. This migration cost is caused by the data migration for the adjustment of the size for LWA. The average migration cost of ACADWR and DWR in the new stage is 0.2%.
3) ADWR achieves the lowest migration cost in the middle and old stages. The average migration cost of DWR is 0.4% in the middle stage and 0.7% in the old stage. This is because the threshold of hot read data identification is 3 for DWR, which encourages migration for read performance optimization.
The average migration cost of ACADWR is 0.4% in both the middle and old stages. For ADWR, the average migration cost is 0.06% in both the middle and old stages. Under ADWR, the hot read data is placed directly in the LWA without additional migration costs. The hottest read data is always stored in the LWA, thus greatly reducing the migration cost of hot read data. In summary, the migration overhead of ADWR is negligible.

Fig. 14. Normalized average read latency in different stages. (a) Middle stage. (b) Old stage.
Fig. 15. Endurance achieved by different schemes at different n.
3) Lifetime: To evaluate the lifetime, we use normalized terabyte writes (TBWs) as the metric. In this part, WL is adopted for both HWA and LWA, respectively. ADWR determines whether the lifetime optimization scheme is activated based on (4) in Section VI. The value in () represents n in the lifetime optimization scheme. During the evaluation, the maximal number of P/E cycles is set to 1000 and corresponding workloads are cycled until there are 2% of bad blocks generated. Fig. 15 shows the normalized TBW for the evaluated schemes. The results have several observations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: ADWR FOR READ PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

391

Fig. 17. Normalized average read latency in the middle stage with PV. W/ and W/o represent taking into account the PV and not taking into account the PV, respectively.
Fig. 16. Normalized refresh count and average read latency under different refresh conditions. Per. represents the normalized average read latency.

1) DWR has a loss of lifetime under all workloads. Compared to the baseline (i.e., WL), the lifetime of DWR decreased by 18.7% on average.
2) ADWR achieves the same lifetime as the baseline. This also proves that the lifetime optimization scheme can guarantee the lifetime.
3) For PROJ_3, the lifetime of ADWR(20) is decreased by 3%. The faster the size of the LWA equals 0, the faster the read performance optimization ends. To improve lifetime and maximize read performance, n is set to 10. With the lifetime optimization scheme, the lifetime impact of ADWR is negligible under all workloads.
4) Refresh: DR scheme can be used not only to reduce the impact of read disturbance on read performance but also to optimize performance. The refresh period and conditions work together to reflect the amount of data being refreshed. In this article, we set the refresh period to 1:2 to provide feedback on the impact of DR on performance and lifetime through different refresh conditions. 1:2 means that the LWA is refreshed twice as often as the baseline, and the baseline is refreshed twice as often as the HWA. Fig. 16 shows the normalized refresh count and average read latency. The baseline represents a uniform frequency refresh scheme. The value in () represents the refresh condition of the LWA. For example, 2 represents refreshing the data for two or more retries. The refresh conditions for HWA and baseline are the same as in Section IX-A. The following observations were obtained from the experimental results. First, compared with the baseline, the average refresh counts of DR(5) is reduced by 34.8%. This is because the footprint of the hot read data is small. Second, for PROJ_3, the refresh counts of DR(2) are increased by 53%. The average read latency of DR(2) is further reduced by 13.7% compared to DR(5). In summary, the DR scheme not only reduces the impact of read disturbance on read performance but also reduces the refresh counts.
C. Sensitive Study
1) PV: To understand the effect of PV, ADWR is evaluated in the middle stage of TLC flash memory with PV. To reflect the PV, the average number of read retries was set to 3 for LWA and 11 for HWA in the middle stage under ADWR. The number of read retries for the pages comes from [35]. The PV distribution model is consistent with [12]. WL W/ PV represents the WL algorithm that takes into account the PV [37]. W/ and W/o represent considering and not considering PV,

Fig. 18. Footprint percentage of hot read data with different NR.
respectively. Fig. 17 shows the results. From the results, we have the following observations.
1) The ADWR W/ PV achieves the best-read performance optimization compared to other solutions. This is because each LWA is composed of the highest-reliability blocks in each plane. With PV, the difference in reliability between HWA and LWA increases.
2) ADWR W/PV achieves higher-read performance optimization compared to ADWR W/o PV. The difference in performance comes from the fact that ADWR takes into account PV.
2) Hot Read Data Threshold (NR): One of the most important parameters is the setting of NR. It not only affects migration overhead but is also critical to read performance. Fig. 18 shows the footprint percentage of hot read data by varying NR from 2 to 16. The results show that with the increases of NR, the footprint percentage of hot read data decreased. In this article, to avoid cold reads affecting the size of the LWA and optimize read performance, NR is set to 3.
X. RELATED WORK
This work proposes to optimize the read performance of high-density NAND flash memory induced by wearing. Then, the related works can be classified into two groups: 1) read performance optimization of high-density NAND flash memory and 2) LDPC optimization. In addition, we optimize read performance by reducing wearing, so the second related work will present the WL algorithms.
Read Performance Optimization: The read performance of flash memory is related to many factors, such as RBER and decoding process. Therefore, the read performance optimization of high-density flash memory can be classified into two aspects.
1) There are some works that focus on optimizing the read process of flash memory [35], [38].
2) There are some works that focus on reducing the RBER of data [13], [14], [41].
Among the works in this aspect, refresh has received extensive attention. For example, Du et al. [14] proposed to refresh data with long access latency and high-access frequency to improve

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 43, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

access performance. Some other schemes have been proposed to reduce the RBER, such as using fine-grained program schemes [31]. Then, the RBER will be much smaller during the read process. The above works are orthogonal to this article. However, none of these works consider the impact of reliability degradation due to wearing on read performance. As the reliability of flash memory decreases, the above solutions cannot optimize performance. Unlike the above works, in this work, we optimize for performance and lifetime degradation due to wearing.
LDPC Optimization: SSDs typically use LDPC to provide fault tolerance. Since all data reads require LDPC for decoding, there are many LDPC optimization schemes [13], [14], [43], [50]. There are many works that propose to combine the reliability characteristics of flash memory with the LDPC decoding process to optimize the performance [13], [43], [45], [50]. For example, Wu et al. [45] proposed to optimize flash read performance through a combination of fine-grained programming and weak ECC. All of these works reduce the decoding latency by optimizing the decoding process of LDPC, thus improving the read performance of flash memory. However, for high-density 3-D NAND flash memory, read performance degradation due to reliability degradation cannot be avoided.
WL: There are also some works that focus on the impact of WL on the lifetime and performance of flash memory [10], [11], [33], [37], [47]. WL has been used to optimize flash lifetime. However, as flash memory moves toward high density, reliability degradation due to wear is causing severe performance degradation. Jiao et al. [21] found that WL negatively affects lifetime under some workloads. Some works have optimized lifetime and reduced the impact on performance by relaxing execution conditions for WL [42], [47]. Unlike these approaches, we propose an ADWR to optimize the read performance and lifetime due to reliability degradation.
XI. CONCLUSION
WL is widely used to optimize flash lifetime. However, WL causes a simultaneous reliability degradation of all blocks, which results in the read performance deterioration of highdensity flash memory. To solve this issue, this work proposes an ADWR design, ADWR, to improve the read performance and lifetime of flash memory. A host-side guided data placement and LRU-based data management schemes are proposed to reduce the migration overhead. Besides, we propose a lifetime model and based on the lifetime model, we propose a lifetime optimization scheme to improve the lifetime. The size of the LWA is dynamically adjusted according to the characteristics of the workload. A DR scheme is proposed to reduce the impact of read disturbance on read performance. The experimental results are based on real workloads and show that on 3-D TLC NAND flash memory, ADWR achieves encouraging read performance optimization with negligible impacts on the lifetime.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.

REFERENCES
[1] “F2Fs.” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F2FS [2] “Intel announces NAND flash memory under 10nm.” 2023. [Online].
Available: https://hardwaresfera.com/en/noticias/intel-ha-fabricadomemorias-NAND-flash-proceso-los-10nm/ [3] “Product flyer: Micron 3D NAND flash memory.” Accessed: Jan. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.micron.com/-/media/client/ global/documents/products/productflyer/3d_NAND_flyer.pdf?la=en [4] N. Agrawal, V. Prabhakaran, T. Wobber, J. D. Davis, M. Manasse, and R. Panigrahy, “Design tradeoffs for SSD performance,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. (USENIX ATC), 2008, pp. 1–14. [5] M. Bjørling et al., “ZNS: Avoiding the block interface tax for flashbased SSDs,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. (USENIX ATC), 2021, pp. 689–703. [6] M. Bjørling, J. Gonzalez, and P. Bonnet, “LightNVM: The Linux openchannel SSD subsystem,” in Proc. 15th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2017, pp. 359–374. [7] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2013, pp. 1285–1290. [8] Y. Cai et al., “Flash correct-and-refresh: Retention-aware error management for increased flash memory lifetime,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2012, pp. 94–101. [9] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, and O. Mutlu, “Read disturb errors in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery,” in Proc. 45th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., 2015, pp. 438–449. [10] L. P. Chang, “On efficient wear leveling for large-scale flashmemory storage systems,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput., 2007, pp. 1126–1130. [11] Y.-H. Chang, J.-W. Hsieh, and T.-W. Kuo, “Improving flash wearleveling by proactively moving static data,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 53–65, Jan. 2010. [12] Y. Di, L. Shi, K. Wu, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting process variation for retention induced refresh minimization on flash memory,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2016, pp. 391–396. [13] Y. Du, D. Zou, Q. Li, L. Shi, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “LaLDPC: Latencyaware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. MSST, 2017, pp. 1–11. [14] Y. Du, Q. Li, L. Shi, D. Zou, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “Reducing LDPC soft sensing latency by lightweight data refresh for flash read performance improvement,” in Proc. 54th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2017, pp. 1–6. [15] D. Narayanan, E. Thereska, A. Donnelly, S. Elnikety, and A. Rowstron, “Migrating server storage to SSDs: Analysis of tradeoffs,” in Proc. ACM Eur. Conf. Comput. Syst., 2009, pp. 145–158. [16] M. W. Green, “Pareto distributions,” J. Royal Stat. Soc. C, Appl. Stat., vol. 35, no. 2, p. 215, Jun. 1986. [17] Y. Hu, H. Jiang, D. Feng, L. Tian, H. Luo, and C. Ren, “Exploring and exploiting the multilevel parallelism inside SSDs for improved performance and endurance,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 1141–1155, Jun. 2013. [18] C.-H. Hung et al, “Layer-aware program-and-read schemes for 3D stackable vertical-gate BE-SONOS NAND flash against cross-layer process variations,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1491–1501, Jun. 2015. [19] J.-W. Im et al., “7.2 a 128Gb 3b/cell V-NAND flash memory with 1Gb/s I/O rate,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, 2015, pp. 1–3. [20] K. Ishimaru, “Future of non-volatile memory -from storage to computing,” in IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting Tech. Dig., 2019, pp. 1.3.1–1.3.6. [21] Z. Jiao, J. Bhimani, and B. S. Kim, “Wear leveling in SSDs considered harmful,” in Proc. 14th ACM Workshop Hot Topics Storage File Syst., 2022, pp. 72–78. [22] D. Kang et al., “7.1 256Gb 3b/cell V-NAND flash memory with 48 stacked WL layers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), 2016, pp. 130–131. [23] J. Kang, J. Hyun, H. Maeng, and S. Cho, “The multi-streamed solidstate drive,” in Proc. 6th USENIX Workshop Hot Topics Storage File Syst. (HotStorage), 2014, pp. 1–5. [24] A. Khakifirooz et al., “30.2 A 1Tb 4b/cell 144-tier floating-gate 3D-NAND flash memory with 40MB/s program throughput and 13.8Gb/mm2 bit density,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC), vol. 64, 2021, pp. 424–426.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: ADWR FOR READ PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

393

[25] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Improving LDPC performance via asymmetric sensing level placement on flash memory,” in Proc. 22nd Asia South Pacific Design Autom. Conf. (ASPDAC), 2017, pp. 560–565.
[26] Q. Li et al. “Process variation aware read performance improvement for LDPC-based NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 310–321, Mar. 2020.
[27] Q. Li et al., “Shaving retries with sentinels for fast read over high-density 3D flash,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchit. (MICRO), 2020, pp. 483–495.
[28] S. Liang et al., “An empirical study of quad-level cell (QLC) NAND flash SSDs for big data applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), pp. 3676–3685, 2019.
[29] C.-Y. Liu, Y. Lee, M. Jung, M. T. Kandemir, and W. Choi, “Prolonging 3D NAND SSD lifetime via read latency relaxation,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Archit. Support Program. Lang. Oper. Syst., 2021, pp. 730–742.
[30] S. Liu and X. Zou, “QLC NAND study and enhanced gray coding methods for sixteen-level-based program algorithms,” Microelectron. J., vol. 66, pp. 58–66, Aug. 2017.
[31] Y. Lv, L. Shi, Q. Li, C. J. Xue, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Access characteristic guided partition for read performance improvement on solid state drives,” in Proc. 57th ACM/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[32] Y. Lv, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Latency variation aware read performance optimization on 3D high density NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Great Lakes Symp. VLSI, 2020, pp. 411–414.
[33] M. Murugan and D. H. C. Du, “Rejuvenator: A static wear leveling algorithm for NAND flash memory with minimized overhead,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Mass Storage Syst. Technol., 2011, pp. 1–12.
[34] N. Papandreou et al., “Characterization and analysis of bit errors in 3D TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE IRPS, Monterey, CA, USA, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[35] J. Park, M. Kim, M. Chun, L. Orosa, J. Kim, and O. Mutlu, “Reducing solid-state drive read latency by optimizing read-retry,” in Proc. ACM ASPLOS, 2021, pp. 702–716.
[36] K.-T. Park et al., “19.5 three-dimensional 128Gb MLC vertical NAND flash-memory with 24-WL stacked layers and 50MB/s high-speed programming,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), 2014, pp. 334–335.
[37] B. Peleato, H. Tabrizi, R. Agarwal, and J. Ferreira, “BER-based wear leveling and bad block management for NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2015, pp. 295–300.
[38] R. Pletka et al., “Improving NAND flash performance with read heat separation,” in Proc. 28th Int. Symp. Model., Anal., Simulat. Comput. Telecommun. Syst. (MASCOTS), 2020, pp. 1–8.
[39] S. Qi, D. Feng, N. Su, W. Liu, and J. Liu, “A new solution based on multi-rate LDPC for flash memory to reduce ECC redundancy,” in Proc. IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA, vol. 1, 2015, pp. 918–923.
[40] S. Qi, D. Feng, N. Su, L. Mei, and J. Liu, “CDF-LDPC: A new error correction method for SSD to improve the read performance,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 7, Feb. 2017.
[41] L. Shi, K. Wu, M. Zhao, C. J. Xue, D. Liu, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Retention trimming for lifetime improvement of flash memory storage systems,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 58–71, Jan. 2016.
[42] Y. Song, Q. Li, Y. Lv, C. Li, and L. Shi, “DWR: Differential wearing for read performance optimization on high-density NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), 2022, pp. 897–902.
[43] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[44] F. Wu, Z. Lu, Y. Zhou, X. He, Z. Tan, and C. Xie, “OSPADA: Oneshot programming aware data allocation policy to improve 3D NAND flash read performance,” in Proc. IEEE 36th Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2018, pp. 51–58.
[45] G. Wu, X. He, N, Xie, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting workload dynamics to improve SSD read latency via differentiated error correction codes,” ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 18, no. 4, p. 55, 2013.

[46] G. Yadgar, M. Gabel, S. Jaffer, and B. Schroeder, “SSD-based workload characteristics and their performance implications,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–26, 2021.
[47] M.-C. Yang, Y.-H. Chang, T.-W. Kuo, and F.-H. Chen, “Reducing data migration overheads of flash wear leveling in a progressive way,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1808–1820, May 2016.
[48] K. Yong and L.-P. Chang, “Error diluting: Exploiting 3-D NAND flash process variation for efficient read on LDPC-based SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 3467–3478, Nov. 2020.
[49] C.-W. Yoon, “The fundamentals of NAND flash memory: Technology for tomorrow’s fourth industrial revolution,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Mag., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 56–65, Jun. 2022.
[50] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), San Jose, CA, USA, Feb. 2013, pp. 243–256.
Yunpeng Song received the B.S. degree in computer science from Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China, in June 2020. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology with East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include NAND flash memory and software/hardware co-design.
Yina Lv (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science from Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China, in July 2018. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology with East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
Her research interests include NAND flash memory and computer architecture.
Liang Shi (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science from Xi’an University of Post and Telecommunication, Xi’an, Shanxi, China, in July 2008, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in June 2013.
Since 2013, he has been an Associate Professor with the College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China. Since 2018, he has been a Full Professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include flash memory, embedded systems, and emerging nonvolatile memory technology.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:14:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

