2372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Random Flip Bit Aware Reading for Improving High-Density 3-D NAND Flash Performance
Hua Feng , Debao Wei , Member, IEEE, Shipeng Gu, Zhelong Piao , Yongchao Wang , and Liyan Qiao , Member, IEEE

Abstract— With the explosive growth of data storage demands, the storage density of flash memory continues to increase. However, the reliability and read performance of high-density flash memory are constantly declining. To address this issue, this study proposes a low-cost read reference voltage (RRV) calibration strategy based on random bit flips. In this study, the relationship between the random bit flips count (RFBC) of flash memory and the read reference voltage offset level (RRVOL) is characterized, and an RFBC-RRVOL conversion model is constructed. Subsequently, the characteristics of 3D flash memory RRV offset are thoroughly studied, and based on the observation results. A RRV grouping optimization scheme and RRV calibration range WL expansion scheme are proposed to achieve generalized calibration of all WLs in flash memory blocks. Experimental results indicate that the proposed strategy introduces a minimal storage overhead of only 15.26 KB, which reduces the raw bit error rate (RBER) of flash memory at the end of life (EOL) and increases the success rate of one time read to 99.89%. Such improvements greatly enhance the reliability of data storage and reading performance. These results demonstrate that the strategy has good practicality and effectiveness in addressing the reliability and read performance issues of high-density flash memory.
Index Terms— 3-D NAND flash, read reference voltage, storage reliability, random read error, memory test.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, with the development of multi-layer stack and multi-bit per cell storage technologies, the storage density of flash memory continues to rise while the storage
cost has been decreasing [1], [2]. Flash memory has become the mainstream storage medium for both the consumer market
and enterprise users [3], [4], [5]. However, the pursuit of high density and low cost by flash memory manufacturers comes
at the expense of the reliability of flash memory [6], [7].
Manuscript received 7 August 2023; revised 27 December 2023; accepted 6 February 2024. Date of publication 28 February 2024; date of current version 30 April 2024. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province under Grant LH-2023F015 and in part by the Aeronautical Science Foundation of China under Grant JZJJX20210009. This article was recommended by Associate Editor Y. Zhang. (Corresponding author: Debao Wei.)
Hua Feng, Debao Wei, Zhelong Piao, Yongchao Wang, and Liyan Qiao are with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150080, China (e-mail: 19B905059@stu.hit. edu.cn; weidebao@hit.edu.cn; 20B905028@stu.hit.edu.cn; 22b305017@stu. hit.edu.cn; qiaoliyan@hit.edu.cn).
Shipeng Gu is with the Chinese Flight Test Establishment, Xi’an 710089, China (e-mail: fywodeshijie@126.com).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSI.2024.3366902.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2024.3366902

In particular, multi-bit per cell storage technology directly compresses the read voltage window of flash memory in different states [8], [9]. On the one hand, it increases the difficulty of reading and writing flash memory, resulting in a multiplication of read/write delays in high-density flash memory. On the other hand, the threshold voltage distribution (TVD) of neighboring storage states is more likely to overlap with the increase of program/erase (P/E) cycles and retention time, resulting in a significant increase of flash raw bit error rate (RBER).
To ensure the reliability of flash data, error correction code is an essential part of modern flash controller. Lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes with high error-correction strength are currently the mainstream flash error correction algorithms [10], [11]. LDPC for flash error correction consists of both hard and soft decoding [12], [13]. When reading flash data, hard-decision sensing is performed first. When the flash RBER exceeds the LDPC hard decoding sensing threshold, the flash controller will perform a read retry operation to enter the LDPC soft decoding process. Read-retry operations are used as an additional method to recover from bit errors beyond the ECC correction threshold. The flash read-retry operation continuously modifies the read reference voltage (RRV) of the flash memory to read the data at the target address several times. It also performs soft decoding based on the preset log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information and attempts to recover data that exceeds the hard decoding correction threshold [14], [15]. As the number of bits per cell stored in flash memory increases, the flash read window is continuously compressed. On the one hand, the error redundancy decreases and read retry operations are executed frequently. On the other hand, the flash read latency increases significantly as the number of RRV increases. Both factors lead to a significant degradation of the read performance of high-density flash memory.
Adaptive calibration of the RRV based on the flash memory status improves the success rate of page read operation, which contributes significantly to the flash read performance. A series of works have deeply investigated the underlying error characteristics of flash memory and constructed threshold voltage offset model under multi-dimensional interference factors such as retention loss, P/E wear, read interference, and layer differences etc [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]. Based on these models, off-line RRV adaptive calibration is realized [21], [22], [23]. However, constructing the off-line RRV calibration model requires a large amount of information about the

1549-8328 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FENG et al.: RANDOM FLIP BIT AWARE READING

2373

underlying error characteristics of the flash memory as prior data, which is not conducive to the fast iteration of the flash memory model. In addition, manufacturers such as Micron and Samsung have continued to improve their flash memory rereading algorithms and have come up with faster in-line read reference voltage calibration schemes [24], [25], [26]. However, according to the currently published research results, the threshold voltages of different word lines (WL) in 3-D flash memory vary greatly [17]. And reading data stored in different WLs requires multiple read-reference adjustments using an in-line rereading scheme, which increases read latency.
To reduce the complex prior data testing work, as well as to reduce the latency overhead associated with multiple readretry operations, this study proposes a randomized flipped bit counting (RFBC) aware RRV calibration strategy. In particular, the correlation between the flip bits count during two consecutive page read operations and the RRV offset level is first utilized to predict the optimal RRV of the flash memory. Then the correlation between the optimal RRVs of different WLs of the flash memory is exploited to predict the optimal values of the RRVs of other WLs, achieving a generalized calibration of all layers in the flash memory block. By testing on real flash memory chips, the validity of the present work is demonstrated. The experimental data show that the RRV calibration strategy based on RFBC aware has an average error of 1.63 offset levels. The strategy reduces the end of life (EOL) flash memory RBER to an average of 0.080% while increasing the one time read success rate to 99.89%.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows: (1) Based on a large number of real experiments, we quantitatively analyzed the relationship between RFBC and RRV offset level (RRVOL). And the transformation model between RFBC and RRVOL was constructed. (2) It is experimentally demonstrated that the stability of inter-WL initial differences in 3-D flash memory and the correlation of different RRV offset in the same page type. Based on this, an extension method and a RRV grouping optimization scheme for RRV optimization are proposed. (3) An on-line RRV calibration method based on RFBC aware is proposed. Experimental data demonstrates that the proposed scheme can improve the one time read success rate of EOL flash memory to 99.89% without complex prior data and huge storage overhead. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the RRV optimization principle and the related works of RRV optimization. Sections III studies the RRV offset characteristics for 3-D TLC NAND flash memory. The proposed RRV calibration strategy is presented in Section IV, and the effectiveness of the strategy is verified in Section V, followed by the conclusion in Section VI.
II. RESEARCH BACKGROUNDS AND RELATED WORKS
This section first introduces the basic background of 3-D NAND flash memory, including the TVD of triple-level cell (TLC) flash memory and the RRV optimization principle. Then are introduced the related works of RRV optimization.

Fig. 1. Threshold voltage distributions of TLC NAND flash.
A. Basics of 3-D NAND Flash Memory
Flash memory stores data by controlling the amount of charge within the cell, which is manifested by the fact that different bit information corresponds to different threshold voltages. Fig. 1 shows the average TVD of EOL (8,000 P/E cycles, rated at 10,000 P/E endurance) TLC flash memory after 120 days retention at room temperature.
TLC flash memory cells exist in 8 states (Er, P1,. . . , P7) and each cell can store 3 bit data. Where all the least significant bits (LSB) data in the same WL are mapped to lower page (LP) storage, using the RRV Vd to determine the LSB state. If the cell threshold voltage is greater than Vd then the LSB state is 0, and vice versa is 1. All the center significant bits (CSB) of the same WL are mapped to the middle page (MP) storage and the CSB state is determined using the RRVs Vb and V f . If the threshold voltage value is in the middle of Vb and V f then the MSB state is 0, and vice versa is 1. All the most significant bits (MSB) of the same WL are mapped to upper page (UP) storage. And the highest bit status is determined using the read reference voltages Va, Vc, Ve and Vg. At the beginning of flash memory writing data, the threshold voltage state is stable, and the RRV can accurately determine the state of the flash memory cell. However, as the retention time increases, the TVD curve is distorted due to charge leakage, etc. And at this time, the cell state cannot be correctly judged using the default RRV, as shown by the red dashed line in Fig. 1. Therefore, the RRV needs to be adjusted to correct the flip bits caused by the threshold voltage offset. The offset level and redundancy that needs to be adjusted is different for different RRVs, as shown in Fig. 2. The data in Fig. 2 and Fig. 1 are from the same test sample.
The horizontal coordinate in Fig. 2 is the RRVOL and the vertical coordinate is the average RBER. The red straight line is the optimal RRV and the red dashed line is the default RRV. The blue dashed line is the error correction limit of LDPC hard-decision sensing, i.e., the probability of LDPC hard decoding error correction failure is less than 10−10 when RBER is lower than the blue line [27]. Only when the RRV adjustment is within the range of values in the parentheses can the LDPC hard-decision sensing be guaranteed to have a high probability of successful decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 2. TLC NAND flash full-state RRV adjustment offset level and redundancy.

B. Related Work and Motivation
Currently, RRV calibration has become a necessary solution for improving flash memory reliability and optimizing performance. In the following, we discuss the work closely related to the strategy proposed in this paper.
Intel and Micron first opened up the RRV adjustment feature in 2011, allowing users to adjust the RRV to read again if the RBER exceeds the ECC error correction capability [24]. Although Intel and Micron only give a few fixed RRVs without specific calibration algorithms, it lays the foundation for all subsequent RRV calibration strategies. The current flash RRV calibration strategies are categorized as off-line and on-line. Among them, the off-line RRV calibration strategy is implemented based on the error characteristics of flash memory. By testing the offset level of the flash memorys optimal RRV under different disturbances, and then by the regression equations or machine learning, the prediction table of flash memory RRV under different conditions is constructed [21], [22], [23], [28], [29], [30]. When reading the flash data, the RRV is simply selected by looking up the table based on the current situation. The off-line RRV calibration strategy has the advantage of low online overhead. Meanwhile the RRV calibration table is becoming more and more accurate

as researchers delve deeper into the underlying error characteristics of flash memory.
However, there are two major drawbacks to the off-line RRV calibration strategy. First, the off-line calibration strategy requires extensive pre-testing in order to construct the RRV calibration table, which greatly delays the use of new flash memory models. In particular, testing flash memory retention loss characteristics consumes a lot of test time. And according to our previous results and other open literature, there is a considerable difference between flash memory high-temperature and room-temperature retention characteristics [31], [32], [33]. Modeling long-term using high-temperature ambient accelerated flash retention loss produces very large errors. Additionally, the same off-line RRV optimization table is generally used for all flash memory blocks. There are some reliability differences between different flash memory blocks, which may be caused by the manufacturing process or by temperature fluctuations in the operating environment [34], [35], [36]. Reliability differences in flash memory blocks can reduce the accuracy of the off-line RRV calibration strategy.
The on-line RRV calibration strategy determines the current optimal RRV by actively adjusting the RRV and testing data such as RBER, 0/1 ratio or number of bit jumps at different RRVs. In 2017 Samsung proposed a low-overhead

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FENG et al.: RANDOM FLIP BIT AWARE READING

2375

RRV prediction method to find the theoretically optimal RRV with three page read operations [25], [26]. In this method, after the first reading, two more readings are offset to the left and right, respectively. The offset direction and offset level are determined based on the number of flip bits between the last two reads and the first read, respectively. However, the on-line calibration strategy cannot provide the predicted value before reading and it can only intervene after the LDPC hard decoding fails, so the on-line calibration strategy has a low success rate of one page read operation. Moreover, it is difficult for the on-line strategy to find the optimal RRV after one read-retry, and it often requires several read-retry for trial and error, which significantly reduces the read efficiency of the flash memory.
Qiao Li et al. propose to infer the RRV of a WL from the error of the sentinel cell [37]. Based on the strong correlation between different RRVs in the same WL, Qiao Li et al. chose 0.2% of the cells in each WL as sentinel cells and utilized the RRV variations of these cells to predict other RRVs. The optimization strategy proposed by Qiao Li et al. is effective, reducing read-retry operations by 81.8% using 0.2% storage overhead. But there are still some points that need to be addressed. First, the sentinel-cell approach needs to determine the current optimal RRV from the RBER, requiring a fixed test pattern to be written in advance. Thus, it requires 0.2% space per WL to be provided for sentinel cells, and this overhead is unavoidable. Then, the sentinel algorithm requires that the sentinel cell data be read first before each read of the target page data. This increases the read latency on one hand, and on the other hand, the sentinel cell will be read at high density, and the read interference will cause the TVD to be skewed to the right as a whole [38], so that the RRV given by the sentinel cell will be in error with the flash block as a whole.
To reduce the defects of previous RRV optimization strategies in terms of calibration overhead and calibration accuracy, this paper proposes an RFBC aware RRV (RARRV) on-line calibration strategy. In particular, the 3-D flash WL RRV optimization range extension and RRV grouping optimization scheme are matched based on real flash test data, which greatly reduces the number of read-retry required for RRV calibration.

Fig. 3. Zynq-based tester used for operating 3D NAND flash samples that BGA-132 packaged.
TABLE I BASIC PARAMETERS OF THE TESTED FLASH MEMORY
A. Flash Memory Test Platform All test work in this paper is completed using the ZYNQ-
7000 SOC based flash memory test platform, and the appearance of the experimental platform is shown in Fig. 3.
The test platform based on ZYNQ-7000 SOC fully meets the requirements for customized, high-speed testing of the underlying characteristics of flash memory. The architecture of this test platform is described in detail in our previous research results [39]. We tested 20 flash chips, each with 300 flash blocks selected as a separate test sample, for a total of 6,000 flash blocks. The test chips are Micron’s B17A series flash memory using the CMOS-under-array (CuA) 3-D stacking architecture [40], [41]. The specific parameters of the chip are shown in Table I.

III. RRV OFFSET CHARACTERISTICS OF 3D NAND FLASH
In this section, we delve into a comprehensive study on the characteristics of RRV offset in 3-D flash memory. First, we introduce information about the hardware platform and the flash memory samples under test. Then, the correlation between RFBC and RRVOL is quantitatively analyzed. Finally, the experimental data demonstrates 1) the consistency of RRV offset for the same page type of TLC flash memory, which provides theoretical support for the RRV grouping optimization scheme, and 2) the stability of the initial inter-WL difference in the RRV of 3-D NAND flash memory, which provides theoretical and data support for the subsequent WL extension scheme for the proposed RRV optimization range.

B. Data Support for the RRV Grouping Scheme
To reduce the complexity and storage overhead of RRV calibration strategies, RRV grouping is a common means [37], [42]. Within the same WL, not only the cell structure is the same but also has consistent P/E wear and retention time, so the offset coefficients of different RRVs are strongly correlated. RRV grouping is to utilize the correlation between different RRVs to bundle several RRVs for calibration, thus reducing the number of RRVs that need to be calibrated. Fig. 4 illustrates the UP RRV offset level of the EOL samples (8k P/E cycles) after 120 days of retention at room temperature. It should be noted that these data represent the average of 20 test samples, further enhancing the robustness of the metrics presented.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 4. UP RRVs offset level of the EOL samples after 120 days retention at room temperature.

Fig. 6. NAND RFBC vs. page read operation count.

Fig. 5. MP RRVs offset level of the EOL samples after 120 days retention

at room temperature.

C. RFBC-RRVOL Model Construction

The horizontal axis in Fig. 4 is the number of the WL, and the vertical axis is the offset level of the optimal RRV relative to the default RRV. The red curve shows the optimal offset level of the 4 RRVs (Va, Vc, Ve and Vg) of UP at different WLs. The blue curve shows the difference between each red curve and the average of all red curves, which can be interpreted as the loss of calibration accuracy caused by using the RRV grouping scheme. Analyzing Fig. 4 data, it can be observed that the offset levels of the four RRVs in UP are close. Compared with independent calibration, when these four RRVs are combined for calibration, the average error of all samples is 1.413 offset levels, which is much smaller than their reading window range. Therefore, to reduce the complexity of the RRV calibration scheme, the four RRVs in UP will be combined for calibration in this work, using the same calibration offset coefficient.
The same conclusion can be obtained by testing the two RRVs (Vb and V f ) in MP, as shown in Fig. 5.
Although the average absolute error of different WLs in Vb and V f reached 2.9 offset levels after retention of 120 days, it is still lower than the RRV correction redundancy of MP.
In summary, the RRV grouping scheme is used in this work to reduce the complexity and storage overhead of the RRV calibration strategy. That is, the same offset level is used for the four RRVs (Va, Vc, Ve and Vg) of the UP, the same offset level is used for the two RRVs (Vb and V f ) of the MP, and the LP RRV, Vd , is calibrated independently.

Interface state traps and oxide layer traps in flash memory cell cause random telegraph noise (RTN). Under the influence of RTN, even if the RRV is kept constant, the data may be different in two consecutive read operations. And in this paper, the data that changes in consecutive read operations is referred to random flip bit count. Fig. 6 shows the trends of RFBC as a function of the number of read operations.
As the number of read operations increases, the RFBC fluctuates within a certain range without abrupt changes. As a result, to minimize the number of read-retry operations with a low read latency, RFBC data were obtained by only one extra time of read-retry operation. At the initial stage of retention, the overlapping area between the default RRV and the flash TVD curve is small. However, as the retention time increases, the TVD is gradually shifted to the left, and at this time, the TVD probability density near the default RRV gradually increases, as shown in Fig. 7.
The horizontal axis in Fig. 7 represents the offset value of TVD, and the vertical axis represents the probability density of cell TVD. As the flash threshold voltage gradually decreases, the probability density of cell TVDs around the default RRV gradually increases. In the case of stable RTN, RFBC will increase as the probability density of TVDs around RRV increases. Therefore, the offset value of RRV can be predicted through RFBC.
To construct an accurate RFBC-RRVOL model, 6,000 sample blocks were tested in this work. The detailed testing process includes 3 steps: 1) Sample block pre-processing. Perform pre-P/E wear on all sample blocks to ensure that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FENG et al.: RANDOM FLIP BIT AWARE READING

2377

Fig. 9. Comparison curves of RFBC-RRVOL for LPs in all WLs within the same flash block.

Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of the relationship between TVD offset and cell probability density around default RRVs.
Fig. 8. Curve of RFBC value in different page types as RRV shifts.

be calculated by least squares. The experimental data indicate that Formula 1 fits the relationship between RRV offset level and RFBC very accurately, with an average root mean squared error (RMSE) of 6.197 and the minimum R-square value of 0.997 for all tested samples.
It should be noted that although the RFBC-RRVOL curves of different WLs all conform to the normally distributed probability density function, the fitting coefficients differ significantly. Fig. 9 compares the RFBC-RRVOL curves of the LPs in all the WLs within the same flash memory block.
According to the experimental data in Fig. 9, even if the RFBC data in the same block are all close to 150, the difference in the optimal RRV offset of different WLs can be more than 12 levels, so the constant coefficients for each WL need to be calculated independently.

life cycle of the tested sample covers the early, middle, and end stages. The pseudo-randomized sequence was written and subjected to 15 days retention at room temperature. 2) RFBC test. Control the RRV offset level to achieve a traversal read operation, in which two consecutive read operations were conducted per RRV offset level. Then an XOR operation is performed on two consecutive read operations, and the RFBC for that offset level is calculated by counting the number of non-zero bits, while the corresponding RBER is recorded. 3) Data processing and analysis. The RRV corresponding to the minimum value of RBER is referred to the optimal RRV. And record the offset level of the other RRVs and the corresponding RFBC. Fig. 8 shows the RFBC of three page types variation curves as RRV shifts.
In Fig. 8, the horizontal axis represents the RRV offset level, with each level being 7.5mV, where 0 represents the optimal RRV and the vertical axis represents RFBC. The error bands of different curves indicate that 99.7% of the sample values are distributed within this range. The relationship between RFBC and RRVOL can be fitted using the normally distributed probability density function, fitted as in Formula 1.

R F BC = a1 · e−

x −b1 c1

2

(1)

where R F BC is the random flip bit count; x is the RRV offset level; a1,b1 and c1 are constant coefficients which can

D. Data Support for the WL Extension Scheme
Data from many studies have indicated that there are significant differences in the threshold voltage distributions for different WLs of 3D flash memory [17], [43], [44]. Current RRV calibration strategies require independent optimization for each layer, which imposes extremely high storage and computational overhead. To avoid the high storage and computational overheads incurred by finding the optimal RRV layer by layer as previous works, we deeply investigate the RRV offset levels of different WLs of 3D flash memory [37], [45]. On this basis, we propose a WL extension scheme of the RRV optimization range.
Fig. 10 shows the optimal RRVs for different word lines at the beginning of the lifetime (BOL, 500 P/E cycles).
According to the experiment data shown in Fig. 10, we can draw two conclusions: 1) The optimal RRV offset varies greatly for different WLs of flash memory, with a maximum difference of 10.42 offset levels. 2) The effect of retention charge loss on the initial difference in RRV between WLs is small, with the maximum value of retention RRV offset for all WLs being only 3.28 offset levels.
As the P/E cycles increases, the flash memory retention charge leakage rises, and the retention RRV offset for different WLs increases slightly, as shown in Fig. 11.
The test samples in Fig. 11 were subjected to 8,000 cycles prior to testing. EOL flash memory has a significantly higher

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 10. Optimal RRV offset level for different WLs of BOL flash memory.

Fig. 11. Optimal RRV offset level for different WLs of EOL flash memory.

charge loss rate and a higher level of left shift in its optimal RRV. Nevertheless, the difference in the offsets of the optimal RRVs during rention is small for all WLs, with a standard deviation of only 2.2 offset levels which is much smaller than the initial differences between the different WLs, and these differences are within the range of the reading window.
In addition to these data, our previous test data and other academic papers confirm this position [22], [46]. Therefore, this work treats the RRVOL difference between different WLs as a constant that does not vary with retention time. During the RRV calibration process, the RRVs of all other WLs in the same block can be calibrated from the RRV of one WL by simply compensating for the initial differences in the different WLs.

Fig. 12. Overview of the RARRV strategy.

IV. RFBC AWARE RRV CALIBRATION STRATEGY
On the basis of the previously discussed 3-D flash RRV offset characteristics, the RARRV calibration strategy is proposed in this section. An overview of the RARRV strategy is shown in Fig. 12.
A. Priori Data Preparation
The prior data consists of two parts: the RFBC-RRVOL fitted model coefficients and the initial differences in RRV between different WLs. The method of obtaining the fitted model coefficients is similar to the steps described in Section III. It includes 4 steps: 1) Write pseudo-random sequence to target flash memory. 2) Controls the RRV individually shift to the right from the default position to the 40th offset level, with two consecutive read operations at each offset. 3) Calculate the RFBC value for each offset level through

XOR operation; 4) Use Formula 1 to perform nonlinear fitting on RRVOL and RFBC, and use the least squares method to calculate the constant coefficients (a1, b1, c1). It should be noted that: 1) The above steps are completed independently for all page types (LP, MP, UP) on the same WL; 2) Due to the different fitting coefficients of different lines, all WLs in the above steps are completed independently. And 16-bit accuracy is used to store the acquired constant coefficient data.
The initial differential data between RRV WLs for 3-D NAND flash memory test procedure is as follows. 1) Write a pseudo random sequence to the target flash memory block. 2) Control the RRV page by page, gradually offsetting from the leftmost to the rightmost. Then record the RBER corresponding to each offset level. 3) Set the offset level corresponding to the minimum value of RBER as the current optimal RRV offset level, which is recorded WL by WL. The initial offset level difference between RRV WLs is stored with 8-bit accuracy.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FENG et al.: RANDOM FLIP BIT AWARE READING

2379

The same evaluation is performed on multiple flash chips of the same type and production batch. The Prior data on one flash memory chip can be well applied to other chips in the same batch.
Unlike the off-line RRV calibration strategy, the prior data in this work does not include testing for flash memory P/E wear and retention loss characteristics. Therefore, prior data collection can be completed using an extremely short amount of time.
B. Online Calibration Process for RARRV Strategy
The RARRV online calibration strategy consists of two schemes, the single WL RRV calibration scheme and the WL calibration range extension scheme. The single WL RRV calibration scheme is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for the Single WL RRV Calibration Require: Input page physical address, fitting parameter table Ensure: Output the optimized RRVOL of single WL
1: Obtain the page physical address, fitting parameter table 2: Monitor the number of LDPC hard decoding iterations 3: if target page LDPC hard decoding failed, then 4: Store current data in page buffer 5: Read target page data again using the same RRV 6: Calculate RFBC by XOR between the data read again
and the data in the page buffer 7: Substituting RFBC into the calibration model to obtain
RRVOL 8: Output the optimized RRVOL of single WL 9: end if

The RRV calibration process is triggered when the LDPC hard decoding error correction fails or its iteration count exceeds a preset threshold. First, read the target page again and XOR the data read again with the data in the page buffer to obtain RFBC. Then, use Formula (2) to calculate the offset coefficient of the target page RRV, as follows:





RFBC

  

RRV

OL

=

b1

+

c1

·



−l n

a1

i f R F BC ⩾ b1



  

RRV

OL

=

b1

−

c1

·



RFBC −l n
a1

i f R F BC < b1

(2)

where RRVOL is the optimal RRV offset level, RFBC is the random flip bit count, and a1, b1, c1 can be obtained by querying the table of fitting coefficients using the physical address of the target page. Based on RFBC, the target page RRV is set. We reread it and record the number of LDPC hard decodes at this point. Lastly, the RRVOL, the corresponding physical address and the number of hard decoding iterations are stored using 16-bit data to predict the RRV offset level of other WLs within the same flash block.
The prior data of initial difference between RRV WLs can be utilized to extend the individual RRV calibration parameters, thus reducing the number of flash memory readretry operations. The extension scheme of the RRV optimized range is shown in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Algorithm for the Calibration Range Extension Require: Input page physical address, RRV initial difference
table,the optimized RRVOL of single WL Ensure: Output the optimized RRVOL
1: Obtain the page physical address, RRV initial difference table, the optimized RRVOL of single WL
2: if presence of calibrated RRVs on the same physical block, then
3: Query the RRV initial difference table to calculate the initial RRV offset level difference between the target WL and the calibration WL
4: Perform read-retry operations after compensating for the RRV of the target page
5: if LDPC hard decoding successful, then 6: Output the optimized RRVOL 7: else 8: Perform single WL RRV calibration scheme 9: end if 10: end if
The RRV optimization range WL extension scheme is triggered when the calibrated RRV exists in the same physical block of the target page. The RRV initial interlayer difference table is first queried to calculate the initial RRV offset level difference between the target WL and the reference WL. The RRV of the target page is offset based on the initial difference. And if the calibration fails then the single WL RRV calibration scheme is executed. If the calibration is successful then record the RRVOL of the target page after successful calibration, the number of LDPC hard decoding iterations and the corresponding physical address.
RRVOL data is stored according to the first in first out (FIFO) order, and each block in this work stores up to 5 sets of RRVOL data. When the layer expansion scheme is executed, all RRVOL data within the FIFO is read. Users can select the RRVOL calibration parameters based on the order within the FIFO and the number of LDPC hard decoding iterations.
V. EXPERIMENTALS
In this section, the comprehensive performance of the RARRV scheme is evaluated based on real-world tests and two mainstream RRV calibration schemes are compared in the evaluation. The evaluation results demonstrate the stateof-the-art of the work in this paper. The RARRV scheme validation experiments use the same batch of 10 additional flash memories as in the prior data tests, and 100 flash memory blocks from each flash memory are selected as independent test samples.
A. Accuracy Analysis of RARRV Strategy
To simulate the real flash memory usage state, different pseudo-random sequences are written to all the tested samples. The measured samples were then placed in a temperature chamber for an equivalent room temperature retention of 180 days. Fig. 13 shows the predicted value of one of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024

Fig. 13. Comparison of the accuracy of different RRV calibration schemes.

samples under different RRV calibration schemes and the actual optimal RRV offset level for that sample.
The sentinel scheme and the dynamic calibration scheme based on the underlying error characterization of flash memory have been chosen to be compared with the scheme proposed in this work, which represent the two dominant types of RRV calibration schemes, on-line and off-line, respectively [22], [37].
The errors of the different RRV calibration schemes with respect to the actual optimum are shown in Fig. 13, where the off-line calibration scheme has the largest error, with an average calibration error of 3.51 offset levels across all WLs. Comparison experiments were performed with an equivalent retention of 180 days by the high-temperature acceleration method. However, the threshold voltages for high-temperature acceleration differed greatly from those for actual long-term retention, resulting in a large error in the off-line scheme [33]. Temperature variations during flash retention are a disturbing factor that cannot be avoided by all off-line calibration schemes.
The calibration error of the sentinel scheme is slightly larger than that of the RARRV scheme, which is 2.59 and 1.63 offset levels, respectively. Since the tested sample has 48 KB per WL storage space and the sentinel cell space is only 0.096 KB, very small RBER fluctuation of the sentinel cell produces a large output variation, which reduces the robustness of the sentinel scheme.
B. Storage Reliability and Read Performance Improvement
The calibration accuracy of the RRV scheme directly affects the optimization of RBER, Fig. 14 compares the distribution of error bits of all test samples under different RRV calibration schemes.
The data in Fig. 14 show that the RARRV scheme optimizes better than the other two schemes in more than 90% of the samples, and other key data are shown in Table II.
Although the RARRV scheme does not have a significant advantage over the sentinel scheme in terms of RBER reduction, the RARRV scheme is much more effective than the sentinel scheme in optimizing flash read latency. On the one hand, because page is the smallest unit of flash read operation, even reading only the sentinel cell requires waiting for a full page read cycle. On the other hand, the sentinel scheme does not consider the correlation between different layers of the 3-D

TABLE II FLASH RBER WITH DIFFERENT RRV CALIBRATION SCHEMES
flash memory, and cannot perform calibration range expansion; one read can only calibrate the RRV of the WL where the sentinel cell is located.
Flash read latency comes mainly from page read latency, flash translation layer (FTL) decoding latency and ECC decoding latency. RRV calibration cannot change the FTL decoding latency and the inherent page read latency of flash memory. However, lowering the RBER can improve the success rate of one-time page read and reduce the number of read-retry operations. To quantitatively analyze the read-retry counts of the sentinel scheme and the RARRV scheme, we performed LDPC error correction tests based on the LDPC error correction schemes and parameters provided in the literature [27]. Fig. 15 compares the number of read-retries of the two schemes.
For all the sample blocks, the average number of rereads per block for the sentinel scheme was 626.2, with a success rate of 71.81% for one time read. The average number of read-retries per block for the RARRV scheme was 2.46, with a success rate of 99.89% for one time read. Regularly, the page read latency is much higher than the sum of the latency of FTL decoding, ECC decoding, and online calculation of RRV calibration, etc. Therefore, the success rate of one-time read of flash memory can directly reflect the optimization effect of the RRV calibration scheme on the read performance of flash memory.
C. Overhead Analysis of RARRV Strategy The storage overhead of the RARRV calibration strategy is
mainly used to store the prior data. The prior data includes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FENG et al.: RANDOM FLIP BIT AWARE READING

2381

Fig. 14. Optimization effect of RARRV calibration strategy for different page types.

Fig. 15. Comparison of the number of read-retry between the sentinel and RARRV schemes.

two parts: the coefficients of the RFBC-RRVOL fitted model and the initial differences in RRVOL between WLs. And the specific storage overhead can be calculated using Equation (3):
Over head = P0 · NW L · NP · C0 + P1 · NW L · NP (3)
where P0 and P1 are the number of bits occupied by each data, Nwl is the number of WLs, N p is the number of page types, and C0 is the number of constant variables for the fitted model. Storage overhead in this work is 16bit × 744 × 3 × 3 + 8bit × 744 × 3 = 15.26 K B.
The storage overhead of the RARRV strategy is fixed, which does not change as storage capacity rises. This greatly reduces the storage overhead compared to previous schemes such as sharing read-retries with sentinels. As solid state disk (SSD) storage capacity rises rapidly, the extremely low overhead benefits of the RARRV strategy will become even more pronounced.
VI. CONCLUSION
To solve the problems of cumbersome prior data testing, low calibration accuracy and high overhead of existing RRV calibration strategies. In this work, an online RRV calibration strategy with an extremely low overhead, RARRV, is proposed. We first characterize the correlation between flash RFBC and RRV offset, and construct an RFBC-RRVOL conversion model. Then the 3-D flash RRV offset characteristics are tested in depth, and the RRV grouping optimization scheme and RRV calibration WL range extension scheme are proposed based on the test results. Finally, the effectiveness of the RARRV strategy is verified on real flash memory. The experimental data proves that the RARRV strategy introduces a minimal

storage overhead of only 15.26 KB, which reduces the RBER of EOL flash memory and increases the success rate of one time read to 99.89%.
Aiming at the two key problems of long prior data testing cycle and high storage overhead of the current mainstream RRV calibration strategies, this paper proposes an effective and practical method for both. We hope that the proposed method can be widely applied to real-world solid-state storage devices and inspire more new strategies to improve the performance and reliability of storage systems, breaking through the bottlenecks in product production.
REFERENCES
[1] G. H. Lee, S. Hwang, J. Yu, and H. Kim, “Architecture and process integration overview of 3D NAND flash technologies,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 15, p. 6703, 2021.
[2] S. Chung et al., “Process improvements for 7th generation 1Tb quadlevel cell 3D NAND flash memory in mass production,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2023, pp. 1–4.
[3] R. Micheloni, L. Crippa, A. Marelli, and G. Wong, “Market and applications for nand flash memories,” in Inside NAND Flash Memories. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, 2010, pp. 1–18.
[4] H. Kim, S.-J. Ahn, Y. G. Shin, K. Lee, and E. Jung, “Evolution of NAND flash memory: From 2D to 3D as a storage market leader,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[5] S. Maneas, K. Mahdaviani, T. Emami, and B. Schroeder, “Reliability of SSDs in enterprise storage systems: A large-scale field study,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–27, Feb. 2021.
[6] C. Zambelli, R. Micheloni, and P. Olivo, “Reliability challenges in 3D NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2019, pp. 1–4.
[7] Y. Wang, J. Huang, J. Chen, and R. Mao, “PVSensing: A processvariation-aware space allocation strategy for 3D nand flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1302–1315, May 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 5, MAY 2024

[8] Y. Pan, H. Zhang, M. Gong, and Z. Liu, “Process-variation effects on 3D TLC flash reliability: Characterization and mitigation scheme,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Softw. Quality Rel. Security (QRS), Dec. 2020, pp. 329–334.
[9] N. Shibata, H. Uchikawa, T. Shibuya, K. Nakai, K. Yanagidaira, and H. Inoue, “7-Bit/2Cell (X3.5), 9-bit/2Cell (X4.5) NAND flash memory: Half bit technology,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2023, pp. 1–4.
[10] S. Tanakamaru, M. Doi, and K. Takeuchi, “Error-prediction analyses in 1X, 2X and 3Xnm NAND flash memories for system-level reliability improvement of solid-state drives (SSDs),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), Apr. 2013, pp. 3B.3.1–3B.3.6.
[11] S. Nie, C. Zhang, C. Zhang, X. Zheng, and W. Wu, “Error source and latency-aware read performance optimization scheme for aged SSDs,” IEICE Electron. Exp., vol. 18, no. 8, 2021, Art. no. 20210103.
[12] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[13] K.-K. Yong and L.-P. Chang, “Error diluting: Exploiting 3-D NAND flash process variation for efficient read on LDPC-based SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 3467–3478, Nov. 2020.
[14] J. Peng, Q. Wang, X. Fu, and Z. Huo, “Dynamic LLR scheme based on EM algorithm for LDPC decoding in NAND flash memory,” IEICE Electron. Exp., vol. 14, no. 18, 2017, Art. no. 20170820.
[15] X. Yu et al., “LIAD: A method for extending the effective time of 3-D TLC NAND flash hard decision,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 1705–1717, May 2023.
[16] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solidstate drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
[17] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “Improving 3D NAND flash memory lifetime by tolerating early retention loss and process variation,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–48, 2018.
[18] Q. Xiong et al., “Characterizing 3D floating gate NAND flash: Observations, analyses, and implications,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–31, May 2018.
[19] W. Liu et al., “Characterization summary of performance, reliability, and threshold voltage distribution of 3D charge-trap NAND flash memory,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1–25, 2022.
[20] D. Wei, Z. Piao, H. Feng, L. Qiao, C. Hu, and X. Peng, “TCSE: A target cell states elimination coding strategy for highly reliable data storage based on 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 5299–5312, Dec. 2022.
[21] D. Wei et al., “Edge word-line reliability problem in 3-D NAND flash memory: Observations, analysis, and solutions,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 861–873, Jun. 2023.
[22] H. Feng, D. Wei, Y. Wang, Y. Song, Z. Piao, and L. Qiao, “Lightweight read reference voltage calibration strategy for improving 3-D TLC NAND flash memory reliability,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 370–379, Sep. 2023.
[23] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, W. Liu, Y. Wang, and C. Xie, “Exploiting error characteristic to optimize read voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5490–5496, Dec. 2020.
[24] M. Goldman, K. Pangal, G. Naso, and A. Goda, “25 nm 64Gb 130 mm2 3bpc NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2011, pp. 1–4.
[25] C. Kim et al., “A 512-gb 3-b/Cell 64-stacked WL 3-D-NAND flash memory,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 124–133, Jan. 2018.
[26] S. Lee et al., “A 1Tb 4b/cell 64-stacked-WL 3D NAND flash memory with 12MB/s program throughput,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers, vol. 342, Feb. 2018, pp. 340–342.
[27] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), San Jose, CA, USA, Feb. 2013, pp. 243–256.
[28] Y. Pan et al., “ADLPT: Improving 3D NAND flash memory reliability by adaptive lifetime prediction techniques,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 1525–1538, Jun. 2023.

[29] C. Zambelli, E. Ferro, L. Crippa, R. Micheloni, and P. Olivo, “Dynamic VTH tracking for cross-temperature suppression in 3D-TLC NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Integr. Rel. Workshop (IIRW), Oct. 2019, pp. 1–4.
[30] Y. Pan, H. Zhang, R. Yu, Z. Lu, H. Zhang, and Z. Liu, “LightWarner: Predicting failure of 3D NAND flash memory using reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 853–867, Mar. 2023.
[31] D. Wei, H. Feng, L. Qiao, C. Hu, and X. Peng, “Experimental verification and analysis of the acceleration factor model for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3543–3547, Oct. 2022.
[32] Y. Wang, J. Tan, R. Mao, and T. Li, “Temperature-aware persistent data management for LSM-tree on 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 4611–4622, Dec. 2020.
[33] Q. Li, M. Ye, T.-W. Kuo, and C. J. Xue, “How the common retention acceleration method of 3D NAND flash memory goes wrong?” in Proc. 13th ACM Workshop Hot Topics Storage File Syst., Jul. 2021, pp. 1–7.
[34] Y. Wang, J. Huang, J. Yang, and T. Li, “A temperature-aware reliability enhancement strategy for 3-D charge-trap flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 234–244, Feb. 2019.
[35] M. Kim et al., “RealWear: Improving performance and lifetime of SSDs using a NAND aging marker,” Perform. Eval., vol. 145, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 102153.
[36] F. Chen et al., “Temperature impacts on endurance and read disturbs in charge-trap 3D NAND flash memories,” Micromachines, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 1152, Sep. 2021.
[37] Q. Li et al., “Shaving retries with sentinels for fast read over high-density 3D flash,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitecture (MICRO), Oct. 2020, pp. 483–495.
[38] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, and O. Mutlu, “Read disturb errors in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery,” in Proc. 45th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., Jun. 2015, pp. 438–449.
[39] D. Wei, Y. Gong, L. Qiao, and L. Deng, “A hardware–software co-design experiments platform for NAND flash based on Zynq,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Embedded Real-Time Comput. Syst. Appl., Aug. 2014, pp. 1–7.
[40] G. Hemink and A. Goda, “5—NAND Flash technology status and perspectives,” in Semiconductor Memories and Systems (Woodhead Publishing Series in Electronic and Optical Materials), A. Redaelli and F. Pellizzer, Eds. Woodhead Publishing, 2022, pp. 119–158, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-820758-1.00003-0.
[41] P. Kalavade, “4 bits/cell 96 layer floating gate 3D NAND with CMOS under array technology and SSDs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, Dresden, Germany, May 2020, pp. 1–4.
[42] N. Papandreou et al., “Open block characterization and read voltage calibration of 3D QLC NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Reliabil. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), Apr. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[43] J. Ahn and T. W. Kim, “Threshold voltage shift variation of vertical NAND flash memory devices dependent on polysilicon channel layer thickness,” J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 7331–7334, Oct. 2017.
[44] C.-H. Hung et al, “Layer-aware program-and-read schemes for 3D stackable vertical-gate BE-SONOS NAND flash against cross-layer process variations,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1491–1501, Jun. 2015.
[45] S. Nie, Y. Zhang, W. Wu, and J. Yang, “Layer RBER variation aware read performance optimization for 3D flash memories,” in Proc. 57th ACM/IEEE Design Autom. Conf., Jul. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[46] M. Raquibuzzaman, A. Milenkovic, and B. Ray, “Intrablock wear leveling to counter layer-to-layer endurance variation of 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 70–75, Jan. 2023.
Hua Feng received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the North University of China (NUC), Taiyuan, China, in 2016 and 2019, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China.
His current research interests include highly reliable storage systems and automatic test systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FENG et al.: RANDOM FLIP BIT AWARE READING
Debao Wei (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) at Weihai, Weihai, China, in 2009 and 2011, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from HIT, Harbin, China, in 2016.
He has been an Associate Research Fellow and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, HIT. His research interests include highly reliable storage systems, embedded data processing systems, and flight test systems.
Shipeng Gu received the B.S. degree from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) at Weihai, Weihai, China, in 2010, and the M.S. degree from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2013.
Since 2019, he has been a Research Senior Engineer with the Chinese Flight Test Establishment. His current research interests include flight test instrumentation systems, data acquisition technology, and digital recording technology.
Zhelong Piao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China, in 2019 and 2020, respectively, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree.
His research interests include computer engineering and highly reliable storage systems.

2383
Yongchao Wang received the B.S. degree from Henan University (HENU), Kaifeng, China, in 2018, and the M.S. degree from Harbin Engineering University (HEU), Harbin, China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China.
His research interests include coded modulation technology and highly reliable storage systems.
Liyan Qiao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China, in 1996, 1998, and 2005, respectively.
He has been a Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the Automatic Test and Control Department, HIT, since 2009. His current research interests include data acquisition technology, massstorage data record technology, and test information processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

