IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2024

529

An Efficient Dynamic Threshold Voltage Detection Scheme for Improving 3-D NAND Flash Reliability
Linxin Yin , Yingzhao Li , Xiaoyi Zhang, Xiongfei Zhai , Member, IEEE, and Guojun Han , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—With high storage density and large capacity, three-dimensional (3D) NAND flash utilizing multi-level storage technology has become the mainstream storage medium. Furthermore, by storing multiple bits in each flash cell, 3D NAND flash memory can achieve much larger storage capacity. However, the threshold voltage distribution in 3D NAND flash memory tends to shift after repeated program/erase and long retention time, leading to more detection error when adopting conventional fixed read reference voltage (RRV). To address this issue, in this work we investigate error characteristics of 3D floating-gate (FG) and charge-trap (CT) NAND flash memory, including the reliability variations of different layers and pages, and threshold voltage shifting. We propose an efficient dynamic threshold voltage detection (EDTVD) scheme by exploiting the error characteristics and the features of the data writing process of NAND flash to optimize RRV. Based on the Nanocycler test platform, the test results show that our proposed scheme can significantly reduce raw bit error rates (RBER) during reading processes and the step count is relatively low. The RBER of the EDTVD scheme is almost equal to the optimal read scheme, and the number of step count is close to 3 fixed-step read scheme.
Index Terms—3D NAND flash memory, EDTVD, retention time, P/E cycles, RBER.
I. INTRODUCTION
N AND flash memory has been widely used in mobile computing and data centers due to its large capacity, high density, low power consumption, and non-volatility. In past decades, flash memory capacity has been improved steadily mainly because of downscaling technologies and multibit storage per cell. However, the down-scaling of two-dimensional (2D) NAND flash memory has run into severe limitations of reduced number of electrons per state, increased cell-tocell interference with shrinking dimensions, and several other types of channel noise [1]. 3D NAND flash memory adopts
Manuscript received 3 July 2024; accepted 29 August 2024. Date of publication 2 September 2024; date of current version 23 December 2024. This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U2001203 and Grant 62301166; in part by the Core Technology Research and Development Projects of Shunde District under Grant 2130218002519; in part by Opening Project of Science and Technology on Reliability Physics and Application Technology of Electronic Component Laboratory under Grant 22D09; and in part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant 2022A1515010153. (Corresponding author: Guojun Han.)
The authors are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: gjhan@gdut.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TDMR.2024.3453329.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDMR.2024.3453329

stacked structure that can further improve storage capacities by increasing the number of stacked layers in the vertical direction. Hence the cell size of a 3D NAND flash memory is typically larger than that of a 2D NAND flash memory [2]. 3D NAND flash memory with high storage capacity is in great demand for several technologies, especially extremely fast speed and tremendous reliability [3]. However, most reliability problems in 3D NAND flash memories come from the processinduced variability of the layers [4]. The threshold voltage distributions are more likely to overlap between adjacent states with voltage shifting caused by increased number of P/E cycles and retention periods. This voltage shifting is difficult to estimate accurately online because of the extremely high complexity of 3D NAND flash channels in actual systems. Storing the voltage shifting with different P/E cycles and retention time in the table of the solid-state drive (SSD) will result in huge additional storage consumption. Once a voltage offset occurs, a read-retry operation is invoked. The SSD controller adjusts its RRV and repeats this retry step until the reference voltage values leading to lower RBER than the correction capability of the error-correcting code (the number of correctable bits) are found. The read-retry operation can decrease RBER at the cost of much larger read latency. In order to improve the reliability of data storage in 3D NAND flash systems effectively, it is necessary to find optimal RRV quickly and accurately.
Some works have been proposed in the literature [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17] to improve the reliability of 2D and 3D NAND flash memory. For a 2D NAND flash memory, Cai et al. [5] has detailed illustrations on error characteristics and underlying working mechanisms. Fan et al. [6] optimized the RRV based on an existing 2D NAND flash channel model, and proposed a scheme to exploit the variation of a number of cells within each subwindow of the overlapped region to detect voltage shifts. Many error characteristics of 2D NAND flash memories are based on the simulations of the well-studied 2D NAND flash channel model.
However, due to the complexity of channel modeling in 3D NAND flash memory, error characteristics analysis needs real-world testing. Many solutions to improve the reliability of NAND flash memory have been proposed from different directions. Resorting to the real-word testing, Luo et al. [7] discovered layer-to-layer variations in 3D NAND flash memories, and proposed a Heatwatch scheme to extend flash memory lifetime. Wu et al. [8] analyzed error modes in 3D

1530-4388 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

530

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2024

charge-trap NAND flash memories and proposed a decoding scheme to reduce the read latency. This method is based on the likelihood-ratio (LLR) value of LDPC, and the decoding delay is relatively high. Besides, it does not consider the influence of the threshold voltage distribution on the experimental results. Nakamura et al. [9] adopted an artificial neural-network to gain accurate LLR and proposed a universal solution for 2D and 3D floating-gate and charge-trap NAND flash to optimize the decoding process. Wu et al. [10] had a comprehensive investigation on cross-temperature phenomenon in 3D NAND flash memory. They proposed to optimize the temperature coefficient consistency by shortening the interval time of erase to program in endurance cycling stage. Zambelli et al. [11] proposed a cross-temperature dynamic threshold voltage tracking scheme to resolve the corresponding issues. They used secondary correction mechanisms like soft decoding or read retry, and its disadvantage is higher latency.
There are also some previous works to study flash error characteristics and optimize the RRV. Kong et al. [12] analyzed the 3D CT triple-level-cell (TLC) flash retention interference and used the characteristics of the read disturbance to compensate the RRV. Cai et al. [13] and Liu et al. [14] studied the threshold voltage distribution characteristics of 2D flash and 3D NAND flash respectively. However, they did not further study the impact of threshold voltage distribution on RBER, nor did they optimize the RRV by exploiting the studied characteristics. Li et al. [15] used retention and program interference errors to infer optimal multi-sensor voltages without considering how to accurately locate and read references. Cai et al. [16] proposed retention optimized reading (ROR) for each block through adaptive online learning. Yet online learning will increase computation and storage overhead. The LDPC method of adjusting RRV is based on whether the data by the current RRV can be corrected. Error correction using LDPC soft decoding requires reading the same page using multiple sets of read reference voltages to provide fine-grained information on the probability of each cell representing a bit value 0 or a bit value 1. If the error cannot be corrected, the RRV is offset and a read-retry operation is performed until the error can be successfully corrected using a certain set of RRV. The number of adjustments for this scheme is related to the minimum offset voltage, the number of iterations, the code rate and the code length. Since the delay for LDPC decoding is large, this method is not the best way to adjust RRV.
In [17], a method of calculating the RRVs based on the high order polynomial fitting is proposed for FG type 3D NAND flash memory. It is shown that this method consumes a long time and the order of polynomial affects the voltage step size. Besides, this method may not be extended to other types of 3D NAND flash memory. To reduce the consuming time, a prediction method according to the feature layers is developed in [18]. However, the difference among the RRVs in different layers of different types of 3D NAND flash memory can be significantly large. Then, this prediction method may not work well in the practical applications. The authors in [19] improve the accuracy of predicting RRVs based on the decision thresholds of hard- and soft-decoding. However, the computational complexity of this solution is extremely high.

The RRV prediction and the channel modeling are performed in [20]. The proposed scheme shows a performance gap as compared with the results from the test platform and the high implementation complexity due to the fact that different types of flash memory need different models. The authors in [21] exploit the BP neural network to predict RRVs. Nevertheless, its online operation occupies a large amount of storage space and it takes extremely long time for training.
As compared with the exiting works, our proposed EDTVD scheme is verified by the flash memory test platform, which is shown that it can achieve the low computational complexity, the quick prediction and track of the optimal RRV. Besides, the EDTVD scheme does not require the additional storage overhead and can be applied to different types of 3D NAND flash memory.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
(1) We investigate the error characteristics of 3D NAND flash memories based on a FPGA-based verification testing platform, which includes a 3D floating-gate and a 3D chargetrap NAND flash memories.
(2) For the aforementioned error characteristics, we mainly focus on the RBER and threshold voltage distribution shifting.
(3) Scrambling mechanism is a key technology in modern communications. In this paper, we randomize the data that needs to be stored. Hence, the probabilities of “0” and “1” is equal, which guarantees that the numbers of cells in TLC flash memory are uniformly distributed.
(4) Based on the analysis of error characteristics, we propose an EDTVD scheme to optimize RRV, which can reduce the RBER and enhance the reliability of data storage efficiently. The effectiveness of the proposed EDTVD scheme is verified by numerical simulations.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the background of 3D NAND flash memory. The error characteristics are analyzed in Section III. The proposed scheme and simulation results are presented in Section IV and Section V, respectively. Section VI draws the conclusion.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we first introduce the fundamental knowledge of 2D and 3D NAND flash memories, and then discuss the factors affecting reliability of 3D NAND flash memory.
A. Basics of 2D & 3D NAND Flash
2D NAND flash memories refer to the structure of flash memory cells inside a single die, which are arranged in a traditional two-dimensional plane pattern, as shown in Fig. 1. Due to physical and electrical limitations [22], [23], when the advanced manufacturing process of 2D NAND flash devices reaches 14nm, the cost of suppressing cell noise and coupling interference increases exponentially. The development of NAND flash on a 2D plane encounters difficulties. Furthermore, storing more bits in each cell would reduce the number of electrons per state [24]. In order to further increase the storage density of NAND flash memory, and reduce storage

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: EDTVD SCHEME FOR IMPROVING 3-D NAND FLASH RELIABILITY

531

Fig. 3. The threshold voltage distributions in different types of 3D NAND flash memories.

Fig. 1. The structure of a 2D NAND flash memory block.
Fig. 2. The structure of a 3D NAND flash memory block.
cost and silicon area, a NAND Flash stacking technology on a three-dimensional plane has been proposed in [25].
The cells of 3D stacked NAND flash memory can be arranged in the vertical direction as three-dimensional stacking. Besides, 3D architecture enables larger storage capacity by increasing the number of stacked tiers without scaling down the cell sizes [26]. As shown in Fig. 2, a 3D stacked flash memory block consists multiple storage layers. Each layer is constructed by multiple Word-lines with each containing several logical pages. Source selective line (SSL) and drain selective line (DSL) are used to control data programming, reading and erasing operations.
According to the number of bits stored in each memory cell, 2D planar and 3D stacked NAND flash memories could be categorized as single-level cell (SLC) type, multi-level cell (MLC) type, and TLC type [27]. In a TLC type 3D NAND flash memory, each WL consists of three logical pages: the most significant bit (MSB) page, the central significant bit (CSB) page, and the least significant bit (LSB) page. According to the storage material, 3D NAND flash can be categorized as a FG type and a CT type. As shown in Fig. 3, the threshold voltage distribution of FG type and CT type 3D TLC NAND flash memories can be divided into 8 parts corresponding to 8 states, respectively. The voltage distributions of FG type and CT type 3D TLC NAND flash

memories are encoded in Gray code. We illustrate the detailed steps in the following:
LSB Read: (1) In the FG type NAND flash memories, the read operation in the LSB pages only needs to apply Vref 4 between the states P3 and P4. If the cell threshold voltage V < Vref 4, the corresponding data is read as 1, otherwise it is read as 0; (2) In the CT type NAND flash memories, the read operation in LSB pages requires to apply two reference voltages Vref 1 and Vref 5. If the cell threshold voltage Vref 1 < V < Vref 5, the corresponding data is read as 0, otherwise it is read as 1.
CSB Read: (2) In the FG type NAND flash memories, the read operation in CSB pages requires to apply four reference voltages Vref 1, Vref 3, Vref 5 and Vref 7. If V < Vref 1, Vref 3 < V < Vref 5 or V > Vref 7, the stored data is 1, otherwise it is read as 0; (2) In the CT type NAND flash memories, the read operation in CSB pages requires to apply three reference voltages Vref 2, Vref 4 and Vref 6. If the cell threshold voltage V < Vref 2, Vref 4 < V < Vref 6, the corresponding data is read as 1, otherwise it is read as 0.
MSB Read: (1) In the FG type NAND flash memories, Vref 2 and Vref 6 are applied in the read operation of MSB pages. When the threshold voltage V satisfies Vref 2 < V < Vref 6, the stored data is 0, otherwise it is 1; (2) In the CT type NAND flash memories, the read operation in MSB pages requires to apply two reference voltages Vref 3 and Vref 7. If the cell threshold voltage V < Vref 3, Vref 7 < V, the corresponding data is read as 1, otherwise it is read as 0.
B. Factors Affecting 3D NAND Flash Reliability
FG NAND flash cells use polysilicon (a type of conductor material) to store electrons, while CT NAND flash cells use insulator material. As we can see from the cell structures shown in Fig. 4, FG type cells are isolated from each other while CT type cells are connected together. In the following, we introduce these two different types of 3D NAND flash memories respectively.
Charge leakage is the main reason affecting the reliability of data storage. There are two ways of charge migration in 3D NAND flash, lateral charge migration (LCM) and vertical charge de-trap(VCT). LCM only exists in CT 3D NAND flash memories due to the connected structure of storage nodes. As shown in Fig. 5(a), stored electrons could migrate to adjacent

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

532

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 4. The cell structures of 3D NAND flash memories: (a) FG type NAND flash. (b) CT type NAND flash.

Fig. 5. (a) Lateral charge migration and vertical charge de-trap mechanism in CT type 3D NAND flash memory. (b) Vertical charge de-trap mechanism in FG type 3D NAND flash memory.

Fig. 6. The RBER performance of different P/E cycles versus retention time.

cells (i.e., LCM) with the increase of endurance time. Due to the existence of LCM, the CT type cells are more sensitive to data retention noise than the FG type cells. Furthermore, high temperature can aggravate LCM impact. Therefore, LCM is a key challenge to the reliability of CT 3D NAND flash memories. Despite the above drawback, CT 3D NAND flash memory is more suitable for stacking storage layers and can greatly simplify the fabrication process flow [12], [26].
VCT exists in both FG type and CT type 3D NAND flash memories. With the increase of P/E cycles, tunnel oxide is gradually worn out. The electrons trapped by tunnel oxide are de-trapped to the channel. As shown in Fig. 5(b), VCT typically occurs more frequently in FG NAND flash cells, since electrons are more prone to leakage in conductor materials. However, for CT NAND flash cells, LCM is for low endurance while VCT is dominant at high endurance [28].
FG type 3D NAND flash memories are also contaminated with FG capacitive coupling noise. FG-to-FG interference could affect Vth states during program operations in adjacent cells. Therefore, FG NAND flash adopts multistepprogramming method to reduce the FG-to-FG interference during the program operation [7]. This interference does not exist in CT type 3D NAND flash memories since one-shot programing method is applied in insulating materials. Besides, cross-temperature effects and endurance wear-out can also degrade 3D NAND flash reliability [11].
III. ERROR CHARACTERISTICS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze error characteristics of FG and CT 3D TLC NAND flash memories by our real-world testing, which include RBER and threshold voltage distribution shifting. In order to ensure the reliability of the experimental data, all the tested 3D NAND flash chips in our test are brand new. Both CT type and FG type NAND flash chips are third generation 64-layer stacked 3D NAND flash memory. The specific models of FG and CT chips are MT29F1T08EEHAF and TH58TFT1T23BA8H, respectively. We randomly select blocks of flash memories for testing. Since we adjust RRV

according to the cell distribution of NAND flash memory, our solution is general for all types of 3D NAND flash.
A. Reliability With P/E Cycles and Retention Time
As aforementioned, the reliability degrades as the number of P/E cycles and the retention time increase. Fig. 6 shows the RBER performance of different P/E cycles versus retention time for the 3D NAND flash. We tested a randomly selected flash memory block of both CT and FG type flash chips on the test platform, and tested a total of 6 chips. When a block is filled and erased, the number of P/E cycles is increased by one. From 7 to 12 months, the stability of cell declines rapidly, and then the number of error bits increases dramatically and then reaches a relatively stable platform. In addition, the more the number of P/E cycles is, the greater the value of RBER is.
By fixing the number of P/E cycles, Fig. 7 shows the left shift of the Vth distribution for the FG type and CT type NAND flash memories with different retention time. The trend of the threshold voltage shifting is dominated by retention time and this effect becomes more severe as the number of P/E cycles increases. This is due to the fact that the charge leakage becomes dominant for Vth shifting as the retention time increases. It is also found that the higher states shows larger offset than the lower ones [9]. This is because retention errors are mainly caused by two mechanisms, trapassisted tunneling (TAT) and stress-induced leakage current (SILC) [29]. The cells of higher states store more charge and have a larger SILC, thus the charge leakage rate is faster. In addition, the shifting characteristics between FG and CT NAND flash are different. In a FG type NAND flash, the charge loss is dominated by the VCT. When the number of P/E cycles is within the physical lifetime (typically 10000 P/E cycles), the oxide layer is typically in normal condition, which means that the VCT mechanism is less affected by the retention time. The storage nodes of CT flash memory are connected to each other in structure, in other words, different WL under the same BL will share the same substrate and there are VCT and LCM. Due to this difference in process structure, CT flash memory is more susceptible to retention errors.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: EDTVD SCHEME FOR IMPROVING 3-D NAND FLASH RELIABILITY

533

Fig. 7. The shift of the Vth distribution under different retention time when the number of P/E cycles at 6500.

B. Reliability Variations of Layers and Pages
In this subsection, we test the average voltages of different layers with different retention time in a 3D FG NAND flash memory. A 3D NAND flash memory block is made up of multiple stacked layers. We not only analyze the error characteristics of flash memory pages, but also need to test and study the layers and blocks of flash memory to observe how the threshold voltage of the flash memory layer changes with channel noise. Fig. 8 shows the difference in Vth distribution among different layers through P/E testing on our flash memory test platform. It can be also observed that Vth oscillates with large amplitude at central layers (i.e., the layers near the 32th layer). It can be observed that there is a discontinuity in the threshold voltage of the middle layer. As the 64 layers in the FG 3D NAND flash are stacked as two group of layers, each with 32 layers, thus a significant change of diameter appears in the central layers. The discontinuity in threshold voltage between layers 32 and 33 is due to the different resistance and capacitance among layers brought by the various diameters of cells.
In addition, we compare the reliability of different pages, as shown in Fig. 9. It is clearly shown that the RBER of LSB pages are far below those of the CSB and MSB pages in a 3D FG type NAND flash memory. As illustrated before, it is caused by transitions between adjacent states. To be more specific, transition ratio between different pairs of adjacent states are typically significantly different. Since cells in higher

Fig. 8. Layer-to-layer variations in a FG 3D NAND flash memory.
states that have more electrons are more prone to transit to adjacent lower states, which results in overlapping regions in threshold voltage distributions. The cell states in overlapping regions cannot be distinguished through RRV. To resolve this issue, we utilize this characteristic in our proposed detection scheme. In a 3D CT type NAND flash, as shown in Fig. 10, the reliability is still different among pages.
According to [30], the result shows that the RBER is lower in intermediate layers. The possible reason is that different brands and types of flash memory chips have different manufacturing processes, different encoding rules and different read reference voltage settings. The previous factors may lead to different RBER performance in different NAND flash memory layers.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

534

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 11. Flowchart of data randomization in the 3D NAND flash memory controller.

time, which are common reliability issues for most practical situations.

IV. THE PROPOSED SCHEME
By exploiting the error characteristics described previously, this section proposes an EDTVD scheme. We first introduce the effects of data scrambling in the NAND flash memory, and then describe the EDTVD scheme in FG and CT type 3D NAND flash memories in details.

Fig. 9. Page variations in a FG 3D NAND flash memory.
Fig. 10. RBER in different pages for a CT type 3D NAND flash memory.
We would like to note that there are other reliability issues, such as read-disturb, cross-temperature, etc. However, these aforementioned issues only exist in specific situations. For example, read-disturb only affects hot data and crosstemperature only exists when temperatures of reading and programming are different. Therefore, our research focuses on the impacts on different numbers of P/E cycles and retention

A. Data Scrambling and State Distribution of Cells
At the flash controller level, two mechanisms are used to improve the reliability of data storage: scrambling codes and error correction codes (ECC) (i.e., low-density parity check (LDPC) codes). According to [31], there are two purposes for randomizing the data written to the flash memory:
(1) Fig. 11 is a flowchart of the data randomization in the 3D NAND flash memory controller. In order to reduce the data dependence of the error rate, the SSD controller scrambles the stored data to ensure that the number of 0’s and that of 1’s stored in the flash memory are the same. The SSD controller architecture is shown in Fig. 12. The scrambler module can be placed either before or after the ECC module.
(2) The scrambling code scheme can reduce the influence of the coupling voltage between adjacent cells and the interference of the coupling voltage on the electrons of the cell. For the TLC NAND flash memory, after writing the scrambled data into the cells, the number of cells in 8 different states remains basically average. Scrambling data is the premise of realizing EDTVD scheme. The principle and implementation of the EDTVD scheme will be introduced in detail later.
redBased on the aforementioned characteristics, we take SLC flash memory with only two states as an example. The optimal RRV of SLC NAND flash can be identified as the value that could divide all cells into two equal parts as shown in Fig. 13. The numbers of cells in each state are approximately the same after data is written [5], [32]. However, as the number of bits of flash memory cells increases from single-bit to multi-bit, the complexity of finding the optimal reference voltage increases extremely, so a more precise solution for dynamically adjusting the reference voltage is needed to reduce the RBER of NAND flash memory.
Due to the scrambling mechanism in the flash memory system, the number distribution of different states in different

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: EDTVD SCHEME FOR IMPROVING 3-D NAND FLASH RELIABILITY

535

Fig. 15. Overview of the EDTVD scheme.

Fig. 12. The SSD Controller Architecture. Fig. 13. The read operation in a SLC NAND flash memory.

B. EDTVD Overview
The overview diagram of the EDTVD scheme is shown in Fig 15. If a fixed read scheme is used, the RBER will be very high. Therefore, RRV needs to be adjusted to reduce RBER. EDTVD keeps the number of cells in both sides of the RRV consistent to dynamically adjust the RRV. The variation of the EDTVD can induce variations of the RBER and step count.We need to ensure low step count and low RBER. The proposed EDTVD scheme contains three parts:
(1) Based on the flash memory test platform, we can obtain the cell distribution of each state in TLC flash memory; (2) Dynamically adjust the RRV according to the step size in the EDTVD algorithm; (3) The number of cells is equal in the state on both sides of the RRV. Meanwhile, the flash memory test platform can also obtain the optimal RRV, but the time overhead is huge.
Fig 16 shows the adjustment process of RRV. Since the RBER of the LSB page is low and the number of RRV that need to be adjusted is small, the RRV adjustment is operated in the sequence of the LSB, CSB and MSB page. The specific adjustment method has been given in the following content.

Fig. 14. Distribution of various states of TLC flash memory.
types of NAND flash memories also tends to be evenly distributed. The binary file of the randomly selected file is scrambled and written to the flash memory chips. Fig. 14 shows the proportion of the number of different states. The numbers of files stored in different states approache a uniform distribution. Otherwise, the distribution of cells will be uneven, which may lead to the ineffective of the EDTVD method.

C. The EDTVD Scheme in a FG Type 3D NAND Flash Memory
In 3D NAND flash memories, we need to use RRV to distinguish different storage states. The EDTVD scheme adjusts the RRV range between the threshold voltages of the valleys of the two states, and the reference voltage is constantly changing. As shown in Fig 7, once the NAND flash channel noise changes, we need to continuously adjust the reference voltage to increase the accuracy of judging different states and reduce RBER.
The evaluation in Section III shows that the RBER of LSB pages in a 3D FG NAND flash memory still maintains a low level as the retention time increases if using the original fixed value of Vref 4. Hence, the reference voltage of the LSB pages does not need to be adjusted as the retention time increases. Besides, after scrambling the initial file data, the numbers of flash memory cells in each state are roughly the same. According to the aforementioned characteristics, Vref 4 can be also used as a reference for adjusting other reference voltages of the MSB and the CSB.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

536

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 16. RRV adjustment process of EDTVD scheme.

Algorithm 1 The EDTVD Algorithm
Input: Initialize Vadjust, Vbase and p. In our experiment, p is set to be 7.5 mV;
Output: The optimized RRV Va∗djust; 1: Scan the flash cells in the page based on Vbase and obtain Nbase; 2: Scan the flash cells in the page based on Vadjust and Vbase, and obtain Ninitial; 3: Calculate by = |Ninitial − Nbase ∗ 0.5|; 4: Update p based on the value of : p = f ( ); 5: Calculate Vadjust by Vadjust = Vadjust − p ∗ p; 6: Scan the flash cells in the page based on Vadjust and Vbase, and obtain N1; 7: Calculate 1 by 1 = |N1 − Nbase ∗ 0.5|; 8: repeat
9: Vr = Vadjust; 10: Update the p based on the value of 1: p = f ( 1); 11: Calculate Vadjust by Vadjust = Vadjust − p ∗ p; 12: Scan the flash cells in the page based on Vadjust and
Vbase, and update N2; 13: Calculate 2 by 2 = |N2 − Nbase ∗ 0.5|; 14: Calculate 1 = ( + 1) /2; 15: Calculate 2 = ( 1 + 2) /2; 16: Let = 1; 17: Let 1 = 2; 18: until 1 < 2 19: Va∗djust = Vr;

Fig. 17. The relationship between N and the RBER of the LSB pages.
As shown in Fig. 17 (a), we first search for the number of cells on the left of the original RRV Vref 4 referred to as N, then search for the number of cells N1 on the left of Vref 2. Let
N denote the bias between the number of cells on the left of the original RRV Vref 4 and that of the cells on the left of Vref 2, which is calculated by N = |N ∗ 0.5 − N1|.
According to our NAND flash test platform, the relationship between N and the RBER of the LSB pages under different retention time are shown in Fig. 17 (b). As we can see, the bias N increases with the retention time, so does the RBER. As the shift of the threshold voltage increases, the transitions of electrons between adjacent states become more active.
Based on the above analysis, we propose an EDTVD scheme, as illustrated in Fig. 19 for FG type and CT type 3D NAND flash memories, which is summarized in Algorithm 1. In particular, Vadjust denotes the RRV that we need to adjust, Vbase denotes

the reference voltage in the adjusting process and p denotes

the minimum size of sampling steps in the experiment. The

offset voltage range of RRV is [-1.28 V, 1.27 V] in our flash

memory test platform. According to the results obtained from

the flash memory test platform, it is found that as the retention

time and P/E cycles increase, the offset of the threshold voltage

does not change linearly with the retention time and P/E cycles.

We adjust the RRV step by step according to the number of

cells in adjacent states. Generally, when the number of P/E

cycles increases by 1000, the threshold voltage of the highest

state will shift to the left from about 30 mV and 60 mV (it

depends on the manufacturers and types of flash memory). The

size of the EDTVD step is 7.5 mV. If the EDTVD max step

is 4, the interval of two adjacent RRV is 30 mV. Taking the

process of adjusting Vref 2 in the FG type 3D NAND flash as

an example, as shown in Fig. 19(a), the specific steps of the

algorithm are described as follows:

(1) We first initialize the values of Vadjust and Vbase. In this

step, Vref 2 is set to be Vadjust, Vref 4 is set to be Vbase. (2) We apply the original RRV Vref 4 to obtain the total

number of cells Nbase on the left.

(3) We apply an Vref 2 to obtain the number of left cells

Ninitial, and calculate = |Ninitial − Nbase ∗ 0.5|.

(4) Vref 2 is adjusted by Vref 2 = p × p. Here p = f ( ),

and

⎧ ⎨ 4, x > 2.5%Nbase

f

(x)

=

⎩

2, 1,

0.5%Nbase < x x ≤ 0.5%Nbase

≤

2.5%Nbase

.

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: EDTVD SCHEME FOR IMPROVING 3-D NAND FLASH RELIABILITY

537

Fig. 19. The EDTVD scheme in the FG type 3D NAND flash memory.

Fig. 18. Flow graph for step size selection in EDTVD algorithm.
ECC engines in contemporary SSDs are able to correct data with a relatively high RBER, approximately between 10−3 and 10−2 [5]. As aforementioned, when is smaller, the Vref 2 is closer to optimal Vr∗ef 2. The selection of step size in the EDTVD algorithm is shown in Fig. 18. The rule for selecting the step size in formula 1 is determined according to 1 = |N1 − Nbase ∗ 0.5|. We set the upper threshold of to 2.5% of Nbase, and the lower threshold to 0.5% of Nbase. These two thresholds are predefined based on the distribution of cell status obtained from the test platform, in order to balance the accuracy of RRV and the number of adjustment steps. The large upper threshold leads to the poor accuracy, while the small one results in the increasing number of adjustment steps. If > 2.5%Nbase, a large step size (which is 4 in (1)) is needed to quickly adjust the RRV and reduce the number of steps. If 0.5%Nbase < < 2.5%Nbase, the EDTVD scheme utilizes a moderate step size. If < 0.5%Nbase, the minimum step size is needed to ensure the accuracy. Then, the RBER can be within the range of the error correcting capability (i.e., 10−2).
(5) We record the value of the Vref 2, set Vr = Vref 2, and then Vref 2 is adjusted by Vref 2 = p × p. Here p = f ( 1).
(6) We apply an Vref 2 to obtain the number of the left cells N2, and calculate 2 by 2 = |N2 − Nbase × 0.5|.
(7) 1 is the average value of 1 and . 2 is the average value of 2 and 1. We set = 1 and 1 = 2. If
1 > 2, we repeat the process from Step (5) to Step (7). If 1 < 2, the process is terminated and the optimized Vr∗ef 2 is Vr. After Vr∗ef 2 and Vref 4 are determined, according to Algorithm 1, we continue to search for the optimal read

threshold voltage between the P2 state and the P3 state. The process of adjusting Vref 3 is illustrated in Fig. 19 (b).
In an actual NAND flash memory system, seven RRV are applied to distinguish the data. With the increase of the number of endured P/E cycles and retention time, the threshold voltage shifts to the left so that the RRV should be adjusted to the left. Note that Vref 1 = 0 V by default and is fixed. Therefore, we only need to retrieve six reference voltages.

D. The EDTVD Scheme in a CT Type 3D NAND Flash Memory

The EDTVD scheme in a CT type 3D TLC NAND flash

memory is more complicated. Although the RBER of the LSB

pages are lower than those of other pages, it still does not meet

the RBER requirement of the NAND flash memory. Therefore,

the RRV of the LSB, CSB and MSB pages all need to be

adjusted. The specific steps of adjusting RRV for different

pages are described as follows:

LSB RRV: Vref 1 and Vref 5 should be adjusted for LSB pages.

In a practical system, P0 is the erase state. Vref 1 is set to be 0

V by default and is fixed. Vref 5 is set to be Vadjust, and Vref 1 is set to be Vbase. As shown in Fig. 20 (a), we adjust Vref 5 to

the left until the number of cells between Vref 1 and Vref 5 is close to 50% of all cells.

CSB RRV: Vref 2, Vref 4 and Vref 6 are applied to CSB read

operations in a CT type 3D NAND flash memory. We first

obtain the optimal value of Vr∗ef 4, and set it to be Vbase. Vref 2

and Vref 6 are set to be Vadjust in turn. We adjust Vref 4 to the

left until the number of cells on both sides is close to obtain

optimal optimal

VVrr∗∗eeff

4. 4,

Then Vref 2 and Vref 6 are as shown in Fig. 20 (b).

adjusted

based

on

the

MSB RRV: Vref 3 and Vref 7 are applied in MSB read

operations. The process of adjusting Vref 3 is based on Vref 1 and

the Vr∗ef

optimal Vr∗ef 5. 5 are both set

Vref to

3 is set to be Vadjust. Vref be Vbase in this process.

1 and optimal As shown in

Fig. 20 (c), Vref 3 shifts to the left until it can separate the

number of cells between Vref 1 and the optimal Vr∗ef 5 into two

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

538

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE I PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT STEP COMBINATIONS IN
EDTVD ALGORITHM

Fig. 20. The EDTVD scheme in the CT type 3D NAND flash memory.

parts with the similar number. Similarly, the shifting of Vref 7 is based on the optimal Vr∗ef 6.
The encoding scheme of TLC NAND flash memory is Gray code. We can give two examples of different TLC NAND flash memory encoding methods. (1) If the encoding method from state P0 to P7 is: [111, 011, 010, 000, 001, 101, 100, 110]. The reference voltages of the LSB page are Vref 1, Vref 5; the reference voltages of the CSB page are Vref 3, Vref 7; the reference voltages of the MSB page are Vref 2, Vref 4, Vref 6. (2) If the encoding method from state P0 to P7 is: [111, 101, 001, 000, 100, 110, 010, 011]. The reference voltages of the LSB page are Vref 2, Vref 4, Vref 6; the reference voltages of the CSB page are Vref 1, Vref 5; the reference voltages of the MSB page are Vref 3, Vref 7. In NAND flash memory, when performing a read-retry operation, the SSD controller will adjust the RRV of one of the LSB page, CSB page, and MSB page. Since the RRV adjustments for the same page are performed at the same time, there is no direct correlation between the efficiency of the EDTVD scheme and the encoding scheme, and there is no need to add additional sensitive experiment. The reason why we specify the encoding scheme of EDTVD is that the LSB page requires a smaller number of RRV to be adjusted, which can ensure a lower RBER. At the same time, the adjusted RRV can be used as a reference for adjusting the RRV of the CSB page and MSB page.
The EDTVD scheme proposed in this paper has certain restrictions, because the EDTVD scheme needs to use a scrambling mechanism to ensure that the number of each storage state is evenly distributed. If the amount of data that needs to be stored is too poor, this solution may have an adverse impact on performance.
The EDTVD scheme in this paper is executed online. Under different P/E cycles and retention time, we obtain the samples

Fig. 21. The number of adjustments for different step size combinations in CT type NAND flash.
of the bit flip positions of adjacent states. The range of voltage offset in the flash test platform is set to [−1.28 V, 1.27 V]. Since the stored data is scrambled, the numbers of cells in different states are roughly the same. We can obtain the difference between the current state and the previous state cell, and perform adaptive adjustments according to formula 1. Compared with the polynomial fitting RRV scheme and the machine learning RRV prediction scheme, the EDTVD scheme achieves low computational overhead. Besides, it only needs to store the numbers of cells in the current state and in the previous state, which can be ignored.
E. Set the Step Size of the EDTVD Scheme
We need to discuss different step combinations of the EDTVD algorithm to observe performance in the 3D CT type NAND flash memory. Since three different step are used in the EDTVD algorithm, we define them as: (maximum step, medium step, minimum step). Table I gives the parameters of different step combinations: (3, 2, 1), (4, 2, 1), (6, 2, 1), (8, 2, 1). Fig. 21 shows 4 different step combinations. p is set to be 7.5 mV. If the step is 4, the step size is 30 mV (4*7.5 mV). We only change the maximum step, and set the medium step and minimum step to 2 and 1 to ensure the accuracy of adjusting RRV. The reason why the blue histogram is high is that the threshold voltage of NAND flash memory shifts greatly to the left, requiring more steps to adjust RRV, when the retention time increases from 0 to 12 months and the P/E cycles increase from 1 to 1K. When the P/E cycles increase from 1 to 5K (the number of adjustments is counted every 1K P/E cycles), the retention time is 12 months, we count the total number of RRV adjustments

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: EDTVD SCHEME FOR IMPROVING 3-D NAND FLASH RELIABILITY

539

Fig. 22. RBER comparison of EDTVD, optimal reading scheme and different fixed read schemes.
Fig. 24. Photo of the NPlusT test platform.

Fig. 23. RBER comparison of fixed read scheme, EDTVD and optimal read scheme.
for 4 different step combination schemes. We observe that the (4, 2, 1) step combination has the smallest number of total adjustments compared to other step combinations. For the step combination of (8, 2, 1) and (6, 2, 1), although the maximum step is large, more small steps are needed to accurately adjust the RRV, and the number of adjustments will increase. Since the minimum steps and the accuracy of four step combinations are the same, their RBERs are also the same. After comprehensive consideration, we choose the most appropriate step combination (4, 2, 1) to use in the EDTVD algorithm.
Fig. 22 gives the RBER comparison of EDTVD, optimal reading scheme and different fixed read schemes. In the fixed step read schemes,the RRV adjustment is performed page by page, in the order of the LSB, CSB, and MSB pages. During the adjustment, the fixed step size is considered in all pages. The RBER of the EDTVD scheme is very close to that of the optimal read scheme. Although the RBER of EDTVD is equal to that of the 1 fixed-step read scheme, the number of RRV adjustments of EDTVD is much lower than that of the 1 fixedstep read scheme. Compared with the 2 fixed step read scheme, 3 fixed step read scheme, 6 fixed step read scheme, and 8 fixed step read scheme, the RBER of the EDTVD scheme can be reduced by 6.2%, 12.2%, 25.3%, and 48.4%, respectively. Fig. 23 gives the RBER comparison of fixed read scheme, EDTVD and optimal read scheme. The RBER of the EDTVD scheme is 85.2% lower than that of the fixed read scheme.

V. EXPERIMENT METHODOLOGY AND RESULT ANALYSIS
Our verification system of 3D TLC NAND flash memory includes MATLAB and FPGA-based test platform. The EDTVD scheme proposed in this paper is first verified based on MATLAB. Then the number of error bits and RBER of FG and CT types 3D NAND flash chips under different P/E cycles and retention time are presented by exploiting the non-volatile memory test device.
To enable the simulation in MATLAB, we first obtain some parameters based on the Nanocycler test platform, e.g., the RBERs and numbers of cells in all states under different P/E cycles and retention time, and the RRV of each state. Then, in MATLAB, the simulation of adjusting the step size of the voltage offset is performed according to formula 1 and the number of steps for RRV adjustment is obtained under different step size combinations, which is introduced in IV-E. Hence, the obtained RRV offset can be exploited in the Nanocycler test platform. After the real-world test, the obtained RBER based on the adjusted RRV can be utilized for the comparison with other schemes.
A. Experiment Platform and Methodology
The test result of EDTVD scheme is based on FPGA hardware platform. A non-volatile memory test device of the Nanocycler test platform is recently launched by an Italian company called NPlusT. A photo of the NPlusT test platform is shown in Fig. 24.
The Nanocycler test platform can directly control the chip pin and connect with personal computer (PC) through network cable. The test platform receives instructions and data of programming flash memory from the PC, and the return result and the data read from the chip can realize the access and operation of the flash chip. The device can support flash interface speed, power pull, high and low temperature test, and also can realize the interface chip read, write, erase and other basic operations. Besides, the device supports the parallel test of 6 flash chips. The tested chips are all new CT type and FG type 3D TLC NAND flash memory chips. Besides, the tested 3D NAND flash chips do not contain any peripheral control

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

540

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2024

TABLE II THE PARAMETERS OF FG TYPE AND CT TYPE 3D NAND FLASH
MEMORY CHIPS

TABLE III RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE BAKING TIME AND THE EQUIVALENT
RETENTION TIME

circuits. The parameters of the two 3D NAND flash chips are shown in Table II.
In order to ensure the reliability of the experimental data, all the tested 3D NAND flash chips in our test are brand new. Both CT type and FG type NAND flash chips are thirdgeneration 64-layer stacked 3D NAND flash memory. The specific models of FG and CT chips are MT29F1T08EEHAF and TH58TFT1T23BA8H, respectively.
In order to analyze the reliability of NAND flash chips under different noises, it is necessary to aging the tested chips before testing. First, blocks are randomly selected, programmed and erased until the required number of P/E cycles is reached. Then random data is written to all pages in the block. Finally, the experiment of data retention persistent noise is carried out. The traditional test method of retention time is to place the chip for the corresponding time after being programmed, which takes a lot of time. In order to accelerate the process, the chip can usually be heated by high temperature, which makes the flash charge movement more active. Hence, high temperature aging can be equivalent to long-term retention effect. We would like to note that baking 3D NAND flash chips to accelerate the retention process is a common and widely accepted method in academic research and industrial testing, which is also supported by our test platform. We set the test temperature to be 70◦C due to the operating temperature range of the NAND flash chips. The baking time for the accelerated retention test was calculated according to the method in [33]. Table III shows the equivalent relationship between the baking time tbake and the equivalent retention time tret at room temperature (25◦C).
B. Result Analysis
Through real-world testing, we first obtain the threshold voltage and cell distributions under different numbers of P/E cycles and retention time. Then we perform simulation with

Fig. 25. RBER performance comparison of FG type NAND flash.
different configurations. We consider the following benchmark schemes:
• Fixed RRV scheme, which always uses the default fixed RRV to read the data.
• Optimal RRV, which is the ideal measured optimal RRV. When the Read-Retry step is small enough, it is possible to find the optimal RRV.
• Different step reading schemes: the minimum step size of the flash memory test platform is 7.5 mV. If the step is 8, the interval for adjusting the RRV is 60 mV (8*7.5 mV).
Remark 1: Under different P/E cycles and retention time, the flash memory test platform needs to scan the RBERs of all states of each word line by exploiting the minimum voltage offset step size. The optimal RRV is defined as the RRV that leads to the lowest RBER. However, it is generally impossible to obtain the optimal RRV due to the unacceptable delay of scanning the RBERs. Therefore, the optimal RRV scheme is considered as a performance upper bound of other schemes.
The EDTVD scheme is based on the data of the flash memory test platform and is simulated on MATLAB to obtain RBER, as shown in Fig. 25 and Fig. 26. Fig. 25 and Fig. 26 show the RBER performance of the considered schemes for the FG and CT types 3D NAND flash memories. We choose

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: EDTVD SCHEME FOR IMPROVING 3-D NAND FLASH RELIABILITY

541

Fig. 27. Comparison of RBER and step count under different step size schemes in CT type NAND flash.

Fig. 26. RBER performance comparison of CT type NAND flash.
the number of P/E cycles to be 5000 and 8000, and evaluate the RBER versus different retention time. As shown in Fig. 25, when the retention time is 3.8 × 103 hours, compared with the 8 fixed-step read scheme, the RBER of the EDTVD scheme is reduced by 51.9% and 50.2% under 5000 and 8000 P/E cycles in FG type NAND flash, respectively. This performance enhancement can be also observed in the test of CT type 3D NAND flash memory. For the CT type 3D NAND flash memory, we choose the retention time of 3 months, 6 months and 12 months to show the RBER versus different P/E cycles. In Fig. 26, when the retention time is 12 months, compared with the 8 fixed-step read scheme, the RBER of the EDTVD scheme is reduced by 49.3% and 49.6% under 5000 and 8000 P/E cycles in CT type NAND flash, respectively. For the FG and CT types of 3D flash memories, under different retention time and P/E cycles, the RBER of the EDTVD scheme is basically close to that of the optimal RRV scheme, and is significantly lower than the RBER of the fixed RRV scheme. Meanwhile, The RBER of the EDTVD scheme is better than other small fixed-step schemes. Besides, from the results we can find that the CT type 3D NAND flash memory is more prone to be interfered by the retention noise due to LCM.

In order to further highlight the advantages of this scheme, the scheme in this paper is compared with the fixed step size adjustment RRV scheme in literature [34]. Under different P/E cycles and retention time, we compare the number of RRV adjustments and the RBER of different fixed step schemes, as shown in 27. When the P/E cycles increase from 1 to 1000 (blue histogram), the reason for the high number of adjustments is that retention time needs to be simulated from 0 to 12 months, and the threshold voltage drifts to the left seriously, so more steps are needed to adjust the RRV. The number of steps of the EDTVD scheme is about 21% less than that of the 2 fixed-step read scheme, and is close to that of 3 fixed-step read scheme. Since the EDTVD scheme has a higher precision adjustment of step size, the RBER of EDTVD is about 6.2% and 12.2% lower than the 2 fixed step read scheme and the 3 fixed step read scheme, respectively. Moreover, the RBER of the EDTVD scheme is equal to that of the minimum fixed-step read scheme, yet the number of steps is far less than that of the minimum fixed-step read scheme. Different flash memory chip manufacturers set different RBER thresholds for ECC capabilities. Generally, the RBER is between 10−3 and 10−2. When the correction capability of ECC is exceeded, the SSD controller cannot count the number of errors in the raw data. When using the EDTVD scheme proposed in this paper, the RBER of NAND flash memory can be reduced. Under the same code length and code rate, LDPC can correct stored error bits with fewer iterations, achieving the purpose of reducing ECC delay and improving the overall performance of NAND Flash memory. Therefore, we can conclude that the EDTVD scheme can effectively reduce RBER of 3D NAND flash memories particularly after long retention time and lots of P/E cycles. Compared with the small fixed-step read voltage scheme, the number of steps of the EDTVD scheme can be significantly reduced. Thus the EDTVD scheme can improve the data storage reliability of 3D TLC NAND flash, and the preponderance can be enhanced as the retention time increases.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the error characteristics caused by P/E cycles and retention time in 3D FG and CT types TLC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 24, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2024

NAND flash memories based on the Nanocycler platform, and the difference of reliability among layers and pages. To improve the reliability, we propose an EDTVD scheme by utilizing the error characteristics. Based on cell distribution in different states, with the increase of the endurance, the proposed scheme can adjust RRV quickly and accurately. The simulation results shows that compared with the fixedstep read scheme, the EDTVD scheme has a significant improvement in RBER and the step count is relatively low. Hence, the proposed EDTVD scheme can serve as one of the promising candidates to improve the reliability of 3D NAND flash memory as retention time and the number of P/E cycles increase.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Park, J. Lee, S. S. Cho, G. Jin, and E. Jung, “Scaling and reliability of NAND flash devices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Reliab. Phys. Symp., 2014, pp. 2E.1.1–2E.1.4.
[2] K. Parat and C. Dennison, “A floating gate based 3D NAND technology with CMOS under array,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2015, pp. 3.3.1–3.3.4.
[3] Y. Ouyang, Z. Xia, T. Yang, D. Shi, W. Zhou, and Z. Huo, “Optimization of performance and reliability in 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 840–843, Jun. 2020.
[4] C. Zambelli, R. Micheloni, and P. Olivo, “Reliability challenges in 3D NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2019, pp. 1–4.
[5] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solidstate drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
[6] Z. Fan, G. Cai, G. Han, W. Liu, and Y. Fang, “Cell-state-distributionassisted threshold voltage detector for NAND flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 576–579, Apr. 2019.
[7] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND flash memory device reliability by exploiting selfrecovery and temperature awareness,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), 2018, pp. 504–517.
[8] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[9] T. Nakamura, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “Adaptive artificial neural network-coupled LDPC ECC as universal solution for 3-D and 2-D, charge-trap and floating-gate NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 745–754, Mar. 2019.
[10] D. Wu, H. You, X. Wang, S. Zhong, and Q. Sun, “Experimental investigation of threshold voltage temperature effect during cross-temperature write–read operations in 3-D NAND flash,” IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc., vol. 9, pp. 22–26, 2021.
[11] C. Zambelli, L. Crippa, R. Micheloni, and P. Olivo, “Cross-temperature effects of program and read operations in 2D and 3D NAND flash memories,” in Proc. Int. Integr. Reliab. Workshop (IIRW), 2018, pp. 1–4.
[12] Y. Kong, M. Zhang, X. Zhan, R. Cao, and J. Chen, “Retention correlated read disturb errors in 3-D charge trap NAND flash memory: Observations, analysis, and solutions,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 4042–4051, Nov. 2020.
[13] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), 2013, pp. 1285–1290.
[14] W. Liu et al., “Characterizing the reliability and threshold voltage shifting of 3D charge trap NAND flash,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), 2019, pp. 312–315.
[15] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[16] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, E. F. Haratsch, K. Mai, and O. Mutlu, “Data retention in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, optimization, and recovery,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), 2015, pp. 551–563.

[17] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, W. Liu, Y. Wang, and C. Xie, “Exploiting error characteristic to optimize read voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5490–5496, Dec. 2020.
[18] D. Wei et al., “Exploiting feature layer for read reference voltage optimization on 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 433–444, Feb. 2024.
[19] D. N. Bailon, S. Shavgulidze, and J. Freudenberger, “Features for read reference voltage estimation in NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. Conf. Consum. Electron., 2023, pp. 88–93.
[20] H. Feng, D. Wei, Y. Wang, Y. Song, Z. Piao, and L. Qiao, “Lightweight read reference voltage calibration strategy for improving 3-D TLC NAND flash memory reliability,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 370–379, Sep. 2023.
[21] D. Wei, J. Qu, Y. Song, Y. Zeng, and L. Qiao, “Neural network based threshold voltage model for 3D TLC NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Electron. Meas. Instrum. (ICEMI), 2023, pp. 125–132.
[22] Y. Deguchi, T. Nakamura, A. Hayakawa, and K. Takeuchi, “3-D NAND flash value-aware SSD: Error-tolerant SSD without ECCs for image recognition,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1800–1811, Jun. 2019.
[23] K. Takeuchi, “Scaling challenges of NAND flash memory and hybrid memory system with storage class memory & NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf., 2013, pp. 1–6.
[24] S. Raghunathan, “3D-NAND reliability: Review of key mechanisms and mitigations,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Electron Devices Technol. Manuf. Conf. (EDTM), 2020, pp. 1–4.
[25] E.-K. Lai et al., “A multi-layer stackable thin-film transistor (TFT) NAND-type flash memory,” in Proc. Int. Electron Devices Meeting, 2006, pp. 1–4.
[26] S. Venkatesan and M. Aoulaiche, “Overview of 3D NAND technologies and outlook invited paper,” in Proc. Non-Volatile Memory Technol. Symp. (NVMTS), 2018, pp. 1–5.
[27] R. Micheloni, L. Crippa, and C. Zambelli, Introduction to 3D NAND Flash Memories. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Int. Publ., 2022, pp. 87– 108. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-03841-9_5
[28] S. Suzuki, Y. Deguchi, T. Nakamura, and K. Takeuchi, “Endurance-based dynamic VTHDistribution shaping of 3D-TLC NAND flash memories to suppress both lateral charge migration and vertical charge de-trap and increase data-retention time by 2.7 x,” in Proc. 48th Eur. Solid-State Device Res. Conf. (ESSDERC), 2018, pp. 150–153.
[29] S. Gerardin et al., “Radiation effects in flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1953–1969, Jun. 2013.
[30] Y. Shim, M. Kim, M. Chun, J. Park, Y. Kim, and J. Kim, “Exploiting process similarity of 3D flash memory for high performance SSDs,” in Proc. 52nd Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchit., 2019, pp. 211–223.
[31] J. Cha and S. Kang, “Data randomization scheme for endurance enhancement and interference mitigation of multilevel flash memory devices,” ETRI J., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 166–169, 2013.
[32] Z. Chen, E. F. Haratsch, S. Sankaranarayanan, and Y. Wu, “Estimating read reference voltage based on disparity and derivative metrics,” U.S. Patent 9 417 797, Aug. 2016.
[33] K. Mizoguchi, T. Takahashi, S. Aritome, and K. Takeuchi, “Dataretention characteristics comparison of 2D and 3D TLC NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[34] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error Characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solidstate drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
Linxin Yin received the B.S. degree in information engineering from the Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2018, and the M.S. degree in information and communication engineering from Hainan University, Haikou, China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in information and communication engineering with the Guangdong University of Technology. His research interests include hardware architecture, wireless mobile communication technology, design of digital IC function module, error control coding, and 3-D NAND flash memory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YIN et al.: EDTVD SCHEME FOR IMPROVING 3-D NAND FLASH RELIABILITY

543

Yingzhao Li is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in information engineering with the Guangdong University of Technology. His research interests include device design with TCAD simulation and characterization of 3-D NAND flash memory.

Xiongfei Zhai (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2009 and 2018, respectively. He was a visiting student with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. His research interests include over-the-air computation, massive MIMO communications, millimeter-wave communications, and application of optimization algorithm in communications.

Xiaoyi Zhang received the M.S. degree in information engineering from the Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2022. His research interests include the reliability and decoding algorithm in 3-D NAND flash memory.

Guojun Han (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China, and the M.E. degree from the South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. From March 2011 to August 2013, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. From October 2013 to April 2014, he was a Research Associate with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently a Full Professor and the Dean of the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou. His research interests are in the areas of memory devices and data storage systems, wireless communications, coding and information theory. He has more than 15 years’ experience on research and development of advanced channel coding and signal processing algorithms and techniques for various data storage and communication systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:20:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

