ECOC 2016 42nd European Conference and Exhibition on Optical Communications Â September 18 – 22, 2016 Â Düsseldorf

Improved Soft-Decision Forward Error Correction via Post-Processing of Mismatched Log-Likelihood Ratios

Alex Alvarado(1), Leszek Szczecinski(2), Tobias Fehenberger(3), Milen Paskov(1), and Polina Bayvel(1)
(1) Optical Networks Group, University College (UCL) London, E&EE Department, London, UK (2) Institute National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS), University of Quebec, Montreal, Canada (3) Institute for Communications Engineering, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany
alex.alvarado@ieee.org

Abstract Correction of soft information based on achievable information rates for SD-FEC is discussed. Linear scaling of LLRs is shown to offer gains of up to 0.75 dB for a rate 0.8 LDPC code in a channel dominated by phase noise.

Introduction and Motivation
Soft-decision forward error correction (SD-FEC) and multilevel modulation formats are key technologies for realizing high spectral efficiencies in optical communications 1. The combination of FEC and multilevel modulation is known as coded modulation (CM), where FEC is used to recover the sensitivity loss from the modulation 2,3.
A key element in a CM receiver is the demapper which calculates log-likelihood ratios (LLRs or “L-values”) based on the channel observations Y . These LLRs Lk are then used by the SD-FEC to estimate the information bits. Exact LLR calculation requires knowledge of the channel law, typically given by a conditional probability density function (PDF). When the PDF used for LLR calculations does not match the true PDF, mismatched LLRs L˜k are generated. This concept is schematically shown in the first block of Fig. 1.
Most optical receivers use a circularly symmetric (CS) Gaussian PDF to approximate the channel law. However, the true channel law could be different due to, e.g., residual phase noise (PN) after phase compensation, or due to strong nonlinear interference (which is particularly important in dispersion-managed systems). Although the receiver performance can be improved by estimating the channel law 4, this multidimensional estimation might be complex.
In this paper we focus on simple postprocessing techniques that can be applied to mismatched LLRs (see Fig. 1). We consider a demapper that computes LLRs based on a CS Gaussian PDF assumption and use information-theoretic quantities to determine the required post-processing block. The idea of postprocessing LLRs before SD-FEC can be traced back to 5 and the use of information-theoretic ar-

L˜1

L˜ c1

Y

Mismatched Demapper

...

LLR Postprocessing

...

SD-FEC Decoder

L˜m

L˜ cm

Fig. 1: Mismatched LLRs, post-processing, and SD-FEC de-

coding.

guments has been previously studied in 2,6,7. In this paper we focus on a channel strongly affected by PN and show that by simple linear scaling of the LLRs, the performance of an SD-FEC decoder can be considerably improved.

Achievable Information Rates

The largest achievable information rate (AIR) for a maximum-likelihood receiver where symbols are transmitted through a memoryless channel with channel law fY |X is given by the symbol-wise mutual information (MI) 3

MI = I(X; Y ) = E

log2

fY |X (Y |X) fY (Y )

.

(1)

If the receiver is based on the pragmatic CM ap-
proach known as bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) 2, an AIR is given by the sum of bit-
wise MIs (BMI), also known as BICM capacity or generalized mutual information (GMI) 3

m

m

BMI = I(Bk; Y ) = E

k=1

k=1

log2

fY

|Bk (Y |Bk) fY (Y )

(2)

where m is the number of bits per constellation

point, and Bk are the coded bits. The BMI in (2) is an AIR for a BICM sys-

tem where the demapper computes log-likelihood

ratios Lk (LLRs) using the true channel law

fY |X . In this case, it can be shown that BMI =

m k=1

I

(Bk

;

Y

)

=

m k=1

I

(Bk

;

Lk

)

2

.

However,

when the LLRs are calculated using a channel

PDF different to fY |X , this equality does not hold.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:02:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISBN 978-3-8007-4274-5

574

© VDE VERLAG GMBH Â Berlin Â Offenbach

ECOC 2016 42nd European Conference and Exhibition on Optical Communications Â September 18 – 22, 2016 Â Düsseldorf

Mismatched LLRs cause a decrease in AIRs due to the loss of information in the suboptimal LLR calculation. An AIR for a decoder that operates directly on these mismatched metrics, i.e., when no correction (NoC) is applied, is given by2

m

GMINoC = m −

E log2 1 + e(−1)Bk L˜k

k=1

. (3)

A larger AIR, however, can be obtained if the mismatched LLRs L˜k are post-processed using correction functions θkc , k = 1, 2, ..., m. The optimal correction (OpC) functions are known to be

θkc (l)

=

log

fL˜ k fL˜ k

|Bk |Bk

(l|1) (l|0)

,

k = 1, ..., m.

(4)

Since the mismatched LLRs L˜k in Fig. 1 can be seen as observations from a channel with PDF

fL˜k|Bk , the optimal correction functions in (4) yield L˜kc = θkc (L˜k), which can be interpreted as LLRs for the new channel. The obtained AIR is then

m

m

GMIOpC = I(Bk; L˜k) = I(Bk; L˜kc ). (5)

k=1

k=1

Although GMIOpC ≥ GMINoC, we note that BMI ≥ GMIOpC, emphasizing the fact that GMIOpC may still be strictly below the BICM capacity in (2).

The optimum correction functions in (4) might

be hard to estimate and implement, and thus,

simplified approaches are sought. The simplest

one is to use a linear correction (LiC) function

θkc,LiC(l) = αk · l. This linear correction function results in the so-called harmonized GMI 2,6

m

GMILiC = m −

E log2 1 + eαk∗(−1)Bk L˜k

(6)

k=1

where

αk∗ = argmin E log2 1 + esk(−1)Bk L˜k

(7)

sk ∈R+

should be interpreted as the optimum linear cor-
recting factors. In view of this and (6)–(7), the rate
GMINoC in (3) can be seen as a particular case of GMILiC in (6) when no correction is applied, i.e., when αk = 1. Furthermore, from this we also obtain GMILiC ≥ GMINoC. The optimization in (7) is straightforward as we can separate it into m parallel unidimensional optimization problems, each of
them convex in sk. This allows a fast computation of the optimal scaling factors αk∗ if the demapper has knowledge about the transmitted sequence,
which can be obtained using training data.
In summary, we have the following inequalities:

MI ≥ BMI ≥ GMIOpC ≥ GMILiC ≥ GMINoC (8) where MI can be achieved by an optimal re-

ceiver that perfectly knows the channel law and BMI can be achieved by a BICM receiver with matched LLRs. The quantities GMIOpC, GMILiC, and GMINoC can be achieved by a BICM receiver with mismatched LLRs and optimal correction functions in (4), linear correction functions, and no correction functions, respectively.

Results: AWGN Channel with PN We consider an AWGN channel with PN, where at each discrete-time n, the received symbols are

Yn = XnejPn + Zn

(9)

where Xn are complex symbols, Zn ∼ CN (0, σz2) is complex AWGN, and Pn ∼ N (0, σp2). The AWGN signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is given by SNR = E[|Xn|2]/σz2.
The performance of SD-FEC for (9) was recently investigated and the true channel law was shown to be well-approximated using a bilinear transformation (BLT) 8. Here we assume this BLT approximation to be the exact channel law. The computation of exact LLRs for (9), however, requires not only knowledge on the variance of the AWGN, but also on the PN variance. More generally, both the distribution and the parameters defining the PDF might be unknown. This is for example the case of the optical fiber channel where the statistics of the nonlinear effects are unknown analytically.
We consider a 16QAM constellation (m = 4) labeled by the binary-reflected Gray code and σp2 = 0.06. This corresponds to a channel with strong PN (see the inset in Fig. 3 for an example with SNR = 20 dB), which will cause a performance degradation if the demapper is not properly adjusted to the non-AWGN statistics.8 The mismatched demapper under consideration assumes the noise to be CS AWGN with total variance ideally estimated as E[|Yn − Xn|2]. Although this variance considers the contributions of both AWGN and PN, there is still a mismatch between the true PDF and the one used for LLR calculations.
AIR results are shown in Fig. 2 (top), where the MI for the AWGN channel without PN is shown as a reference. The GMI thresholds for the DVBS2 LDPC codes with coding rates 3/4 (overhead 33%) and 4/5 (overhead 25%) are given as reference. 9 We observe that the symbol-wise MI in (1) is an upper bound to the BMI, which in turn is larger than the three GMIs, as expected from (8).
The three GMIs curves in Fig. 2 (top) show that no AIR gain is obtained by correcting the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:02:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISBN 978-3-8007-4274-5

575

© VDE VERLAG GMBH Â Berlin Â Offenbach

ECOC 2016 42nd European Conference and Exhibition on Optical Communications Â September 18 – 22, 2016 Â Düsseldorf

AIR [bit/sym]

3.5
GMI Threshold 4/5

GMI Threshold 3/4
3

2.5

5

10

1

15 AWGN SNR [dB]

MI AWGN MI AWGN+PN BMI AWGN+PN GMIOpC in (5) GMILiC in (6) GMINoC in (3)

20

25

0.9

α∗k

0.8

0.7

k = 1, 3

k = 2, 4

0.6 5

10

15

20

25

AWGN SNR [dB]

Fig. 2: AIRs (top) and optimal linear correction factors (bottom) for 16QAM and σp2 = 0.06.

LLRs in the low SNR regime, where the AWGN is by far dominant over the PN. In the high SNR regime (beyond the 3/4 GMI threshold), however, PN cannot be neglected, and potential gains by applying LLR correction appear. We observe that the larger the mismatch (in this case the larger the SNR), the larger the potential gains achieved by post-processing of LLRs. For the mismatch under consideration, the difference between GMIOpC and GMILiC is small, showing that it is sufficient to use the simple linear correction in (7) instead of the nonlinear one in (4). The optimal correction factors αk∗ are shown in Fig. 2 (bottom), where because of the symmetry of the constellation, labeling, and channel, even and odd bit positions are equivalent. A decrease in αk∗ for more pronounced PN is observed for all bit levels.
Fig. 3 shows the post-FEC BER for the LDPC codes with thresholds shown in Fig. 2. A FEC threshold of 4.7 · 10−3 is also shown for an outer staircase code with 6.25% overhead. As expected, the best performing demapper is BLT, which knows the true channel statistics. The performance of the mismatched demapper is considerably worse, which is in good agreement with the large gap between the GMINoC and BMI curves in Fig. 2. By linear correction of the LLRs (using the values in Fig. 2 (bottom)), the sensitivity is improved by 0.15 dB and by 0.75 dB for the low- and high-rate code, respectively.

Post-FEC BER

10−1

Rate 3/4

10−2

10−3

BLT Demapper Linear Correction (LiC) No Correction (NoC)

Rate 4/5 SNR = 20 dB

Staircase Code Threshold

10−412

14

16

18

20

22

AWGN SNR [dB]

Fig. 3: Post-FEC BER performance for LDPC codes.

Conclusions In this paper we studied achievable information rates for mismatched LLRs and show that simple linear scaling can improve the SD-FEC performance. Additional performance gains are expected if the optimal (but nonlinear) correcting functions are used. This is left for further investigation.
This paper focused on a phase noise channel with a demapper that makes a circularly symmetric Gaussian assumption for the LLR calculation. The methodology presented here, however, can be used in other scenarios where there is a mismatch between the true channel law and the one used for LLR computation. This includes the case of incorrect SNR estimation or uncompensated nonlinearity.

Acknowledgements
Financial support from the UK EPSRC Programme Grant UNLOC (EP/J017582/1) is gratefully acknowledged.

References
[1] D. J. Richardson, “Filling the light pipe,” Science 330(6002), 2010. [2] L Szczecinski and A. Alvarado, “Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation:
Fundamentals, Analysis and Design,” John Wiley & Sons, 2015. [3] A. Alvarado and E. Agrell, “Four-Dimensional Coded Modulation
with Bit-wise Decoders for Future Optical Communications,” JLT 33(10), 2015. [4] T. A. Eriksson et al., “Impact of 4D Channel Distribution on the Achievable Rates in Coherent Optical Communication Experiments,” JLT 34(9), 2016. [5] B. Classon et al., “Channel Coding for 4G Systems with Adaptive Modulation and Coding,” IEEE WCOMM Mag. 9(2), 2002. [6] T. Nguyen and L. Lampe, “Bit-Interleaved Coded Modulation with Mismatched Decoding Metrics,” IEEE TCOMM 59(2), 2011. [7] L. Szczecinski, “Correction of Mismatched L-values in BICM Receivers,” IEEE TCOMM 60(11), 2012. [8] T. Koike-Akino et al., “Phase Noise-Robust LLR Calculation with Linear/Bilinear Transform for LDPC-Coded Coherent Communications,” in Proc. CLEO 2015, Paper SW1M.3. [9] A. Alvarado et al., “Replacing the Soft-Decision FEC Limit Paradigm in the Design of Optical Communication Systems,” JLT 33(20), 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:02:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISBN 978-3-8007-4274-5

576

© VDE VERLAG GMBH Â Berlin Â Offenbach

