,(((,QWHUQDWLRQDO&RQIHUHQFHRQ6LJQDODQG,PDJH3URFHVVLQJ

A High Coding-Gain Reduced-Complexity Serial Concatenated Error-Control Coding Solution for Wireless Sensor Networks

Duc Phuc Nguyen, Thi Hong Tran, Yasuhiko Nakashima
Graduated School of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST) 8916-5 Takayama-cho, Ikoma-shi, Nara-ken, Japan
e-mail: {nguyen.phuc.ni6, hong, nakashim}@is.naist.jp

Abstract—Error-Control Coding (ECC) now plays an important role in wireless transceivers because it helps to increase link reliability and lower required transmit power. One popular problem of ECC implementation is the trade-off between high coding-gain and decoder’s complexity. In this paper, we propose a serial concatenated ECC solution which is a combination of truncated-iteration layered-decoding LDPC block code with low-constraint Viterbi decoder at low code rate. Simulation results show that very high coding-gain and reduced-complexity are achieved. This paper also gives a supposition about applying low code rate ECC for less-active wireless nodes in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) to reduce transmit power and expand sensor network topology.
Keywords-component; error-control coding; ECC; codinggain; concatenated; wireless sensor networks (WSN)
I. INTRODUCTION
Providing a reliable communication channel with lowest power consumption of devices seems to be a critical problem in most wireless communication applications, especially in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN). Error-Control Coding (ECC) algorithms can detect and correct to a level of errors appearing in received bit stream due to bad channel. The basic idea of such ECC algorithms is to add redundant bits or symbols to the original data together with constraint equations, then original data will be rediscovered at receiver side [1]. By this way ECC helps to increase channel reliability and lower required transmitter power. However, lowering power at transmitter side comes at the cost of high complexity and power consumption caused by receiver’s decoder [2]. Adding extra bits also means that communication rate (code rate) will be reduced. This creates a trade-off between high coding-gain and low code rate. Some popular ECC algorithms are Hamming Codes, Reed Solomon, BCH, Turbo, Convolutional Code, LDPC etc., each method has typical characters in error correction and they are selected to apply in various applications.
Concatenated ECC technique is the combination of inner code and outer code in both transmitter and receiver sides to take advantages of component ECC algorithms. Fig. 1 shows the schematic depiction of a typical serial concatenated code in which outer and inner code can be implemented by ECC algorithms. Recently, many researches have proposed several solutions for concatenated ECC in WSN applications or in hard disk drives [2]-[6]. They can be the combination

between LDPC, Turbo code, BCH at various code rates and with serial or parallel concatenation.
WSN consists of a set of small devices with limited energy resources, reduced processing capabilities and a radio frequency communication unit with limited transmission power [6]. Applying ECC for WSN transceivers needs to take care about consumed transmit power and receiver’s decoder power dissipation. Many researchers have proposed various methods to apply ECC in WSN applications. Specifically, Moataz et al. [2] combined LDPC with Turbo code for WSN, their approach could remove error floor of Turbo code by using LDPC but BER performance was reduced remarkably in combination version and ECC decoder was quite complex due to iterative decoding of LDPC and Turbo code. Quassim et al. [1] introduced a modification version of Reed Solomon (RS) code to reduce power consumption to apply in WSN applications but BER/PER performance was not so good even in AWGN channel. Nashat et al. [6] proposed an adaptive parallel concatenation Turbo codes with various interleave sizes for sensor nodes, forwarding nodes and base station. This approach could reduce power consumption at sensor nodes but Turbo code at code rate 1/3 was quite low together with BER performance at small sizes of interleaver memory was not good. Moreover, power efficiency was not evaluated in the paper. Ravanesh. M presented a flexible parallel concatenated Turbo codes in [3]. Contribution of his research was that he evaluated BER performance of Turbo code in many communication hops and at different interleaver sizes. However, error floor appeared clearly even in low SNR area, this creates a big drawback to apply in WSN applications.
Figure 1. Schematic depiction of a concatenated code
In this paper, we propose a combination of truncatediteration layered decoding LDPC (TILD-LDPC) with lowconstraint convolutional code and random interleaver at low code rate. This combination removes definitely error floor and burst error happened in data. Besides, our proposal also achieves very high coding-gain by using only reduced complexity TILD-LDPC and low-constraint Viterbi decoder. Our method requires transmitting more redundant bits due to low code rate and we also give clues to demonstrate that it is

978-1-5090-2377-6/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE



Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:02:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

quite acceptable in environment wireless sensor nodes which have limited active time.
II. POTENTIALITY OF USING LOW CODE RATE CONCATENATED ECC IN WSNS

using a more robust ECC and at the same transmit power can support for a longer distance between two nodes.
III. PROPOSED METHOD AND SIMULATION RESULTS

Figure 2. Energy efficiency of a less-active wireless sensor node in case of concatenated ECC has low code rate.
WSNs includes many nodes which rely on limited battery power [7]. Inside each wireless sensor node, wireless part together with transceiver circuits are main power consumption components, so that many transmission power control techniques have been proposed for WSN applications [7], [8]. According to [2], maximum attainable energy efficiency increases with correction capability of the error control code and the corresponding optimal frame length as well. That research also mentioned that frame length in the range from 200 to 1000 bits is a suitable selection in case of energy efficiency. For these reasons, our research goal is to find an efficient concatenated ECC method that has low complexity and achieves high coding gain. Moreover, the frame size of 324 bit is selected for simulation.
Research [8] mentioned about Transmission Power Control (TPC) which could improves the performance of the network by detecting whether link reliability is below a certain threshold or not. Besides, their MAC protocol helps to adjust the transmission power and improve the probability of successful data transmissions. Implementing a powerful ECC helps increase channel reliability, therefore at the same allowable transmit power we can support for a wider WSN. We also know that transmit power of wireless sensor node is changed over time, it is active when transmitting data and stays in idle state when there is no data ready for transmitting. Figure 2 shows our argument, in which trb and tra are “startup” time before and after transmitting one packet respectively, ta is time for transmitting one packet. When a serial concatenated ECC is implemented without puncturing routines, more redundant bits will associate together with original data. Taking scenario of code rate reduced by 2, in less-active wireless sensor nodes, the time between two consecutive transmissions is quite long and trb, trb are not small comparable with ta (ta is small when a small packet is transmitted). In this case, code rate reduced by 2 is quite acceptable because transmit power will be reduced due to

A. Truncated-Iteration Layered Decoding QC-LDPC (TILD-LDPC) Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) with regular parity-
check matrices has attracted many attentions because of its cost-effective and low-power hardware implementation. Besides, it is easy to adjust the block lengths and code rates in QC-LDPC. Therefore, QC-LDPC codes are employed in a large number of recent wireless communication standards, e.g., IEEE 802.16e, DVB-S2, and IEEE 802.11n. Layered Decoding QC-LDPC design in [9] showed low power and very high coding gain. In this paper, we take advantages of LDPC in [9] and run simulation to find a suitable truncatediteration value to reduce complexity of LDPC design. Our simulation results are showed in figure 3. From these results, we see that QC-LDPC with layered decoding technique at iteration number equals 5 can achieve a reasonable high level of coding gain. When iteration number is larger than 5, BER performance improves unremarkably with increasing cost of complexity. We know that in normal hardware implementation of QC-LDPC, a multiprocessor-architecture is often selected in which each iteration is represented by a processor. Consequently, with only 5 iterations, our proposed TILD-LDPC can achieve good BER performance with reduced complexity compared with other LDPC designs (8 iterations [4], equal or more than 10 iterations [9]).
Figure 3. Simulation of QC-LDPC PCM 648, code rate ½ at different iteration number in AWGN channel.
B. Low-Constraint Convolutional Encoder/Viterbi Decoder Convolutional codes (CC) are often characterized by
code rate and the memory depth (or called as constraint length) [n,k,K]. The code rate is typical given as n/k where n is the input data rate, k is the output symbol rate and K is constraint length. Ioannis et al. [10] showed the relationship of constraint length and complexity of convolutional code. He found that complexity of convolutional code increased


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:02:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

exponentially when constraint length increased. In this paper, we have evaluated BER performance of the concatenation of convolutional code and TILD-LDPC at different values of constraint length (CL). We found that in most of cases, higher CL would get better BER performance. However, as shown in figure 7 and 8, the case TILD-LDPC (code rate 1/2 and 2/3) concatenates with convolutional code CL = 3 (code rate 1/2) has equality or even better BER performance compared with CL = 7 (which 7 is a popular constraint value in many wireless transceivers). As following [10], using CL3 convolutional code will reduce about 1300 equivalent additions compared with CL7 so that our proposal’s complexity could reduce remarkably.
C. Influence of Inner and Outer Coder/Decoder to Super Encoder/Decoder’s Performance
We have simulated four scenarios to give conclusions about selecting ECC algorithm for Outer and Inner blocks. x Scenario 01: Outer = TILD-LDPC matrix 324ൈ648;
Inner = BCC Encode/Viterbi Soft Decision Decoding. x Scenario 02: Outer = BCC Encode/Viterbi Soft
Decision Decoding; Inner = TILD-LDPC matrix 324ൈ648. x Scenario 03: Outer = TILD-LDPC matrix 324ൈ648; Inner = BCC Encode/Viterbi Hard Decision Decoding.
x Scenario 04: Outer = TILD-LDPC matrix 324ൈ648; Inner = 2 ൈ (TILD-LDPC matrix 324ൈ648).

worse BER performance compared with only TILD-LDPC is implemented (scenario 03). D. Removing Burst Errors happened in data by Internal
Random Interleaver Turbo code can achieve very good coding gain at low SNR with a small iteration number. However, its big drawback is the error floor happens in high SNR area. Our proposal avoids this drawback by using TILD-LDPC which does not cause error floor but high coding gain is still achieved. However, one of main drawbacks of using Viterbi decoder is burst errors happen in data. We recognized burst errors by employing image data together with random data as transmit data in MATLAB simulation model. Figure 5 shows the block diagram of our simulation model.
Figure 5. Simulation model of the proposed serial concatenated ECC

(a) Only BCC/Viterbi (CC) at SNR = 4dB (BER = 0.0111)

Figure 4. BER performance of four simulation scenarios
Figure 4 shows BER simulation of four scenarios and TILDLDPC at code rate ½ for reference. We see that scenario 01 (Outer = TILD-LDPC, Inner = BCC/Viterbi Soft Decision) shows the best BER performance. If we assume the name “stronger code” for TILD-LDPC and “weaker code” for BCC/Viterbi, we can conclude that serial concatenation of a “stronger code” with another “stronger code” does not always give a better BER performance than the concatenation of a “stronger code” with “weaker code” does (scenario 04 and scenario 01). Moreover, “stronger code” should be Outer and “weaker code” should be Inner (scenario 01 and scenario 02). Besides, concatenation of TILD-LDPC with Viterbi Decoder Hard Decision gives

(b) TILD-LDPC + CC without Interleaver at SNR = 1dB (BER = 0.003)
(c) TILD-LDPC + CC with Interleaver at SNR = 1dB (BER = 0.0022) Figure 6. Received images at receiver in different test cases


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:02:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I. COMPARISON TABLE OF CODING GAIN OF PROPOSED CONCATENATED ECC WITH OTHER ECC ALGORITHMS

Code Rate

Proposed Method

Proposed Method

[1]

[5]

1/4

1/3

RS (x,x)

1/3

Convolutional Convolutional

[6]

[2]

Code Soft

Code Hard

Decision

Decision

1/3

5/12

1/2

1/2

BER = 1E-3

8.6 dB

7.8 dB

3.8 dB

7.6 dB 6.1 dB 7.2 dB

6.9 dB

4.8 dB

BER = 1E-4

9.9 dB

8.9 dB

4.3 dB

x

x

8.5 dB

7.1 dB

6.9 dB

Fig. 6 shows received images at receiver side in different simulation situations. Fig.6a is the received image when only convolutional encoder/decoder are implemented, burst errors can be found easily at SNR = 4dB and are marked in circles. Fig. 6b is the case of serial concatenation of TILDLDPC and convolutional code (scenario 01), we can see that error correction capability of this combination is very robust even in SNR = 1dB, but there are still some burst errors remain in received data. Fig.6c shows image result in case of random interleaver is implemented between TILD-LDPC and convolutional code, in this case burst errors are removed definitely in received data.
E. Proposed Method and BER Simulation Results
Based on simulation results which are given in sections III.A, B, C, D, we have proposed the concatenation of TILDLDPC with low-constraint (CL3) convolutional code and an internal random interleaver. Block diagram of the proposed concatenation method is showed In figure 5. We have also conducted the simulation of proposed method with simulation parameters which are given in table II.

TABLE II. SIMUMATION PARAMETERS

Software Channel Modulation
LDPC
BCC/Viterbi
Packet size Number of packets

MATLAB 2015a AWGN BPSK
Matrix size 324x648, Layered Decoding, Offset Min-Sum, Code rate 1/2. 2/3, 3/4, 5/6. Hard Decision, Soft Decision, Code rate 1/2,
Constraint Length (3,4,5,7) 324 bits
1000, 10000

Figure 7. BER performance of proposed method at different code rates of TILD-LDPC and different constraint length of convolutional code
Figure 7 shows BER performance of proposed method at different code rates of TILD-LDPC. We see that at code rate 1/2 and 2/3 of TILD-LDPC, the proposed method gets better BER performance at high noise area with low-constraint convolutional code (CL3) than with CL7 (the area is marked in hyphen oval). This helps reduce remarkably complexity of Viterbi decoder as explained in section III.B.

Figure 8. Comparison of BER performance of the proposed method with other EEC proposals for WSN
Table I shows coding gain comparison of our proposal with other approaches which are also proposed for WSN applications. We evaluated coding gain value by finding SNR value that ECC algorithm achieves BER = ͳͲିଷ and ͳͲିସ and take BER performance of an uncoded AWGN channel as reference. It’s seem that the proposal [2] also shows good coding gain results in low code rate, but their proposal used LDPC and Turbo code both with iterative modes so that their design was very high complexity. Figure 8 shows the comparison of BER performance of the proposed method with related works which are ECC solutions proposed for WSN. Our proposal outperforms other approaches in case of coding gain and error floor.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:02:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have proposed a serial concatenation of TILD-LDPC with low-constraint Convolutional Code. We found that TILD-LDPC with only 5 iterations can achieve good BER performance with reduced complexity. Besides, the proposed concatenated ECC technique guarantees no burst errors happen in received data by implementing an internal interleaver. Low-constraint (CL3) convolutional code also shows better BER performance compared with higher constraint length when BCC encoder/Viterbi decoder combine with TILD-LDPC encoder/decoder at 1/2 and 2/3 code rate modes, this helps reduce remarkably complexity of convolutional code up to 1300 equivalent additions. Moreover, we have evaluated the effects of Inner and Outer code to BER performance by simulating different scenarios with other type of ECC algorithms. Also, we have simulated our proposal at different code rate modes and different constraint length values of convolutional code and found that at code rate 1/4 and 1/3, the proposed concatenation shows an impressive BER performance in high noise area with no error floor. Coding-gain evaluation of proposed method has been given in details and compared with other available ECC algorithms which have been proposed for WSN applications. Finally, we also gave out our argument about potentiality of using low code rate concatenated ECC for WSN to reduce power consumption and broaden WSN network.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Funding of Japan Ministry of Education KAKENHI (16K18105).
REFERENCES
[1] Yousef Qassim, Mario Edgardo Magana;“Error-Tolerant Non-binary Error Correction Code for Low Power Wireless Sensor Networks”;

IEEE International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), ISSN:1550-445X, 2014.
[2] Moataz M. Salah, Ashraf A. Elrahman; “Energy Efficiency Based Concatenated LDPC and Turbo codes for Wireless Sensor Networks”; IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing, Communications and Computing (ICSPCC), Page(s) 1-6, Sept. 2015.
[3] Revanesh. M, Sujatha D.Badiger; “Performance of Smart and
Flexible Parallel Concatenated Turbo Codes for Wireless Sensor Network”; International Journal of Engineering Research and Development, ISSN: 2278-067X, Volume 1, Issue 4, pp.53-63, 2012.
[4] Ningde Xie, Wei Xu, Tong Zhang, Erich F.Haratsch, Jaekyun Moon;“Concatenated Low-Density Parity-Check and BCH Coding
System for Magnetic Recording Read Channel with 4kB Sector Format”; IEEE Transactions on Magnetics Vol.44, No.12, December 2008.
[5] Nashat Abughalieh, Kris Steenhaut, Bart Lemmens, Ann Nowe; “Parallel Concatenation vs. Serial Concatenation Turbo Codes for Wireless Sensor Networks”; 18th IEEE Symposium on Communications and Vehicular Technology in the Benelux (SCVT), Nov. 2011.
[6] Nashat Abughalieh, Kris Steenhaut, Ann Nove;“Adaptive Parallel Concatenation Turbo Codes for Wireless Sensor Networks”; International Conference on Communications and Information Technology (ICCIT), Aqaba, 2011.
[7] Sookan Panichpapiboon, Gianluigi Ferrari, Ozan K. Tonguz; “Optimal Transmit Power in Wireless Sensor Networks”; IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, Vol.5, No.10, Octorber 2006.
[8] Luiz H.A. Correia, Daniel F. Macedo, Aldri L. dos Santos, Antonio A.F. Loureiro, Jose Marcos S. Nogueira; “Transmission Power Control Techniques for Wireless Sensor Network”; Science Direct International Journal on Computer Networks, Vol. 51, Issue 17, Pages 4765-4779, Dec. 2007.
[9] C. Roth, P. Meinerzhagen, C. Studer, and A. Burg; "A 15.8 pJ/bit/iter
Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Decoder for IEEE 802.11n in 90nm CMOS"; Proc. IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuit Conference (A-SSCC), Nov. 2010.
[10] Ioannis A. Chatzigeorgiou, Miguel R. D. Rodrigues, Ian J. Wassell; Rolando A. Carrasco; “Comparison of Convolutional and Turbo Coding for Broadband FWA Systems”; IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, Vol. 53, Issue. 2, Pages 494-503, June 2007.


Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:02:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

