134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS

A 3.0 Gb/s Throughput Hardware-Efficient Decoder for Cyclically-Coupled QC-LDPC Codes
Qing Lu, Jianfeng Fan, Chiu-Wing Sham, Member, IEEE, Wai M. Tam, and Francis C. M. Lau, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a new class of quasi-cyclic

low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes, namely cycli-

cally-coupled QC-LDPC (CC-QC-LDPC) codes, and their

RAM-based decoder architecture. CC-QC-LDPC codes have a

simple structure and are constructed by cyclically-coupling a

number of QC-LDPC subcodes. They can achieve throughput

and error performance as excellent as LDPC convolutional codes,

but with much lower hardware requirements. They are therefore

promising candidates for future generations of communication

systems such as long-haul optical communication systems. In par-

ticular, a rate-5/6 CC-QC-LDPC decoder has been implemented

onto a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) and it achieves a

throughput of 3.0 Gb/s at 100 MHz clock rate with 10-iteration

decoding. No error floor is observed up to an

of 3.50

dB, where all

transmitted bits have been decoded

correctly.

Index Terms—Cyclically-coupled QC-LDPC code, decoder architecture, FPGA implementation, QC-LDPC code.

I. INTRODUCTION
W ITH THE growing need of advanced communication technologies, developing superior forward-error-correction (FEC) schemes has become imperative. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) block codes [1] have undoubtedly been one the most promising FEC classes recently due to their capability in approaching channel capacity. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes, having a regularized structure that reduces the encoder/decoder complexities, have further demonstrated the practical value of LDPC codes [2]–[4]. It has also been proved that QC-LDPC codes can achieve as excellent error performance as random LDPC codes [5].
By spatially-coupling consecutive LDPC block codes, LDPC convolutional codes (LDPCCCs) having an infinite code length are formed1 [6]–[8]. LDPCCCs have been shown to possess lower thresholds and better error performance compared with LDPC block codes [9], [10]. However, when burst erasures occur and the erasures are beyond recovery, the chain decoding of LDPCCCs becomes seriously disrupted. Moreover, the
Manuscript received September 25, 2015; accepted November 10, 2015. Date of publication January 01, 2016; date of current version February 15, 2016. This work was supported by a grant from the RGC of the Hong Kong SAR, China (Project No. PolyU 152088/15E). This paper was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Zhang.
The authors are with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong (e-mail: encmlau@polyu.edu.hk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2015.2510619
1In general, spatially-coupled LDPC codes are constructed by re-connecting the edges among a large number of block codes and form a much larger code.

infinite coupling structure of LDPCCCs incurs application chal-

lenges such as initial delay, termination difficulty and a gigantic

memory requirement [9]. Subsequently, a tail-biting convo-

lutional LDPC code has been proposed [11]. The tail-biting

convolutional LDPC code is technically a block code. The

overall length of the tail-biting code increases linearly with

the number of times that a sliding convolutional structure is

repeated (see Supplementary Materials for more details) and so

is the memory requirement at the decoder. Also, if the decoder

hardware is to be fully utilized, multiple codewords have to

be decoded at the same time to fill the pipeline holes [12]. It

implies much more memory will be needed at the decoder.

As to the decoding of LDPC (block or convolutional) codes,

a method called sum-product algorithm (SPA) or belief propa-

gation (BP) has been widely used [13], [14]. However, due to

the complex process involved in updating the check-to-variable

messages, the original SPA is usually applied with approxima-

tions. One of the most widely used substitutes is known as the

min-sum (MS) algorithm [15], which executes the check-node

updating by making simple comparisons. The min-sum algo-

rithm hence has lowered the decoder complexity by a signif-

icant scale, but at the same time has caused a non-negligible

bit-error-rate (BER) degradation [16], [17]. Normalized/offset

MS algorithms have been proposed [18]. However, in practical

implementations where messages are highly quantized, the ac-

curacy degradation of MS techniques is still not negligible, es-

pecially when the check-node degree or code rate is high [16].

In another dimension, a layered decoding schedule is proposed

to speed up the convergence of iterative decoding [19]. It has

been shown that layered decoding can generally make the con-

vergence rate two times faster compared to the flooding scheme

[20], [21].

From time to time, the decoding practices of QC-LDPC

codes, with either pragmatic or investigative purposes, are

reported in literatures. A partially parallel decoder architec-

ture has been developed using FPGA for a 9216-bit 1/2-rate

(3,6)-regular LDPC code [22]. With a throughput of 54 Mbps,

the decoder achieves a BER of

at

over

an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Then a

modified SPA algorithm that balances the computation load

between the two decoding phases has been implemented on a

FPGA with both uniform and non-uniform 6-bit quantization

[23]. For a 7/8-rate QC-LDPC code of length 8176 bits, a

throughput of 175 Mbps is attained with a clock frequency

of 193 MHz. Unlike the above practices, CMOS technology

has been employed to complete a code-specific design char-

acterized by a chunk-by-chunk check-node updating [24].

1549-8328 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: A 3.0 GB/S THROUGHPUT HARDWARE-EFFICIENT DECODER FOR CYCLICALLY-COUPLED QC-LDPC CODES

135

Min-sum algorithm together with layered decoding has been

implemented using 0.18 CMOS process [25]. Moreover, a

bypassing scheme that effectively reduces the memory access

and energy consumption has been proposed [24], [25]. How-

ever, without general applicability, this code-specific design

may have a problem in migrating to other platforms.

As mentioned earlier, a great loss in BER performance is

observed when the messages are quantized and min-sum de-

coding is used. The BER performance of quantized MS algo-

rithm with offset is elaborated and optimized [26]. Despite a

certain amount of BER compensation, implementation barriers

exist. Another issue of common concern in literatures is memory

requirement that relates to a great portion of hardware resources

as well as power dissipation. Aware of the FPGA's popularity in

evaluating LDPC codes, optimizations in memory-throughput

tradeoff of modern FPGAs have been presented [27]. In addi-

tion, a synthesis tool is provided for architecture optimization

of LDPC decoders.

In some specific applications such as future generations of

optical transport networks, FEC schemes have to meet several

characteristics. Firstly, a high code rate, say above 80%, is the

key to achieving a high raw data rate. Secondly, no error floor

should exist at or above a bit error rate of

so that no more

than 10 bit errors exist per day in a 100 Gbps transmission link.

Thirdly, a large net coding gain (NCG) is preferred considering

the cost of installing repeaters. Last but not least, an acceptable

complexity in the overall FEC design is a must due to practical

concerns such as fabrication cost, power dissipation, etc.

With comparable decoder complexities, an LDPC convolu-

tional code generally outperforms its block code counterpart

in terms of bit error rate and net coding gain [6]. The advan-

tages of using block code, however, keep spurring researchers

to close the above gap. Intuitively we may borrow the idea of

spatial-coupling from LDPCCC and apply it to the design of the

block code such that a lower BER can be achieved. In this paper,

we make use of the aforementioned idea and propose a specific

type of QC-LDPC codes, namely cyclically-coupled QC-LDPC

(CC-QC-LDPC) codes, as well as their decoder architecture.

Like QC-LDPCCC, a CC-QC-LDPC code can be con-

structed from an original QC-LDPC block code. However,

CC-QC-LDPC codes differ from QC-LDPCCCs in the fol-

lowing aspects. First, a QC-LDPCCC is formed by re-con-

necting the edges among a number of consecutive QC-LDPC

block codes; whereas our proposed CC-QC-LDPC code is

constructed by combining variable nodes of consecutive block

codes. Second, in a CC-QC-LDPC code, the coupling between

consecutive block codes is performed in a cyclic manner, i.e.,

the first block couples with the second one, the second one with

the third one, , and the last one with the first one (similar to

tail-biting). Third, part of the original QC-LDPC block code

does not couple with other block codes.

The contributions of this work can be summarized as fol-

lows. Firstly, we propose a new class of QC-LDPC codes

called CC-QC-LDPC codes. Secondly, we propose a composite

decoder architecture, which consists of subordinate QC-LDPC

subdecoders, for the decoding of CC-QC-LDPC codes. With

mutual dependence between adjacent subdecoders, the overall

decoder gains a remarkable improvement in decoding capability. In addition, a concurrent operation is applied in the decoder resulting in a high decoding parallelism and a high throughput. Thirdly, specific arrangements are made to reduce the memory size of the random access memories (RAMs). Wherever possible, we assign only one RAM location for each variable-check connection. Thus the same location stores the variable-to-check (V2C) message and check-to-variable (C2V) message alternately. Compared to existing designs [25], [28], the required memory is substantially reduced. For some redundant messages not being able to be dynamically stored as such, we minimize the memory requirement by using two sets of RAMs—one for the odd layers and the other for the even layers. Fourthly, a check-node processor implementing the quantized SPA computation is applied. By using look-up tables (LUTs), the quantized SPA computation has a similar complexity as the quantized MS computation [12]. Also, we set up the LUTs in a parallel way to alleviate the delay. Last, we implement the decoder and evaluate its complexity under different code lengths. The BER results of a high rate, long CC-QC-LDPC code are attained under the AWGN channel. The proposed decoder has been experimentally demonstrated to achieve very low error rate, moderate complexity and high throughput.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the details of LDPC codes and the widely used SPA decoding algorithm. Section III describes the basic structure of our proposed CC-QC-LDPC codes. In Section IV, a CC-QC-LDPC decoder architecture with layered decoding is developed and presented. In Section V, an experiment to evaluate our decoders is presented with results and observations. Finally conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. BACKGROUND
A. LDPC Codes
LDPC codes are a class of linear block codes that can be represented by a sparse parity-check matrix . In this matrix, each row serves as a constraint (check node) towards the specified received signal bits corresponding to columns (variable nodes) which contain elements of “1” in that row. The parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code is represented by

...

... . . . ...

(1)

where and denote the number of block columns and block

rows, respectively, and , of size , is formed by cyclically

shifting the columns of an identity matrix to the right by

times. The codeword length is

and the

code rate is lower bounded by

.

B. Decoding Algorithm
In the realm of LDPC decoders, the sum-product algorithm (SPA) is the most widely used decoding scheme and is also the essence of many other variants such as min-sum (MS) decoding. Also known as belief propagation (BP), SPA carries out iterative

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

136

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS

message-passing processes to achieve convergence for all constrained variables. To speed up this convergence, a layered decoding schedule making an immediate use of the updated messages can also be employed.

, where is the received value and is the standard deviation of noise samples. We compute in the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) form and therefore its sign bit exactly symbolizes the bit state.

Algorithm 1 Equivalent Layered Decoding for the QC-LDPC code in (1) using SPA

Initialization

set

and

Iteration

for iteration

do

for layer

do

for group

do

for check node do

for

do

update the C2V messages current layer using

in the

(2)

update the APP nodes using

of the variable

for check node next layer, i.e., layer

AND in the do

update the V2C messages the next layer using

in (4)

end for end for end for end for

C. Modified SPA for Implementation Due to the nonlinearity of (2), SPA cannot be implemented
with simple circuits unless some algorithmic adjustments are made. An adder-based architecture is implemented by introducing extra log-domain mapping and demapping units [29]. The check-node processing function is then
(5)
(6)
where
(7)
III. CYCLICALLY-COUPLED QC-LDPC CODES As demonstrated by LDPCCCs, using spatial coupling is an effective way of improving the loose constraints suffered by short codes such that an enhanced decoding capability is achievable [10]. In this paper we propose a structured subclass of QC-LDPC codes which are constructed by cyclically coupling a number of QC-LDPC subcodes. Similar to QC-LDPCCCs, the proposed cyclically-coupled QC-LDPC (CC-QC-LDPC) block codes can be constructed from an original QC-LDPC subcode. First, we divide the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC subcode into three portions , and . Hence, the parity-check matrix of the subcode can be rewritten from (1) to
(8)
By cyclically-coupling such subcodes, we form a CC-QCLDPC code whose parity-check matrix is represented as

end for end for

...

...

...

...

... . . .

...

...

Decision

set

if

, or set

if

,

(9)

.

Note that in this paper, we assume that all the subcodes are iden-

tical. In general, they can be different.

Considering the parity-check matrix in (1), we denote the We assume that each subcode consists of

subma-

check-to-variable (C2V) message with

and variable-to- trices each of size . We use the following notation to relate

check (V2C) message with , where

and adjacent subcodes. We denote the subcode to the cyclic left of

. We further define

as the set of variable the current subcode as the preceding subcode, and the one to

nodes connected to check node ;

as the set of check its cyclic right as the following subcode. For example, if the

nodes connected to variable node ;

as the set

current subcode is

, the preceding subcode will be

excluding variable node ; and

as the set

ex-

, and the following subcode will be

.

cluding check node . For each layer (i.e., block row), check Referring to (9), we say that of the current subcode couples

nodes can be divided into groups that are processed in a se- with of the preceding subcode because and corre-

quential order. Finally we denote as the channel message spond to the same block columns in (9) but they come from dif-

(CM) and as the a posteriori probability (APP) for vari- ferent subcodes. Hence, we also can say that of the current

able . The layered SPA decoding is summarized in Algorithm subcode couples with of the following subcode. Since

1. In our design a binary input-additive white Gaussian noise and correspond to the same block columns in (9), they must

(BI-AWGN) channel is assumed and hence is initialized as have the same number of block columns. We call the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: A 3.0 GB/S THROUGHPUT HARDWARE-EFFICIENT DECODER FOR CYCLICALLY-COUPLED QC-LDPC CODES

137

Fig. 1. The overall architecture of the CC-QC-LDPC decoder. The messages passing between adjacent subdecoders are marked by asterisks.

such coupled block columns as the coupling degree and denote block couples with the second one, the second one with the third

it by . In other words, both and consist of

sub- one, , and the last one with the first one (similar to tail-biting).

matrices and consists of

submatrices. Then Thirdly, part of the original QC-LDPC block code, i.e., ,

the rate of the CC-QC-LDPC code is easily shown to be lower does not couple with other block codes.

bounded by

. Note also that the check-node de-

gree of the CC-QC-LDPC code is the same as those of the sub-

IV. CC-QC-LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

codes. In other words, coupling the QC-LDPC subcodes to form a CC-QC-LDPC code will not increase the check-node degree.

A. Overall Architecture

In summary, a CC-QC-LDPC code is constructed by cycli- The overall architecture of our proposed CC-QC-LDPC de-

cally coupling QC-LDPC subcodes. Moreover, the parity- coder is illustrated in Fig. 1. In this architecture, there are

check matrix corresponding to the original QC-LDPC subcode identical subdecoders and a global controller. Moreover, the

consists of block rows and block columns, and each block subdecoders are connected in a cyclic way, similar to the cou-

is a circulant matrix of size . Among the block columns, pling among the corresponding subcodes. The components in

of them (i.e., ) share the same variable nodes with the pre- each subdecoder can be classified into the following three main

ceding subcode, another of them (i.e., ) share the same categories.

variable nodes with the following subcode, and the remaining 1) The first category includes the computational logics (and

of them (i.e., ) do not couple with any variable

registers for pipelining) consisting of i) check-node pro-

nodes of other subcodes.

cessor (CNP), ii) variable-node processor (VNP), and

The structural features of CC-QC-LDPC codes shall benefit

iii) format converters (2's complement to sign-magnitude

the corresponding decoders in a hardware sense compared with

(C2S) and its inverse (S2C)). The function of these logics

other codes having equivalent decoding capabilities. Firstly, the

is to update the edge messages between the variable nodes

overall CC-QC-LDPC decoder architecture can be assembled

(VNs) and check nodes (CNs). Since we adopt a layered

from subordinate decoders of smaller size to reduce the com-

decoding, we called this category of components a layered

plexity. In our architecture, the decoder for after modifica-

decoder.

tion is used as a subdecoder of . Secondly, the decompos- 2) The second category includes the random access memories

able structure endows the decoding with a chance of high paral-

(RAMs) which store the updated messages and channel

lelism, which is especially appreciated by circuits and critically

messages. Each RAM contains memory locations that can

relevant to the throughput. Thirdly, when the subcodes are iden-

be accessed easily based on their independent addresses.

tical, some decoding circuits (e.g., multiplexers and controllers) 3) The third category includes a switch network that connects

can be shared and hence the hardware efficiency is improved.

the layered decoder and RAMs. The switch network is im-

We make use of these advantages in our proposed decoder ar-

plemented with multiplexers and controlled by a controller.

chitecture, the details of which are presented in the following The V2C messages are stored in sign-magnitude formats.

sections.

These V2C messages are used to compute new C2V mes-

Note that CC-QC-LDPC codes differ from QC-LDPCCCs in sages by the CNP that executes (2). Then other existing C2V

several aspects. Firstly, a CC-QC-LDPC code is constructed by messages and channel messages can be retrieved from the

combining variable nodes of consecutive block codes. For ex- corresponding RAMs and added to the newly updated C2V

ample, and correspond to the same variable nodes. Sec- messages by the VNP. The purpose is to evaluate the new V2C

ondly, in a CC-QC-LDPC code, the coupling between consec- messages using (4) and the APP using (3). For convenience, all

utive block codes is performed in a cyclic manner, i.e., the first the updated C2V messages are converted into 2's complement

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS

Fig. 2. The parallel structure of LUTs in the CNP with

.

and

are the V2C inputs and C2V outputs, respectively. Solid/hollow

nodes represent the LUTs and the arrows represent the connections among them.

denotes the partial product of V2C messages, and that with a prime de-

notes the partial product of a mirror node. Dashed circles and lines are, respec-

tively, the LUTs and valid connections related to the computation of .

another LUT with two partial V2C products, which come from

different sets of LUTs. For a check node with degree , this

type of CNP consumes a total of

LUTs.

One notable drawback of this structure is that the cascaded

LUTs may cause a significant delay, which equals

where is the average delay caused by each LUT. Here we

reroute these LUTs to make them operating in parallel. We de-

note the set of variable nodes connected to a degree- check

node by

. Our target design can be de-

rived by dividing these variable nodes in a hierarchical manner.

First, we divide into 2 subsets. Next we consider a specific

variable node

which must fall into one of these two

sets. We use

to denote the subset that includes/excludes

. Then the C2V message passing from to is written as

format in advance. The newly generated V2C messages have to be first converted into sign-magnitude format by the C2S converters before being stored into the RAMs whereas the updated C2V messages are stored without further conversion.

If we keep dividing the subset in which tually be decomposed into

(10) exists, (10) can even-

All the updated messages are then ready to be used for the

decoding of the following layer in the layered decoder. After

(11)

a pre-defined number of iterations has been performed, the

VNP shall make decisions on the received bits based on the

APP values (3) which have been updated according to the C2V

messages and channel messages.

The layered decoder adopts a parallel structure that simulta-

neously processes a group of check nodes and their associated

variable nodes. During the decoding of Layer , the groups de-

noted by

are sequentially processed. When the

memory locations of the messages have been appropriately allo-

cated, the different groups can simply be controlled by counters

that are incremented by one at each clock cycle. Another func-

tion of the controller is to switch the connections when the last

group of Layer has been processed and the first group of Layer

(or Layer 1 if

) is to begin.

Referring to the structure of a CC-QC-LDPC code, the

C2V messages corresponding to and the V2C messages

corresponding to are updated by the current subdecoder.

However, these two types of updated messages are to be used

by the preceding subdecoder and the following subdecoder,

respectively. Hence, these messages are stored with particular

storage arrangements such that memory redundancies can be

minimized. Details of the message storage will be discussed in

Section IV-C.

where denotes the total number divisions made (or equiva-

lently the number of levels) and represents the set of variable

nodes separated from the set containing at the th division. Ac-

cordingly, we have

and

.

As a natural representation, a binary tree is adopted to illus-

trate our division strategy. We consider an example in which

the check-node degree equals 14, i.e.,

. Referring to

Fig. 2, there are 14 variable nodes and

levels. In the

first level, the variable nodes

are assigned to the subset

while the remaining nodes

are assigned to the

subset . Note that we allow the larger subset (i.e., )

to contain 8 elements so that the number of hierarchical levels

can be minimized. Next,

is further divided into

con-

taining

and

containing

; while

is

divided into

containing

and

containing

and . At this level the size of every subset is a power of 2 and

hence equal divisions can be executed at the subsequent levels,

as shown in Fig. 2. Note that we can decompose

at either

the third level or the fourth level, and hence both and

can have two different labels. In Fig. 2, each filled circle/node

represents an LUT that outputs the partial product of a certain

subset. These filled nodes reflect the division strategy and also

B. LUT-Based CNP With Parallel Routing

make up a binary-tree structure. Note that the root node (at the 0-th level) is omitted because there is no need to compute the

A CNP based on look-up tables (LUTs) is applied in overall product of the variable set .

our architecture to realize the quantized SPA [12]. In other After dividing the set into different subsets, the partial

words, the CNP consists of functional units performing products of these subsets (at different levels) need to be multi-

, where plied together according to (11) in order to compute all the C2V

denotes quantization. Then the C2V updating formula (2) can messages. Without loss of generality, the output (denoted by )

be completed by repeatedly using such LUTs. To reduce the to the first variable node, which is computed using

, is

gross usage of the LUTs, a recursive structure has been pro- considered. According to the above divisions, the required par-

posed in [30]. At first, the partial V2C products (in hyperbolic tial products are

,

,

, and

(refer to nodes

tangent domain) can be bidirectionally achieved with two sets along the dashed line in Fig. 2). We will complete the multiplica-

of cascaded LUTs, each LUT taking in an untapped V2C input tion among these partial products using three cascaded LUTs at

and the up-to-date partial product. Then the resultant C2V three levels. As illustrated in Fig. 2,

and

are used to

message to each variable node can be computed by feeding compute , which becomes the partial product of

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: A 3.0 GB/S THROUGHPUT HARDWARE-EFFICIENT DECODER FOR CYCLICALLY-COUPLED QC-LDPC CODES

139

Next,

and

(the product of and ) are used to com-

pute , which becomes the partial product of

. Fi-

nally,

(i.e., ) combines with

to compute the result

(i.e., ), which is the partial product of

. After

taking all outputs into account, we minimize the total number

of LUTs required by re-using all the partial products as much

as possible. For example,

can be combined with each of

the elements ( and ) in

to produce two outputs (

and ). Hence, the path for producing differs by only one

segment (LUT) compared with that for producing .

As shown in Fig. 2, another LUT tree formed by the hollow

circles/nodes and mirroring the tree formed by the filled circles

(from the second level downwards) has been constructed. In this

tree, the output of each hollow node will be shared by the sub-

sets/variable nodes of the subset corresponding to its symmetric

node. For example, the output of

will combine with the re-

spective subsets of

(i.e.,

and ); and the output of

will combine with the respective variable nodes of

(i.e.,

and ).

Intuitively, a fewer number of levels in the (division) hi-

erarchy implies a smaller delay of the critical path. It can

be easily shown that the number of levels is bounded by

. Accordingly, the delay of the CNP can be

minimized to

with our proposed structure.

Another observation is that a total of

LUTs is

employed and is the same as that required in the traditional

structure. To construct our proposed symmetric-tree structure

in a systematic way, we can make use of the following steps.

1) Forward Step: Place

LUTs in parallel to form a bal-

anced binary tree so that the minimum number of levels is

achieved. In this tree, the inputs of each node (LUT) are the

outputs of its children (LUTs) or the leaves corresponding

to the V2C inputs of the CNP.

2) Backward Step: Construct the mirror of the balanced bi-

nary tree generated in the Forward Step from the second

level onwards. To every node at the second level of the

mirrored tree, the two inputs come from the outputs of i)

the sibling of the corresponding node in the original bal-

anced binary tree and ii) the sibling of the parent of the

corresponding node in the original balanced binary tree.

For example, we consider

at the second level of the

mirrored tree. The corresponding node in the original bal-

anced binary tree is . Hence, the sibling of the cor-

responding node is

and the sibling of the parent of

the corresponding node is . The outputs of these two

nodes therefore become inputs of .

C. Memory Arrangement

In our decoder, the message storage is fulfilled by RAMs

that have been organized to fit the code structure. In each sub-

code, the check nodes forming one layer are connected to no

common variable nodes. This characteristic allows the check

nodes to be split into distinct groups such that

check

nodes can be processed in parallel. As a result, a total of

RAMs are required to store the edge or channel messages cor-

responding to each submatrix of the subcode2 and each RAM

should contain entries.

2The channel messages can be considered as an additional layer of check nodes in which every submatrix is the identity matrix.

Recall that for each subcode of the CC-QC-LDPC code in (9),

there is a corresponding subdecoder in Fig. 1. Furthermore, each

subcode is divided into three portions, i.e., , and .

We consider the -th subcode

and its cor-

responding subdecoder. The subdecoder is responsible for up-

dating all the C2V messages of the subcode. The variable nodes

corresponding to of the -th subcode are not shared by other

subcodes. Thus, these edge messages can only be updated by the

-th subdecoder. However, variable nodes corresponding to

of the -th subcode are common with those corresponding to

of the

-th subcode; and variable nodes corresponding to

of the -th subcode are common with those corresponding

to of the

-th subcode. As a result, we can choose

using the -th subdecoder to update the V2C messages corre-

sponding to either or of the -th subcode, leaving the

other V2C messages to be updated by the adjacent subdecoder.

In our design shown in Fig. 1, the -th subdecoder is responsible

for updating the V2C messages corresponding to of the -th

subcode, leaving the V2C messages corresponding to of the

-th subcode to be updated by the

-th subcoder. Hence,

the -th subdecoder is responsible for updating i) the C2V mes-

sages of the -th subcode; ii) the V2C messages corresponding

to and of the -th subcode; and iii) the V2C messages

corresponding to of the

-th subcode.

Given the behavioral differences of the messages under dif-

ferent subcode partitions, the RAMs are classified into four dif-

ferent categories and storage schemes. They are described as

follows.

1) The first category of RAMs performs a dynamic storage

where the V2C and C2V messages corresponding to

of each subcode, are alternately stored. During

the decoding of Layer

of the -th sub-

code, only V2C messages of that layer and C2V messages

of the other layers are required. Consequently, we can

save the memory by assigning only one memory location

for each variable-check edge. After a V2C message has

been accessed by the layered decoder, the corresponding

memory location will be immediately overwritten by the

updated C2V message of the same variable-check edge.

Each C2V message, moreover, will be accessed

times in each decoding iteration and shall be replaced by

the V2C message after the last use during the decoding of

Layer

(or Layer if

). Numerically, the total

number of RAMs in the first category for each subdecoder

is

.

2) The second category of RAMs are dedicated to storing the

C2V messages corresponding to . These C2V messages,

while updated by the current subdecoder, will be used in

the V2C and APP message-updating process of the pre-

ceding subdecoder. In consequence, each RAM is contin-

ually read by the

-th subdecoder (or -th subde-

coder if

) but written only when a specific layer of

the -th subcode is processed. The total number of RAMs

in this category for each subdecoder is

.

3) The third category of RAMs are dedicated to storing the

V2C messages corresponding to . As opposed to the

second category, these messages are produced by the pre-

ceding subdecoder and are used by the current subdecoder

to update its C2V messages. Among the C2V messages

(i.e., corresponding to , and ) updated by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS

Fig. 3. Two sets of V2C-dedicated RAMs alternate to serve the odd or even

layers of a subcode.

is the messages from common (with the preceding

previous subcode assumed) variable nodes to the check nodes of Layer .

current subdecoder, moreover, those corresponding to

will be returned to and used by the preceding subdecoder.

Since all subdecoders are operating at the same time, the

preceding subdecoder will be writing V2C messages to the

RAMs while the current subdecoder is reading them. To

ensure that there are no conflicts occurring when the sub-

decoders are writing to/reading from the third category of

RAMs, we allocate two sets of RAMs to alternately and re- Fig. 4. A CC-QC-LDPC code with

,

,

,

, and

spectively convey the V2C messages for the odd and even

.

layers of each subcode. Referring to Fig. 3, when Set 1

of RAMs is being accessed for the decoding of Layer

in the -th subdecoder, Set 2 of RAMs is written by the

-th subdecoder (or -th subdecoder if

)

with the V2C messages for Layer

(or Layer 1 if

) of the th subcode. Similarly, when Set 2 of RAMs

is being accessed, Set 1 of RAMs is being written. Using

this method, the memory efficiency is optimal in terms of

the RAM usage. Altogether, there are

such RAMs

required for each subdecoder.

4) Distinct from the previous categories, the last category of

RAMs stores the channel messages. During the decoding

process, the channel messages are kept unchanged and con-

tinually output to the layered decoder for updating the V2C

and APP messages. After the decoding of the current code-

word has been completed, these RAMs are loaded with a

new block of channel messages for the decoding of the next

codeword. Totally, there are

RAMs in this

category for each subdecoder.

To summarize the above discussions, a total of

RAMs each containing entries are required for

each subdecoder. Since there are subdecoders, the overall

memory size of our proposed decoder architecture equals

bits where is the width of each message in

binary format.

th category as specified in Section IV-C, each input port selects

data from possible output ports where is given as follows.

1) From the layered decoder to RAM(1),

.

2) From the layered decoder to RAM(2),

.

3) From the layered decoder to RAM(3),

.

4) From RAM(1) to the layered decoder,

.

5) From RAM(2) to the layered decoder,

.

6) From RAM(3) to the layered decoder,

.

7) From RAM(4) to the layered decoder,

.

Note that the worst scenarios are mentioned here and can

be much smaller for a certain configuration or a specific code.

For example, if

, there will be a fixed connection from

RAM(4) to the layered decoder, i.e.

.

There are also multiplexers connecting the RAMs and the

address counters because the initial addresses vary for the de-

coding of different layers. To control the read and write ad-

dresses of the RAMs, modulo- counters with strong fan-out

capabilities, each with a different output number, are needed.

For the read/write address port of each RAM selecting output

numbers from counters, the following cases are concluded:

1) read operation of RAM(1),

;

2) read operation of RAM(2),

;

3) read operation of RAM(3),

;

4) read operation of RAM(4),

;

5) write operation of RAM(1),

;

D. Switch Network

6) write operation of RAM(2),

;

7) write operation of RAM(3),

.

In each subdecoder, the layered decoder and the RAMs need Note that the conclusions of the multiplexing cases are consisto be connected perfectly in order to complete the processing of tent with the arrangement of the RAMs.

the layers of the corresponding subcode. To reduce the complexity, we make use of a network that switches layer-by-layer

E. Example

to correctly arrange the messages passed between the layered In this subsection, we make use of an example, where

,

decoder and the RAMs. Specifically, we use multiplexers to

,

,

and

, to elaborate the de-

fulfil this task. Denoting RAM as one or more RAMs in the coding process of the proposed decoder. As shown in Fig. 4,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: A 3.0 GB/S THROUGHPUT HARDWARE-EFFICIENT DECODER FOR CYCLICALLY-COUPLED QC-LDPC CODES

141

Fig. 5. State 1 of the decoding procedure in the example.

the code is constructed by two subcodes, namely and , and

at the first entry of

, are fed into the CNP.4 The

therefore two subdecoders are used in the decoder. Each sub-

updated C2V messages

will

decoder, moreover, contains 13 RAMs: RAM1 and RAM2 for

overwrite the original V2C contents in the first entries of

V2C messages corresponding to leftmost block column (i.e.,

and will be used in State 2;

); RAM3 and RAM4 for C2V messages corresponding to

whereas the updated C2V message

will replace the

same block column; RAM5 to RAM10 for V2C/C2V messages

original one stored in the first entry of

and will

corresponding to the other block columns (i.e., and );

be instantly read by the subdecoder in the next (second)

and RAM11 to RAM13 for the channel messages corresponding

stage.

to and . We assume a discordant schedule as an example, 2) With the updated C2V messages

i.e., when one subdecoder is processing its first layer, the other

, subdecoder further computes

subdecoder is dealing with its second layer. To clarify the rele-

the V2C messages corresponding to variable

vant timing terminology, the simultaneous decoding of the two

nodes ,

and . The other C2V messages

layers described above shall be referred to as a state and each

at the second, first and

time slot within a state is called a stage. In our case, the decoding

third entries of

are

procedure of one complete iteration is comprised of two states

therefore retrieved. Moreover, subdecoder provides

and each state is comprised of three stages. Fig. 5 and Fig. 93

C2V messages concerning . They are

and

provide the step-by-step details of this process.

located at the second and first entries of

Referring to Fig. 5, the messages corresponding to the first

and

, respectively. (This shows the coupling

layer of subcode and those corresponding to the second layer

effect between the subcodes and .) Together with the

of subcode are updated in subdecoders and , respectively.

channel messages

retrieved from

1) At the beginning of State 1, the initial contents of

, subdecoder updates

are V2C messages. In the

the V2C messages

.

first stage when check node is activated, the first

The V2C messages

replace the

entries of these RAMs are accessed for the messages

original C2V messages

stored

. They, together with

in

; whereas

is

stored in the second entry of

in subdecoder .

3Due to lack of space, Fig. 9 is shown in the Supplementary Materials and is

also available on the authors' website http://www.eie.polyu.edu.hk/~encmlau/

4The design for a degree-4 CNP can be easily completed with the proposed

ccqcldpc_supp_mat.pdf.

method and the result can be found identical to the traditional structure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS

Fig. 6. The switch network for the decoder example. The numbers in parentheses indicate the order of block columns in the subcode to which the messages correspond.

As shown in Fig. 9, in State 2 during which subdecoder In Fig. 6, the switch network between the RAMs and the lay-

decodes Layer 1, the contents in

will be used ered decoders is illustrated. Since there are two decoding states,

while the contents in

will be updated.

2-to-1 multiplexers are exclusively used for data selections at all

3) Referring to the first stage of Fig. 5, subde- input ports (except for the channel messages because

).

coder updates the messages related to check Each multiplexer is controlled by the State signal that is

node

and its associated variable nodes. negated by the controller every time three decoding stages have

are read from been completed. Since

, most multiplexers are paired up

the first entries of

and each multiplexer in a pair delivers the message for one of the

and the CNP then updates the corresponding C2V two layers. In this diagram, the network used for routing mes-

messages, i.e.,

. sages internal to the subdecoder is shown in the lower part while

is stored at the first entry of

that for routing messages external to the subdecoder is shown in

while

replace the the upper part. The routing reveals how the subcodes are cycli-

original V2C messages stored in the first entries of cally related and meanwhile possess respective autonomies.

.

The above example can also be used to show the scalability

4) Similar to decoder , decoder then retrieves other of the proposed architecture. If the code length needs to be ex-

C2V messages (

from tended, we can simply insert replicas of the subdecoders in a

and

ring-shape manner as illustrated in Fig. 1. Details within each

from

of decoder ) and subdecoder are left unchanged and so are the incoming con-

channel messages (

from trolling signals. Then statistics will be scaled up accordingly

). Using the updated including memory, logics, and throughput. Similarly, the de-

C2V messages in the previous step, decoder updates coder can also be scaled down by extracting subdecoders out

the V2C messages

. and splicing the remaining parts together.

replace the original C2V

messages in

while

is stored in

of decoder . By analogy, the second

and third stages of State 1 and the three stages of State 2

can be deduced. The descriptions are therefore omitted

here.

Comparing Fig. 5 and Fig. 9, an address-hopping can be

found at the end of each State and, according to the discussion

in Section IV-D, is fulfilled by switching the connected address

counters. Another observation is that {RAM5, RAM7, RAM9}

and {RAM6, RAM8, RAM10}, both belonging to the first

category of RAMs, keep swapping their roles as storage of

V. IMPLEMENTATION AND PERFORMANCE

The proposed decoder has been implemented on an Altera

Stratix IV EP4SE530H35C2 FPGA which provides 424 960

Adaptive Look-Up Tables (ALUTs) and 10 624 memory logic

array blocks (MLABs). CC-QC-LDPC codes of rate 5/6 are

constructed with

,

,

,

, and

submatrix sizes of

. Assuming that

4-bit quantization5 is used together with 10 decoding iterations

(i.e.,

), Table I shows the implementation details of our

CC-QC-LDPC decoders. For code , and , each subde-

coder adopts a degree-8 parallelism but for code both 8 and

V2C and/or C2V messages in successive states. We refer to such type of storage as dynamic storage.

5A larger number of quantization bits results in a higher complexity of, namely, CNP, VNP, memory size, etc., but a better error performance [31].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: A 3.0 GB/S THROUGHPUT HARDWARE-EFFICIENT DECODER FOR CYCLICALLY-COUPLED QC-LDPC CODES

143

TABLE I

HARDWARE INFORMATION OF THE DECODER IMPLEMENTATIONS. CODE :

; CODE :

; CODE :

; CODE :

. ALL THE

CC-QC-LDPC CODES ARE CONSTRUCTED BY FOUR 4 28 SUBCODES WITH A COUPLING DEGREE OF 4. FOR COMPARISON, THE INFORMATION OF A LDPCCC

DECODER IS IMPORTED FROM [30] (CODE 2-P). ALL DECODERS ARE DESIGNED UNDER 4-BIT QUANTIZATION

16 parallelism degrees have been attempted. It is observed that

there is not much difference in the complexities of the first four

cases except that their memory sizes hold a linear dependence

on . For Code , when the parallelism degree is increased

from 8 to 16, the number of ALUTs and registers are about

doubled but the number of memory bits remains the same.

All the implementations are evaluated at a normalized clock

rate (100 MHz) for an evident comparison and the information

throughput is related to other parameters as

, where is the number of pipelining

stages, is the code rate and is the clock frequency. We have

arranged four stages in our design, which are tasked with 1)

reading messages from the memory, 2) updating the C2V mes-

sages, 3) updating the V2C messages, and 4) writing messages

into memory.

In Table I, we also list the complexity of the best-error-per-

forming LDPC convolutional code (LDPCCC) decoder in [30].

Firstly, a strong memory size contrast can be noticed. Numer-

ically, even the largest CC-QC-LDPC decoder consumes only

13.4% (2 359 296 bits versus 17 558 528 bits) of the LDPCCC decoder memory. Next we compare the CC-QC-LDPC decoder of code having degree-16 parallelism with the LDPCCC

Fig. 7. The BER comparison of different decoders. The CC-QC-LDPC code is code and the QC-LDPC code is the subcode of code . All the results are obtained from FPGA simulation under AWGN channels and 4-bit quantization.

decoder. It is shown that with a lower combinational ALUTs

and registers requirement and a substantially lower memory

requirement, the CC-QC-LDPC decoder can achieve a 3.0

Gbps6 throughput, i.e., 50% higher than that of the LDPCCC

decoder. Note, however, that the total number of iterations are

different for the CC-QC-LDPC decoder and LDPCCC decoder.

One feature of the LDPCCC decoder in [30] needed to be men-

tioned is that it adopts a fully pipelining structure so that all the

iterations are performed by a series of processors. Therefore,

its hardware size is proportional to the iteration number while

its throughput is constant. Moreover, the better the target BER,

the higher the implementation complexity. In contrast, the

proposed CC-QC-LDPC decoder can flexibly trade between

the BER performance and throughput by adjusting with a

given complexity.

Note that we select the parameters

,

,

,

such that our CC-QC-LDPC code achieves the same

code rate (i.e., ) as the LDPCCC in [30]. For a given sub-

code

, adjusting the coupling degree has

the following effects. Generally, the larger the number of cou-

pling columns (i.e., ), the more hardware required. A larger

overlapping region calls for a larger number of adders to im-

plement the VNP. It also consumes more memory locations. It

will also more likely improve the BER. However, the code rate

(given by

) is reduced and so is the information

rate. So the coupling degree should be the result of tradeoff be-

tween error performance and hardware complexity.

Based on the FPGA simulation on code with degree-16

parallelism, an experiment is conducted to collect the BER

results of our proposed CC-QC-LDPC decoder. In our sim-

ulations, binary phase-shift-keying (BPSK) modulation and

AWGN channels are applied and the number of decoding

iterations is assumed to be 10. As shown in Fig. 7, no

error floor is observed above a BER of

. Moreover, at

, we are able to decode all the received

correctly. Such evidence suggests that error

floor might be bounded by

, although a hundred times

more bits are required to be simulated to ascertain the statis-

tical significance of this bound. The error performance of this

CC-QC-LDPC decoder is compared with that of the aforemen-

tioned LDPCCC decoder. Referring to Fig. 7, we can observe

that there is only a 0.02 dB difference at a BER of

and

the gap is narrowing as

increases. Next, we investigate

the gain of the CC-QC-LDPC code due to coupling. Fig. 7

plots the BER curve of the QC-LDPC code without coupling

(i.e., using only one subcode in code ). We can observe that

our proposed CC-QC-LDPC code outperforms the original

QC-LDPC code (the one without coupling) by more than 0.25

dB at a BER of . Furthermore, a larger gain is expected at

a lower BER.

6The maximum clock rate based on our implementation model is slightly over

Lastly, we examine the performance of our proposed

110 MHz, and hence the possible highest throughput is 3.3 Gbps.

check-node processor (CNP) that implements quantized SPA

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS

TABLE II COMPARISON OF THE CNPS USING DIFFERENT METHODS. THE RESULTS ARE COLLECTED BY SYNTHESIZING THE CNP AND A PARTITION WITH
REGISTERED INPUTS AND OUTPUTS

VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 8. The BER comparison of various decoders using different CNPs: QSPA using the LUTs, ASPA using mappers and adders, and min-sum using comparators. All the hardware simulations are under 4-bit quantization. BP is the result of computer-based simulation with double-precision floating-point data. The simulations are all based on the same QC-LDPC code with a check-node degree of 28.

A cyclically-coupled QC-LDPC (CC-QC-LDPC) code and

its decoder architecture are proposed and implemented using

a FPGA platform. The decoder for a rate 5/6 CC-QC-LDPC

code has been implemented. It achieves a throughput of 3.0

Gbps. The BER results show that CC-QC-LDPC codes have a

high potential to outperform LDPCCC in decoding capability

with lower complexities. Moreover, at

, the

CC-QC-LDPC decoder can decode all the

received

bits correctly. The evidence suggests that error floor might be

bounded by

, although a hundred times more bits would

be required to be simulated by the proposed system.

REFERENCES

(QSPA) based on LUTs. Two other CNPs, namely i) ap-

proximate SPA (ASPA) based on mappers and adders and

ii) min-sum based on comparators, are also studied for com-

parisons. The BER performance of the QC-LDPC decoder

is plotted in Fig. 8 when different types of CNPs are used.

The floating-point computer simulation result is also shown.

With 4-bit quantization, the LUT-based architecture (QSPA)

degrades by only 0.1 dB compared with the double-precision

floating-point decoder at a BER of

. Also at this level,

there is only a 0.03 dB difference between the ASPA decoder

and the QSPA decoder. The min-sum decoder, however, is no-

tably seen as much worse than the other decoders. We further

compare the complexity and clock frequency of these CNPs

by implementing them as independent processors. Referring

to Table II, we observe that the ASPA CNP, despite having

the best BER performance, is much more complex than the

others in terms of the number of ALUTs. As a matter of fact,

the min-sum decoding can also be considered as LUT-based.

Thus its usage of combinational ALUTs is close to QSPA's.

This is also the reason why the proposed parallel structure can

work for the min-sum decoder to achieve a possibly high clock

rate.7 More importantly, the delay improvement of the parallel

structure from the cascade structure has been measured. By

rearranging the LUTs, the clock frequency of the proposed

LUT-based CNP has increased by over 140% without any

degradations in the complexity and computation accuracy.

Although the adder-based CNP (ASPA) has a parallel struc-

ture, its delay is still significant mainly because the output of

its mapping unit that executes (7) has a larger width than the

input. In summary, if a slight error degradation is tolerable, our

proposed parallel LUT-based architecture is an optimal choice

for implementing a reduced-complexity check-node processor.

7The maximum clock of the min-sum decoder appearing in Table II is actually the result of using the traditional (cascaded) structure with min-sum tables (comparators) in the CNP.

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 8, pp. 21–28, 1962. [2] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from
circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp.
1788–1793, 2004. [3] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of
quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 54, pp. 71–81, 2006. [4] W. M. Tam, F. C. M. Lau, and C. K. Tse, “A class of QC-LDPC codes
with low encoding complexity and good error performance,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 14, pp. 169–171, 2010. [5] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasi-
cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.
52, pp. 1038–1042, 2004. [6] A. Jimenez Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic
convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2181–2191, 1999. [7] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 2966–2984, 2004. [8] E. Pisek, D. Rajan, and J. Cleveland, “Trellis-based QC-LDPC convolutional codes enabling low power decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, pp. 1939–1951, 2015. [9] D. J. Costello Jr, A. E. Pusane, S. Bates, and K. S. Zigangirov, “A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes,” in Proc.
ITAW, 2006. [10] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation
via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, pp. 803–834, 2011. [11] D. Mitchell, A. Pusane, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “Asymptotically good LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2008, pp. 1030–1034. [12] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. M. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst. (APCCAS), Dec. 2012, pp. 475–478. [13] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, 2001. [14] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, 2001. [15] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: A 3.0 GB/S THROUGHPUT HARDWARE-EFFICIENT DECODER FOR CYCLICALLY-COUPLED QC-LDPC CODES

145

[16] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 1288–1299, 2005.
[17] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 549–554, 2005.
[18] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406–414, 2002.
[19] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “An efficient message-passing schedule for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 23rd IEEE Conv. EEE Israel, 2004, pp. 223–226.
[20] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop SPS, 2004, pp. 107–112.
[21] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, pp. 4076–4091, 2007.
[22] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3,6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS '02), pp. 127–132.
[23] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, pp. 104–114, 2007.
[24] L. Liu and C.-J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, pp. 3697–3710, 2008.
[25] J. Jin and C. ying Tsui, “An energy efficient layered decoding architecture for LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, pp. 1185–1195, 2010.
[26] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Optimally quantized offset min-sum algorithm for flexible LDPC decoder,” in Proc. 42nd Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., 2008, pp. 1886–1891.
[27] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Memory system optimization for FPGA-based implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, pp. 98–111, 2011.
[28] Z. Wang, Z. Cui, and J. Sha, “VLSI design for low-density parity-check code decoding,” IEEE Circuits Syst. Mag., vol. 11, pp. 52–69, 2011.
[29] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404–412, 2002.
[30] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, F. C. M. Lau, Y. Zhao, and W. M. Tam, “A 2.0 Gb/s throughput decoder for QC-LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, pp. 1857–1869, 2013.
[31] B. Xiang, R. Shen, A. Pan, D. Bao, and X. Zeng, “An area-efficient and low-power multirate decoder for quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, pp. 1447–1460, 2010.
[32] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, pp. 835–857, 2011.
Qing Lu received the B.E. degree from Dalian University of Technology, China, and the M.Sc. degree from the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (HKPolyU), Hong Kong, respectively. He is currently a Research Assistant at HKPolyU. His research interests include digital implementation of communication systems, VLSI design optimization, and system development based on FPGAs.

Jianfeng Fan received the B.E. degree from Heilongjiang University, China, and the M.Sc. degree from Hong Kong Polytechnic University (HKPolyU), Hong Kong. From 2013 to 2014, he was a Research Assistant at HKPolyU. His research interests include hardware design for coding.
Chiu-Wing Sham received the B.Eng., M.Phil., and Ph.D. degrees from the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. Before joining Hong Kong Polytechnic University (HKPolyU), Hong Kong, in 2006, he was a Research Engineer with Synopsys, China, and an Electronic Engineer with ASM (HK). He received the Best Paper Award in ISQED 2013. His research interests include design automation of VLSI, design optimization of digital VLSI systems, and embedded systems.
Wai M. Tam received B.Sc. degree from Jinan University, China, and M.Phil. and Ph.D. degrees from Hong Kong Polytechnic University (HKPolyU), Hong Kong. She is currently a Research Fellow at HKPolyU. Her research interests include channel coding, mobile cellular systems, complex networks, and chaos-based digital communications.
Francis C. M. Lau (M'93–SM'03) received the B.Eng. (Hons) degree and Ph.D. degree from King's College London, University of London, U.K. He is a Professor and Associate Head at the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, Hong Kong Polytechnic University (HKPolyU), Hong Kong. His main research interests include applications of complex network theories, channel coding, cooperative networks, wireless sensor networks, chaos-based digital communications, and wireless communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:59:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

