IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

163

Searching for Binary and Nonbinary Block and Convolutional LDPC Codes

Irina E. Bocharova, Senior Member, IEEE, Boris D. Kudryashov, Senior Member, IEEE, and Rolf Johannesson, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— A unified approach to search for and optimize codes determined by their sparse parity-check matrices is presented. Replacing the nonzero elements of a binary parity-check matrix (the base or parent matrix) either by circulants or by companion matrices of elements from a finite field GF(2m), we obtain quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (LDPC) block codes and binary images of nonbinary LDPC block codes, respectively. By substituting monomials of a formal variable D, we obtain the polynomial description of an LDPC convolutional code. A set of performance measures applicable to different classes of LDPC codes is considered, and a greedy algorithm for code performance optimization is presented. The heart of the new optimization algorithm is a fast procedure for searching for LDPC codes with large girth of their Tanner graphs. For a few classes of LDPC codes, examples of codes combining good error-correcting performance with compact representation are obtained. In particular, we present optimized convolutional LDPC codes and conclude that the LDPC block codes are still superior to their convolutional counterparts if both decoding complexity and coding delay are considered. Moreover, a specific channel model can easily be embedded into the optimization loop. Thereby, the code can be optimized for a specific channel. The efficiency of such an optimization is demonstrated via an example of faster than Nyquist (FTN) signaling using LDPC codes. The FTN strategy combined with a rate R = 1/2 LDPC code of length 64 800 optimized for effective data rate R = 3/4 gains more than 0.5 dB compared with the standard LDPC codes of the same rate and length. The obtained gain corresponds to transmission at the capacity of the binary input additive white Gaussian noise channel. In most numerical examples, we consider codes with bidiagonal structure of the parity-check matrix. This restriction preserves low encoding complexity and allows fair comparison with codes selected for communication standards.
Index Terms— Channel coding, block codes, convolutional codes, LDPC codes, QC codes, nonbinary LDPC codes, iterative decoding, belief propagation, AWGN channels, code design.
I. INTRODUCTION
S TARTING with their rediscovery in 1995 low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have got a lot of attention
Manuscript received February 14, 2015; revised September 6, 2015; accepted October 23, 2015. Date of publication October 29, 2015; date of current version December 18, 2015. This paper was presented at the 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory and the 8th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing in 2014.
I. E. Bocharova and B. D. Kudryashov are with the Department of Information Systems, Saint Petersburg University of Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics, Saint Petersburg 197101, Russia (e-mail: irina@eit.lth.se; boris@eit.lth.se).
R. Johannesson is with the Department of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, Lund SE-22100, Sweden (e-mail: rolf@eit.lth.se).
Communicated by R. Smarandache, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2015.2496213

due to their near Shannon limit performance. Currently, a few classes of LDPC codes are considered practical in terms of implementation complexity and they are often referred to as candidates for different applications. The non-exhaustive list of such (partially overlapping) classes includes repeataccumulate (RA) codes, e.g., [1], LDPC convolutional codes, e.g., [2], protograph-based LDPC block codes, e.g., [3], binary quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC block codes, e.g., [4], nonbinary (NB) LDPC codes, e.g., [5], and QC NB LDPC codes, e.g., [6].
Not all but many of the codes mentioned above can be interpreted as long codes derived from short codes via some kind of “lifting” or “graph covering” procedure. To construct a parity-check matrix of a long code, first, usually but not necessarily, one takes a sparse binary matrix (or the corresponding Tanner graph) called base or seed matrix (protograph) and then replaces its nonzero elements by some other matrices. This second stage adds some randomness (turbulence) to the construction destroying cycles and thereby improving the efficiency of iterative decoding of the code. Such a two-stage construction helps a lot in simplifying the code search, the code description, as well as the encoding and decoding implementation.
It is a difficult problem to select the best class of codes and then choose a code within the selected class. The traditional approach based on maximizing the minimum distance dmin of the code does not work for codes to be used with iterative decoding, since codes with bad minimum distance may perform much better than codes with large minimum distance. A better combinatorial parameter of an iteratively decodable code is the girth of the corresponding Tanner graph [7]. For an LDPC code to perform well under iterative decoding, cycles of length 4 in its Tanner graph should be avoided. Thereby, a girth value of at least 6 is guaranteed. An algebraic approach to the construction of such (binary and nonbinary) codes is explored in [8] and [9], and examples of efficient codes are presented.
The progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm having the girth as the target parameter leads to efficient non-structured codes with a given degree distribution [10]. Involving more parameters, in particular, the approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) [11], [12] allows us to reduce the error floor of the frame (bit) error rate (FER (BER)) performance at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) compared to the original PEG algorithm. To facilitate low-complexity implementation and make the approach feasible for longer codes PEG techniques should be generalized to structured codes [13]. However, as we will see below, neither exploiting girth only

0018-9448 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

164

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

nor together with the ACE yields an optimal performance of LDPC codes. This motivated us to use a set of combinatorial parameters as search criteria and to apply them not only as global optimization criteria but to optimization of specially selected submatrices of code parity-check matrices.
Another code search strategy is based on searching and counting specific substructures related to the Tanner graph of the code, which are provably responsible for decoding errors when an iterative decoding procedure is used for a communication channel. Most often the binary erasure channel is used as a model for which analytical relationships between combinatorial parameters of the code and the code efficiency can be established. Among such combinatorial structures are pseudo-codewords [14], trapping sets, and stopping sets [15] (see also [16] for binary and [17] for nonbinary LDPC codes). This approach is efficient for analysis of certain codes as well as the EXIT chart-based technique [18], [19]. Neither approach is suitable for code search. The main problem related to the first approach is the high computational complexity of identifying and counting the listed structural sets (see [20]). The EXIT chart-based approach is, typically, used for analysis of the convergence of iterative decoding procedures.
If we are using the above mentioned two-stage (or multistage) protograph or QC LDPC code construction, we, typically, start with selecting a base matrix, which itself determines a binary code. An important structural property of the base matrix is its column and row degree distributions, which influence performance of iterative decoding [21]. Examples of almost capacity-achieving degree distributions (DD) are presented in [21]. These degree distributions are computed without taking into account any cycles in the code Tanner graph and, therefore, the optimization strategy suggested in [21] is suitable for constructing infinitely long asymptotically optimal codes but it is not applicable to optimization of practical codes of short and moderate lengths. For practical applications avoiding cycles and maximizing degrees of nodes involved in short cycles are commonly accepted as search criteria.
Although the density evolution-based analysis does not take cycles into account, the DDs for which iterative decoding thresholds are the best, are often selected and then combined with girth and ACE optimization for finding practical codes. At the same time, in [8] it is noted that if the code to be constructed is short, the DD obtained via the density evolution technique can be far from optimal and can require some adjustment in order to lower the error floors.
A huge amount of efforts has been invested into optimization of each particular construction in connection to various specific communication scenarios: [22]–[24]. Notice, that the solutions accepted for the standards provide strong error correcting capability and at the same time they satisfy some practical limitations, such as the low complexity of hardware implementation, delay compatibility etc. Although these codes were selected several years ago, they remain to be a good benchmark for researchers looking for new codes.
In this paper, having in mind the new generations of communication standards, we are trying to further improve

the parameters of LDPC codes. We address the problem of

combinatorial optimization of LDPC codes obtained via the above mentioned two-stage procedure. The suggested approach can be interpreted as a modification of the PEG algo-

rithm with the following three distinguishing features: 1) A multi-criteria search procedure with a set of combinatorial parameters applied to optimization of selected submatrices of code parity-check matrices. 2) A fast procedure for searching for the girth of the code Tanner graph with extremely low complexity determined by the size of the code base matrix only. 3) We include channel simulations into the optimization loop since the main target of optimization (low FER performance) is not always matched to the optimal values of combinatorial criteria. In order to tailor our optimization technique to searching
for codes of short and moderate lengths and to take a communication channel into account, despite it could look completely impractically complex, we used the FER performance of

iterative decoding as our final search target. Let n and R denote the length and rate of a QC LDPC

block code, respectively. Assume that n and R are fixed and we are searching for QC LDPC block codes minimizing the error probability for belief propagation (BP) decoding. The FER is used as the search criterion. In other words, for binary PSK-modulated signals transmitted over the AWGN channel

with a given signal-to-noise ratio per bit (SNR) we should search for the parity-check matrix H ∗ which is a solution of

H ∗ = arg min {FER(H, SNR)}

(1)

H

under coding and decoding complexity restrictions which will be discussed below.
Since the search space (the space of all possible H ) is finite, the solution of (1) exists and can be found by exhaustive search over all possible parity-check matrices H . For each candidate H we have to compute the function FER(H, SNR). The only available approach for computing (estimating) FER(H, SNR) is the Monte-Carlo method. In this paper we are trying to reduce the search complexity measured as a number of candidate H (number of computed estimates for FER(H, SNR)) while preserving near-optimality of the solution and taking into account the low-complexity requirement.
Depending on the application area, different ranges of SNRs and different FER requirements should be considered.

Two extremes are wireless channels, where, due to the presence of a feedback channel, FER of the order 10−3 is

considered as good enough, and memory storage devices, where the required FER is below 10−10. In our search examples we assume that the required FER is in the range from 10−2 to 10−4. In practice, we always start from low SNRs. It does not slow down the search since simulations run fast in this case. We increase SNR gradually until acceptable performance will be reached.
The suggested optimization algorithm is rather universal: with minor changes it can be applied to different classes of QC LDPC codes, regular or irregular, block and convolutional, binary and nonbinary. We consider only quasi-cyclic codes (not general protograph codes). This restriction is imposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

165

by using monomial parity-check matrices which are easy to analyze using graph-lifting or voltage graph techniques. Limiting the degrees of monomials we obtain block codes. If we allow infinite degrees, we come to convolutional codes. By allowing monomials to have nonbinary coefficients, nonbinary LDPC codes can be obtained. Moreover, involving a channel model into the optimization loop makes it possible to optimize codes for specific communication environments.
To preserve low encoding complexity in all application examples (not in the optimization algorithm) we limited the search to codes with bidiagonal structure of the check part of the parity-check matrices. This restriction makes the encoding complexity growing linearly with the code length and allows fair comparisons with codes used in communication standards.
In essence, this restriction can be reformulated as a restriction on the column weight distribution, since for a code with a base matrix of size (c − b) × c we require that the portion of weight-2 columns is equal or larger than (c − b − 1)/c.
A reasonable question is, how large is the loss in coding gain resulting from this restriction. Somewhat surprisingly, applying our optimization tool to constructing codes of length n = 2304 and rates R = 1/2 and R = 3/4 we did not succeed to find any examples where we could improve FER performance due to relaxing the encoding complexity restriction. However, for large code length n = 64800 the parity-check matrix of the best binary QC LDPC code presented in this paper does not have the form satisfying low encoding complexity requirement. Thus, optimality of this class of codes, at least for large code lengths is questionable.
Among new contributions of the paper are:
• We present a modification of the algorithm [25], [26] for searching for QC LDPC codes with a given girth of their Tanner graphs, based on an improved procedure of fast labeling base parity-check matrices and derive a complexity bound which shows that the search complexity is a polynomial function of the size of the base matrix and does not depend on the code length.
• Results of the extended search for short and long binary block and convolutional LDPC codes for communication standard scenarios are presented. As expected, by using larger base matrices it is possible to further improve the coding performance compared to published results.
• Influence of an encoding complexity restriction on the system performance is analyzed. An example of very good long code violating this restriction is presented.
• Examples of rather long codes competing with the DVB-S2 standard codes are found.
• Using an example of Faster Than Nyquist (FTN) signaling systems we demonstrate that involving a specific channel model into the optimization loop can be very efficient. We found that AWGN-optimum codes can be substantially outperformed by codes constructed using our technique.
In Section II, we introduce notations and formulate the code search problem. In particular, we introduce a set of new combinatorial parameters used for preselecting code-candidates: girth profile and sliding-window girth.

In Sections III, we introduce main tools which are universally applicable to all classes of QC LDPC codes: the improved algorithm for fast labeling; limitations on the structure of the parity-check matrix of binary QC LDPC block codes as well as LDPC convolutional codes and nonbinary LDPC block codes, which guarantee low encoding complexity; the QC LDPC code optimization algorithm.
In Section IV, we demonstrate optimization efficiency when applying our search algorithm to different classes of QC LDPC codes: binary codes, binary convolutuional codes, nonbinary codes. For each class we describe code examples and present simulation results. The efficiency of involving a channel model into the code optimization loop is shown in this section using an example of FTN signaling combined with LDPC coding. Parity-check matrices of all codes used in simulations are presented on webpage [27].
We summarize all findings in the Conclusion.

II. DEFINITIONS AND PROBLEM FORMULATION

It is convenient to consider a QC LDPC block code as

a tailbitten (TB) parent convolutional code determined by a

polynomial parity-check matrix whose entries are polynomials

with a few (typically not more than one) nonzero coefficients.

A rate R = b/c parent LDPC convolutional code can be

determined by its polynomial parity-check matrix

⎛

⎞

h 11 ( D)

h12(D) . . . h1c(D)

H (D) = ⎜⎜⎜⎝

h 21 ( D) ...

h 22 ( D) ...

... ...

h 2c ( D) ...

⎟⎠⎟⎟

(2)

h(c−b)1(D) h(c−b)2(D) . . . h(c−b)c(D)

where hij (D) is either zero or a monomial entry, that is, hij (D) ∈ {0, Dwij } with wij being a nonnegative integer,

wij ≤ μ, and μ = maxi, j {wij } is the syndrome memory.

The degree matrix corresponding to matrix H (D)

⎛

⎞

w11

w12 . . . w1c

W = ⎜⎜⎜⎝

w21 ...

w22 ...

... ...

w2c ...

⎟⎟⎠⎟

(3)

w(c−b)1 w(c−b)2 . . . w(c−b)c

is the (c − b)×c matrix with entries wij at the positions of the monomials hij (D) = Dwij and we write wij = −1 to indicate the positions where hij (D) = 0.
The polynomial matrix (2) determines an (Mc, Mb)

QC LDPC block code using a set of polynomials modulo DM − 1. If M → ∞ we obtain an LDPC convolutional

code which is considered as a parent convolutional code

with respect to the QC LDPC block code for any finite M.

By tailbiting the parent convolutional code to length M > μ

we obtain the binary parity-check matrix (see [28, Ch. 2])

HTTB

=

⎛ ⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜⎜

H0T 0 ... HμT ...

H1T H0T
0 ...

... H1T ...
... ...

HμT−1 ... ...
0 ...

HμT HμT−1
...
H0T ...

0
HμT ...
H1T ...

⎞

... 0

... ...
... ...

Hμ0T...−1⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

(4)

H1T . . . HμT 0

. . . 0 . . . H0T

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

166

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

of the (Mc, Mb) QC LDPC block code, where Hi, i = 0, 1, . . . , μ, are binary (c − b) × c matrices in the series expansion
H (D) = H0 + H1 D + · · · + Hμ Dμ

If each column of H (D) contains J nonzero elements and each row contains K nonzero elements the QC LDPC block code is (J, K )-regular, and irregular otherwise.
Another form of the equivalent (Mc, Mb) binary LDPC block code can be obtained by replacing the nonzero monomial elements of H (D) in (2) by powers of the circulant permutation matrix P of size M × M. The rows of P are cyclic shifts by one position to the right of the rows of the identity matrix.
The polynomial parity-check matrix H (D) (2) can be interpreted as a base matrix B labeled by monomials, where B is the (c − b) × c binary matrix with ones at the positions of the nonzero entries of H (D), satisfying

B = H (D)|D=1

Interpreting both B and HTB as biadjacency matrices [29] yields their corresponding Tanner graphs GB and G, respectively. Moreover, the parity-check matrix H (D) (2) of the parent convolutional code corresponds to an infinite Tanner graph obtained by unwrapping the Tanner graph G of the tailbiting block code and extending it to infinity in the time domain. Hence, the problem of finding new QC LDPC codes can be reduced to finding suitable base matrices B as well as proper labelings for the base Tanner graphs GB determined by B. The girth g is often used as a target when searching for good QC LDPC block codes (see, for example, [30]–[32], [25]). It is known that there exist a tailbiting length M and a set of edge labels, such that the girth g of the Tanner graph for the corresponding tailbiting block code of length n = Mc satisfies the inequalities [25]

g ≥ 2d2 ≥ 2 (gB + gB/2 ) ≥ 3gB

(5)

where gB is the girth of the base Tanner graph GB and d2 is the minimum second generalized Hamming distance of the
linear block code [33] whose parity-check matrix is equal to the incidence matrix of GB. Notice that the free girth gfree, that is, the length of the shortest cycle in the infinite Tanner graph determined by the polynomial matrix H (D) upperbounds g, that is, g ≤ gfree.
For irregular QC LDPC block codes, let Jmin and Jmax denote the minimum and maximum numbers of the nonzero entries in any column of H (D), respectively. Then the column degree distribution of the parity-check matrix H (D) as well as of the base matrix B is given by the vector

λ = d(1)(n1) d(2)(n2) . . . d(l)(nl )

where ni is the number of columns with d(i) nonzero elements,

d(1) = Jmin, d(l) = Jmax, and

l i =1

ni

=

c. For example,

λ = 2(11) 3(13) means that 11 columns of H (D) have

weight 2 and the other 13 columns have weight 3. Notice

that the column degree distribution is invariant with respect to

column permutations. Let the columns of H (D) be ordered in increasing order of
their column weight. Denote by Hij (D), i, j = 1, 2, . . . , c,

j > i , a submatrix of H (D) formed by the columns with numbers i, i + 1, . . . , j and let gi be the girth of the Tanner graph with biadjacency matrix H1i (D), gi ≥ gi+1, i = 1, 2, . . . , c − 1. Then we call the c-tuple

g = g1 g2 . . . gc = g

the girth profile (GP) of the QC LDPC block code determined by H (D). It can be efficiently represented as the ordered set

Sg = g(1)(n1) g(2)(n2) . . . g(l)(nl )

(6)

where n j < n j+1, nl = c, and g( j)(n j ) = gi for n j−1 < i ≤ n j with n0 = 0. A girth profile g is said to be superior to (>) another girth profile g∗ if there exists a
positive integer p such that

gj =

= g∗j > g∗j

j = 1, 2, . . . , p − 1 p≤ j≤c

Here g j , for each j , is the girth of the Tanner graph of the length n j M code determined by the polynomial parity-check matrix H1j (D).
In the special case when the components of H (D) are considered to be elements of the infinite ring of polynomials (M → ∞) the free girth profile is defined [34] as

gfree = gfree,1 gfree,2 . . . gfree,c

Note that the inequality gfree ≥ g always holds. Below we use the notation g(H ) for the girth of the Tanner
graph of the code defined by H , to indicate precisely for which
matrix the girth g is computed. Let w denote the length of a sliding window containing
w consecutive columns of the parity-check matrix ordered by their weights. Consider a sequence T of Tanner graphs determined by the corresponding sliding-window submatrices Hii++1w(D) of the parity-check matrix. In [35] a sliding-window girth (SWG) gw was introduced as

gw

=

min
i =0,...,c−w

g

Hii++1w ( D)

and is equal to the minimum over the sequence of girth values of the Tanner graphs in T .
Using the girth profile for code optimization is, in some sense, analogous to using the ACE. Since the columns are ordered according to increasing weights, we can require that the Tanner graph determined by a submatrix formed by low-weight columns would have larger girth and we let the Tanner graph determined by a submatrix formed by higherweight columns have lower girth.
Thereby, the ACE parameter which is determined by the sum of column weights corresponding to the cycle, is kept large for the entire code. Notice, however, that the ACE is not meaningful for regular codes, whereas the girth profile works for them as well. The goal of restricting the SWG value is to additionally reduce the number of short cycles.
The role of GP and SWG can be clarified by the following example. Let for a given triple c, b, M, and given degree distribution, the maximum achievable girth be equal to g. Notice that for the code with parameters c = c − 1, b, M, and the same (or almost the same) DD of its parity-check

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

167

matrix it is easier than for the original code to reach girth equal to g and often it is possible to construct the code with girth g = g + 2. If we succeed to extend the resulting matrix with c−1 columns by one column and get girth g for the entire code, then the “effective” girth is still closer to g = g + 2 for most error combinations. By restricting the SWG value, the number of cycles of length g will be additionally reduced.
As a numerical example, we consider regular codes with an all-one base matrix. The shortest rate R = 1/2, b = 3, c = 6 code with girth g = 12 has length n = cM = 6 × 306 = 1836 (see [25]). At the same time there exists a R = 3/5, b = 3, c = 5, g = 12 code of length n = cM = 5 × 163 = 815. Extending its monomial parity-check matrix by one column, we construct an LDPC code with c = 6 of length n = 6 × 163 = 978 with g = g(H16(D)) = 10, but g(H15(D)) = 12. For this code the number of minimum length cycles will be low since the first 5 block-columns have g(H15(D)) = 12. Thus, the expected error-correcting performance is almost the same as if the entire code would have g = 12.
III. LDPC CODE ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION TOOLS
A. Fast Labeling Code Base Matrices
The heart of the optimization algorithms is a procedure for fast labeling. This procedure was presented in [26] for QC LDPC codes with column weight 2 and in [25] it was generalized for constructing regular QC LDPC codes with arbitrary base matrices. Here we further extend this algorithm and apply it to searching for both binary (block and convolutional) irregular and nonbinary QC LDPC codes.
The presented below matrix description of the search tree and cycles of the code allows to reduce memory requirements and computational complexity of the search. Moreover, we present a complexity analysis which shows that the search complexity is a polynomial function of the size of the base matrix and does not depend on the lifting factor.
Consider a monomial parity-check matrix H (D) = {hij (D)}, i = 1, 2, . . . , c − b, j = 1, 2, . . . , c of a QC LDPC code represented by its (c − b) × c base
B = H (D)|D=1
and degree
W = {wij }, i = 1, 2, . . . , c − b, j = 1, 2, . . . , c
matrices, where wij = −1 if hij (D) = 0 as in (3). We have to select nontrivial elements of W to provide
the maximum achievable girth of the Tanner graph corresponding to a given base matrix B. To do this, we generate pseudo-random candidates W and evaluate the girth of the corresponding H (D). In order to perform fast analysis of millions of candidates, the girth computation procedure is split into two parts: 1) preliminary computations, which are performed once for a given base matrix and 2) fast testing if the candidate W provides a predetermined girth.
Let T (D) of size (c + (c − b)) × n be the polynomial incidence matrix of the Tanner graph determined by H (D),

Fig. 1. Tanner graph for the code of example 1.

where n is the total number of nonzero elements in H (D). The matrix T (D) has the following form

T (D) = t1(D) t2(D) . . . tn(D)

where column tl (D), l = 1, 2, . . . , n of weight 2 corresponding to the nonzero element hij (D), has D0 = 1 on position j and Dwij on position c + i .

Example 1: Let B(D) and H (D) be

⎛

⎞

1101

B(D) = ⎝1 1 1 0⎠,

(7)

1011

⎛Dw11 Dw12

0

Dw14 ⎞

H (D) = ⎝Dw21 Dw22 Dw23

0⎠

(8)

Dw31

0

Dw33 Dw34

For further computations it is convenient to re-numerate non-

trivial degrees, assigning to them numbers column-by-column

⎛Dw1 Dw4

0

Dw8 ⎞

H (D) = ⎝Dw2 Dw5 Dw6 0 ⎠

(9)

Dw3

0

Dw7 Dw9

The corresponding polynomial incidence matrix T (D) is

⎛

⎞

111000000

T

(D)

=

⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝

0
0 0 Dw1 0

0
0 0
0 Dw2

0 0 0 0 0

110
001
000 Dw4 0 0
0 Dw5 Dw6

0 1 0 0 0

0
0 1 Dw8 0

0 0 1 0 0

⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠

0 0 Dw3 0 0 0 Dw7 0 Dw9

The Tanner graph determined by T (D) is presented in Fig. 1. Circles and squares correspond to variable and check nodes, respectively. Edges are directed from nodes with smaller numbers to nodes with larger numbers. To find the girth we search for the shortest cycle with zero sum of degrees of edges, where degrees are summed up with signs depending on the direction of the edge. This explains why degrees wi are called voltages and the labeled graph is called voltage graph [25], [26].
For example, if for the cycle 2 −w→4 5 −−−w→1 1 −w→2 6 −−−w→5 2 we obtain

w4 − w1 + w2 − w5 = 0

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

168

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

or, equivalently, if

(−1) · w1 + 1 · w2 + 0 · w3 + 1 · w4 + (−1) · w5 + 0 · w6 + 0 · w7 + 0 · w8 + 0 · w9 = 0 (10)

then the girth of the Tanner graph of the QC LDPC code is equal to g = 4. Since the computational complexity of labeling does not depend on M we do not specify that computations in (10) and below are performed by modulo M.
For each particular girth value g, using the Tanner graph of the parent convolutional code, a complete list of length-g cycles can be constructed. For the i th cycle a linear combination

n
aih wh
h=1

similarly to (10) is obtained, where coefficients aih are

numerically equal to the difference between numbers of

passes of the edge h in forward and backward directions in the

i th cycle.

Denote by L j the number of cycles of length j , j ≤ g. Let

w = w1 w2 . . . wn be a vector of voltages and

⎛

⎞

a11 a12 . . . a1n

Aj

=

⎜⎜⎝

a21 ...

a22 ...

... ...

a2n ...

⎟⎟⎠

aL j1 aL j2 . . . aL jn

be a matrix of weighting coefficients describing all cycles of length j .
If for a given voltage vector w all components of the product

A j wT

are nonzero, then there are no cycles of length j in the code.
Denote by A<g a concatenation of matrices A< j for all j < g. The size of A<g is L<g × n, where L<g = j<g L j . If all elements of the product

A<g wT

(11)

are nonzero, then the girth of the code Tanner graph is not less than g.
We do not include the complexity of constructing A<g into the complexity of computing the girth for a particular voltage vector w, since it is performed only once for a given base matrix. Thus, the complexity of straightforward computations for a given w according to (11) is equal to ξ = n L<g.
If g n then the matrix A<g is rather sparse. Therefore, there should exist more efficient way to compute matrixvector product (11). Moreover, we demonstrate below that even for dense matrices a significant simplification can be achieved by using a tree representation of the set of cycles. The further complexity reduction can be achieved without loss of optimality by imposing restrictions on voltage values.
Example 2: For the code with base matrix (8) for any labeling

4 ≤ g ≤ gmax = 14

The upper bound follows from the presence of balanced cycles of length 14 with zero voltage independently on labeling.

One of such cycles is 1 −w→2 6 −−−w→5 2 −w→4 5 −−−w→1 1 −w→3 7 −−−w→7 3 −w→6 6 −−−w→2 1 −w→1 5 −−−w→4 2 −w→5 6 −−−w→6 3 −w→7 7 −w→3 1. Each of the 7 participating edges is traversed

two times, in opposite directions.

The full set of equations to be checked to guarantee that

the girth is equal to 14 can be written in the form

⎛

⎞

−1 1 0 1 −1 0 0 0 0

A4 = ⎝ 0 −1 1 0 0 1 −1 0 0 ⎠

−1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 −1

⎛

−1 1 0 0 0 −1 1 1

A6 = ⎝⎜⎜−01

0 −1

1 1

1 −1 −1 1

1 0

−1 0

0 1

0 0 0 −1 1 −1 1 1

(12)
⎞ −1 −01⎟⎟⎠ −1

⎛

⎞ (13)

2 −2 0 −2 2 0 0 0 0

A8 = ⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝1212

−1 −2 0 1

−1 1 −2 −2

−1 −1 0 0

1 1 0 0

0 1 0 −1

0 −1 0 1

−1 0 −2 −1

2011⎟⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟

(14)

0 2 −2 0 0 −2 2 0 0

⎛

−2 2 0 1 −1 −1 1 1

A10 = ⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜−−−−−−−−00012121112

1 2 1 2 2 1 −1 −2 0 −1 −1

1 −1 0 −2 −1 1 2 2 2 1 2

2 2 2 0 0 0 1 −1 1 1 −1

−2 −2 −2 0 0 0 −1 1 −1 −1 1

1 0 1 −2 −2 −1 2 1 1 2 0

−1 0 −1 2 2 1 −2 −1 −1 −2 0

0 −1 −1 0 1 2 0 1 1 −1 2

⎞ −1 −−−−−10011022111⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

−1 0 1 −1 1 −1 1 2 −2

⎛

(1⎞5)

−3 3 0 3 −3 0 0 0 0

A12 = ⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜−−−−−−−−−−−00031221121323

2 3 1 3 2 1 −2 −3 −1 0 0 0 −2 −1

1 −1 2 −2 0 0 3 3 3 2 1 3 2 1

2 2 1 1 0 −1 0 0 0 2 2 0 −2 −2

−2 −2 −1 −1 0 1 0 0 0 −2 −2 0 2 2

0 −1 0 −2 −2 −2 2 3 1 2 2 0 0 −1

0 1 0 2 2 2 −2 −3 −1 −2 −2 0 0 1

1 0 2 0 2 2 1 0 2 0 −1 3 2 2

−−−−−−−−−10000321222221⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

0 0 0 −2 2 −2 2 2 −2

(16)

Thus, L4 = 3, L6 = 4, L8 = 6, L10 = 13, L12 = 15, and L<14 = 41.
Remark: Some equations are multiples of other ones used
for smaller girth evaluation. For example, the first and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

169

Fig. 2. Cycle generating tree.
last rows in (16), are multiples of the first row in (12) and the last row in (13), respectively. They can be excluded if a module M is a prime number or if it is infinite.
Since the Tanner graph is a bipartite graph, all its cycles have even lengths. Each cycle of the (even) length g can be represented as a concatenation of two paths of length g/2.
Consider a set of all cycles passing via one of variable nodes, for example, the first node. To find such a set we grow a tree of all paths of length g/2 from this node. In the sequel, we distinguish between two sets of node numbers. Each node has its number in the code Tanner graph. Additionally, we assign to each node its serial number when constructing the tree. In Fig. 2, node numbers are shown inside the squares and circles, and serial numbers are typed above the nodes. Pairs of nodes with the same node numbers at level g/2 correspond to cycles of length at most g.
Next, we select the second variable node as the starting node and construct the tree of depth g/2 excluding those paths which pass through the first node. Thereby, we append to the list of cycles those cycles which were not presented in the first set, etc.
Given a set of all trees, we can directly check if the girth value exceeds a predetermined even value g for a given voltage vector w as follows
1) Compute the accumulated voltages of nodes at depth g/2 of the tree.

2) Sum up voltages for each pair of nodes with the same

node numbers at depth g/2.

3) If a sum of two voltages is equal to zero, then the girth

is less than or equal to g. If all sums are nonzero, the

girth is equal to or larger than g + 2.

Notice that the tree configuration, in particular, the set of

paths ending in nodes with the same node numbers, is available

before generating the voltage vector. This knowledge can be

used for reducing the computational complexity at the cost of

some preliminary computations.

To each node of the tree we assign a triple (t, e, v), where

t is a serial number of the node in the tree, e is the index of the

voltage we of the edge starting in t with the sign determined by the direction of the edge, and v denotes the (Tanner

graph) node number of the edge terminating node. By using

entries of T = {τ i = (ti , ei , vi )}, i = 1, 2, . . . , |T |, we can

describe a complete list of cycle candidate-pairs by the matrix

C = {( ji , jh)}, ji , jh ∈ {1, . . . , |T |}, where ji , jh are indices
of rows of T such that (τ ji , τ jh ) satisfy t ji ≥ t jh , v ji = v jh . Example 3: For the base matrix (9) the depth g/2 = 4 tree

is shown in Fig. 2.

⎛

⎞

015

T

=

⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜

0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 4

2
3 −4 −8 −5 −6 −7 −9 5

6 7 2 4 2 3 3 4 6

⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

⎛. . .

6

C

=

⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜

8 9 13 14 15 19 20 20 22 24 24 26

. . .⎞ . . . 4 1111112111576718226088 ⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

... ...

In particular, the first row of C corresponds to two paths connecting the root variable node with two identical nodes v = 2 at level 2 of the tree. The first path passes through the check node 5 (the first row of T ), the second path passes through the check node 6 (the second row of T ). It is easy to see that the corresponding cycle of length 4 is described by the first row of matrix A4 in (12):

(w2 − w5) − (w1 − w4)

In this example for girth g = 14 the matrix T contains 80 entries and the cycle table C consists of L<g = 41 pairs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

170

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

The computational complexity can be estimated as |T |

additions with sign inversions if necessary and |C| additions.

For this particular case in total 80 + 41 = 121 operations are

required for one labeling trial. Straightforward computations

require L<g × n = 41 × 9 = 369 operations.

The computational complexity gain grows fast with increas-

ing the number of nonzero elements in the base matrix and

increasing the expected girth (see examples in [25]). For the

all-one 3 × 12 base matrix and g = 12 the number of nodes

|T | = 9446 and L<g = 251889. Thus, the complexity gain is equal to (251889 × 27)/(251889 + 9446) = 26.

One more possibility of reducing the search complexity is

normalization of the base matrix. Dividing column or row

entries of the monomial matrix by a monomial gives a parity-

check matrix of an equivalent code. This means that the first

nonzero element of each column and row can be selected equal to D0. This reduces the search space significantly.

Example 4: Instead of the general matrix (9) we can search

for good codes with parity-check matrices

⎛

⎞

11

0

1

H (D) = ⎝1 Dw22 1

0⎠

(17)

1

0

Dw33 Dw34

In other words, in the voltage vector w = (w1, w2, . . . , w9) only w5, w7, and w9 are nonzero. Complexity of the straightforward computations for testing one voltage vector is equal

now 41×3 = 123. If we use the tree-based search, then nontriv-

ial arithmetic operations will be required only at 27 nodes out

of 80. Thus, the overall complexity is 27 + 41 = 68 arithmetic

operations per one voltage vector.

The shortest code with girth g = 14 is determined by a

monomial parity-check matrix

⎛

⎞

11 0 1

H (D) = ⎝1 D 1 0 ⎠

(18)

1 0 D4 D7

with tailbiting length M = 16 which corresponds to the (64, 16) QC LDPC block code.
The formal description of the labeling procedure is summarized as Algorithm 1.
Next we discuss the asymptotic complexity of the code search as a function of the code length. We assume that the size (c − b) × c of the base matrix is fixed and that increasing codelength is provided by increasing the lifting degree (TB length) M.
Notice, that all computations are based on the base matrix only and the parameter M does not appear explicitly in the algorithm. Thus, the search complexity depends only on properties of the base matrix and does not grow with codelength, that is, when M → ∞. One can argue that the codelength n = Mc influences the search complexity implicitly via the girth value g. However, although the girth may, potentially, grow proportionally to log n, this is not the case for QC LDPC codes. The girth value of the Tanner graph of a QC LDPC block code is upperbounded by the length of the shortest balanced cycle, i.e. by the length of the cyclic path in which each edge is passed an equal number of times in two opposite directions.

Algorithm 1 Algorithm for Search for QC LDPC With Given Girth g
Input: Binary base matrix of size (c − b) × c, lifting parameter M Preliminary computations for all variable nodes vi , i ∈ {1, . . . , c} do
Grow subtree according to the underlying base graph up to depth g/2 − 1. Do not allow paths through nodes v j if j < i. end for Represent the full set of trees as a set of triples T = (ti , ei , ξi ), i = 1, . . . , |T |, where ti is the number of preceding node in the tree, and ei is the voltage of the connecting edge with a sign determined by the direction of the transition, ξi is the index of the reached vertex of the graph. for all pairs (i, j ) ∈ {1, . . . , |T |}2, i = j do
if ξi = ξ j then Include (i, j ) into the list of cycles.
end if end for Create a reduced list of cycles C by removing identical cycles. Create a reduced tree T by removing nodes which voltages are not used to compute voltages of cycles of the set C. Labeling search loop while the allowed number of attempts is reached or the do required number of codes is found
1. Generate random labeling vector w. 2. Compute voltages of all nodes of the tree modulo M. 3. Compute voltages of cycles as differences between voltages of two identical nodes modulo M. if voltages of all cycles are nonzero then
add w into the list of labelings providing girth value at least g
end if end while Output: List of labelings

Properties of balanced cycles are studied in [31] and [36]. From bounds on the length of balanced cycles we obtain the following upper bound on the girth of any QC LDPC block code.
Theorem 1: For any QC LDPC block code defined by the polynomial parity-check matrix H (D) of size (c − b) × c, b > 0, with the minimum column weight at least 2

g ≤ 4(c − b + 1)

(19)

if there exist at least 2 different Hamiltonian cycles in the Tanner graph of the code, and

g ≤ 8(c − b − 1)

(20)

otherwise. Proof: Two possible types of balanced cycles are shown in
Fig. 3 [36]. Parameters α, β, and γ denote the corresponding path lengths. Check nodes are connected by dotted lines

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

171

Fig. 3. Two configurations of balanced cycles: a) balanced cycle of length 2(α + β + γ ); b) balanced cycle of length 2(α + 2β + γ ).

Fig. 4. Two particular examples of balanced cycles a) balanced cycle of length 12; b) balanced cycle of length 24.

to show that nodes are connected by paths consisting of some other (both check and variable) nodes connected with edges.
If there exist at least two different Hamiltonian cycles (cycles passing through all check nodes), that is typically the case, then there exists a balanced cycle having the shape shown in Fig. 3a. The total number of check-nodes participating in this theta-graph is equal to c − b. At most two nodes of the graph have degree 3, other nodes are of degree 2. Thus, there are at most 2(c −b −2)+2 ×3 = 2(c −b)+2 edges connected with check nodes. At the same time, this is the total number of edges since every edge is connected with one of the check nodes. In the balanced cycle each edge is passed twice, which proves the estimate (19) for the case when the theta-graph provides shortest balanced cycle.
If there are no Hamiltonian cycles in the graph and each edge is connected with two nodes then the balanced cycle has to be of the shape shown in Fig. 3b. For a given size of the graph (c−b check nodes) the maximum length of the balanced cycle is provided if a path of length β is as long as possible and paths of lengths α and γ are as short as possible. Assume that α = γ = 4 edges (see the example below). In this case the path of length β consists of c − b − 4 check nodes. Since the number of variable nodes in this path is one less than the number of check nodes then it is equal to c−b−3. Taking into account that the number of edges connecting nodes is always one less than the number of nodes and that the path of length β is connected to the paths of lengths α and γ by two outer edges, we obtain β = 2c − 2b − 8 + 2 = 2(c − b − 3) edges. Finally, since g ≤ 2(α + 2β + γ ) we obtain (20).
Two examples of base matrices for which the estimates of the theorem are tight are

B

=

1 ⎛1

1 1

1 1

,

g ≤ 12 ⎞

11000

B = ⎜⎜⎝10

1 0

1 1

0 1

10⎟⎟⎠,

g ≤ 24

00011

The corresponding graphs are shown in Fig. 4. The total number of nodes in the tree with g/2 levels is
upper-bounded by

|T | ≤ c [( Jmax − 1)(Kmax − 1)]g/4 ≤ c [( Jmax − 1)(Kmax − 1)]2(c−b)

where Jmax is the maximum column weight and Kmax denotes the maximum row weight. This estimate shows that the search complexity is independent on M but grows exponentially with the size of base matrix.
A more realistic estimate of complexity follows from (5), namely, g ≈ 3gB. Removing some edges (nonzero elements in the columns) of a parity-check matrix cannot decrease the girth of the corresponding Tanner graph. Thus, the girth of the Tanner graph of any code can be upper-bounded by the girth of the Tanner graph of some code with column weight J = 2.
Assume that the minimum row weight of a base matrix Kmin > 2. In this case an upper bound on the girth of the base Tanner graph can be derived from the Moore bound on the size of the optimum cage with given girth [7], [37]. This bound yields

gB ≤ 4 log(c − b + 2)

Thus, we can estimate the complexity growth rate as

|T | ≈ [( Jmax − 1)(Kmax − 1)]3 log(c−b+2)

(21)

which is a polynomial of c. Comparison with numerical results from [25]) shows
that the practical complexity growth rate is close to the estimate (21).

B. QC LDPC Codes With Low Encoding Complexity
A computationally efficient encoding procedure for the code determined by H (D) having bidiagonal form is well known and it is used in communication standards [24]. We present here its generalization which allows using it for encoding nonbinary (NB) and convolutional QC LDPC codes as well.
We describe a rate R = b/c NB QC LDPC block code C by its generalized polynomial parity-check matrix similar to (2)

H (D) = hij (D) ,

(22)

hij (D) ∈ {0, αij Dwij }, i = 1, . . . , c − b, j = 1, . . . , c

where wij are nonnegative integers, and αij are nonzero elements of GF(q), q = 2m, i = 1, . . . , c − b, j = 1, . . . , c, μ = maxi, j {wij } is the syndrome former memory of the parent convolutional code. As special cases of this class we obtain
binary QC LDPC block codes if m = 1, and general NB LDPC block codes if m > 1 and μ = 0, i.e., all wij = 0.
The corresponding binary matrix H of the binary or nonbi-
nary QC LDPC block code can be obtained by, first, replacing the monomials Dw by M×M circulants Pw obtained by cyclic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

shifts of the rows of the identity matrix I by w positions to the right, and then by replacing each nonzero element αij , ∈ GF(q) by the corresponding power of the companion matrix of the primitive element α and the zero elements by the m × m all-zero matrices.
Similarly to [24] we consider polynomial parity-check
matrices of the parent convolutional code in the form

H (D) = Hbd(D) h0(D) Hinf(D)

(23)

where the first part Hbd(D) is a bidiagonal matrix of size (c−b)×(c−b−1), h0(D) is a column with at most 3 nonzero elements and Hinf(D) can be any monomial submatrix of the
proper size. This submatrix corresponds to the information part of a codeword.1

To use low complexity coding we require the bidiagonal

matrix Hbd(D) and column h0(D) to be written in the

form

⎛

⎞

1 0 0 ... 0

Hbd(D) = ⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜.1000. .

β2 β2 0 ...
0

0 β3 β3 ...
0

... ... ... ... ...

0 0 0 ... βc−b−1

⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟

(24)

0 0 0 . . . βc−b−1

h0(D) = . . . γ0 Dα . . . 0 . . . γ1 . . . 0 . . . γ2 Dα . . . T ,

(25)

where βi , γ j ∈ GF(2m ) for i = 0, . . . , c − b − 1, j = 0, 1, 2. For example, if b = 4, c = 8, the polynomial parity-check
matrix may be written as

H (D⎛)D0 = ⎜⎜⎜⎝D00
0

0 β2 D0 β2 D0
0

0
0 β3 D0 β3 D0

γ0 Dα γ1 D0
0 γ2 Dα

α15 Dw15 . . . α25 Dw25 . . . α35 Dw35 . . . α45 Dw45 . . .

α18 Dw18⎞

α28 α38

DDww3288⎟⎟⎟⎠

α48 Dw48

(26)

Write the codeword v in the form v = vcheck vinf , where vinf = vc−b+1 vc−b+2 . . . vc is the message sequence represented by b blocks of length M over GF(q) and
vcheck = v1 v2 . . . vc−b is the check part. The two parts of the codeword v have to satisfy

vcheck Hbd(D) h0(D) T = vinf Hinf(D)T

(27)

Denote by s = s1 s2 . . . sc−b = vinf Hinf(D)T a partial syndrome obtained by multiplying the information part of the
codeword v by the parity-check matrix H (D) and denote by e = 1 1 . . . 1 the all-one vector of length M(c − b). Multiplying both sides of (27) by eT and taking into account Hbd(D)TeT = 0 we obtain

c−b

vc−b(γ0 Dα + γ1 D0 + γ2 Dα) = si

(28)

i =1

In the binary case γi = 1, i = 0, 1, 2. Thus, from (28) follows

c−b

vc−b = si

(29)

i =1

In the nonbinary case we can force γ0 = γ2 and get the solution of (28) as

c−b

vc−b = γ1−1 si

(30)

i =1

One more option for the nonbinary code is to use the column h0(D) of weight 2. In this case we assume α = 0, γ1 = 0, γ0, γ2 = 0, and γ0 = γ2. The last requirement guarantees that the submatrix consisting of the first c columns of H (D) is
nondegenerated. In this case, (28) is reduced to

c−b

vc−b = (γ0 + γ2)−1 si

(31)

i =1

Once vc−b is known, first we modify the partial syndrome

s˜ = s + vc−b h0(D)

(32)

and then all other parity-check bits can be found using the simple recursion

v1 = s˜1

(33)

vi = γi−1(s˜i + γi−1vi−1), i = 2, . . . , c − b (34)

The encoding complexity grows linearly with the code length

(more precisely, with the circulant size M).

Notice, that the algorithm above operates on blocks of

length M. In case of convolutional codes M is infinite,

therefore we cannot encode using (28) – (34) directly. For a

convolutional code we change the order in which code symbols

are computed.

Similarly to the encoder for a general convolutional code

at time instant t the encoder computes the length c block of

code symbols v(t) =

v(cth)eck

v

(t ) inf

,

where

v(cth)eck

and

v

(t ) inf

are

the parity-check and the information part of the block, respec-

tively. As before, Hi , i = 0, .., μ, denotes the coefficients in the series expansion of H (D). Furthermore, as in (23), the

binary matrix H0 has the form H0 = Hbd h0 Hinf , where

Hbd is a bidiagonal matrix, the column h0 has one nonzero element, and Hinf is an arbitrary binary matrix.

As for block codes, encoding consists of computing

a partial syndrome and a recursion for computing the

parity-check symbols compensating this syndrome. For the

LDPC convolutional code, at the tth encoding step we compute

the partial syndrome of length c − b as

μ

s(t) = v(int)f HiTnf +

v(t

−

j

)

H

T j

j =1

(35)

1Unlike the conventional notation the information bits are located at the end of a codeword. The reason is that the optimization algorithm generates the parity-check matrices with ascending column weights.

Notice that in series expansion of (25) the check parts of all
H j are zero submatrices except for Hα, which has 2 nonzero elements in the (c − b)th column.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

173

Algorithm 2 General Algorithm for QC LDPC Block Code Optimization
Input: Size of base matrix (c − b) × c, tailbiting length M for all candidate CDDs do
Generate set of “combinatorially good” candidate base matrices B
for each good B do Generate a set of “combinatorially good” degree
matrices W Preselect a small set of matrices W using preliminary
computer simulations end for Include the pair (B, W ) in the list of candidates if the
estimated FER is good enough. end for Select the best code by thorough computer simulation of each candidate (B, W ) from the obtained list of candidates. Output: The parity-check matrix of the QC LDPC block code in the form of (B, W )

The components of the parity-check subblock v(cth)eck = v1(t) v2(t) . . . vc(t−)b are computed recursively as

c−b

vc(t−)b =

s (jt )

(36)

j =1

v1(t) = s1(t)

(37)

v

(t j

)

=

v

(t ) j −1

+

s(jt−) 1,

j = 2, . . . , c − b − 1

(38)

where s(jt), j = 1, 2, . . . , c − b, are the components of s(t). Notice that (37) and (38) can be interpreted as a
component-wise implementation of (33) and (34).

C. QC LDPC Code Optimization Algorithm
Assume that the required code rate R = b/c, the number c of columns of the parity-check matrix H (D), and the parameter M (circulant size or TB length) are chosen from delay and complexity restrictions. In this case, the QC LDPC block code optimization includes a search for good column degree distributions (CDD), good base matrices B, and then good degree matrices W . The chosen pair (B, W ) determines H (D). The pseudocode of the search algorithm is presented as Algorithm 2.
Below we discuss separately constructing “combinatorially good” B and “combinatorially good” W .
We start with base matrix optimization. As mentioned in the Introduction, the threshold achieving CDD is not necessarily the best one if we are looking for the best codes under delay and complexity restrictions.
If we preselect the shape of the parity-check matrix as shown in (23), then one component of the degree distribution vector d is fixed (at least limited from below), n2 ≥ c − b − 1 and n3 ≥ 1, which reduces the complexity of the search over the degree distributions.
Notice that the complexity of the exhaustive search over the possible column degree distributions is not that high as it seems. Since we choose the parity-check matrices from the

limited set determined by (23) and (24) then the weights of the

(c − b) columns of the parity part of B are fixed. We should

distribute the weights from the set {3, 4, . . . , c − b} between

b columns of the information part of B. Let h ≤ c − b − 2

denote the number of different column weights. Then it is

easy to see that for b ≥ h the total number of candidate degree

distributions is equal to the number of different representations

of the number b as the sum of h positive integers, that is, it

is equal to

b+h−1 h−1

.

For example, in case of rate R = 1/2, b = 12, c = 24, and

h = 10 there exist

21 9

= 293930 different degree distributions.

This value is rather large but it was found that choosing

h > 4 does not improve code performance. Then it is enough

to check not more than

15 3

= 455 candidates. Moreover, many

of the bad degree distributions (e.g., too dense and too sparse)

can be rejected at a very low computational cost.

Consider the problem of selecting a base matrix for a

given degree distribution. In the base matrix B = {bi }, i = 1, 2, . . . , c, we let bi denote the i th column of B and Bij denote the submatrix of B containing columns bi ,bi+1,…,b j .

We construct the base matrix B randomly column-by-column

in order of increasing column weight by using the following

criteria, listed in the order of their usage:

• Number of common positions in columns bi , i = 1, 2, . . . , c,

c−1

C1 =

w(bi ∧ b j )

i=1 j >i

where ∧ denotes the logical and for binary vectors and w(x) is weight of the vector x. • Number of common triples in columns intersecting in more than 3 positions,

c−1
C2 =
i=1 j >i,w(bi ∧b j )≥3

w(bi ∧ b j ) 3

• Girth gBt of the Tanner graph of the current base matrix B1t of size (c − b) × t, t = 1, 2, . . . , c, C3 = gBt

• Sum of weights of columns participating in the shortest cycle (approximate cycle extrinsic message degrees [15] (ACE)-like criterion)

C4 = w(b) − 2
b∈D
where D denotes a set of columns corresponding to the shortest cycle of the base Tanner graph. • Multiplicity C5 of the cycles with minimum value C4. • Estimated FER by simulation using several randomly selected degree matrices W . We create a shortlist of best base matrices B according to these criteria. Now we are searching for the best degree matrix W for a given base matrix B. Since we restricted ourselves to the class of bidiagonal matrices (23), the first c − b − 1 columns of W are fixed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

174

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Algorithm 3 Degree Matrix W Optimization
Input: Base matrix B, target girth profile (GP), and sliding window girth (SWG). repeat
for column number t = c − b + 1 : c do for a given number of trials do Generate random labeling W for a column t Check GP and SWG restrictions if pass then add W to the list of candidates end if end for if empty or too small set of candidates then Relax GP and SWG restrictions end if
end for Preliminary computer simulations if FER(W ) is good enough then
Include W into the list of candidates end if until a predetermined number of candidates is found Select the best W by thorough computer simulation of each candidate from the list. Output: The degree matrix W
Since dividing a column of H (D) by any monomial Da we obtain the parity-check matrix of an equivalent code, we always select the first nonzero element of each column equal to 1.
We select all other elements of W at random from {1, 2, . . . , M}, column by column, taking into account the above formulated restrictions. To select the best i th columncandidate, we use the following criteria: the girth of the current submatrix W1i must be not less than a predetermined number gi and the SWG must be not less than a predetermined value gw.
We run the procedure for i = c − b + 1, c − b + 2, …, c. If for a given set of restrictions the algorithm failed to find any matrix W or found too few, we relax some of restrictions and start the algorithm again. Finally, for all candidate matrices W (typically about one thousand) we estimate FER for targeted SNRs and select the final winner. The pseudocode is presented as Algorithm 3.
We distinguish between “preliminary” and “thorough” simulations. The former one is typically done until 10-20 error events happen for the largest SNR value from the range of interest and with reduced, 20, say, number of BP decoding iterations. The latter one is performed for all SNRs from the range, for 50–100 error events, with full amount (50 in our case) of BP decoding iterations.
From the complexity point of view the most time-consuming steps are related with computing the girths of the submatrices of a parity-check matrix. The details of the fast girth computing algorithm [25] are presented in Section III.
IV. SEARCH RESULTS FOR CLASSES OF QC LDPC CODES A. Binary QC LDPC Codes
Here we demonstrate the efficiency of the described search technique when applied to the WiMAX and

TABLE I UNCONSTRAINED AND CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION
DVB-S2 standards. Those examples are convenient benchmarks since complete descriptions of currently used codes, including their parity-check matrices, are published, which make fair comparisons by simulating under identical conditions possible. Moreover, we analyze how different steps of the optimization algorithm as well as encoding complexity restrictions influence the efficiency of the constructed LDPC codes. Some new examples of LDPC codes superior to the previously optimized ones are given.
When competing with the WiMAX standard, we consider codes of rates R = 1/2 and R = 3/4 in order to cover both low-rate and high-rate requirements. We have chosen c = 24 as in [24] and two extreme delay values, covering both short delay (M = 24, n = 576) and relatively long delay (M = 96, n = 2304).
Different optimization scenarios were analyzed. A constraint optimization was performed under delay and SNR-compatibility restrictions. The delay-compatibility implies that the same parity-check matrix reduced by different modules is used for different delays. The SNR-compatibility implies that the same parity-check matrix is used for different channel conditions or different target FER performance. The results of constrained and unconstrained optimizations as well as the influence of the constraints on the code performance are illustrated in Table I.
It follows from the simulation results, that the delay-compatibility restriction is more critical than the SNR-compatibility requirement. The difference between the FER(SNR) functions obtained by the constrained and unconstrained optimizations is not large enough to be clearly visible in performance plots.
The degree distributions which were selected using the above optimization are given in Table II. We have presented column degree distributions from the WiMAX standard [24] and the asymptotically optimized distribution from [21] in the same table. The difference between the asymptotically and finite-length optimized distributions can be easily explained: a large amount of high-weight columns leads asymptotically to decreasing FER performance but it creates a large amount of short cycles and thereby leads to a performance degradation for finite lengths. These cycles are ignored by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

175

TABLE II COLUMN DEGREE DISTRIBUTION EXAMPLES

TABLE III GIRTH PROFILES

Fig. 5. FER plots for the code from the WiMAX standard and the new codes with base matrices of size (12 × 24), (16 × 32), and (24 × 48), R = 1/2.

density-evolution analysis. However, unlike the degree distribution used in the WiMAX standard, the optimized degree distribution contains a small portion of high-weight columns. This circumstance can, probably, explain the obtained gain with respect to the WiMAX standard. Clearly, the larger the base matrix, the heavier columns are allowed at the cost of larger implementation complexity.
To show the efficiency of the degree matrix selection in Table III we present the girth profile and the sliding window girth of rate R = 1/2 and R = 3/4 QC LDPC block codes. Parity-check matrices of these codes and other simulated codes are tabulated on the webpage [27].
We can see that although the Tanner graphs for these codes both have girth g = 6, the Tanner graphs determined by the submatrices have much larger girths. Moreover, the sliding window girth is equal to at least 8 for both matrices.
Below we present simulation results obtained after 50 iterations of BP decoding and accumulating not less than 100 error events for each point. Figs. 5 and 6 show the FER performances of the constructed QC LDPC block codes of rates R = 1/2 and R = 3/4, respectively, and their counterparts from [24]. It is easy to see that the new codes provide a significant improvement compared to the QC LDPC block codes from the WiMAX standard. Moreover, this improvement grows with the SNR and the optimization gain is larger for shorter lengths and lower rates.
In [38], the performances of QC LDPC block codes from [24] were improved by using c = 48 instead of c = 24 while keeping the structure of the base matrix to allow fast encoding.
In Figs. 5 and 6 we presented the FER performance of codes with base matrices with c = 24, 32, and 48. As expected, codes with larger base matrices are generally better, although the

Fig. 6. FER plots for the code from the WiMAX standard and the new codes with base matrices of size (6 × 24) and (12 × 48), R = 3/4.
coding gain is not large enough to justify increasing encoding and decoding complexity. The curves for the QC LDPC block code with base matrices of size 24 × 48 from [38] and for the turbo code are not shown in Fig. 5 since they are very close (slightly inferior, but indistinguishable) to that for the new QC LDPC block code with base matrix of size 16 × 32.
Another interesting question is: how important is each optimization step for overall code performance? To understand this deeper, we simulated for a fixed base matrix, first a code with random labeling, then the code selected by Algorithm 2 (the best among 10 random codes for the given base matrix), and, finally, the code labeled using greedy Algorithm 3. It is clear from the simulation results shown in Fig. 7 that fine optimization leads to much better performance for high signal-to-noise ratios.
In Fig. 8 we present the FER and BER curves for newly constructed QC LDPC codes with base matrix of size (16×32) and maximum degree of monomials equal to μ = 500. Choosing the tailbiting length (circulant size) equal to either M = 2025 or M = 1012 we obtain new block codes of length 64800 or 32384, respectively. We compare the FER and BER performance of the new codes with the same performance of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

176

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 7. Labeling algorithm efficiency, R = 3/4.
Fig. 8. FER plots for the code from the DVB-S2 standard and the new codes, R = 1/2.
the codes from the DVB-S2 standard [22]. The new codes gain compared to the standard code about 0.1 dB for longer delay and 0.05 dB for shorter delay. This gain seems to be nonnegligible since the original code is already not far away from the Shannon limit (0.2 dB for the binary input AWGN channel).
Even larger coding gain, about 0.15dB, was obtained using the code with base matrix of size 18 × 36. Its base matrix has bidiagonal structure (23) but the nonzero elements of column h0 are all different (see [27]). As we can see in Fig. 8 this code has significantly better BER and FER performances than codes found under encoding complexity restriction. Certainly, encoding complexity for the new code is not as high as for general QC LDPC codes. This example shows that further optimization of degree distribution and labeling of long QC LDPC codes could allow even closer approaching to the channel capacity. Parity-check matrices of the new codes are presented on the webpage [27]. B. Convolutional LDPC Codes
As mentioned in Section II, if a parity-check matrix of the QC LDPC block code is presented in form (4), then by letting the tailbiting length M → ∞ we obtain a binary parity-check

matrix of an LDPC convolutional code. Equivalently, we can

interpret the matrix in form (2) as a polynomial description of the LDPC convolutional code (LDPC CC).
The restriction on the parity-check matrix providing low

encoding complexity were discussed in subsection III-B. Next we consider the decoding procedure for LDPC CC. In order to

decode an LDPC CC we use sliding window decoding (SWD)

[2], [39]. This decoder is determined by a binary parity-check

matrix

⎛ H0T . . . HμT 0

0 ...

HSTWD = ⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜

0 ...
0

H0T . . . HμT 0 . . .

... ...

... ...

. . . 0 H0T . . . HμT

0⎞

0 ...
0

⎟⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟

(39)

0 0 . . . 0 H0T . . . HμT

of size (ω −μ)c ×ω(c −b), where ω > 2μ denotes the size of the decoding window and μ is the syndrome former memory. We introduce an additional parameter S < ω which determines

the number of input and output blocks of size b and c symbols,

respectively, which are processed at each step. The decoding

delay measured as the number of c-blocks is denoted by L.

One step of the SWD is illustrated in Fig. 9 [40].

At each step of the decoding algorithm, Sc received likeli-

hoods enter the decoder. These input likelihoods together with

(ω − S)c likelihoods from the decoder buffer are processed

together by a predetermined number of iterations of the

BP

decoding

and

Sb

decoded

information

bits

uˆ tt

−L −L

+S

−1,

corresponding to the Sc likelihoods that entered the decoder

L steps ago, are the output from the decoder. Then the buffer

content is shifted by Sc input values and the next Sc received

likelihoods enter the decoder. Thus, the decoding delay is

equal to Lc input symbols.

The important question is how the block of ωc soft estimates

stt

−1 −ω

computed

by

the

BP

decoder

at

step

t

should

be

taken

into account at the following steps of decoding. Two extreme

solutions are:

• Updating all ωc likelihoods stored in the decoder buffer

•

Keep the channel likelihoods

r

t t

−1 −ω

=

( r t −ω

r t−ω+1

...

rt−1) in the buffer.

For our simulations we have chosen a compromise shown in Fig. 9: the buffer content is updated by a linear combination of the channel output and the newly obtained soft estimates. This updating is performed only for a sub-window of length Sc

for which the final hard decisions are made as well. In most simulations we used α = 1/2. For large block lengths and low SNRs, α = 1/4 was preferred.
The arguments in favor of introducing α are the following. First, by experiments we found that complete updating (α = 1) leads to error propagation, and keeping non-updated channel data (α = 0) leads to worse BER performance. Second, using all ωc estimates for updating is not efficient due to the existence of low-weight columns in the parity-check matrix (39) (see, for example, [41]).
The larger parameter S the fewer decoding trials in which the same subblock of c channel outputs participates. Thus, by choosing S an additional BER performance-decoding complexity trade-off can be obtained.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

177

Fig. 9. Sliding window decoding.

The decoder complexity can be measured by several parameters such as delay, number of computations, memory requirements, feasibility for parallelization, etc. The role and significance of each parameter varies depending on a specific application. In our investigation we restricted ourselves to studying rate R = 1/2 codes for the following two delay values: relatively small (576 bits), and average (2304 bits). The motivation for such a choice is the existence of strong block code-competitors used in the communication standard WiMAX [24].
For each delay value we considered a SWD of a convolutional counterpart with two sets of decoding parameters:

TABLE IV CODE PARAMETERS

S1: L = 2μ, S = 1, and ω L S2: L = 2μ, S = μ, and ω = 2L

The first set of parameters (S1) provides a required delay without taking into account the decoding complexity issue: the decoding complexity for each b bits is comparable with BP decoding of a block code of length ωc. (We ignore complexity reduction possibilities based on reusing intermediate computational results, applying stopping rules, etc. since the goal is to estimate the largest coding gain achievable by LDPC CCs). For the second set of parameters (S2) SWD can be implemented with decoding complexity comparable with that of BP decoding of an LDPC BC of length n = 4μc.
In general, the larger ω the better BER performance can be achieved at the cost of higher complexity. However, using ω > 10L does not give further improvement.
Formally, the optimization technique for convolutional codes differs from that for LDPC block codes only in the range of degrees wij of elements of the degree matrix W . In case of block codes wij ∈ {0, . . . , M − 1} whereas for convolutional codes wij ∈ {0, . . . , μ}. Indeed, as we will see below, to satisfy the same delay and decoding complexity restrictions, the code parameters for the block and convolutional codes have to be different. Moreover, since the decoding procedures for block and convolutional codes are not completely the same,

Fig. 10. Comparison of BER performances for delay equal to 576.
the expected optimization results can differ for this reason as well. Thus, the found parent LDPC CCs of the best QC LDPC block codes do not coincide with the best LDPC CCs.
Using the optimization algorithm described in Section III we improved the search results obtained in [40].
Parameters of the newly constructed codes are tabulated in Table IV and their parity-check matrices are presented on the website [27].
The BER performance for the codes with decoding delay 576 and 2304 are shown in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively, as well as performance of block codes presented in subsection IV-A.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

Fig. 11. Comparison of BER performances for delay equal to 2304.
Improvement over previously published results in [40] is most noticeable for delay value 2304 as shown in Fig. 11. Notice that all simulations were performed with 50 iterations of BP decoding until at least 50 block error events had occurred.
In order to make LDPC CCs comparable with BCs we, typically, choose the syndrome former memory μ to be about L/2 blocks of length c, which is smaller than the monomial degrees for the corresponding BCs. As a consequence, under comparable complexity restrictions for short and moderate delays LDPC CCs lose compared to the optimized block counterparts. However, it follows from the presented plots that if the complexity restriction is relaxed under fixed decoding delay then the optimized LDPC CCs with SWD show better BER performance behavior than the BP decoding of LDPC BCs from the WiMAX standard as well as the optimized QC LDPC BCs from subsection IV-A at least at low SNRs.
It was shown in [40] that large memory LDPC convolutional codes win with respect to DVB-S2 standard and perform rather close to the Shannon limit. Optimization gain obtained in this paper for delay 2304 can be considered as an indication that further search among more powerful codes could bring even larger improvement. However, such an optimization is still too complex and considered as a topic for future research.
C. Nonbinary LDPC Block and QC Block Codes
It is well-known that nonbinary (NB) LDPC block codes of short and moderate lengths with generalized beliefpropagation (BP) decoding demonstrate so far the best FER and BER performance among generalizations of binary LDPC block codes with iterative decoding procedures. However, this performance improvement is achieved at the cost of increasing both the encoding and decoding complexity (see [42]–[44] and references therein).
We consider binary images of nonbinary LDPC codes over Galois field GF(2m), m > 1. In general, such nonbinary codes, have better distance properties than binary LDPC codes of the same length and rate. They have better error correcting

performance owing to more complicated processing, performed by the generalized BP decoder, both in check nodes and symbol nodes. In particular, check nodes processing requires MAP decoding over the trellis having q = 2m states with q branches entering and leaving each state. Thus, in general, the computational complexity of iterative decoding is proportional to q2.
Several simplified decoding techniques for nonbinary LDPC block codes were suggested (see [5] and references therein) which make decoding of relatively short codes feasible. In order to simplify the search for good long NB LDPC block codes and to satisfy low-complexity encoding and decoding restrictions, we focus on a class of nonbinary QC LDPC block codes.
We describe a rate R = b/c NB QC LDPC block code C by its polynomial parity-check matrix (22)
By replacing all nonzero entries in (22) by 1 we obtain the corresponding base matrix B = H (D) D=1,αij =1. If every column and row of H (D) (equivalently, B) contains J and K nonzero entries, respectively, we call C a (J, K )-regular NB QC LDPC code and irregular otherwise.
A parity-check matrix of the (Mc, Mb) q-ary LDPC block code can be obtained by replacing degrees of D in H (D) (22) by the corresponding powers of the M × M circulant permutation matrix P. Another option is interpreting H (D) as a polynomial parity-check matrix of the convolutional code and applying to it tailbiting termination, as described in Section II for binary codes. We obtain a binary image of the q-ary code by replacing each nonzero element αij = αsij ∈ GF(q) by the corresponding power of the companion matrix for the primitive element α and the zero elements by the m ×m all-zero matrices.
In our research we restricted ourselves to the subclass of NB QC LDPC codes with low encoding complexity as described in Subsection III-B.
Notice that the parity-check matrix (22) with entries hij (D) = αij Dwij can also be represented by its degree matrix W = {wij } and the matrix of coefficients A = {αij }, i = 1, . . . , c − b, j = 1, . . . , c, where wij = −1, αij = 0 if hij (D) = 0. Constructing NB QC LDPC block codes is reduced to finding pairs of matrices (W, A) satisfying certain criteria while taking into account the complexity and delay restrictions. To reduce the search complexity, instead of joint optimization of three matrices (base matrix B, degree matrix W , and matrix of coefficients A) we performed the search for good codes in the following steps:
1) Similar to [45] we preconstructed a data bank of good “row codes”, which are binary images of nonbinary codes determined by nonzero elements of rows of A (with minimum distance at least 4 for m ≥ 4).
2) Search for good degree distribution. An algorithm similar to Algorithm 2 was used to find good CDD. The difference is that not only a random matrix W was selected for each candidate matrix B but also a random matrix A was selected by choosing random row codes from the preconstructed bank of candidates. Somewhat surprisingly, base matrices with all column weights equal to 2 won in this competition.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

179

3) Search for base matrix. For regular codes of rates R = 1/2 and 1/3 good candidates are incidence matrices representing the smallest graphs with a given girth [26].
4) Search for degree matrix W . An algorithm similar to Algorithm 3 was used for constructing degree matrices W . The difference is that additionally randomly chosen code candidates from the bank of candidates were used to generate the matrix A to be used in preliminary simulations.
5) Search for coefficients matrix A. Matrices A were obtained via a random choice of row codes from the bank for each candidate W . The final code was selected by simulating a number of candidate triples (B, W, A).
We present here two examples of optimized NB QC LDPC rate R = 1/2 codes. The first one is a short code which potentially could be used in mobile communication standards like WiMAX. The second example is a long code which competes with the DVB-S2 standard code.
For the first code we chose q = 28, M = 7, and c = 16. Then matrices (40) and (41) at the bottom of this page, describe an (896, 448) binary code which is a binary image of an NB QC LDPC (112,56) code over GF(28).
In Fig. 12 the FER and BER performances of this code are compared with the same performances of binary QC LDPC codes of different code lengths determined by the 12 × 24 monomial parity-check matrix used for constructing the rate R = 1/2, n = 2304 code in subsection IV-A. We can see from the plots that the length n = 896 binary image of the (112, 56)-code over GF(28) has roughly the same performance as the length 1728 binary code. In other words, the obtained nonbinary code over GF(28) has the same performance as an about twice longer binary code. Compared to the nonbinary code of approximately the same length (n = 848) from [45] our code has a very simple structure, see (40) and (41), and, hence, lower encoding and decoding complexity.
In Fig. 13 we show the performances of relatively long NB QC LDPC codes and compare them with the binary code used in the DVB-S2 standard.

Fig. 12. Nonbinary versus binary short QC LDPC codes.

The base matrix B of size 1170 × 2340 for the first (18720, 9360) code (the (2340, 1170) code over GF(28)) is
obtained algebraically via tailbiting the polynomial parity-
check matrix

Hcon⎛v( D )

⎞

1 1 1 10 0 00 0 0

= ⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜D00

0 D4 0

0 0 D29

0 0 0

1 1 0

1 0 D15

1 0 0

0 1 1

0 D35 0

0 0 1

⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 D26

(42)

of a convolutional code at length 234. This choice is based on the fact that for tailbiting length 78 and larger, the girth of the corresponding graph is equal to 10 (the girth of the code Tanner graph is equal to 20) [26]. The rows of matrix A of size 1320 × 2340 are labeled at random as described above.
The second (16640, 8320) code is obtained from the base matrix of size 26 × 52 which corresponds to the 4-regular

⎛

⎞

0 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 0 0 −1 −1 −1 −1 0 −1 −1

W = ⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜−−−−−011111

0
0 −1 −1 −1 −1

−1 0
0 −1 −1 −1

−1 −1 0 0 −1 −1

−1 −1 −1 0
0 −1

−1 −1 −1 −1 0
0

−1 −1 −1 −1 −1 0

−1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1

−1 −1 1 −1 −1 −1

0 −1 −1 4 −1 −1

−1 0 −1 −1 5 −1

−1 −1 0 −1 −1 2

−1 −1 −1 0 −1 −1

−1 −1 −1 −1 2 −1

0 −1 −1 −1 −1 1

−−−−−011111⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

(40)

−1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 0 0 −1 −1 −1 −1 3 −1 −1 4

⎛

⎞

1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 73 30 −1 −1 −1 −1 214 −1 −1

A = ⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜−−−−−111111

30
30 −1 −1 −1 −1

−1 252 252 −1 −1 −1

−1 −1 171
171 −1 −1

−1 −1 −1 165
165 −1

−1 −1 −1 −1 7
7

−1 −1 −1 −1 −1 152

−1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1

−1 −1 173 −1 −1 −1

214 −1 −1 76 −1 −1

−1 115 −1 −1 152 −1

−1 −1 64 −1 −1 157

−1 −1 −1 64 −1 −1

−1 −1 −1 −1 6 −1

73 −1 −1 −1 −1 162

1−−−−−2111117⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

(41)

−1 −1 −1 −1 −1 −1 152 223 −1 −1 −1 −1 48 −1 −1 13

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

180

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

TABLE V LDPC CODES USED FOR FTN SIGNALING

Fig. 13. Nonbinary versus binary long QC LDPC codes.

graph with 26 vertices and 52 edges with girth 6 (the girth of the Tanner graph corresponding to this code is equal to 12). As shown in [26] the base matrix B can be obtained via tailbiting at the length 13 of a convolutional code with paritycheck matrix

Hconv(D) =

1 1

1 D

1 D3

1 D9

(43)

This matrix is rearranged to bidiagonal form (24) and then W and A are optimized as described above. In total, two bidiagonal matrices of size (26 × 52) describe the code. The matrices A and W for both new nonbinary LDPC codes are presented on the webpage [27].
As we can see from the simulation results presented in Fig. 13 the performance of the two nonbinary codes are rather close and the second code has advantages in sense of encoding and decoding complexity requirements. Both codes perform substantially better than the almost four times longer code selected for the DVB-S2 standard.

D. LDPC Code Optimization for a Given Channel Model
Algorithms 2 and 3 can be easily modified to include a specific channel model into the optimization loop. In both algorithms we used preliminary simulations to exclude nonpromising code candidates. Thus, if at the corresponding steps of these algorithms the channel model will be taken into account, then it will strongly influence the preferred code parameters, in particular, its degree distribution. In this section we consider code optimization for the case when binary orthogonal signals are transmitted over the AWGN

channel with bandwidth F Hz with inter-signal time interval T shorter than the Nyquist interval T0 = 1/(2F) sec. Such a transmission, called Faster-Than-Nyquist (FTN) signaling, causes “controlled” inter-symbol interference (ISI).
This technique of increasing the data transfer rate while preserving frequency bandwidth dates back to Mazo [46]. A recent survey of FTN technology can be found in [47].
If an LDPC code of rate R0 is used with BPSK signaling with intervals of duration T = τ/(2F), τ < 1, then the equivalent data rate is equal to R = R0/τ > R0. The payment for increasing the data rate is unavoidable ISI, which causes a substantial increase in complexity of the receiver. Fortunately, due to [48], the problem of combating ISI can be solved efficiently combining an MAP equalizer with an iterative decoder of an LDPC code (turbo-codes were considered in [48]). The block diagram of the system is shown in Fig. 14. In this diagram L and Lext denote, respectively, loglikelihoods estimates and extrinsic information of the equalizer and BP decoder of LDPC code.
At the first global iteration the equalizer receives channel output data and produces estimates of log-likelihoods taking into account the intentionally introduced ISI. The output of the equalizer enters the LDPC decoder which produces new estimates after some BP decoding iterations (30 in our case). The difference L − Lext represents the input of the equalizer at the global iterations. We used not more than 5 global iterations in our simulations.
Algorithms 2 and 3 were used for code optimization for FTN signaling with the only difference that the preliminary and final simulation for candidate selection were performed using the scheme shown in Fig. 14. This small change substantially influences the overall performance since it determines the preferred CDD and the structure of the base matrix. According to our observations, the matrices preferred for FTN signaling are more sparse than the matrices selected for conventional (Nyquist) signaling over the AWGN channel (see Table V).
The BER and FER performances of the optimized code compared to the standard code are shown in Fig. 15 and in Table VI for effective code rate R = 3/4. For Nyquist signaling we used the code from the DVB-S2 standard with appropriate code rate. For FTN signaling we used either the standard or the newly constructed code of rate R = 1/2 with τ = 0.67 to obtain the effective code rate R = 3/4. The paritycheck matrix of the optimized LDPC code of rate R = 1/2 is presented on the webpage [27].
The curves labeled as “New” correspond to a QC LDPC code with a base matrix of size 18×36. The shape of the code base matrix satisfies the low encoding complexity restrictions (23) and (24).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

181

Fig. 14. Block diagram of the FTN signaling system using LDPC codes.

In order to illustrate the importance of involving a channel model into the optimization loop the BER and FER performances of BP decoding of the LDPC block code of length 64800 optimized for Nyquist signaling over the AWGN channel are shown in Fig 15 as well. Although they are better than the same performances of the standard code for the AWGN model, this code is inferior when used for FTN signaling compared to both the standard and the FTN-optimized codes.
Application of FTN signaling to communication systems with high order modulation was studied in [49].

Fig. 15. FTN and Nyquist signaling for code length 64800, R = 3/4.
TABLE VI THE SNR VALUES REQUIRED FOR ACHIEVING BER = 10−6 AT
NYQUIST SIGNALING RATE AND AT FTN SIGNALING
This figure shows that FTN signaling has a great potential in sense of approaching channel capacity for high code rates. A coding gain over the DVB-S2 standard of about 0.6 dB can be achieved. Moreover, we can see that code optimization can provide an additional 0.1–0.2 dB which makes the gap between the achieved rate and the Shannon limit for AWGN channel even smaller. Notice, that for rate R = 3/4 FTN signaling allows reliable communication at SNR per bit below the Shannon limit for binary signaling over AWGN channel (see Table VI).

V. CONCLUSION
We presented a code search technique which appears to be efficient for finding good LDPC codes for different applications. This technique implies that the optimization is split into two steps: optimization of the base matrix and optimization of the labeling. The main idea is a greedy column-by column construction of a base (parity-check) matrix with supporting a predetermined degree distribution (girth profile and sliding window girth of the corresponding Tanner graph). Also we demonstrate that the important practical limitations like delay compatibility and low encoding complexity can be easily taken into account.
With minor changes, we applied this method to finding binary QC LDPC codes, binary convolutional codes, and nonbinary LDPC block codes. Simulation results show that all found codes are competitive with the best ones known in this art. The distinguishing feature of the presented technique is its high flexibility in sense of different channel models. For example, it can be easily modified in order to be used in such a sophisticated communication scenario as FTN signaling. It has been shown that the new technique applied to a communication channel with FTN signaling allows us to find LDPC codes which are significantly superior when used together with this channel with respect to the nonoptimized codes from the DVB-S2 standard.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

182

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to Fredrik Rusek for introducing
them into the FTN signaling area and to the reviewers for
their detailed comments that were essential to improve the
presentation.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Rel. Topics, Brest, France, 2000, pp. 1–8.
[2] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Felstrom, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[3] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” IPN Prog. Rep., vol. 42, no. 154, pp. 1–7, 2003.
[4] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[5] D. Declercq and M. Fossorier, “Decoding algorithms for nonbinary LDPC codes over GF(q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 633–643, Apr. 2007.
[6] L. Zeng, L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, S. Song, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Transactions papers—Constructions of nonbinary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 545–554, Apr. 2008.
[7] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[8] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[9] S. Song, B. Zhou, S. Lin, and K. A. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A unified approach to the construction of binary and nonbinary quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on finite fields,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 84–93, Jan. 2009.
[10] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[11] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edgegrowth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715–717, Dec. 2004.
[12] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, “Generalized ACE constrained progressive edge-growth LDPC code design,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 32–34, Jan. 2008.
[13] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., vol. 2. Nov. 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[14] L. Dinoi, F. Sottile, and S. Benedetto, “Design of variable-rate irregular LDPC codes with low error floor,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), vol. 1. May 2005, pp. 647–651.
[15] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[16] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[17] L. Dolecek, D. Divsalar, Y. Sun, and B. Amiri, “Non-binary protographbased LDPC codes: Enumerators, analysis, and designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 3913–3941, Jul. 2014.
[18] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Code rate and the area under extrinsic information transfer curves,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2002, p. 115.
[19] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of lowdensity parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[20] M. K. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of a Tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2278–2280, Jun. 2007.
[21] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.

[22] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB), Eur. Telecommun. Standards Inst., Sophia Antipolis, France, Aug. 2009.
[23] Standard GSFC-STD-9100, Low Density Parity Check Code for Rate 7/8. [Online]. Available: http://standards. globalspec.com/std/9966453/gsfc-std-9100, accessed Nov. 6, 2015.
[24] Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE Standard P802.16e/D12, Oct. 2005.
[25] I. E. Bocharova, R. Johannesson, F. Hug, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V. Satyukov, “Searching for voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2265–2279, Apr. 2012.
[26] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V. Satyukov, “Graph-based convolutional and block LDPC codes,” Problems Inf. Transmiss., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 357–377, 2009.
[27] Parity-Check Matrices of QC LDPC Codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.eit.lth.se/index.php?uhpuid=hs.rjo&hpuid=228, accessed Nov. 6, 2015.
[28] R. Johannesson and K. S. Zigangirov, Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2015.
[29] A. S. Asratian, T. M. J. Denley, and R. Häggkvist, Bipartite Graphs and Their Applications. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.
[30] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[31] M. E. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic construction of sparse matrices with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718–727, Feb. 2006.
[32] M. Esmaeili and M. Gholami, “Structured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with girth 18 and column-weight J ≥ 3,” AEU-Int. J. Electron. Commun., vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 202–217, 2010.
[33] V. K. Wei, “Generalized Hamming weights for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1412–1418, Sep. 1991.
[34] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, and B. D. Kudryashov, “A greedy search for improved QC LDPC codes with good girth profile and degree distribution,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2012, pp. 3083–3087.
[35] I. E. Bocharova, R. Johannesson, F. Hug, and B. D. Kudryashov, “High-rate QC LDPC codes of short and moderate length with good girth profile,” in Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Aug. 2012, pp. 150–154.
[36] C. A. Kelley and J. L. Walker, “LDPC codes from voltage graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2008, pp. 792–796.
[37] G. Exoo and R. Jajcay, “Dynamic cage survey,” Electron. J. Combinat., vol. 15, p. 16, Jul. 2008.
[38] T. Lestable, E. Zimmerman, M.-H. Hamon, and S. Stiglmayr, “BlockLDPC codes vs duo-binary turbo-codes for European next generation wireless systems,” in Proc. IEEE 64th Veh. Technol. Conf., Sep. 2006, pp. 1–5.
[39] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[40] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. Johannesson, “LDPC convolutional codes versus QC LDPC block codes in communication standard scenarios,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun./Jul. 2014, pp. 2774–2778.
[41] N. ul Hassan, M. Lentmaier, and G. P. Fettweis, “Comparison of LDPC block and LDPC convolutional codes based on their decoding latency,” in Proc. 7th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Aug. 2012, pp. 225–229.
[42] M. C. Davey and D. MacKay, “Low-density parity check codes over G F(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[43] X.-Y. Hu and E. Eleftheriou, “Binary representation of cycle Tannergraph GF(2b) codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Paris, France, Jun. 2004, pp. 528–532.
[44] S. El Hassani, M.-H. Hamon, and P. Pénard, “A comparison study of binary and non-binary LDPC codes decoding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. SoftCOM, 2010, pp. 355–359.
[45] C. Poulliat, M. Fossorier, and D. Declercq, “Design of regular (2, dc)LDPC codes over GF(q) using their binary images,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1626–1635, Oct. 2008.
[46] J. E. Mazo, “Faster-than-Nyquist signaling,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1451–1462, 1975.
[47] J. B. Anderson, F. Rusek, and V. Öwall, “Faster-than-Nyquist signaling,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 101, no. 8, pp. 1817–1830, Aug. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BOCHAROVA et al.: SEARCHING FOR BINARY AND NONBINARY BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL LDPC CODES

183

[48] M. Tuchler, R. Koetter, and A. C. Singer, “Turbo equalization: Principles and new results,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 754–767, May 2002.
[49] J. Yu, J. Park, F. Rusek, B. Kudryashov, and I. E. Bocharova, “High order modulation in faster-than-Nyquist signaling communication systems,” in Proc. IEEE 80th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Fall), Sep. 2014, pp. 1–5.

Boris D. Kudryashov (SM’13) was born in Leningrad, U.S.S.R., on July 9, 1952. He received the Diploma in Electrical Engineering in 1974 and the Ph.D. in technical sciences degree in 1978 both from the Leningrad Institute of Aerospace Instrumentation, and the Doctor of Science degree in 2005 from Institute of Problems of Information Transmission, Moscow. In 1978, he became Assistant Professor, in 1983 Associate professor, and in 2005 Professor at Leningrad Institute of Aerospace Instrumentation (now the State Unversity on Aerospace Instrumentation, St.-Petersburg, Russia). Since November 2007, he has been Professor at the State University on Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics, St.-Petersburg, Russia. His research interests include coding theory, information theory and applications to speech, audio and image coding. He has authored two textbooks on information theory and coding theory (both in Russian), and has more than 80 papers published in journals and proceedings of international conferences, 20 U.S. patents in image, speech and audio coding. Professor Kudryashov served as a member of the Organizing Committees of ACCT International Workshops.

Irina E. Bocharova (SM’13) was born in Leningrad, U.S.S.R., on July 31, 1955. She received the Diploma in Electrical Engineering in 1978 from the Leningrad Electro-technical Institute and the Ph.D. degree in technical sciences in 1986 from Leningrad Insti- tute of Aircraft Instrumentation. Since 1986 until 2007, she has been Senior Researcher, Assistant Professor, and then Associate Professor at the Leningrad Institute of Aircraft Instrumentation (now State University of Aerospace Instrumentation, St.-Petersburg, Russia). Since 2007 she has been Associate Professor at the State University of Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics. Her research interests include convolutional codes, communication systems, source coding and its applications to speech, audio and image coding. She has more than 70 papers published in journals and proceedings of international conferences, and seven U.S. patents in speech, audio and video coding. She has authored the textbook Compression for Multimedia (Cambridge University Press, 2010). Professor Bocharova was awarded the Lise Meitner Visiting Chair in engineering at Lund University, Lund, Sweden twice (January-June 2005 and 2011). In 2014 she received Scopus Russia Award.

Rolf Johannesson (S’72–M’75–SM’96–F’98–LF’12) was born in Hässleholm, Sweden, on July 3, 1946. He received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 1970 and 1975, respectively, both from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, and the degree of Professor, honoris causa, from the Institute for Problems of Information Transmission, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, in 2000. In 1976, he became a faculty member with Lund University where he had the Chair of Information Theory. Since 2013 he is Professor emeritus at Lund University. From 1976 to 2003, he was department Head and during 1988-1993 Dean of the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. During 1990-1995, he served as a member of the Swedish Research Council for Engineering Sciences. His scientific interests include information theory, error-correcting codes, and cryptography. In addition to papers in the area of convolutional coding and cryptography, he has authored two textbooks on switching theory and digital design (both in Swedish) and one on information theory (in both Swedish and German) and coauthored Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding (New York: IEEE Press, 1999, Second Edition, IEEE Press/Wiley, 2015), and Understanding Information Transmission (Hoboken, NJ: IEEE Press/WileyInterscience, 2005). Professor Johannesson has been an Associate Editor for the International Journal of Electronics and Communications. During 1983-1995 he cochaired seven Russian-Swedish Workshops, which were the chief interactions between Russian and Western scientists in information theory and coding during the final years of the ColdWar. He became an elected member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences in 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

