IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016
15
Breaking the Trapping Sets in LDPC Codes: Check
Node Removal and Collaborative Decoding
Soonyoung Kang, Student Member, IEEE, Jaekyun Moon, Fellow, IEEE,
Jeongseok Ha, Member, IEEE, and Jinwoo Shin
Abstract—Trapping sets strongly degrade performance of
low-density parity check (LDPC) codes in the low-error-rate
region. This creates significant difficulties for the deployment of
LDPC codes to low-error-rate applications such as storage and
wireless systems with no or limited retransmission options. We
propose a novel technique for breaking trapping sets based on
collaborative decoding that utilizes two different decoding modes.
While the main decoding mode executes message passing based
on the original parity check matrix of the corresponding LDPC
code, the sub-decoding mode operates on a modified parity check
matrix formed by removing a portion of check nodes in the fac-
tor graph representation of the given code. The modified parity
check matrix is designed to promote a passing of correct informa-
tion into erroneous variable nodes in the trapping set. Theoretical
properties of the proposed trapping-set-breaking technique have
been established based on the notion of the improved separation
for the trapped variable nodes. Simulation results show that the
proposed collaborative LDPC decoding scheme switching between
the two decoding modes back and forth effectively breaks domi-
nant trapping sets of various known types of regular and irregular
LDPC codes.
Index
Terms—Low-density
parity-check
codes,
message
passing, error floor, trapping set, collaborative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE LDPC codes [1], [2] decoded by message-passing
algorithms have excellent error correcting capabilities
[3]. A wide variety of communication systems including Wi-
Fi, 10G Ethernet and digital video broadcasting have adopted
LDPC codes as part of their standard specifications. However,
the LDPC codes tend to exhibit error floors in their error rate
curves as the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) increases. This char-
acteristic behavior presents serious issues in applications that
target very low error rates like wireless systems where data
retransmission is highly undesirable due to low latency require-
ments or storage devices where retransmission is simply not
an option. It has been observed that the error floor is mainly
caused by special sets of hard-to-correct error events, called
near codewords, pseudo codewords or trapping sets [4]–[6].
Manuscript received April 26, 2015; revised August 7, 2015 and October 21,
2015; accepted October 28, 2015. Date of publication November 5, 2015; date
of current version January 14, 2016. This work was supported by NRF of Korea
under Grant 2010-0029205 and SK hynix-KAIST Storage Media Solutions
Center. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving
it for publication was D. Declercq.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea
(e-mail: soonyoung@kaist.ac.kr; jmoon@kaist.edu; jsha@kaist.edu; jinwoos@
kaist.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2015.2498161
Several methods for lowering error floor using decoder mod-
ifications have been introduced. In [8], the bi-mode, bit-pinning
and generalized-LDPC (G-LDPC) decoding strategies are dis-
cussed. While the bit-pinning method requires additional outer
coding based on the prior knowledge of the trapping sets, the
other two methods focus on decoder modification and thus
can be used to decode any LDPC coded signals in principle,
provided the trapping sets are already characterized.
The two-step decoding strategy described in [20] has also
been shown to lower the error floor of certain regular LDPC
codes. In the first step, a conventional message-passing decoder
runs through a fixed number of iterations. If decoding fails in
the first step, some VNs near unsatisfied CNs are collected
into a set and are allowed to receive fixed, magnified messages
from unsatisfied CNs and fixed, attenuated messages from sat-
isfied CNs. Again, this method requires prior knowledge of the
trapping set in determining the bias levels. Note that character-
izing trapping sets in itself is a very difficult task [15], [16].
McGregor and Milenkovic [15] have shown that even approx-
imating the size of trapping sets in the Tanner graph, let alone
evaluating them, is an NP-hard problem.
Planjery et al. introduced a finite alphabet iterative decoder
(FAID) [27] wherein the VN-to-CN message is not updated
as in the conventional message passing algorithms but instead
assigned a value from a finite alphabet according to the given
CN-to-VN messages and channel output value. Assigning the
finite alphabet to a specific VN-to-CN message requires the
knowledge of the trapping sets in the given code’s factor graph.
The results reported in [27] show that for a number of column-
weight-three codes a 3-bit FAID yields better performance in
the error floor region than the floating point belief propaga-
tion decoder over the binary symmetric channel (BSC). This
scheme, however, requires knowledge of the trapping sets;
in addition its applicability to more general additive white
Gaussian noise channel (AWGNC) is not clear.
A two-bit bit-flipping (TBF) algorithm of [26] uses an extra
bit for representing the VN-to-CN message strength. Another
two-bit information is also employed at each CN for storing
its previous and present states. Different bit-flipping functions
have also been devised in [26] based on the knowledge of the
trapping sets. The main idea is that the multiple functions run
sequentially or in parallel with each function targeting a differ-
ent set of errors. Again, the TBF scheme is applicable to BSC
only, and it also depends on the trapping set knowledge.
The backtracking method of [9] is able to lower the error
floors of various types of LDPC codes without prior knowledge
of the trapping sets. In this approach, two backtracking steps are
0090-6778 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
16
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016
implemented if the message passing decoder fails. At the first
backtracking step, for every adjacent (directly connected) VN
of unsatisfied CNs, the sign of the channel log-likelihood ratio
(LLR) is flipped one by one. Since each flipping is followed
by an independent run of message passing, the total number of
decoding iterations depends on the number of unsatisfied CNs,
the node degree of each unsatisfied CN and the number of iter-
ations in each independent run of message passing. The second
backtracking, which ensues if the first backtracking step fails, is
based on a more narrow selection of VNs for flipping, but each
flipping still requires independent message passing. The back-
tracking is a very efficient technique for lowering error floors if
it is applied to trapping sets with a small number of unsatisfied
CNs. However, for some regular codes of which the dominant
trapping sets have a large number of unsatisfied CNs, the back-
tracking technique requires a huge number of flipping trials
and decoding iterations. In a subsequent work [10], the same
authors introduce two techniques called early trap detection
and variable node degree based flipping. While the former cuts
down the number of decoding iterations, the latter reduces the
number of flippings. However, the required number of iterations
for the backtracking is still large. The experimental result in
[10] shows that, for example, more than 300 decoding iterations
are required to lower the error floor of the (n = 1944, k = 972)
IEEE 802.11n LDPC code [13] by an order of magnitude.
In [22], Zhang and Siegel established the condition for break-
ing trapping sets1 on the BSC and the AWGNC using message-
passing decoders under some reasonable assumptions. Consider
a computation tree [24] with an incorrect VN of a trapping set as
root. If the root has at least one adjacent CN with degree-one (in
the subgraph associated with a trapping set) that does not have
any incorrect VN among all its own descendant nodes within k
decoding iterations, then the root VN is said to be k-separated.
Note that a degree-one CN adjacent to a trapped erroneous VN
is an unsatisfied CN. It is shown in [22] that if all incorrect
VNs in the trapping set are k-separated for sufficiently large
k, then the errors in the trapping set are successfully corrected
by a message-passing decoder under a mild assumption (in the
low-error-rate regime) that all VNs outside the given trapping
set receive uniformly reliable messages from the channel. This
successful linking of the “separation” of the trapped VNs to the
ability to escape from the trapping set provides a powerful key
to developing effective trapping-set-breaking solutions, includ-
ing the method presented in this paper. Unfortunately, however,
the VNs in the dominant trapping sets of the LDPC codes in
practice are often not sufficiently separated. For example, the
VNs in the (12,4) trapping set of the Margulis code [6] are only
2- or 3-separated while all VNs in the (8,8) trapping set of the
(n = 2048, k = 1723) Reed-Solomon (RS) based LDPC code
[14] are just 1-separated.
A non-uniform quantization scheme referred to as quasi-
uniform quantization is also introduced in [22]. In this
scheme, (q + 1)-bit quantization utilizes 2q uniform quantiza-
tion intervals as well as 2q exponentially-widening quantization
1Throughout this paper, the “breaking” of a trapping set is taken to mean cor-
rection of one or more trapped VN errors, which is a prerequisite for eventual
correction of the entire VNs in the trapping set.
intervals, effectively enlarging the dynamic range of the quan-
tization process without increasing the bit resolution. While
this scheme appears highly effective in lowering error floors in
many different types of LDPC codes, in order for the method
to work well, the internal bit resolution needed in the com-
putation of the sums of the LLRs in the VN-to-CN message
passing stage has to be maintained at a level much higher
than required by the (q + 1)-bit quantization scheme. For this
reason, performance advantages of the quasi-uniform quanti-
zation method over conventional uniform quantization are not
clear when the same bit resolution is maintained in the com-
putation of the intermediate soft-decision quantities within the
message-passing operation.
The contributions and distinguishing features of our work
are as follows. In relation to the work of [22], we introduce
in this paper algorithms for extending the VN separation k by
modifying the parity-check matrix. We show that by strate-
gically removing some CNs near an incorrect VN, k can be
extended. Since it is not possible to know the location of incor-
rect VNs a priori, we introduce two probabilistic approaches
for generating the modified parity-check matrix. In applying
the proposed schemes, an irregular modified factor graph may
arise whether the original factor graph is regular or irregular.
Since the k-separation condition of [22] can guarantee the cor-
rection of trapped VNs in the regular factor graphs only, we
introduce a related notion of k-strong-separation for establish-
ing sufficient conditions to break the trapping sets in irregular
factor graphs as well. For practical application of the devised
CN removal strategies, we suggest collaborative decoding using
both the original parity-check matrix and the modified parity-
check matrix. Message-passing on the modified parity-check
matrix allows escape from the trapping set whereas the orig-
inal parity-check matrix ensures reliable recovery across all
codewords. Simulation results show that our method based on
switching back and forth between the two decoding modes
matched to two parity-check matrices effectively lowers the
error floors of all regular and irregular LDPC codes tested. The
proposed scheme can be implemented as two separate collab-
orating decoders or as a single decoder operating under two
different modes corresponding to the original and the modi-
fied factor graph. Similar to the use of multiple FAIDs in [25]
and the TBF of [26], our method can be viewed as utilizing
multiple decoders for correcting trapping sets. However, again
we stress that our method does not require prior knowledge of
the trapping sets. In addition, while the FAID and TBF have
been applied only to BSC, we confirm that our scheme works
well on AWGNC. Compared to the scheme of [20], although
our method requires more decoding iterations for the same
improvement on the error floor, the scheme in [20] requires
prior knowledge of the trapping set for selecting an appropri-
ate value for biased message. Moreover, since the bias value is
determined by the structure of a single trapping set, the scheme
in [20] does not guarantee performance on the codes having
various trapping sets such as irregular LDPC codes. In addi-
tion, our method has been validated against a wider variety of
LDPC code types, which is important as not many known error
floor reductions algorithms are robust enough to work well for
different types of codes. Compared to the backtracking scheme
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KANG et al.: BREAKING THE TRAPPING SETS IN LDPC CODES
17
of [10], we achieve the same order of error floor reduction using
a considerably smaller number of extra decoding iterations.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we pro-
vide a quick overview on the message passing algorithm, the
trapping set and the separation of the VNs in the trapping
set. In Section III, we introduce the parity-check matrix mod-
ification techniques that can correct the trapped VNs. The
proposed methods are presented in the form of theorems and
propositions. In Section IV, we describe collaborative decoding
utilizing both the original parity check matrix and the reduced
modified parity check matrix. Experimental results are given in
Section V. Conclusions are drawn in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Message Passing Algorithm
For the sake of maximum readability as well as establishing
notations, we start with a quick overview of the message-
passing decoding. The message passing algorithm for the
LDPC codes is run iteratively in such a way that the CNs and
the VNs exchange the messages at every iteration. The over-
all message passing algorithm is basically separated into two
steps: the CN-to-VN message passing and the VN-to-CN mes-
sage passing. In the VN-to-CN message passing, a VN sends
information to a particular CN, as it collects information from
all other CNs it is connected to. In this way, when a VN passes
information to a CN, it is ensured that there is no information
in that message that has come from the same CN.
Let L(0)
i
denote the channel observation for VN i in the form
of log-likelihood ratio (LLR) defined as
L(0)
i
= log Pr(xi = 0|ri)
Pr(xi = 1|ri)
(1)
where xi and ri represent the coded bit and the channel output,
respectively, for VN i.
Let q(l)
i→j be the message that VN i passes onto CN j at lth
iteration, and s(l)
j→i the message that CN j sends to VN i at lth
iteration. Then the message sent from VN i to CN j is given by
q(l)
i→j = L(0)
i
+

k∈M(i)\ j
s(l−1)
k→i
(2)
where the set M(i) is the group of CNs tied to VN i and M(i) \
j means the set M(i) excluding CN j.
The message from CN j to VN i in the sum-product algo-
rithm (SPA) version of the message-passing is described as
s(l)
j→i =

k∈N( j)\i
sign

q(l)
k→j

· φ
⎛
⎝

k∈N( j)\i
φ
q(l)
k→j


⎞
⎠(3)
where φ(x) = −log[tanh(x/2)], the set N( j) is the group of
VNs tied to CN j and N( j) \ i means the set N( j) excluding
VN i.
Although the min-sum algorithm (MSA) based decoder
requires a less computational power than the SPA-based
decoder, its error correcting performance is worse than that of
the latter. There is a simple technique for enhancing perfor-
mance of the MSA called the scaled (or attenuated) min-sum
algorithm (SMSA) based on a scaling-down of the magnitude
of the CN-to-VN messages.
The message from CN j to VN i for the SMSA is descr-
ibed as
s(l)
j→i =

k∈N( j)\i
sign

q(l)
k→j

· α ·
min
k∈N( j)\i
q(l)
k→j

(4)
where 0 < α < 1 is the scaling factor. When α = 1, (4) reduces
to the CN-to-VN message passing for the MSA.
After computing q(l)
i→j and s(l)
j→i for all i and j, the overall
message for VN i can be calculated as
L(l)
i
= L(0)
i
+

k∈M(i)
s(l)
k→i
(5)
where L(l)
i
represents the LLR for VN i at the lth iteration.
B. Trapping Set and Its Separation Vector
The trapping set was first defined in [4] as a set of VNs
that do not get eventually corrected despite extensive decoding
iterations. While a CN connected to an even number of incor-
rect VNs is always satisfied (or mis-satisfied, to be accurate),
a CN connected to an odd-number of incorrect VNs is always
unsatisfied.
An (a, b) trapping set is a set of a VNs which induces a sub-
graph that includes b unsatisfied CNs and any possible number
of satisfied CNs. During iterative decoding, messages from the
unsatisfied CNs try to change the states of their adjacent VNs
to satisfy the parity constraints. On the other hand, the satis-
fied CNs tend to keep current hard decisions of the decoder
associated with their adjacent VNs and reinforce the current
states. The satisfied CNs in a trapping set, which are in fact
mis-satisfied CNs, create a major issue and contribute to the
error floor because they tend to maintain the current states of
the nodes that reflect an incorrect codeword.
We use the term elementary trapping set which is known to
be the main cause of the error floor [17]–[19]. Let G = (V ∪
C, E) denote the Tanner-graph of an LDPC code with the sets
of VNs V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn}, of CNs C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} and
of edges E. Let S be the subgraph induced by the trapping set
and VS be the set of VNs in S. Also, let CS be the sets of CNs
adjacent to the VNs in VS. Define C1 ⊂CS to be the set of
unsatisfied CNs with degree-one in S and V1 ⊂VS the set of
adjacent VNs of the CNs in C1.
Definition 1 (Elementary trapping set): A trapping set is an
(a, b) elementary trapping set if there are a VNs inducing b
unsatisfied CNs such that all CNs have either degree one or two
in the corresponding subgraph S.
Fig. 1 shows two elementary trapping sets in actual LDPC
codes. The circles are VNs, the filled squares are unsatisfied
CNs and the empty squares are mis-satisfied CNs. The (12,4)
and (8,8) trapping sets are the most dominant trapping sets of
the (2643,1320) Margulis and the (2048,1723) RS-based LDPC
codes, respectively [6], [21]. While four of the VNs in the (12,4)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
18
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016
Fig. 1. The most dominant trapping sets of the Margulis and (2048,1723)
RS-based codes are the (12,4) and (8,8) trapping sets, respectively. Both are
elementary trapping sets. The circles are erroneous VNs, the filled squares are
unsatisfied CNs and the empty squares are mis-satisfied CNs.
trapping set are connected to degree-one CNs, all VNs in the
(8,8) trapping set are connected to degree-one CNs. Since the
elementary trapping sets are known to be the dominant cause
of the error floors [17]; as in the developments of other known
floor lowering techniques [18], [19], [27], we also focus on the
elementary trapping sets. All trapping sets referred to in this
paper are elementary trapping sets, unless noted otherwise.
A computation tree T (v) is a tree with its root at VN v hav-
ing as descendant nodes the participating CNs and VNs in the
message-passing decoder [24]. The level of a computation tree
is increased as the number of decoding iterations is increased.
In particular, a subgraph of T (v) having a set of nodes visited
through k decoding iterations of a message passing decoder
is called a k-iteration computation tree and denoted by Tk(v)
[22]. While the root of a computation tree is a VN in the origi-
nal definition, it is useful for our purposes to make an obvious
extension of the notion of the computation tree so that the root
of a computation tree can also be a CN.
In [22], a useful notion of separation for a VN v ∈V1 in the
trapping set VS is introduced and a lower bound on the mag-
nitude of the correct message sent from an unsatisfied CN to
v has been established using this notion. The authors of [22]
also show an upper bound on the incorrect message sent from a
mis-satisfied CN to v. Given a VN v ∈V1, if there is at least
one adjacent degree-one CN having no erroneous VN as a
descendant node in Tk(v), then v is said to be k-separated. The
same authors show that if k is sufficiently large, the root VN
can be corrected by the message-passing decoder over BSC or
AWGNC.
However, the critical issue is that most of the dominant trap-
ping sets in practice are composed of erroneous VNs with small
separation. We define the separation vector s(V1) composed of
the separation values k for all v ∈V1 in the trapping set VS.
TABLE I
DOMINANT TRAPPING SETS AND THEIR SEPARATION VECTOR
The size of s(V1) is the same as |C1|, the size of C1, in sub-
graph S. Table I shows some representative LDPC codes and
their dominant trapping sets along with the corresponding sep-
aration vectors. Note that, the separation vector is determined
not only by the subgraph involving the trapping set but also by
that of the graph structure outside the trapping set.
III. PARITY-CHECK MATRIX MODIFICATION
In this section, we introduce two algorithms for modifying
the parity-check matrix for the purpose of enlarging the ele-
ments of the separation vector and hence promoting passing
of correct information to erroneous VNs in the trapping set. A
modified parity-check matrix in the proposed schemes is gener-
ated by removing some CNs in the original parity-check matrix.
Note that certain mis-satisfied CNs determine the separation
values of the trapping set and also cause the error floor.
In message-passing decoding, we can find the set of unsat-
isfied CNs, denoted by Cu, as well as its size |Cu| at every
decoding iteration. For the parity-check matrix modification,
let A(Cu) denote the set of CNs which are candidates for des-
election in the original parity-check matrix. Let A(Cu) be the
set of all leaf CNs in Tti (ci), i.e., all CNs in level ti, for all
ci ∈Cu for some ti ∈t. We call ti ∈t the modification length
for ci and t the modification vector. If t is set equal to s(V1),
then the particular mis-satisfied CNs that determine the sepa-
ration vector would be included in A(Cu), which is a desired
scenario. For example, let V1 be the (8,8) trapping set of the
(2048,1723) RS-based code which has the separation vector
s(V1) = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1). In this case, every VN v ∈V1 is
1-separated. By setting t = (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1), A(Cu) would
include all CNs within 1 decoding iteration from an unsatis-
fied CN adjacent to each VN in V1, and all mis-satisfied CNs
causing 1-separation are automatically included in A(Cu) (see
Fig. 2). Now we suggest two strategies for modifying the parity-
check matrix: one is referred to as fixed-number CN removal
(FNCR) and the other is termed variable-number CN removal
(VNCR).
Let H and Hm denote the original parity-check matrix and
the modified parity-check matrix, respectively. Recall that when
the LDPC decoder based on H is stuck in trapping set VS, we
can easily generate the computation trees T (ci), ci ∈Cu, based
on the observed set of unsatisfied CNs Cu. The construction of
Hm based on FNCR is described in Algorithm 1. We call d f the
deselection degree of FNCR.
Theorem 1: Let G be the Tanner graph of a regular LDPC
code that contains a subgraph S induced by a trapping set. Let
kr ∈s(V1) be the separation value for vr ∈V1 ⊂S. Assume
that there is at least one VN in Tkr (vr) which is not connected to
the mis-satisfied CN that is the adjacent CN of incorrect VNs.
If the modification vector t is equal to the separation vector
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KANG et al.: BREAKING THE TRAPPING SETS IN LDPC CODES
19
Fig. 2. A 1-iteration computation tree T1(c1) with root at an unsatisfied CN
c1 in a (8,8) trapping set. Since c1 is degree-one CN, one of the VN vi,
i ∈{1, . . . , n} should be the VN of the trapping set. The set of CNs in T1(c1)
is denoted by A(c1) ⊂A(Cu). Since all VNs in the (8,8) trapping set are 1-
separated, A(Cu) includes all mis-satisfied CNs causing 1-separation for the
root VN. For FNCR, d f child CNs are chosen for deselection for every vi. For
VNCR, every CN in A(Cu) is subject to a Bernoulli trial for removal.
Algorithm 1. FNCR
initialization: Set Hm identical to H. Set the modification
vector t.
for i = 1 to |Cu| do
Generate Tti (ci) based on H where ci ∈Cu and ti ∈t,
respectively;
For every VN in the last level of Tti (ci), select d f child
CNs randomly;
end for
Removed the selected CNs from Hm.
s(V1) and FNCR is run repetitively, there exists at least one
vr ∈V1 ⊂S for which separation will be increased within a
finite number of runs as long as 1 ≤d f < dv −1, where dv is
the VN degree of the original parity-check matrix and d f is the
deselection degree of FNCR.
Proof: Consider a computation tree T (cr) with its root at
CN cr, where cr ∈C1 is the adjacent unsatisfied CN of vr. Let
nkr (cr) be the number of mis-satisfied CNs in Tkr (cr). From
the definition of separation and the given assumption, we know
that nkr−1(cr) = 0, and less than or equal to nkr (cr) VNs are
connected to one or more mis-satisfied CNs in Tkr (cr).
For each VN that connected to several mis-satisfied CNs, the
probability that the mis-satisfied CNs are removed by FNCR is
given by
dv −1 −L
d f −L

/
dv −1
d f

=
L

i=1
d f + 1 −i
dv −i

(6)
where L represents the number of mis-satisfied CNs connected
to the certain VN. Then we can compute the probability that the
separation of vr is extended by FNCR:
ps(vr) =
q
i=1
Lq

j=1
d f + 1 −j
dv −j

(7)
where q and Lq represent the number of VNs connected to
several mis-satisfied CNs and that of the mis-satisfied CNs con-
nected to the certain VNs. Note that, L1 + L2 + . . . + Lq =
nkr (cr).
Fig. 3. Plots show probabilities of separation-extension for the (8,8) trapping
set of the (2048,1723) RS-based code versus the number of trials for parity-
check matrix modification based on FNCR and VNCR, respectively. m repre-
sents the number of trials for modification and Pm is the separation-extension
probability given m trials.
We can further compute the probability that there exists at
least one variable node vr ∈V1 ⊂S for which separation is
increased within m FNCR trials:
Pm = 1 −
⎡
⎣

vr∈V1⊂S
{1 −ps(vr)}
⎤
⎦
m
(8)
Since 0 < ps(vr) < 1, Pm goes to 1 as m increases, completing
the proof.
■
We investigate how fast FNCR can extend the separation of
erroneous VNs in the trapping set according to the specified
d f . Fig. 3(a) shows the number of FNCR trials for separation-
extension of the VNs in the (8,8) trapping set of the (2048,1723)
RS-based LDPC code. As shown in the figure, if d f is set larger,
the separation-extension probability gets higher and the speed
of separation-extension becomes faster (see (8)). However, if
d f is too large, the general performance of a message-passing
decoder will suffer. From (5), it is seen that the CN degree deter-
mines the magnitude of the overall LLR for a VN. Since a large
d f results in a small magnitude for the decoder output in a given
iteration, setting d f to a large value has a detrimental effect
on the decoder performance given a fixed number of decoding
iterations.
From the practical point of view, Algorithm 1 requires the
modification vector which comes from the separation vector
which in turn is from the knowledge of the trapping set. In
the absence of the trapping set knowledge, however, we can
simply start with an all-ones modification vector, the method
which is justified by Corollary 1 below. We first establish a new
definition on weak CN.
Definition 2 (Weak CN): Given a Tanner graph G and a sub-
graph S induced by a trapping set, consider a computation tree
T (cr) with its root at CN cr, where cr is the adjacent unsatis-
fied CN of vr ∈V1 ⊂S. If a CN in the lth level of T (cr) has the
shortest path of all CNs in the same level to any v ∈VS among
its descendant nodes, then it is called “weak CN in the lth level
of T (cr)”.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
20
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016
It is obvious that there exists at least one weak CN in every
level of the tree if separation is finite. Note that, since the near-
est v ∈VS from the unsatisfied CN cr in T (cr) determines
the separation value, removing weak CN results in separation
extension. Corollary 1 shows that FNCR with all-ones mod-
ification vector removes the weak CN (i.e., the separation is
extended) within a finite number of runs of FNCR.
Corollary 1: Let G be the Tanner graph of a regular LDPC
code that contains a subgraph S induced by a trapping set.
Assume that there is at least one VN in the first level of T (cr)
that is not connected to the weak CN. If the modification vector
t is set to all-ones vector and FNCR is run repetitively, there
exists at least one vr ∈V1 ⊂S for which separation will be
increased within a finite number of runs as long as 1 ≤d f <
dv −1, where dv is the VN degree of the original parity-check
matrix and d f is the deselection degree of FNCR.
Proof: Consider a computation tree T (cr) with its root
at cr, where cr ∈C1 is an adjacent unsatisfied CN of vr.
Let w1(cr) be the number of weak CNs in the first level of
T (cr). We can simply complete the proof using Theorem 1 by
replacing nkr (cr) with w1(cr) and (7) with
ps(vr) =
q
i=1
Mq

j=1
d f + 1 −j
dv −j

(9)
where q and Mq represent the number of VNs connected to
several weak CNs and that of the weak CNs connected to the
certain VNs. Note that, M1 + M2 + . . . + Mq = w1(cr).
■
With a successful and sufficient separation, the resulting
Tanner graph will allow a breaking of the trapping set. This is
a rather direct consequence of Theorem 1 of [22] when applied
to our modified factor graph, and we state it more formally as a
proposition.
Proposition 1: Let Gm be the Tanner graph of an LDPC
code which is based on a modified parity-check matrix gen-
erated by FNCR. Let Sm be the subgraph associated with the
trapping set. Assume that the channel is either a BSC or an
AWGNC, and that the messages from the channel to all VNs
outside Sm are correct. Provided that a VN vr ∈V1 ⊂Sm satis-
fies k-separation for a large k on Gm, the corresponding MSA
(or SMSA) decoder will correct vr.
Proof: The proof simply follows that of Theorem 1 in [22]
after replacing dv, the VN degree, with dv −d f , the reduced
VN degree due to the application of FNCR in our case.
■
FNCR is simple, but unfortunately not suitable for some
irregular LDPC codes such as the one based on the irregular-
repeat-accumulate (IRA)
[11] structure, which yield many
degree-2 VNs. To this end, we introduce a more flexible algo-
rithm called VNCR that can be easily applied to both regular
and irregular codes. The construction of a modified parity-
check matrix Hm based on VNCR is given in Algorithm 2.
Recall that t is the modification vector which can be set once
s(V1) of the trapping set is known or set to all-ones vector given
no precise prior knowledge of the dominant trapping sets.
Theorem 2: Let G be the Tanner graph of an LDPC code that
contains a subgraph S induced by a trapping set. Let kr ∈s(V1)
be the separation value for vr ∈V1 ⊂S. Assume that there is at
least one CN in Tkr (vr) which is not connected to erroneous
Algorithm 2. VNCR
initialization: Set Hm identical to H. Set the modification
vector t.
for i = 1 to |Cu| do
Generate Tti (ci) based on H where ci ∈Cu and ti ∈t,
respectively;
Let every leaf CN in Tti (ci) be subject to a Bernoulli trial
that returns 1 with probability pr; store its returned value;
end for
Remove the CNs with a returned value of 1 from Hm.
VN. If the modification vector t is set equal to the separa-
tion vector s(V1) and VNCR is run repetitively, there exists at
least one vr ∈V1 ⊂S for which separation is increased within
a finite number of runs, provided 0 < pr < 1, where pr is the
probability of deselection.
Proof: Consider a computation tree T (cr) with its root at
CN cr, where cr ∈C1 be the adjacent unsatisfied CN of vr. Let
nkr (cr) be the number of mis-satisfied CNs in Tkr (cr). We know
that nkr−1(cr) = 0 and nkr (cr) > 0 from the given assumption
and by the definition of separation. Since each mis-satisfied CN
in Tkr (cr) is subject to a Bernoulli trial with probability pr, the
probability that the separation for vr is extended by VNCR is
given by
ps(vr) = pr nkr (cr).
(10)
We can write the probability that there exists at least one vari-
able node vr ∈V1 ⊂S such that its separation is increased
within m VNCR trials as
Pm = 1 −
⎡
⎣

vr∈V1⊂S
{1 −ps(vr)}
⎤
⎦
m
.
(11)
Since 0 < ps(vr) < 1, Pm goes to 1 as m increases. This
completes the proof.
■
Fig. 3(b) shows the number of VNCR trials for separation-
extension of the VNs in the (8,8) trapping set of the (2048,1723)
LDPC code. As pr increases, the speed of separation-extension
for VNCR gets higher. This behavior is consistent with one’s
expectation based on (10) and (11) above. However, a large
pr induces a small magnitude for the overall LLR for a VN
in a given iteration. Thus, setting an appropriate pr is impor-
tant to maintain the decoder performance in a fixed number
of message-passing iterations. While d f for FNCR should be
an integer in the range 1 ≤d f < dv −1, the parameter pr for
VNCR can be chosen more flexibly in the range 0 < pr < 1.
As with FNCR, we can apply VNCR with all-ones modi-
fication vector given the lack of the trapping set knowledge.
Corollary 2 ensures that VNCR with all-ones modification vec-
tor extends the separation within a finite number of runs of
VNCR.
Corollary 2: Let G be the Tanner graph of an LDPC code
that contains a subgraph S induced by a trapping set. Assume
that there is at least one CN in T (cr) which is not a weak
CN. If the modification vector t is set equal to all-ones vec-
tor and VNCR is run repetitively, there exists at least one vr ∈
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KANG et al.: BREAKING THE TRAPPING SETS IN LDPC CODES
21
Fig. 4. Two sides of computation tree T (vr): (a) unsatisfied CN side and (b) mis-satisfied CN side.
V1 ⊂S for which separation is increased within a finite num-
ber of runs, provided 0 < pr < 1, where pr is the probability
of deselection.
Proof: Consider a computation tree T (cr) with its root at
CN cr, where cr ∈C1 be the adjacent unsatisfied CN of vr.
Let w1(cr) be the number of weak CNs in the first level of
T (cr). We can simply complete the proof using Theorem 2 by
replacing (10) with
ps(vr) = pr w1(cr).
(12)
■
Like in the case of FNCR, successful and sufficient separa-
tions of the trapped VNs using VNCR would allow escape from
the trapping set. There is an important caveat here, however.
Namely, unlike in the FNCR case, we cannot simply invoke
Proposition 1 to assure correction of the trapped VN even under
the successful and sufficient separation. This is because the
application of VNCR inevitably generates an irregular modi-
fied factor graph, and a large separation alone would not be
able to guarantee that the message arriving from the unsatisfied
CN is larger than the overall messages from the mis-satisfied
CNs for an irregular VN degree distribution. This is a con-
sequence of the fact that Theorem 1 of [22], based on which
Proposition 1 is constructed, cannot ensure trapped-error cor-
rection when VN degrees are not uniform. Nevertheless, while
Proposition 1 cannot be utilized directly, imposing a somewhat
narrower condition than the k-separation on the structure of the
modified graph allows constructing a similar proposition. To
this end, we first establish the following new definitions:
Definition 3 (k-strong): Given a Tanner graph G and a sub-
graph S induced by a trapping set, let Tk(c1) and Tk(c2) be
subtrees of T (v) where the unsatisfied CN c1 ∈C1 and the mis-
satisfied CN c2 ∈(CS \ C1) are child nodes of VN v ∈V1. The
VN v is said to be k-strong, if the minimum VN degree of Tk(c1)
is greater than or equal to the maximum VN degree of Tk(c2).
Definition 4 (k-strongly-separated): Given a Tanner graph G
and a subgraph S induced by a trapping set, a VN v ∈V1 is said
to be k-strongly-separated, if the VN v is both k-separated and
k-strong.
Fig. 4 illustrates these definitions. Consider an erroneous VN
vr and its computation tree T (vr) in Fig. 4. Both the unsatis-
fied CN side (i.e., the computation tree rooted at c1) and the
mis-satisfied CN side (i.e., the computation tree rooted at c2,
which is assumed to be the sole mis-satisfied CN in this exam-
ple) are shown. On the unsatisfied side, T2(vr) does not contain
any other erroneous VN while T3(vr) has one erroneous VN.
Accordingly, vr is 2-separated. Also, notice that the minimum
VN degree of T2(c1) is 3, the same as the maximum VN degree
of T2(c2), meaning that vr is 2-strong. Hence, the erroneous VN
vr in Fig. 4 is 2-strongly-separated.
Clearly, any VN in a regular LDPC code is k-strong for any k,
because all VN degrees are the same. Therefore, if a trapped VN
of any regular LDPC code is k-separated, it is also k-strongly-
separated.
For a trapped VN that is k-strongly-separated for suffi-
ciently large k, the message-passing algorithm can correct it,
as formally stated below.
Proposition 2: Let Gm be the Tanner graph of an LDPC
code which is based on a modified parity-check matrix gen-
erated by VNCR. Let Sm be the subgraph associated with the
trapping set. Assume that the channel is either a BSC or an
AWGNC, and that the messages from the channel to all VNs
outside Sm are correct. Provided that a VN vr ∈V1 ⊂Sm is k-
strongly-separated for a large k on Gm, the corresponding MSA
(or SMSA) decoder will correct vr.
Proof: Let c1 ∈C1 and c2 ∈(CS \ C1) denote the adja-
cent unsatisfied and mis-satisfied CNs of vr, respectively. The
corresponding trees are denoted by T (c1) and T (c2), respec-
tively. Let d1 be the smallest VN degree in T (c1) and d2 the
greatest VN degree in T (c2).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
22
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016
According to the proof of Theorem 1 in [22], for a regular
LDPC code under the SMSA decoder, the magnitude of the
incoming correct message to vr can be written as
|Ll| = |L0| + α(dv −1)|Ll−1|
> [α(dv −1)]l|L0|
(13)
where |Ll| and |L0| denote the magnitudes of the incoming cor-
rect message at lth iteration and of the channel observation,
respectively, and α is the scaling factor for the SMSA.
Now, for the modified irregular factor graph at hand, it is
clear that the lower bound should instead be
|Ll| > [α(d1 −1)]l|L0|.
(14)
As for bounding the amount of the incorrect message com-
ing into vr for a regular LDPC code, the authors of [22] use the
fact that since each mis-satisfied CN in a (a, b) trapping set is
connected to all other erroneous VNs of the trapping set within
j ≥a decoding iterations, there is at least one CN passing cor-
rect message having a sign opposite to that of the message from
the mis-satisfied CN. Considering the computation tree rooted
at vr as a super-node with (dv −1) j child VNs, the upper bound
on the magnitude of the incoming incorrect message to vr has
been shown to be
|L′l| < |L0|[α(dv −1) j −1]
⌈l/j⌉
(15)
where |L′l| represents the magnitude of the incoming incorrect
message at lth iteration and ⌈l/j⌉is the smallest integer greater
than or equal to l/j.
We make a modification similar to the one leading to the
lower bound in (14) to derive an upper bound on the incorrect
incoming message to vr for our modified trapping set structure.
Specifically, replace dv in (15) with d2 to get
|L′l| < |L0|[α(d2 −1) j −1]
⌈l/j⌉.
(16)
Since d1 ≥d2 by assumption, |Ll| of (14) is greater than |L′l|
of (16) with a large l, i.e., the incoming correct message over-
whelms the incorrect one, in which case vr will be corrected. A
similar proof can be constructed for the SPA.
■
IV. COLLABORATIVE DECODING
In the previous section, we have shown that decoding based
on a modified parity-check matrix that results from the pro-
posed CN removal strategies effectively changes the structure
of the trapping set. In particular, the established theorems guar-
antee that the separations of one or more trapped VNs will be
enhanced using the suggested probabilistic CN removal meth-
ods. This result, combined with the main theoretical results of
[22] linking large separation with ability to break trapping sets,
suggests that decoding on the modified parity check matrix with
some CNs removed will tend to lower error floors, as stated in
the propositions of the last section. As with the work of [22],
however, our work still could not tell precisely how large the
separation k should be for a given code and trapping structure
Fig. 5. System model: the main decoder runs through its own internal iterations
until decoding succeeds, runs through a predetermined number of iterations
or gets stuck in a trapping set. After the main decoder run, the extrinsic
information is passed to the sub-decoder. The sub-decoder uses the extrinsic
information of the main decoder as well as the LLR values from the channel.
The sub-decoder stops when the iteration number exceeds some predetermined
level, and passes its extrinsic information back to the main decoder. The whole
process is repeated until all errors are corrected or the total number of iterations
reaches a set level.
and how to achieve a particular separation value using the pro-
posed CN removal strategies. Furthermore, for irregular codes
and/or application of VNCR, it has been shown that being k-
strong is sufficient for a trapped but k-separated VN to ensure
its eventual correction, but it is not clear whether being k-strong
is critical in providing a high probability of success in breaking
trapping sets in practice.
Finding precise solutions analytically to these questions is
difficult, and a resort is made to computer simulation to see
whether the error floor behaviors improve using the proposed
methods. Extensive simulations in fact reveal that for many
different types of LDPC codes running a message-passing algo-
rithm on a reduced parity check matrix after removing certain
CNs as proposed does in most cases results in a breaking of the
trapping sets, including the ones that are known to be tough
to break (without prior knowledge of the trapping set struc-
ture), like the dominant trapping sets of the Margulis code.
We do, however, also recognize that the modified parity-check
matrix admits some codewords that are not valid according to
the original parity-check matrix and this results in poor over-
all performance in error rate simulation studies. To get around
this practical issue, we suggest taking advantage of both par-
ity check matrices, the original one with reliable overall error
rate performance and the modified one that is highly effective
in breaking the trapping set when stuck. We specifically intro-
duce the notion of collaborative decoding using two decoders
based on two parity-check matrices.
We simply call the decoder based on the original parity-check
matrix the main decoder and that based on the modified parity-
check matrix the sub-decoder. Fig. 5 describes the collaborative
LDPC decoding. The system is a concatenation of the main
decoder and the sub-decoder. The vector r refers to the LLR
values from the channel and ˆx is the decisions made by the
decoding system.
In the first step, the main decoder runs through its own inter-
nal iterations until decoding succeeds, runs through a predeter-
mined number of iterations, N1, or gets stuck in a trapping set.
When the number of unsatisfied CNs remains unchanged over
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KANG et al.: BREAKING THE TRAPPING SETS IN LDPC CODES
23
some predetermined number of iterations, the main decoder is
assumed stuck in a trapping set. In this case, the extrinsic infor-
mation is passed to the sub-decoder. The sub-decoder uses the
extrinsic information of the main decoder as the a priori infor-
mation. The LLR data from the channel form another input to
the sub-decoder.
The sub-decoder stops when the iteration number exceeds
some predetermined level, N2, and passes its extrinsic informa-
tion back to the main decoder. This whole process is repeated
until all errors are corrected or the total number of iterations
reaches the maximum set iteration number, Nt. The system does
not require additional parity bits for the sub-decoder. An esti-
mated number of sub-decoder trials for separation extension of
the trapping set would be available through (7), (8), (10) and
(11) if the trapping set were known.
We note that while it is conceptually easier to view the decod-
ing process as collaboration between two separate decoders,
implementation can equally be based on a single decoder
switching between two different modes, one based on the orig-
inal factor graph and the other based on a reduced factor graph
with some of the CNs removed. In the switching mode imple-
mentation, the edges of the removed CNs can simply be blocked
off or the CN processing can be disabled on the specified nodes
in the message-passing operations while in the reduced factor
graph mode. Clearly, there is no additional burden in hardware
implementation.
In the next section, simulation results will be presented which
indicate that the suggested decoding methods indeed provide
powerful and efficient ways of reducing error floors of all
different types of LDPC codes tested.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we set the modification vector to an all-
ones vector for all our experiments to reflect practical scenarios
where the underlying trapping sets are not known a priori. In
addition, we simply fixed pr to 0.7 regardless of the code type
in running the VNCR algorithm. Fixing pr = 0.7 means 70%
of the candidate CNs attached to each VN under question (adja-
cent to unsatisfied CN) are removed. In the language of the
FNCR algorithm, this is roughly equivalent to d f = 3 for the
(2048,1723) RS-based LDPC code in hand (i.e., removing 3
or so candidate CNs), which was the value of the deselec-
tion degree used in running FNCR in the presented simulation
results. Note also that d f must be smaller than dv −1, mean-
ing that in the Margulis code tested d f can only be 1. For
the collaborative decoding, the iteration number for the main
decoder is capped at 50, while it is always fixed at 5 for the
sub-decoder. However, for the main decoder, if the number of
unsatisfied CNs does not change over 5 iterations, the decoder
stops; at that point the sub-decoder gets activated. The total
iteration number for collaborative decoding is the sum of the
iteration numbers for the main decoder and the sub-decoder.
The decoding schemes and the corresponding iteration numbers
are indicated for each curve. We use a 5-bit uniform quantiza-
tion scheme denoted by Q4.1. The symbol Qm. f represents an
(m+ f )-bit uniform quantization with an m-bit signed integer
and an f -bit fraction. For example, Q4.1 means a uniform step
Fig. 6. Error rate performance of collaborative decoding for the (2640,1320)
Margulis code.
size of 0.5 and a dynamic range of [−7.5 7.5]. This particu-
lar quantization strategy gives the best results among all 5-bit
precision uniform quantization methods.
Fig. 6 shows the error rate performance of the proposed
decoding compare to that of the conventional scheme based on
a single decoder for the (2640,1320) Margulis code [6]. The
plot presents the word error rate (WER) or the codeword fail-
ure rate versus Eb/N0 over AWGNC. We set d f = 1 for FNCR
and pr = 0.7 for VNCR. In addition, we use the SMSA with
α = 0.75 for single-decoder-based decoding and collaborating
decoding using either FNCR or VNCR. We observe in the
figure that FNCR and VNCR lower the error floor by one order
and one and a half orders of magnitude, respectively, with 300
iterations. VNCR seems somewhat more effective than FNCR.
Since dv of the Margulis code is 3, d f should be 1 and no
other choices make sense. However, choosing pr of VNCR is
more flexible. The strategies of [8] also effectively lower the
error floor of the Margulis code, but we emphasize that our
method does not require any prior knowledge of the dominant
trapping sets. The inset figure includes for additional compari-
son the WERs of the backtracking scheme of [10] in the floor
region. Note that the backtracking scheme is the only method
in the existing literature that can reduce error floors without
explicit prior knowledge of the trapping sets. The backtracking
tries LLR flipping for every adjacent VN of the unsatisfied CNs
one by one. In addition, each trial requires independent decod-
ing iterations. For our simulation of the backtracking method,
we set 20 for the iteration number of the independent decod-
ing, which is the same parameter used in [10]. Backtracking is
performed until either all errors are corrected or the total num-
ber of iterations reaches the predetermined number. The results
indicate that the backtracking with 100 iterations shows no
improvement on the error floor but that with 300 iterations low-
ers the floor by about one half order of magnitude at 3 dB. At the
same SNR, the collaborative decoder based on VNCR shows
better WER performance by about one order of magnitude
compared to backtracking at 300 decoding iterations.
The dominant trapping sets of the Margulis code include a
relatively small number of degree-one CNs (Fig. 1(a)). In the
(12,4) or the (14,4) trapping set of the Margulis code, only
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
24
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016
Fig. 7. Error rate performance of collaborative decoding for the (2048,1723)
RS-based code.
4 VNs out of 12 or 14 are connected to degree-one CNs.
Therefore, only a small number of VNs have opportunity to
extend separation via FNCR or VNCR. However, for the (8,8)
trapping set of the (2048,1723) RS-based code (Fig. 1(b)), all
VNs are connected to degree-one CNs and our scheme works
particularly well within a small number of decoding iterations.
Fig. 7 compares the error rate results for the (2048,1723)
RS-based LDPC code [14]. We set d f = 3 for FNCR and
pr = 0.7 for VNCR. Again, we use the SMSA with α = 0.75.
We observe in the figure that the proposed decoding schemes
lower the error floor significantly. FNCR lowers the error floor
by about an order of magnitude with 100 decoding iterations.
VNCR achieves a floor reduction by more than one order of
magnitude with only 50 decoding iterations and more than two
orders of magnitude with 100 decoding iterations. We observe
that the VNCR curves are much steeper than the FNCR curves
at high SNRs. VNCR with 100 iterations exhibits no error floor
even at a 3.2 × 10−10 WER. Again, the WER curves in the inset
provides comparison between the collaborative decoder and the
backtracking scheme of [10]. The backtracking with 50 itera-
tions hardly improves the error floor while with 100 iterations
lowers the floor slightly. We observe that between the collab-
orative decoder and the backtracking scheme, both under 100
iterations, the former gives an error floor improvement by about
one order of magnitude.
We also evaluated performance for an irregular LDPC code.
Fig. 8 shows the performance of the (1944,972) IEEE 802.11n
code [13], which is an irregular LDPC code based on the IRA
structure. In this experiment, the MSA is used for decoding
because we observe that the performance of MSA is definitely
better than that of the SMSA for this code. We observe in the
figure that the collaborative decoding lowers the error floor by
more than an order of magnitude with 50 iterations. In addi-
tion, the performance improvement continues as the decoding
iteration increases. The inset figure also shows that compared
to backtracking, the proposed collaborative decoder based on
VNCR improves the WER by a factor 8 in the floor region,
when the decoding runs are limited to 300.
Overall, the experimental results show that the proposed
scheme efficiently lowers error floor without prior knowledge
Fig. 8. Error rate performance of collaborative decoding for the (1944,972)
irregular code.
of the trapping sets across different types of LDPC codes. The
backtracking method of [10] also lowers error floor without
the knowledge of the trapping sets and can potentially achieve
improved floor reduction relative to our scheme, provided a
larger number of decoding iterations is allowed. We, however,
emphasize that our scheme works well with moderate numbers
of decoding iterations. Our experiments in fact confirm that the
collaborative decoder provides better floor reduction capability
than the backtracking scheme for a fixed number of decoding
runs.
While it is difficult to analytically show how large a
separation-extension guarantees breaking trapping sets, addi-
tional insights into the required separation are obtained through
extensive observations of how the bad VNs and separation
vectors evolve in the course of collaborative decoding. For
this, we collected over hundreds of trapping sets at error floor
regions and observed the number of erroneous VNs and sep-
aration vectors at each iteration of the collaborative decoder.
We confirmed that for the (2048,1723) RS-based LDPC and
Margulis code that even a one-level separation extension drives
the sub-decoder to correct several errors in a trapping set or pass
good information to the main decoder. Representative results
are depicted in Fig. 9 for the (8,8) trapping set corresponds to
the (2048,1723) RS-based LDPC code. In the simulation, sub-
decoders are constructed by VNCR with pr = 0.7 and message
passing is performed based on SMSA with Q4.1 quantization.
In Fig. 9, the y-axis labeled by Ne shows the number of
erroneous VNs at the end of I th decoding iteration where the
squares and the circles represent the main and sub-decoder turn,
respectively. The vertical-dashed lines indicate switching times
to the sub-decoder and then back to the main decoder. The suc-
cess of separation-extension can be judged by the maximum
value of the separation vector denoted by S. In a typical error-
correcting behavior depicted in Fig. 9(a), the main decoder
cannot escape the (8,8) trapping set and terminates the first pass
at the end of 8th iteration because the number of unsatisfied CN
does not change for 5 iterations. Then the sub-decoder takes
over using the extrinsic information from the main decoder and
corrects three errors in 5 iterations. We observe in the experi-
ment that all the VNs in the (8,8) trapping set are 1-separated
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KANG et al.: BREAKING THE TRAPPING SETS IN LDPC CODES
25
Fig. 9. Dynamic behavior of the (8,8) trapping set during collaborative decod-
ing.
until the end of the first pass of the main decoder (iteration
number 4 to 8) and the separation of one or more VNs in the
trapping set are extended to 2 by VNCR as soon as the sub-
decoder takes over. In this case, a good message generated by
the sub-decoder with extended separation effectively corrects
several errors. Finally the main decoder corrects all remained
errors in its second pass (iteration number 14 to 16).
Fig. 9(b) shows another representative error-correcting
behavior pattern by the collaborative decoder. The main
decoder trapped by the (8,8) trapping set and passes its turn
to the sub-decoder after 6 iterations of decoding run. However,
the sub-decoder cannot correct any error for 5 iterations (iter-
ation number 7 to 11) and transfers its extrinsic information
back to the main decoder (after iteration number 11). Then the
main decoder corrects all errors in 4 iterations. We observe
in the experiment that the one or more VNs in (8,8) trap-
ping set successfully extended their separations from 1 to 2
at the beginning of the sub-decoder pass. Although no erro-
neous VNs are corrected in the sub-decoder pass, improved
messages are transferred to the main decoder as the extrinsic
information. We surmise that the sub-decoder generates good
enough information for correcting errors in the trapping set with
extended separation and helps the main decoder for eliminat-
ing the error floor of the (2048,1723) RS-based LDPC code.
We also ran extensive simulations for the Margulis code and
obtained consistent results.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a collaborative LDPC decoding
scheme that could break trapping sets and lower the error floor
significantly via message-passing that switched between two
decoding modes. The factor graph on which the sub-decoding
mode operates is derived from the original graph based on
removal of certain CNs, and allows correct messages to be
enhanced, which helps break the trapping sets. The simula-
tion results show that the collaborative LDPC decoding works
well for both regular and irregular codes. We stress that our
approach does not need prior knowledge of the trapping sets.
We provided formal discussions in the form of mathemati-
cal theorems, corollaries and propositions on the processes
by which the proposed decoder escapes from trapping sets.
Although the proposed scheme requires additional decoding
iterations, its performance is considerably better than that of
traditional decoding using a single decoder while requiring a
much smaller number of iterations to achieve a significant error
floor reduction than existing backtracking methods.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low
density parity check codes,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–
1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On
the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the
Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[4] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf.
Commun. Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–
1435.
[5] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length
analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” CoRR,
Dec. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078
[6] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-
Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor.
Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[7] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear
codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-
20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[8] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[9] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding
algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[10] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Hardware implementation of a
backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder for lowering the error floor of
quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuit Syst. I, vol. 58, no. 12,
pp. 2931–2943, Dec. 2011.
[11] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat accumulate
codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Relat. Topics, Brest, France,
Sep. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[12] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative
decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–6–680, May 1999.
[13] IEEE Draft Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications
and information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan
Area Networks-Specific Requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium
Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications:
Amendment: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE Std. 802.11n/
D2.00, Feb. 2007.
[14] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and
Information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area
Networks-Specific Requirements—Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access
With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer
Specifications, IEEE Std. 802.3an, Sep. 2006.
[15] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating
stopping and trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4,
pp. 1640–1650, Apr. 2010.
[16] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dom-
inant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58,
no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
26
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016
[17] S. Landner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial anal-
ysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Wireless Netw. Commun. Mobile Comput., Maui, HI, USA, Jun. 2005,
pp. 630–635.
[18] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trap-
ping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[19] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[20] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright,
“Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global
Commun. Conf., New Orleans, LA, USA, Nov. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[21] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright,
“Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance:
Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[22] X. Zhang and P. Siegel, “Quantized iterative message passing decoders
with low error floor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62,
no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2014.
[23] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[24] B. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of itera-
tive decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 766–781, Feb.
2001.
[25] D. Declercq, B. Vasi´c, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, “Finite alphabet iterative
decoders—Part II: Improved guaranteed error correction of LDPC codes
via iterative decoder diversity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10,
pp. 4046–4057, Nov. 2013.
[26] D. V. Nguyen and B. Vasi´c, “Two-bit bit flipping algorithms for LDPC
codes and collective error correction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62,
no. 4, pp. 1153–1163, Apr. 2014.
[27] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasi´c, “Finite alphabet
iterative decoders—Part I: Decoding beyond belief propagation on the
BSC,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4033–4045, Oct. 2013.
Soonyoung Kang (S’12) received the B.S. degree in
electrical engineering from Korea University, Seoul,
South Korea, and the M.S. degree in electrical engi-
neering from Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea, in
2010 and 2012, respectively. He is currently pur-
suing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at
KAIST. Since 2010, he has been a Member of the
Communications and Storage Laboratory, KAIST.
His research interests include coding theory and sig-
nal processing for data storage systems.
Jaekyun Moon (F’05) received the Ph.D. degree in
electrical and computer engineering from Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. He is
a Professor of Electrical Engineering with Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea. From 1990 to
2009, he was with the faculty of the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Minnesota, Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN, USA. He
consulted as Chief Scientist for DSPG, Inc., from
2004 to 2007. He also worked as Chief Technology
Officer with Link-A-Media Devices Corporation in 2008. His research inter-
ests include channel characterization, signal processing and coding for data
storage and digital communication. He received the McKnight Land-Grant
Professorship from the University of Minnesota. He served as Program Chair
for the 1997 IEEE Magnetic Recording Conference (TMRC). He is also Past
Chair of the Signal Processing for Storage Technical Committee of the IEEE
Communications Society. He served as a Guest Editor for the 2001 IEEE
JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS issue on Signal
Processing for High Density Recording. He also served as an Editor for IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS in the area of signal processing and cod-
ing for 2001–2006. He was the recipient of the IBM Faculty Development
Awards as well as the IBM Partnership Awards, the National Storage Industry
Consortium (NSIC) Technical Achievement Award for the invention of the
maximum transition run (MTR) code.
Jeongseok Ha (M’06) received the B.E. degree in
electronics from Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, South Korea, the M.S. degree in electronic
and electrical engineering from Pohang University of
Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engi-
neering from the Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA, USA, in 1992, 1994, and 2003. He is
now with the Korea Advanced Institute of Science
and Technology (KAIST) Daejeon, South Korea, as
an Associate Professor. His research interests include
theories and applications of error-control codes and physical layer security.
Jinwoo Shin received the B.S. degrees in mathe-
matics and computer science from Seoul National
University, Seoul, South Korea, and the Ph.D.
degree from Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA, in 2001 and 2010, respec-
tively. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
the Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST,
Daejeon, South Korea. After spending two years
(2010–2012) at Algorithms and Randomness Center,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA,
and one year (2012–2013) at Business Analytics and
Mathematical Sciences Department, IBM T. J. Watson Research, he started
teaching at KAIST in the fall of 2013. He was a Programmer for computer-
security softwares at Penta Security Systems in 2001–2005. He was the recip-
ient of the Kennneth C. Sevcik (Best Student Paper) Award at SIGMETRICS
2009, the George M. Sprowls (Best MIT CS PhD Thesis) Award 2010, Best
Paper Award at MOBIHOC 2013, and Best Publication Award from Applied
Probability Society 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:57:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
