CPE: Codeword Prediction Encoder
Satish Grandhi1, Elsa Dupraz2, Christian Spagnol1, Valentin Savin3, Emanuel Popovici1
1 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
2 Telecom Bretagne; UMR CNRS 6285 Lab-STICC, Brest, France
3 CEA-LETI, Minatec Campus, Grenoble, France
sagrand@ue.ucc.ie, elsa.dupraz@telecom-bretagne.eu, christian.spagnol@ue.ucc.ie, valentin.savin@cea.fr, e.popovici@ucc.ie
I.
INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC) codes are known to
provide excellent error correction performance that closely ap-
proaches the Shannon capacity of noisy transmission channels.
However, in the future systems of communication and storage,
errors may not only come from the transmission channels, but
also from the faulty hardware [1]. Thus, the study of novel
techniques for reliable data transmission using unreliable hard-
ware is an increasing priority. LDPC decoders on unreliable
hardware have been widely investigated recently [2] proving
its natural robustness to hardware errors. Unfortunately, it was
also shown that LDPC encoders completely fail when they
are built from unreliable gates [3]. The focus of the current
work is thus on constructing reliable LDPC encoders built from
unreliable gates.
This paper introduces a novel reliability driven fault tol-
erant methodology known as Codeword Prediction Encoder
(CPE) for reliable LDPC encoding by augmenting extra logic
to correct the errors introduced during the encoding process.
The approach presented here can be seen as an expansion of the
Check Symbols Generation [4]. We formalize these approaches
and extend them to take full advantage of the power of error
correction codes to enable correction of the faults, and not
just detection. The CPE simulator provides a unified platform
which comprises of novel encoder and fault tolerant LDPC
decoders. Simulations results prove that it is possible to retrieve
the original information by employing particular configurations
of these encoders and decoders. In general, output BER is
reduced by upto 10K times by adopting CPE mechanism as
compared to transmitting data directly.
II.
LDPC CODES AND ERROR MODELS
A binary information sequence u of length k has to be
transmitted through a noisy channel. The data is protected
against noise with an LDPC code that encodes the information
sequence u into a codeword x of length n > k. An LDPC
code is defined by its binary parity check matrix H of size
m × n. A binary vector x of length n is a codeword of the
LDPC code if it satisfies HxT = 0, where T is the transpose
operator. Once the LDPC parity check matrix H is fixed,
one can construct a generator matrix G of size k × n, where
k = n −m, that verifies HGT = 0. The encoding operation
can then be realized from the generator matrix as x = uG.
Several solutions have been proposed to construct a generator
matrix G from the parity check matrix H
[5]. Most of the
usual solutions consider systematic encoding, for which the
codeword x = [u, p] contains both the information sequence
u and m parity bits given by p. In this case, the left hand side
of the generator matrix G is the identity matrix of size k × k.
Here we present the Von Neumann error model we consider
for the unreliable gates that are used in the encoder and
in the decoder. A Von Neumann erroneous gate is modeled
as an ideal logic gate cascaded with an independent error
injecting XOR gate. The noise variable E at the XOR gate
input takes value 1 with a given probability pg that represents
the gate error probability. Denoted by ˜x, the codeword at the
output of an encoder realized from unreliable gates. Under this
model, it was shown that most of the standard LDPC encoders
completely fail when they are built from unreliable gates [3].
III.
CODEWORD PREDICTION ENCODER (CPE)
Here, we consider two cases that are non-systematic en-
coding and systematic encoding. In case of non-systematic
encoding as described in Fig 1(a), in addition to the parity
bits p contained in ˜x, we now compute ma extra parity bits
˜pa from u. The vector ˜xa = [˜x, ˜pa] is called the augmented
codeword. Before channel transmission, ˜xa is passed through
an LDPC decoder, denoted by DCPE, in order to eliminate the
encoding errors. After decoding, only ˜x is transmitted through
the channel.
(a) Non-systematic Encoding
(b) Systematic Encoding
Fig. 1.
The CPE approach
The CPE approach for systematic encoding is illustrated in
Fig 1(b). We denote by Gp the G sub-matrix of size n−k×k,
corresponding to parity bits. Thus, x= [u, p], and the parity
bits p can be computed by p = u · Gp. In this case only the
parity bits p can be affected by gate errors, while the data
bits u are assumed to be error free. We also denote the circuit
composed either by G and Pa (non-systematic case) or by
Gp and Pa (systematic case) as GCPE. Both for systematic
and non-systematic encoding, the additional parity bits
˜pa
are computed from a split-extended construction introduced
in [6]. In addition to CPE, we introduce a second level of
protection based on the critical gates. The criticality degree of
a node X, denoted by cdeg(X), is defined as the number of
output nodes to which X is connected by at least one path.
In our simulations, we fix a criticality threshold (CT): Nodes
2016 21st IEEE European Test Symposium (ETS) 
!
978-1-4673-9659-2/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE 
!
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
X with cdeg(X) > CT are considered to be “protected” (e.g.
by increasing area), so as to make then reliable (error-free).
Hence, errors are injected only in nodes X with cdeg(X) <
CT.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In our simulations, both encoder and decoder are assumed
to be error prone. We consider regular LDPC codes with
different column weights for the parity check matrix, namely
dv = 3 and dv = 4, and different coding rates, namely
r = 1/2 and r = 3/4. We have employed three state-of-the-
art reliability enhanced LDPC decoders within the CPE CAD
flow: Min-Sum (MS), Self-Corrected Min-Sum (SCMS), and
Gallager B with Extended Alphabet(Gal-B).
TABLE I.
CRITICAL GATE COUNT FOR DIFFERENT ENCODING
SCHEMES
Encoder
GCPE Node Count
CT=10
CT=20
CT=50
dv3-r12
44399
3373
1844
833
dv3-r34
28182
2288
1240
537
dv4-r12
45175
3424
1851
824
dv4-r34
27167
2112
1183
488
A. Critical Nodes
Table I lists the count of total & critical nodes within the
four encoding schemes, for critical thresholds CT set to 10,
20, and 50. As expected, lower the value of critical threshold,
higher the number of critical nodes within the encoder. As a
tradeoff, a lower critical threshold is also expected to lead
to lower encoding error probability. To illustrate this, we
employed an encoder with r = 3/4 and dv = 4 and DCPE
was set to Min-Sum model. As depicted in Fig. 2, the output
BER value reduces with the critical threshold values.
Fig. 2.
Critical Threshold impact on Output BER
B. Impact of Decoder Configuration
For faulty decoders, we assume that the output of every
variable and check node function computation is flipped with
a probability p = 10−3. For non-binary message alphabets,
flipping the output value means that a value different from the
correct one is selected uniformly at random from the alphabet.
Fig. 3 highlights the output BER values for different faulty
decoders and the default non-CPE approach when the critical
threshold is set to 20. The encoder employed in this particular
case has the following parameters r = 3/4 and dv = 3.
Clearly, SCMS and MS decoders provide the best performance
by reducing the error rates to upto 10K times better than the
default encoder. Gal-B provides upto 100 times improvement
in terms of error correction. It also illustrate the performance
of CPE compared to the default encoding mechanism. This
represents a significant improvement, by more than 5 orders
of magnitude.
Fig. 3.
Decoder Configuration impact on Output BER
V.
CONCLUSION
A novel fault tolerant methodology known as Codeword
Prediction Encoder (CPE) for reliable data transmission using
unreliable hardware is proposed. Simulation results show that
performance of CPE is much better as compared to transmit-
ting data by employing traditional encoding methodology. It
is shown that by employing Min-sum decoding mechanisms
and a strong encoder r = 1/2 and dv = 4, it is possible to
correct all errors given that gate errors smaller than Pg = 6e−4.
In general, CPE performance improvement of upto 10K is
observed when compared to the normal encoding mechanism.
VI.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the Seventh Framework
Programme of the European Union, under Grant Agreement
number 309129 (i-RISC project).
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Borkar, “Designing reliable systems from unreliable components:
the challenges of transistor variability and degradation,” Micro, IEEE,
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 10–16, 2005.
[2]
C. K. Ngassa, V. Savin, E. Dupraz, and D. Declercq, “Density evolution
and functional threshold for the noisy Min-Sum decoder,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1497–1509, May 2015.
[3]
E. Dupraz and D. Declercq, “Evaluation of the robustness of LDPC
encoders to hardware noise,” in IEEE BlackSeaCom conference, 2015,
pp. 1–5.
[4]
M. R. Choudhury and K. Mohanram, “Low cost concurrent error masking
using approximate logic circuits,” Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits and Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1163–
1176, 2013.
[5]
T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-
check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2,
pp. 638–656, 2001.
[6]
V. Savin, “Split-extended LDPC codes for coded cooperation,” in Inter-
national Symposium on Information Theory and its Applications (ISITA),
2010, pp. 151–156.
!
!
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
