Variable Throughput LDPC Decoders Using SIMDbased Adaptive Quantization

Virgil Petcu*, Oana Boncalo*, Alexandru Amaricai*, and Valentin Savin‡
*Department of Computer and Information Technology, University Politehnica Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania ‡CEA-LETI, MINATEC Campus, Grenoble, France
Email: oana.boncalo@cs.upt.ro ; valentin.savin@cea.fr

Abstract—In this paper, we present an LDPC decoder design equipped with an adaptive throughput mechanism achievable using a multiple quantization scheme. Three representations are supported by the proposed architecture: 1-bit (hard decision), 2bit, and 4-bit messages. A throughput increase by of factor of 4, 2 and 1 can be achieved with respect to the 4-bit message representation version, by simultaneously decoding 4, 2, or 1 codewords. This is done by employing a single instruction multiple data (SIMD) approach at processing unit level which is able to process 4, 2 and 1 operands corresponding to the distinct codewords. We provide implementation results for a partial parallel flooding architecture, with serial processing at processing node level. FPGA implementation results indicate that the proposed SIMD approach has an overhead of about 60% in logic with respect to the fixed 4-bit LDPC decoder, with no memory increase, while having a throughput increase of 4x when the hard-decision decoding is used.
Keywords—FEC; LDPC; SIMD; multiple quantization; iterative decoding; design; flooding scheduling;
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes represent a class of Shannon theoretical capacity approaching code, defined by a spare matrix [1]. This let to their inclusion in a wide range of communication standards, such as IEEE 802.3 an, DVB-S2, WiMAX [2], etc. Quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC are a subclass which allows efficient hardware implementation of LDPC decoders [3]. An important issue in the design of LDPC codes and their corresponding decoders is represented by ensuring an optimal error correction capability versus throughput trade-off for different channel noise characteristics – Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR).
In this paper, we follow an approach based on the variation of the message quantization. Adaptive message quantization has been proposed in the context of gear-shift LDPC decoders [4][5]. The main gain of these architectures is the reduced power consumption due to lower switching activity when using messages represented on a smaller number of bits. We target increase in throughput by parallelizing the arithmetic operations within the processing units for smaller quantizations. We propose novel three-mode SIMD style variable node unit (VNU) and check node unit (CNU), which can perform one variable-node/check-node 4-bit message processing, two parallel 2-bit message processing and four 1bit (hard decision) message processing.
The proposed LDPC decoder architecture can be used for decoding 1 codeword when 4-bit message representation is
This work has been supported by the Franco-Romanian (ANR-UEFISCDI) Joint Research Programme “Blanc–2013” – project DIAMOND.

employed, 2 codewords when 2-bit message representations are used, and 4 codewords for 1-bit message quantization. The latter two cases will be executed using the same memory and routing resources. We have developed a partial parallel flooded LDPC decoder with serial message processing at VNU/CNU level which incorporates the proposed SIMD processing units. Variable throughput LDPC decoders could be used in conjunction with link adaptation mechanisms, in which the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) is chosen according to the quality of the radio channel and a target throughput that can be achieved by the SIMD-based adaptive quantization decoder. This is beyond the scope of this paper, and will be investigated in future work.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents a brief introduction into flooded LDPC decoding; related work is presented in Section III; the proposed architecture is detailed in Section IV; results and discussions can be found in Section V; last section is dedicated to the concluding remarks.

II. MIN-SUM BASED FLOODED LDPC DECODING
Min-Sum (MS) and its variants (i.e. offset MS or normalized MS) decoding algorithms for LDPC codes rely only on additions and comparisons on a small number of bits, yielding the lowest hardware complexity [6]. Two types of nodes are required: check-nodes, corresponding to to the rows of the parity-check matrix , and variable-nodes, corresponding to the columns of . We use β to denote the check-node unit (CNU) output messages, α for the variablenode unit (VNU) output messages, and γ messages for the decoder input (log likelihood ratio - LLR ), γ – a-posteriori update messages. Flooded MS decoding has as inputs the LLR messages and consists of the following steps:

Init: Initialize α, and γ messages with the channel input. For it = 1,

CNU step:

∏ ( ) 
βz,i = 

sgn(α

z

,

j

)

 

×

min

αz, j

 j∈H ( z)\i



VNU step:

 α z,i = γ i +

βj

j∈H ( z )\i

A-posteriori update:

 γ i = γ i +

βj

j∈H ( z )

end iteration

Note that check node update has to wait for the variable node

update and vice-versa. These message exchanges continue over

a number of successive iterations

978-1-5090-1288-6/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

425

TSP 2016

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Partially parallel flooded architecture overview
III. RELATED WORK Different strategies have been employed in order to adapt the throughput to different channel noise parameters and/or power consumption budget, within a given architecture. The conventional is the multi-rate approach [7]-[8]. Others are based on the selecting between different decoding algorithms during the decoding process: the algorithm with increased error correction capability, but also with increased power and throughput penalties, is turned off after several iterations [4][9]-[10]. Some use adaptive quantization schemes [5],[11][12]. Bit-serial and digit-online decoders can easily implement multiple quantization, as the check-node and variable-node processing is performed using serial arithmetic units [12]. In order to overcome the message serialization (i.e. 1 message bit is processed at a time), they use fully parallel architectures that are less flexible, and may suffer from routing problems. Our approach targets more flexibility, and serial message processing in our case refers to 1 out of , or is input for processing during each clock cycle. This requires the use of parallel arithmetic units. Typically, adaptive quantization of LDPC decoding circuits, implemented using parallel arithmetic circuits, is achieved by disabling components in the arithmetic circuit when performing computation on smaller quantization messages [5][11]. Hence, energy consumption is reduced by the decrease in switching activity.
With respect to existing work that uses adaptive quantization, our decoder attempts to trade message quantization for throughput increase, as well as power consumption decrease per decoded codeword. Based on the channel conditions, and targeted decoder performance, one can select among the existing message quantization. We propose the realization of a unit level SIMD, which remains statically configured in one of the operational modes during a codeword decoding process. For memory the SIMD modes are transparent.
IV. SIMD ARCHITECTURE
A. LDPC Decoder Architecture We target a subclass of LDPC codes named quasi cyclic
LDPC (QC-LDPC), which are structured codes [3]. The matrix is built based on a base matrix . Each B matrix entry is replaced by a square matrix of size (i.e. circulant size) equal to the zero matrix if it is -1, or the identity matrix permuted by

number equal to the value of the entry. The baseline architecture is a partially parallel solution with serial message processing at both VNU and CNU node level that uses flooding scheduling (Fig. 1). Throughput increase is obtained by means of: (i) vectorized data storage & processing: a number of VNU and CNU processing units equal to the size of the circulant; (ii) dual frame concept: VNU & CNU execution on different codewords at the same time in order to increase HUE; this is achieved by using dual port memories for and message storage, as well as context switching logic inside the control unit that dictates the type of actual operation (VNU or CNU to be carried out on each codeword). The LDPC architecture has the following building blocks:
1. Input LLR memory – each entry corresponds to a column from the base matrix of the QC-LDPC code and holds circulant size elements packed together; since dual frame is employed, the number of required locations is doubled
2. VNU processing block – VNUs corresponding to a column in the matrix; one message is being processed every clock cycle;
3. α message memory – the word size for this memory is (m x α_quant) bits ; the storage requirements are doubled for dual frame processing as with the LLR memory;
4. CNU processing block - it consists of CNUs; the CNUs perform the check node updates corresponding to a row in the B matrix;
5. β messages memory - the word size for this memory is (m x β_quant) bits; for a frame, the depth of this memory is equal the depth of the α message memory;
6. Barrel shifters – are the interconnect network between the processing units and memory.
7. Control unit (CU) – generates the read and write addresses for the memories, and generates the appropriate shift amounts for the barrel shifters; the code dependent information – shift amounts for routing, read addresses, as well as row degrees and column degrees for irregular LDPC codes - are stored in ROM look-up tables;
Serial processing limits LDPC code dependencies, making it easy to evaluate this architecture for different base matrices (i.e. control ROM information needs to be overwritten, as well as the size of some CU counters and number of address and index bits).
We propose a SIMD-based implementation of VNU and CNU processing units that can be grafted on an existing architecture with minimal control changes and offers the benefits of throughput increase of up to 4x. In order to support it, the addition of a programmable SIMD mode register is required (column 3 - Table I). This information is needed by the processing units, as well as during the decoder initialization, and the offloading of the hard decision (HD) bits. The changes required to obtain the SIMD from the baseline, are mainly inside the processing units, as highlighted in Fig. 1. Thus, we will discuss them separately in the following sections.

426
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2 - Baseline VNU architecture design

B. VNU Unit Changes
Baseline VNU operation is presented in Fig. 2. As it can be noted, one check node message is fetched for each codeword, sign extended and buffered at VNU interface. This is also the case for γ message, received during the first operation cycle of a new column processing. The design goal of the SIMD VNU is to reuse as much as possible the available resources among the 3 operation modes (see Table I), without major reduction in frequency or increase in processing time. We have identified the following shared units among the 3 modes: adders for β message accumulation, subtractors for α calculation, β FIFO (unchanged from the baseline) and all the intermediate pipeline registers required for holding data. From our analysis, the nonsaturating accumulator implementation from Fig. 3 has yielded better area and timing results than the solution of adding extra multi-mode saturation logic. We use a branching/merging implementation using the SIMD mode bits for path selection and masking in order to maximize the resource reuse between the 3 implemented SIMD modes.

Fig. 3 illustrates the unpacking scheme. Unpacking logic and

the level comparison (X4 only) and saturation logic are

branched implementation as they are different for the 3 modes.

We chose a classic Gallager B algorithm majority voting

threshold of ℎ =

⁄2 . The above assumptions give a

buffering requirement of

⁄2 + 2 −

.

Extra guard bits are needed in the event of carry

propagation/borrow during the HD VNU processing.

Another, relevant change with respect to baseline is the number of HD bits outputted by the SIMD based VNU. For the proposed VNU outputs 4 HD bits. This means outputting either the selection of the most significant bits for in and , or

Fig. 3 - VNU SIMD architecture & unpacking scheme

Fig. 4. - Baseline CNU architecture design

the result of the comparison between each buffer and a threshold in the case of (hard decision decoding based on majority voter). SAT & PACK logic implements saturation of the outputted variable node messages based on the SIMD mode. After saturation, the packaging of 1/2/4 values to the 4 bit result register is done.

C. CNU Unit Changes Baseline CNU operation Fig.4 can be resumed as: every
cycle a new alpha message is inputted per codeword, converted from two’s complement (C2) to sign-magnitude (SM), and sent to the comparator unit that computes the first and second minima as well as the index for the first minimum. The sign of the β output message is the xor of all signs except the sign of β.

SIMD CNU (Fig. 5) has two logic paths: one for and the
second for and . The highlighted units are reused in at least 2 of the 3 operating modes. Sign FIFO buffer is extended to 4 bits to support but it is also used without any extra logic by the other 2 modes. All the pipeline and results registers are reused by all 3 operating modes and the minimum index detection logic is duplicated (for mode). We summarize the requirements of each mode:

1.

: same as in baseline.

2. : a set of 2 identical 3-input 3-output lookup tables,

one for each of ‘s 2 operands. The 3 inputs represent the

current values of

,

and current α absolut value.

The outputs represent the new values of

,

and a

decision bit to update index with current index if min1 has

changed value. The index storage logic needs to be duplicated.

3. : sign calculation logic, expanded to 4 bits width.

C2SM and SM-C2&PACK are multiplexing glue logic between and data paths.

TABLE I. SIMD MODES

MQ

Number of messages/cc

One hot encoding

4

x1

001

2

x2

010

1

x4

100

427
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5 CNU SIMD architecture

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We present decoder synthesis results for Xilinx FPGA XC7VX485T device, for 2 LDPC codes, one irregular (WiMAX rate 1/2 code with matrix expansion factor 96) and one regular (3,6) (rate 1/2, matrix expansion factor 54 [14]) – Table II . We achieve the flexibility to adapt decoding throughput at a relatively low cost of 50-60% logic resources increase and at no extra memory and interconnect cost. It is worth emphasizing that in ASIC technologies, memory and interconnects occupy more than 75% of the area of the decoder [13]. We computed the decoder's processing throughput (T) for coded bits as:

=

ℎ

_

+

_

+

_

Analysis of processing units’ synthesis results shows considerable overhead of 3-mode SIMD approach with respect to baseline– Table III. Nonetheless, for the entire decoder, results show that the increase is compensated by the reusability of control logic and message storage and routing.

TABLE II. Code
WiMAX [r1/2, MQ4]

LDPC DECODER SYNTHESIS RESULTS

LUTFF pairs

BRAMs

Freq [MHz]

Tcoded [Mbps]

15076

35

333

483

SIMD WiMAX [r1/2, MQ4/2/1] 24401

35

327 475/936/1817

dv3 [r1/2, MQ4]

7468

20

344.5

289

SIMD dv3 [r1/2, MQ4/2/1]

11210

20

345 290/571/1108

TABLE III. PROCESSING UNITS IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

LUT-FF pairs Freq [MHz]

VNU base [MQ ]

34

377.758

VNU SIMD [MQ / / ]

97

CNU base [MQ ]

42

369 333.361

CNU SIMD [MQ / / ]

75

357

VI. CONCLUSIONS
We propose SIMD like VNUs and CNUs that allow a throughput increase of 1x, 2x and 4x with respect to the baseline decoder within a flooded architecture, with the price of 50-60% overhead in logic only and the same memory cost as the baseline. The proposed multi-mode quantization decoder can be used in conjunction with link adaptation mechanisms, in which the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) is chosen according to the quality of the radio channel and a target throughput that can be achieved by the SIMDbased adaptive quantization decoder. This is beyond the scope of this paper, and will be investigated in future work.
REFERENCES
[1] D.J.C. Mackay and R.M. Neal. “Near Shannon limit performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes”, IEEE Ellectronic Letters, vol 32, no 8, pp 126-131, Aug. 2003.
[2] IEEE-802.16e, “Physical and medium access control layers for combined fixe and mobile operation in licensed bands,” 2005, amendment to Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems.
[3] M.P.C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes from Circulant Permutation Matrices,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, 2004.
[4] J. Andrade, G. Falcao, V. Silva “Accelerating and deccerating min-sum based gear-shift LDPC decoders” Proc. 40th Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2015
[5] K. Cushon, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, W. Gross, "Energy-efficient gearshift LDPC decoders" Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Application-specific Systems,Architectures and Processors (ASAP), 2014
[6] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, 1998
[7] Y-L. Ueng, B. J. Yang, C.-J. Yang, H.-C. Lee, J.-D. Yang “An Efficient Multi-Standard LDPC Decoder Design Using Hardware-Friendly Shuffled Decoding” IEEE Trans. On Circuits and Systems I, Vol. 60, No. 3, pp. 743-757, 2013
[8] B. Le Gal, C. Jego, C. Leroux, “A Flexible NISC-Based LDPC Decoder” IEEE Trans. On Signal Processing, Vol. 62, No. 10, pp 24692480, 2014
[9] M. Ardakani, F. Kschischang, "Gear-shift Decoding" IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1235-1242, 2006
[10] X. Chen, Q. Huang, S. Lin, V. Akella, “FPGA based Low-complexity high-throughput Tri-mode Decoder for Quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes" Proc. Annual Allterton Conf. on Communication, Control and Computing, 2009
[11] C.-H. Chung, Y.-L. Ueng, M.-C. Lu, M.-C. Lin, "Adaptive quantization for low-density-parity-check decoders" Proc. IEEE Symp. On Information Theory and Its Applications, 2010
[12] A. Darabiha, A. C.Carusone, F. Kschischang, "A Bit-serial Approximate Min-sum LDPC Decoder and FPGA Implementation" Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2006
[13] C.H. Liu, S. W. Yen, C. L. Chen, et. all “An LDPC Decoder Chip Based on Self-Routing Network for IEEE 802.16e Applications” IEEE Trans. On Solid State Circuits, Vol. 54, Issue 8, 2008
[14] FP7-FET-Open “Innovative Reliable Chip Design from Low Power Unreliable Components” Deliverable D6.1 – “Report on Reliability Aware Synthesis and LDPC Decoders Built with Unreliable Components”, available online: www.i-risc.eu , 2015

428
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:31:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

