FPGA Implementation of Regular Random LDPC Codes

Huang Xin, Liu Yong and Ding Kui Laboratory of LOW-frequency Electro-magnetic Communication Technology of the 722 Research
Wuhan 430079, China

Abstract: In order to ensure the performance at the same time to reduce the complexity of the encoding and decoding, the paper focuses on the binary regular random LDPC codes of fast encoding and decoding and its hardware implementation method. This idea can be effectively realized by using upper triangular and lower triangular (LU) decomposition of the the minimal product of row weight and column weight as the principal component as well as the log domain decoding method. For FPGA design, the key is to solve the contradiction between the amount of resource, encoding and decoding efficiency, so as to achieve a higher efficiency of the compile at the same time the amount of resource is relatively small. Key words: LDPC code; log domain decoding; FPGA
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC code with its excellent and practical performance has become a typical representative of the modern encoding theory, but also is one of the hot spots in the current communications industry. The LDPC code is a kind of linear block codes with sparse matrix, that is, the number of nonzero elements in the check matrix is much smaller than that of the zero element. LDPC code is proposed by Gallager[1] in 1962, which is close to the Shannon limit in the AWGN channel, and the sparsity of the check matrix makes it possible to achieve the code. Gallager has a comprehensive description of the LDPC code, including its theoretical analysis, construction method and the method of encoding and decoding, besides, the proposed iterative decoding algorithm is far more than Turbo. But by the time limit of computation requirement and the emergence of BCH codes, concatenated codes, few people pay attention to LDPC code.
Later, the study of LDPC codes has made valuable achievements, such as parity check matrix of the structure[2,3], the decoding algorithm of simplification and LDPC code realization, LDPC codes with their excellent performance in error correction has been applied in many practical communication standard. It is because of the deep research of LDPC codes, which makes it possible to realize the hardware[4-6].
II. LOG DOMAIN DECODING OF LDPC CODES
The process of the log domain decoding algorithm[7] and the probability domain decoding algorithm is in general agreement, which mainly includes initialization, updating the check point, updating the variable point, and the decision. Log domain decoding algorithm convert multiplication into addition operation, greatly save hardware resource, and
978-1-5090-1997-7/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

reduce the decoding complexity. What is more, initialization

does not need to make normalized process, further reduces the

amount of computation and its properties with probability

domain are in roughly the same.

Similar to the probability domain decoding algorithm,

the log domain can be used in the form of log likelihood ratio (LLR) decoding[7], for binary code, it is a value. The log

likelihood ratio is defined as the ratio of the likelihood value

of the non-zero element to the likelihood value of the zero

element in the GF (2) domain.

(1) Initialization

For the GF (2) domain, the likelihood values obtained by

the Gauss channel model are only 1 possible. Throughout

gauss probability density function

f x 

1 2 

 exp  

x   2
2 2

 

:

So the log likelihood ratio is:

Lch (x)



ln

P( x P(x

 

a) 0)



2a 2

(1)

(2) Update check point

The process is roughly the same as the probability field

decoding, and it is also the calculation of the check point. It is

assumed that the matrix H is regular, the row weight is 6, and

the column weight is 3. The total probability formula can be

transformed into the sum of 6 conditional probabilities which

satisfy the constraint condition:

 Lr (m  n)  2ar tanh1(

tanh(Lq (n '  m) / 2))

n'N (m)\n

(2)

N (m) represented all the variable points adjacent to the

m-th check point; n’ represented other variable points in

addition to the variable point n for certain check point m.

(3) Update variable point

 Lq (n  m)  Lch (xn ) 

Lr (m '  n)

(3)

m 'M (n)\m

M (n) represented all the check points adjacent to the

n-th variable; m’ represented other check points in addition to

the check point m for certain variable n.

(4) Decision

The posterior probability likelihood ratio for each

variable point is calculated by:

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

 Lq (n)  Lch (xn ) 

Lr (m  n)

(4)

mM (n)

After getting the posterior probability likelihood ratio of

each variable point, comparing it with 0, the corresponding

element is the maximum possible value of the variable.

xn  Lq (xn  a1) a1  GF (2)

(5)

Finally, all possible values of the variables combined

into a codeword X, if X  H T  0 , thus the decoding is

successful, if the above equation is not zero, thus the decoding

is failure, proceeding to the second step to continue to iterate

until it reaches maximum iteration times.

III. THE PROCESS OF THE HARDWARE IMPLEMENT OF LDPC
CODES
The hardware implement of LDPC codes[8] mainly aimed to decoding, it mainly includes converting the floating point number into integer, the input data is processed in Initialization Unit(INU), the check points are updated in Check Node processing Unit(CNU), the variable points are updated in Variable Node processing Unit(CNU), and the decision is made in Decision Unit(DEU), lratio signal means the value of initialization, lr signal means the updated value of check points, pr signal means the updated value of variable points, LLR signal means the value of decision. In the process, set RAM associated with the checkpoints, RAM associated with the variable points and RAM associated with the decision, each RAM mainly includes the following factors: clock, the address of read and the address of write, input data, read and write control signal and output data. An address translator is also set up to match the chaotic sequence in the decoding process. Test process is actually through the set state machine to control the decoding process, which use the Modelsim software to test the 2-th, 3-th, 4-th step of the decoding process and finally carry comprehensive test.
The specific process of initialization is shown in figure 1(a). Firstly, initialize the data, controlled by setting the signal InitMemTest_Run, state for the idle state. In this state, set some initial value of variables: Alg_Stop signal that used to control algorithm start and end is set to low level, READY signal whether the data is ready is set to low level, Init_Finished signal whether the initialization is completed is set to low level. When InitMemTest_Run signal is set to high level, data is initialized; InitMemTest_Run signal is only set to low level, indicating that the initialization end, state converted into the process of operation, this time sends out the READY signal and set it to high level, Init_Finished signal is also set to high level, the state converted to the idle state 2. The idle state 2 gets ready for updating the next check points, Run_MemWriteRead_pr signal used to control read and write of the check points is set to read, read address is set to 0, state converts into the operation state of check points.

Figure 1(a). initialization and decision
The specific process of the check points is shown in figure 1(b).Because the matrix H is regular and row weight is 6, so the check points are divided into 6 datas for a group, so the operation state of check points actually includes 16 states, state 1-6 defined as reading datas from CPU to operate; 7-th state judged if all the datas are finished by the read address, if finished,state is transferred to the eighth state, if not, state is transferred to the state 1 to continue to read the datas; the eighth state is ready for that the result of computing will be written back to the CPU, Run_MemWriteRead_pr signal is set to write, write address is set to 0, the state is transferred to the ninth state, because RAM may make the data delay, thus setting state 9 as waiting state; state 10-15 defined as that the result of computing is written back to the CPU, also taking 6 data as a group; the sixteenth state judged if all the data are finished through the write address, if not, state is transferred to the state 10 to continue to write datas, if finished,state is transferred to the operation state of variable points.
The specific process of the variable points is shown in figure 1(c). In this state, the operation is roughly the same as the check points, but the column weight of H matrix is 3, so the variable points are divided into 3 datas for a group. And in the operation process of variable points, the address of RAM is arranged in disorder rather than in order like the check points, so it is needed to call the function to convert the order address into random sequence. This state includes 12 states: the first state is ready state, Run_MemWriteRead_lr signal used to control read and write of the variable points is set to read, the read address is set to 0; state 2-4 defined as reading datas from CPU to operate, paying attention to the address that adopted random sequence. 5-th state judged if all the data are finished by the read address, if finished,state is transferred to the sixth state, if not, state is transferred to the state 2 to continue to read the datas; the sixth state is ready for that the result of computing will be written back to the CPU, Run_MemWriteRead_lr signal is set to write, write address is set to 0, the state is transferred to the 7-th state, because RAM

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

may make the data delay, thus setting state 8 as waiting state; state 9-11 defined as that the result of computing is written back to the CPU, also taking 3 data as a group; the 12-th state judged if all the data are finished through the write address, if

not, state is transferred to the state 9 to continue to write datas, if finished,state is transferred to decision state. Meanwhile, Alg_Stop signal is set to high level. State transition diagram is shown in figure 2.

Figure 1(b). operation process of check points

Figure 1(c). operation process of variable points Figure 2. state transition diagram

Finally, Run_MemWriteRead_LLR signal used to control read and write of decision is set to write, write address is in the order of the decision and is set to 0, likelihood ratios obtained in the operation of variable points are stored by decision RAM and written to the CPU to do the test.
IV. THE RESULT OF HARDWARE TEST
Whether decoding process of the hardware implementation is accurate needs to be tested.We select the matrix H that has 1000 bits of information and 2000 bits of codes. Channel is stationary memoryless Gaussian channel, the method of modulation is BPSK modulation, noise is
additive white Gaussian noise and obey N(0,  2 ). The
standard datas used in the test are based on the C ++, including the initialization file, the updating check points file, updating variable points file, the decision file. Each test results will be displayed in the Modelsim, pass represents the success of test, fail represents the failure of test, if failure, print out the corresponding error values and the corresponding ideal values. The upper level of the likelihood ratio obtained

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

in the operation of variable points make inversion as the final decision results.The results of test are shown in figure 3.

Figure 3. the result of test

REFERENCES

[1] R.G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT

Press,1963.

[2] S.Landner and O.Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of

trapping sets in Structured LDPC codes, ”in Proc. Wireless

Networks,Communications

and

Mobile

Computing

Conference,vol.1,2005,pp.630-635

[3] CHEN Y, CHEN X,ZHAO Y, et al. Design and implementation of

multi-mode QC-LDPC decoder[C]. 2010 12th IEEE International Conference

on Communication Technology, Nanjing: 2010: 1145-1148

[4] BLANKSBY A J, HOWLAND C J. A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder[J], IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 2002, 37(3): 404-412. [5] XiaoHeng Chen, Jingyu Kang, Shu Lin. Memory system optimization for FPGA-based implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codcs decoders[J]. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 2011, 58(1): 98-111. [6] CHEN X, LIN S, AKELLI.A V. QSN-a simple circular-shift network for reconfigurable quasi-cyclic LDPC decoders[J]. IEEE: Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, 2010, 57(10): 782-786. [7] F.Guilloud, E.Boutillon, J.Tousch,and J.Danger, “Generic decription and synthesis of LDPC decoders, ” IEEE Trans.Commun.,to be published. [8] G.Masera, F.Quaglio,and F.Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans.Circuits Syst.,vol.54,no.6,pp.542-546, June 2007

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:32:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

