arXiv:2505.19027v1  [cs.IT]  25 May 2025
High Throughput QC-LDPC Decoder With
Optimized Schedule Policy in Layered Decoding
Dongxu Chang, Qingqing Peng, and Guanghui Wang
School of Mathematics
Shandong University
Jinan, China
Email: {dongxuchang, pqing}@mail.sdu.edu.cn,
ghwang@sdu.edu.cn
Guiying Yan
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, CAS
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
Email: yangy@amss.ac.cn
Abstract—In this study, a scheduling policy of layered decoding
for quasi-cycle (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes
with high throughput and good performance is designed. The
influence of scheduling on the delay of the decoder’s hardware
implementation and on the decoding performance are considered
simultaneously. Specifically, we analyze the idle time required
under various scheduling sequences within a pipelined decoding
architecture and formulate the problem as a traveling salesman
problem (TSP) aiming at minimizing idle time. Furthermore, con-
sidering that different scheduling sequences can affect decoding
performance, we refine the graph used to solve the TSP based
on scheduling characteristics that promote improved decoding
outcomes. Simulation results demonstrate that the identified
scheduling sequence achieves a low number of hardware delays
while maintaining excellent decoding performance for 5G New
Radio (NR) LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check code, scheduling pol-
icy, decoding efficiency
I. Introduction
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code [1] has been widely
used in communication fields, such as 5G New Radio (NR) [2],
IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) [3]. It was demonstrated by D. MacKay
and M. Neal in 1996 [4] that LDPC codes can approach
the Shannon limit. The belief propagation (BP) decoding
algorithm [5] of LDPC code is most commonly used due to
its low complexity and good performance in practice.
As a structured LDPC code, Quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC
codes feature a parity-check matrix constructed from circularly
shifted identity submatrices [6]. Owing to their exceptional
hardware compatibility and low encoding/decoding complex-
ity, QC-LDPC codes have been adopted in the 5G New Radio
(NR) standard for data channels [2].
In 2004, D. Hocevar introduced the concept of layered belief
propagation (LBP) decoding [7], which updates information
sequentially. This decoding strategy can accelerate the decod-
ing process as it ensures that the most recent information is
disseminated. In comparison to the flooding scheduling strat-
egy [8], which updates all variable-to-check (V2C) messages
or check-to-variable (C2V) messages simultaneously in one
iteration, LBP can reduce decoding complexity by nearly 50%
while achieving the same performance.
Through the pipeline decoding architecture [9] of LBP,
QC LDPC can achieve high clock frequency and high data-
throughput in hardware implementation. However, memory
conflicts can arise when the information to be read from
the current row has not yet been written in the previous
row. In such cases, idle cycles are required to delay the
reading of information, which causes memory conflicts. This
increases the decoding latency and reduces the throughput of
the decoder. It is noteworthy that the number of idle cycles
required can vary depending on the update order of check
nodes and variable nodes.
In [10], a random search algorithm was developed to reorder
the rows and columns of the parity-check matrix, enabling
the identification of decoding orders with fewer idle cycles.
In [11], by employing a flooding scheduling strategy on
certain layers, memory conflicts can be mitigated. In [12] and
[13], the required number of idle cycles was analyzed and
characterized by the common degree of adjacent check nodes
in the decoding order. By formulating the problem of finding
the scheduling sequence with the minimum idle cycles as a
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) [14], scheduling sequences
with low decoding latency can be obtained. Nevertheless, there
is still room to further optimize the decoding order to reduce
the number of required idle cycles. More importantly, existing
studies that investigate the impact of decoding scheduling on
hardware memory conflicts have not taken into account its
effects on decoding performance. As demonstrated in [15]–
[17], different scheduling sequences can significantly impact
both decoding efficiency and decoding performance.
In this study, similar to [12] and [13], we transform the
problem of finding the scheduling sequence that minimized
the number of idle cycles into an equivalent TSP for a
solution. Furthermore, based on the characteristics that an
effective scheduling sequence should possess [16], we modify
the graph used for TSP accordingly, so that the scheduling
sequence obtained from the TSP can achieve good decoding
performance. We demonstrate that when the latency of the
soft-output (SO) data path is small, the constraints imposed
on the scheduling sequence from the perspective of decoding
performance do not, on average, hinder our ability to find the
scheduling with low idle time. Simulation results confirm that
the scheduling sequences obtained by the proposed algorithm
effectively resolve memory conflicts while maintaining excel-
lent decoding performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
provides an introduction to the scheduling problem under LBP,
as well as the calculation of the number of idle cycles required
in the pipelined decoding architecture. Section III presents the
policy for finding scheduling sequences that simultaneously
achieve favorable idle time and decoding performance. Section
IV provides a comparative simulation analysis of various
scheduling policies. We conclude the paper in Section V.
II. Preliminaries
A. Belief Propagation for LDPC Codes
A brief review of the iterative BP decoding algorithm [5] is
provided to facilitate the analysis of scheduling sequences.
The message-passing process of BP decoding consists of
V2C message updates and C2V message updates. The message
update rule of V2C is
m(l)
i→α = m0 +
X
h∈N(i)\α
m(l−1)
h→i ,
(1)
and the message update rule of C2V is
m(l)
α→i = 2 tanh−1

Y
j∈N(α)\i
tanh

m(l−1)
j→α/2

(2)
where m0 is the channel message in LLR form, l is the number
of iterations, N(v) represents the nodes connected directly to
node v, m(l)
i→α means the message from variable node i to check
node α in iteration l and m(l)
α→i means the message from check
node α to variable node i in iteration l. The initial message
m(0)
i→α and m(0)
α→i is 0.
B. Layered Belief Propagation and Scheduling Sequences
In each decoding iteration, LBP [7] sequentially selects each
check node or layer in the graph and updates the information
on all edges connected to the selected check node or layer,
where one layer refers to all the rows obtained from a single
row of the base graph after lifting. Specifically, it performs
V2C message updates along all edges connected to the selected
check node, followed by C2V message updates. The order in
which check nodes are selected for updating in LBP is referred
to as the scheduling sequence, defined as follows:
Definition 1 (scheduling sequences). The scheduling sequence
of a QC-LDPC code is a sequence composed of the indices of
layers. It represents the order in which the layers are selected
for decoding in LBP, with the decoder selecting layers for
decoding according to the order in which they appear in the
scheduling sequences.
When the same message passing order is used in each
iteration, the scheduling sequence can consist of only the layer
update order within one iteration.
Different scheduling sequences can have a great impact on
the message passing efficiency in layered decoding, thereby
affecting the decoding performance and latency [15].
read
write
clock
𝑣1 𝑣2 𝑣3 𝑣4 𝑣5 𝑣6
1
2
3
4
5
6
𝑣1 𝑣2 𝑣3 𝑣4 𝑣5
𝑡= 3
𝑣7 𝑣8 𝑣9 𝑣1 𝑣2
idle cycle
layer 1
layer 1
layer 2
8
9
10
11
12
⋯
⋯
𝑣6
7
13
14
15
⋯
Fig. 1. Idle cycle in the pipelined decoding architecture.
C. Idle Cycles in Pipelining
The pipelined decoding architecture achieves high through-
put by effectively utilizing hardware resources [9], [18]. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, the information associated with the
variable nodes is read and written in a pipelined manner, where
t represents the latency of the SO data path, measured in clock
cycles. During this process, the decoder simultaneously reads
the information of the variable nodes in the current decoding
layer while writing the updated information of the variable
nodes from the previously decoded layer.
However, when there are correlations between the input and
output information, memory conflicts can occur, necessitating
the insertion of idle cycles to prevent such conflicts. For
example, in Fig. 1, one idle cycle needs to be inserted to avoid
memory conflicts. It is worth noting that in Fig. 1, the read
and write-back order of the information has been optimized
to ensure the minimum number of required idle cycles [19]–
[21]. Following [19] and [22], for a given scheduling sequence
{c1, c2, · · · , cm}, the number of idle cycles nidle required in one
iteration can be calculated using the following equation:
nidle = max

t −(dc1 −dc
cm,c1), 0

+
m
X
i=2
max

t −(dci −dc
ci−1,ci), 0

,
where dci is the degree of layers ci and dc
ci−1,ci is the common
degree of layers ci−1 and ci.
III. Scheduling with Small Idle Time And Good Performance
To achieve high throughput and performance in scheduling,
in this section, we transform the problem of finding the
scheduling sequence with minimal idle time into an asym-
metric TSP. By adjusting the graph used in the TSP, based
on the characteristics of good scheduling sequences [16], this
approach simultaneously accounts for the impact of scheduling
on both hardware design and decoding performance.
A. The TSP for Solving Memory Conflicts
The task of identifying the scheduling sequence that mini-
mizes the number of idle cycles can be equivalently reformu-
lated as an asymmetric TSP, defined as follows: for a given
complete weighted direct graph G, the objective is to find a
Hamiltonian cycle with the minimum total weight [14]. In
this context, the nodes in G represent each layer in the given
QC-LDPC code. The weight wi−1,i of the edge from node
ci−1 to node ci in G represents the number of idle cycles
𝑐1
𝑐2
𝑐3
𝑐4
𝑤1,2
𝑤2,1
Fig. 2. The graph G for TSP with 4 layers.
required for decoding from layer ci−1 to layer ci, which is
wi−1,i = max(t −(dci −dc
ci−1,ci), 0). It should be noted that the
idle time from layer ci−1 to ci may differ from the idle time
from layer ci to ci−1, meaning that the weights of the edges
between two nodes in the G may not be the same in different
direction. Figure 2 illustrates the graph G constructed for the
asymmetric TSP with four layers. The resulting asymmetric
TSP can be directly solved using the differential evolution
algorithm, or it can be transformed into a symmetric TSP for
subsequent resolution [23].
B. Optimization of Idle Time And Decoding Performance
The choice of scheduling sequences influences not only the
number of required idle cycles but also the decoding perfor-
mance. As demonstrated in [16], scheduling sequences that
achieve good decoding performance should prioritize updating
check nodes with smaller degrees and fewer connections to
punctured variable nodes.
Therefore, scheduling sequences with good decoding per-
formance are expected to exhibit the following characteristics:
1. The layers in the scheduling sequence should be ordered
by their degrees, from smallest to largest. 2. Layers with the
same degree should be ordered by the number of connections
to punctured variable nodes, from smallest to largest. Based on
the above requirements, we group the layers in the graph such
that the layers within each group have the same degree and
the same number of connections to punctured variable nodes.
The groups are further labeled based on (di, pi), in ascending
order, where di is the degree of layer i and pi is the number of
connections to punctured variable nodes of layer i. Specifically,
group i is labeled before group j (i.e., i < j) if di < d j, or
di = dj and pi < p j. The labels of the layer groups are denoted
sequentially from 1 to P.
Consider an arbitrary edge in the directed graph G. Let this
edge point from a layer labeled i to a layer labeled j. If i
and j do not satisfy any of the following three conditions,
set the weight of the corresponding edge to positive infinity:
1. i + 1 = j. 2. i = j. 3. i = P, j = 1. The third scenario
above corresponds to the last updated check node in the current
iteration transitioning to the first updated check node in the
subsequent iteration. With these modifications, the resulting
scheduling sequence can satisfy the characteristics of efficient
scheduling. Additionally, for the edges directed from the layers
labeled P to the layers labeled 1, we add an extra weight of H
𝑐1
𝑐2
𝑐3
𝑐4
label 1
label 2
label 3
label 3
Fig. 3.
The modified graph G for TSP with 4 layers. The dashed edges
represent weights of positive infinity.
to these edges, where H is a large constant. This ensures that
the resulting scheduling sequence strictly follows the order
of updating the layers with smaller labels before those with
larger labels within a single iteration. Figure 3 illustrates the
modified version of the graph in Figure 2, where dashed edges
represent edges with infinite weights.
By solving the asymmetric TSP problem on the modified
graph G, an optimal scheduling sequence with minimal idle
time can be obtained within those that exhibit good decod-
ing performance. Specifically, for the scheduling sequence
{c1, c2, · · · , cm}, if c1 and cm are carefully chosen such that
the common degree from cm to c1 is small, then nidle can be
approximated by n′
idle, where
n′
idle =
m
X
i=2
max

t −(dci −dc
ci−1,ci), 0

.
(3)
We show that if the latency of the SO data path t is rela-
tively small, then probabilistically, prioritizing the update of
low-degree check nodes before high-degree check nodes can
achieve the minimum n′
idle.
Proposition 1. Let the variable nodes be uniformly randomly
connected to the check nodes, and denote the minimum degree
of the layers by dmin. Assume that t ≤dmin and N approaches
infinity. Then prioritizing the update of low-degree check
nodes before high-degree check nodes can yield the minimum
expectation of n′
idle.
Proof. Appendix.
□
IV. Simulation Results
In this section, we compare the idle time and decoding
performance of the scheduling sequences obtained under
different scheduling policies. Specifically, we examine the
scheduling policy derived from solving the TSP with the sole
objective of minimizing idle cycles (denoted as "idle"), as
well as the scheduling policy that simultaneously minimizes
idle cycles and optimizes decoding performance (denoted as
"idle&performance"). Additionally, we include comparisons
with the scheduling policy that orders layers based on their
degree in ascending order (denoted as "LD") [24] and the
nested scheduling policy derived from threshold calculations
(denoted as "nest") [25].
-0.8
-0.7
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Es/N0 [dB]
BLER
Rate: 1/3, Information Length: 8448
LD
nest
idle
idle&performance
(a)
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Es/N0 [dB]
BLER
Rate: 1/2, Information Length: 2112
LD
nest
idle
idle&performance
(b)
Fig. 4. Error-correcting performance for various scheduling policies under different code rates and information lengths. The 5G NR LDPC codes constructed
from BG1 are evaluated. The latency of the SO data path t is 4.
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Es/N0 [dB]
BLER
Rate: 1/3, Information Length: 8448
LD
nest
idle
idle&performance
(a)
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Es/N0 [dB]
BLER
Rate: 1/2, Information Length: 2112
LD
nest
idle
idle&performance
(b)
Fig. 5. Error-correcting performance for various scheduling policies under different code rates and information lengths. The 5G NR LDPC codes constructed
from BG1 are evaluated. The latency of the SO data path t is 9.
TABLE I
nidle for different scheduling policies under 5G NR LDPC BG1.
t = 4
t = 9
Scheduling policies R = 1/3, K = 8448 R = 1/2, K = 2112 R = 1/3, K = 8448 R = 1/2, K = 2112
nest [25]
19
10
214
99
LD [24]
15
9
195
89
idle
2
2
158
66
idle&performance
6
4
176
79
In Fig. 4 and 5, the block error rate (BLER) performance
for various scheduling policies is presented for t = 4 and
t = 9, respectively, across different code rates and information
lengths. The 5G NR LDPC codes constructed from base
graph (BG) 1 are evaluated. It can be observed that, for
different values of t, code rates, and information lengths,
the scheduling sequences obtained solely by minimizing idle
time exhibit large performance degradation compared to other
scheduling policies. In contrast, scheduling methods that take
both decoding performance and memory conflicts into account
can mitigate the performance loss caused by focusing solely
on memory conflict reduction. By characterizing the features
of effective scheduling, optimal decoding performance can be
achieved.
In TABLE I, the values of nidle for different scheduling
policies under 5G NR LDPC BG1 are presented. It can be seen
that the number of idle cycles obtained when simultaneously
considering idle time and decoding performance is slightly
higher than that in the case where only idle time is considered.
However, compared to other scheduling policies that solely
focus on decoding performance, the number of idle cycles used
under the proposed scheduling policy can be largely reduced.
V. Conclusion
In this study, we considered the impact of scheduling
sequences on the decoding performance and hardware idle
time of LDPC codes. By analyzing the number of idle cycles
required for different scheduling sequences and the character-
istics of effective scheduling sequences, we transformed the
problem of minimizing idle cycles while maintaining good
decoding performance into a TSP for resolution. Simulation
shows that the scheduling sequences we obtained exhibit
both good decoding performance and low idle time. Further
research is required to better consider the characteristics of
effective scheduling in order to enhance performance and
reduce idle time.
Acknowledgment
This work was partially supported by the National Key R&D
Program of China (2023YFA1009600).
Appendix
For two randomly chosen layers ci and c j, let their degrees
be denoted as di and dj, respectively. Since the variable nodes
are uniformly randomly connected to the check nodes, the
expected value Ei,j of max(t −(dc j −dc
ci,cj), 0) is
Ei, j =
min(di,dj)
X
k=dj+1−t
P(dc
ci,c j = k)(k + t −d j)
=
min(di,dj)
X
k=dj+1−t
Ck
di · C
dj−k
N−di
C
dj
n
(k + t −dj)
=
min(di,dj)
X
k=dj+1−t
1
Nk + o( 1
Nk )
=
1
Ndj+1−t + o(
1
Ndj+1−t ).
Therefore, the number of idle cycles required by layers with
smaller degrees is expected to be significantly greater than
that required by layers with larger degrees. As a result, for a
layer with a small degree, the degree of the preceding layer
during its update should be as small as possible to minimize
the number of idle cycles required by the small degree layer.
Since we assume c1 and cm are carefully chosen such that the
common degree from cm to c1 is small, updating the layers in
ascending order of their degrees can minimize the expectation
of n′
idle.
References
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] 3GPP, “5G NR; multiplexing and channel coding (release 15),” 3GPP
TS 38.212 v15. 2.0, 2018.
[3] I. C. S. L. S. Committee et al., “IEEE standard for informa-
tion technology-telecommunications and information exchange between
systems-local and metropolitan area networks-specific requirements Part
11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer
(PHY) Specifications,” IEEE Std 802.11ˆ, 2007.
[4] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of low
density parity check codes,” Electronics letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–
458, 1997.
[5] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse
matrices,” IEEE transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2,
pp. 399–431, 1999.
[6] M. P. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from cir-
culant permutation matrices,” IEEE transactions on information theory,
vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, 2004.
[7] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered
decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing
Systems, 2004. SIPS 2004., pp. 107–112, IEEE, 2004.
[8] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound
codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, 1998.
[9] T. Bhatt, V. Sundaramurthy, V. Stolpman, and D. McCain, “Pipelined
block-serial decoder architecture for structured LDPC codes,” in 2006
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing Proceedings, vol. 4, pp. IV–IV, IEEE, 2006.
[10] W. Sułek, “Idle time reduction in TDMP implementation of LDPC
decoder,” in 2010 IEEE Region 8 International Conference on Compu-
tational Technologies in Electrical and Electronics Engineering (SIBIR-
CON), pp. 44–49, IEEE, 2010.
[11] V. L. Petrovi´c, M. M. Markovi´c, D. M. El Mezeni, L. V. Saranovac,
and A. Radoševi´c, “Flexible high throughput QC-LDPC decoder with
perfect pipeline conflicts resolution and efficient hardware utilization,”
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 67,
no. 12, pp. 5454–5467, 2020.
[12] C. Marchand, J.-B. Doré, L. Conde-Canencia, and E. Boutillon, “Con-
flict resolution for pipelined layered LDPC decoders,” in 2009 IEEE
Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp. 220–225, IEEE, 2009.
[13] Z. Wu and K. Su, “Updating conflict solution for pipelined layered
LDPC decoder,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Signal
Processing, Communications and Computing (ICSPCC), pp. 1–6, IEEE,
2015.
[14] D. Davendra, Traveling salesman problem: Theory and applications.
BoD–Books on Demand, 2010.
[15] D. Chang, G. Wang, G. Yan, and D. Yin, “An optimization model
for offline scheduling policy of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE
Communications Letters, 2024.
[16] K. Tian and H. Wang, “A novel base graph based static scheduling
scheme for layered decoding of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Communica-
tions Letters, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1450–1453, 2022.
[17] B. Wang, Y. Zhu, and J. Kang, “Two effective scheduling schemes for
layered belief propagation of 5g ldpc codes,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1683–1686, 2020.
[18] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. R. Cavallaro, “High throughput, parallel,
scalable LDPC encoder/decoder architecture for OFDM systems,” in
2006 IEEE Dallas/CAS workshop on design, applications, integration
and software, pp. 39–42, IEEE, 2006.
[19] M. Rovini, G. Gentile, F. Rossi, and L. Fanucci, “A minimum-latency
block-serial architecture of a decoder for IEEE 802.11 n LDPC codes,”
in 2007 IFIP International Conference on Very Large Scale Integration,
pp. 236–241, IEEE, 2007.
[20] C.-Y. Lin, L.-W. Liu, Y.-C. Liao, and H.-C. Chang, “A 33.2 Gbps/ITER.
Reconfigurable LDPC decoder fully compliant with 5G NR applica-
tions,” in 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems
(ISCAS), pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2021.
[21] J. Nadal and A. Baghdadi, “Parallel and flexible 5G LDPC decoder
architecture targeting FPGA,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1141–1151, 2021.
[22] Y. Ren, H. Harb, Y. Shen, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, and A. Burg, “A
generalized adjusted min-sum decoder for 5G LDPC codes: Algorithm
and implementation,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I:
Regular Papers, 2024.
[23] R. Jonker and T. Volgenant, “Transforming asymmetric into symmetric
traveling salesman problems,” Operations Research Letters, vol. 2, no. 4,
pp. 161–163, 1983.
[24] J. Frenzel, S. Mueller-Weinfurtner, J. B. Huber, and R. R. Mueller,
“Static layered schedules and core-only parity check for the 5g new
radio ldpc codes,” in SCC 2019; 12th International ITG Conference on
Systems, Communications and Coding, pp. 1–5, VDE, 2019.
[25] M. Jang, K. Kim, S. Myung, H. Jeong, K.-J. Kim, and S.-H. Kim, “A
design of layered decoding for qc-ldpc codes based on reciprocal channel
approximation,” in 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Information
Theory (ISIT), pp. 554–559, IEEE, 2022.
