Fast DSP Implementation of a Low Complexity LDPC Decoder

Mouhcine Razi
ERSI Laboratory USMBA University
Fez, Morocco mouhcine.razi@usmba.ac.ma
Anas Mansouri
ERSI Laboratory USMBA University
Fez, Morocco anas.mansouri@usmba.ac.ma

Ali Ahaitouf
ERSI Laboratory USMBA University
Fez, Morocco ali.ahaitouf@usmba.ac.ma

Mhammed Benhayoun
ERSI Laboratory USMBA University
Fez, Morocco benhayounmed@gmail.com
Abdessalam Aït Madi
ETSE Laboratory UIT University Kenitra, Morocco aitmadi_abdessalam@yahoo.fr

Abstract—The Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm is known as the most efficient algorithm in terms of convergence speed. But this algorithm has a very high level of computational complexity. The Min Sum Algorithm (MSA) permits to reduce this computational complexity but with some performances degradations. In this paper we recommend a new approach with more simplified algorithm, that allows to get performances near to these of the BP algorithm by adopting a new version of the MSA algorithm. This last uses Horizontal Shuffled (HS) scheduling instead of the usually used flooding scheduling. This algorithm was successfully implemented on the Digital Signal Processor (DSP). The results obtained after implementation show that the proposed version of the MSA algorithm does not only improve the decoding performance but also decreases the number of iterations necessary for the decoding of the LDPC codes.
Keywords—LDPC decoders, Min Sum Algorithm, Horizontal Shuffled Scheduling, DSP implementation
I. INTRODUCTION
The need for an easy hardware implementation of a performant binary LDPC code decoder for wireless communications (WiFi, WiMAX, DVB-S2, etc. …) continues to grow. In the literature, both hard and soft decision algorithms are generally proposed as the main classes of LDPC decoding algorithms. Hard decision decoders such as Gallager B (GaB), Bit-Flipping (BF), Gradient Descent Bit-Flipping (GDBF), have much less hardware requirements, but offer a low error correction performance. On the other hand, soft decision algorithms such as Log-Likelihood Ratio BP (LLR-BP), Offset Min-Sum (OMS), and Self Adjustable Offset Min Sum (SAOMS) provide high errors correction performance with the cost of excessive hardware requirements [1,2].

The belief propagation algorithm (BP) is known for its high decoding performance in terms of convergence for the soft decision classes, but its implementation on embedded platforms (DSP, ARM, FPGA, etc..) seems more difficult [1]. Thus, many researches have been conducted in order to develop simplified algorithms easy to implement on such platforms with small degradations [2, 3,4].
In this paper suggest a new approach with more simplified algorithm, that allows to get performances near to these of the BP algorithm by adopting a new version of the MSA algorithm. This last uses Horizontal Shuffled (HS) scheduling instead of the usually used flooding scheduling. We used an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and we employed a binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation for the noise variance σ2. This algorithm was successfully implemented on the Digital Signal Processor (DSP) TMS320C6713. The results obtained after implementation for different values of the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) show that the proposed version of the MSA algorithm does not only improve the decoding performance but also decreases the number of iterations necessary for the decoding of the LDPC codes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows, section II an overview of the main known approaches of the Log-Likelihood Ratio BP (LLR-BP) algorithm that permit a hardware implementation of the simplified LDPC decoder. In section III we present our approach, named MSA-HS algorithm. Results and highlighted results will be presented in section IV.
II. DECODING ALGORITHMS The LDPC code uses a sparse H (M, N) parity check matrix that can be represented by a conventional Tanner graph, where M represent the number of rows or the check nodes (CNs) and

978-1-5386-7850-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:32:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

N represent the number of columns or the variable nodes (VNs). Each non zero entries in the matrix H represents a link between the check nodes and the variable nodes in tanner graph [5]. A. Log-Likelihood Ratio BP algorithm
The LLR-BP algorithm is mainly based on the calculation of LLR messages exchanged between the control nodes and the variable nodes of the Tanner graph. LLR messages are computed by equation “1),”
where U is a random binary variable.

ln

(1)

To represent the steps of iterative decoding algorithms, we use in this paper the notations in the “Fig. 1,”.

Where:

M(n) represent the set of CNs connected to VN(n) and N(m) represent the set of VNs connected to CN(m).

M(n)\m denote the M(n) with CN(m) excluded and

N(m)\n denote the N(m) with VN(n) excluded.

LC represent the LLR initial message calculated according to

the signal yn received from the channel:

.

Lm denotes the equation of the parity check associated with the check node Cm as a function of the message Zn coming from the variable nodes which are adjacent to it.

Zn denote the equation for calculated the LLR message (Znm) sent from VN(n) to CN(m) at iteration i. This message
represents the LLR so that the bit associated with the VN(n) is
a 1 or a 0. Z represents the a posteriori message of VN(n) at iteration i.

Thus, the LLR-BP algorithm used for decoding LDPC codes is defined by the following steps [6]:

Step 0 : We start by preparing all LLR messages by “(2),” :

(2)

∏∈

\

∅∑ ∈ \ ∅| |

(3)

where ∅ = - log tanh Step2 (Update VNs): We calculate:

∑∈ \

(4)

Z

∑∈

(5)

Step3 (Create an estimate ): After each calculation of Z messages, an estimation is
created. If Z is less than 0, x takes the binary value 1; and if Z is more than or equal to 0, x takes the binary value 0.

After that, we calculate the syndrome S=X o H .

The decoding algorithm stops if the Syndrome S=0; and X is a valid codeword or the maximum number of iterations is reached; and the decoding procedure fails; otherwise if S is different from 0, it is initiated from step 1.

The LLR-BP algorithm is recognized for its good error correction performance. But it requires a high level of computation, because this version of the belief propagation algorithm includes the involution function ∅(x) “Fig. 2,” and additions, which make the update of the CNs more difficult if we target a hardware implementation.

The challenged problem here still the calculation of the function ∅(x) [2].

B. Min-Sum algorithm

We note from the function of ∅ in the “(3),” of the LLR-

BP algorithm that the term ∅ ∑ ∈ \ ∅ | | strongly depends on the smallest element among | |. Therefore, we can

replace this term with min | | to simplify the update of

∈

\

the control nodes [3,4].

Thus, in the MSA algorithm equation “(3),” given Lm becomes:

∏∈

\

min | |

∈

\

(6)

Step 1 (Update CNs): We calculate:

Fig. 1. Updating a Vn and Cm nodes.

Fig. 2. Graphical representation of the function ∅ = - log tanh

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:32:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This simplified Lm expression “(6),” makes it possible to minimize the difficulty of calculation and thus the implementation of the LDPC decoder on an embedded board. C. Convergence Test
We have simulated the Matlab code of the LLR-BP and MSA algorithms to test the convergence characteristics of the C(288,576) corresponding to the H matrix in the WiMax standard. The result of comparison between the two algorithms, with maximum iteration fixed to 16, is given by the “Fig. 3,”.
The MSA algorithm even less difficult for a hardware implementation because of its simplicity, it presents strong degradations of decoding performance in terms of BER. For instance: for a BER=10-3 we have a gain of -0.35dB. These degradations are principally due to the overestimation of the equation of the Lm messages.
III. PROPOSED MSA-HS APPROACH In order to improve the performance of the MSA algorithm, we have changed the method of browsing nodes in the tanner graph by using another scheduler procedure. A. Scheduling For the belief propagation algorithms, the scheduling corresponds to the browsing order of the variable nodes (Vn) and the check nodes (Cm) in the Tanner graph, which determines a one iteration. For the BP algorithm, the classic sequencing procedure stills the flooding scheduling (FS). We start by the control nodes (Cm) updating and then the variable nodes (Vn) updating in a second step. Thus the convergence of the algorithm is relatively slow [4,7,8,9]. To solve the problem of convergence speed of the MSA, we applied the Horizontal Shuffled scheduling [5].

B. Horizontal Shuffled Scheduling
Horizontal Shuffle (HS) decoding starts decoding by calculating messages considering the first control node of the Tanner graph, followed by calculating messages coming from the variable nodes connected to this control node. Then we move on to the next control node until the last one (see "Fig. 4,"). An iteration for decoding with HS scheduling is the transition from updating the first control node to updating the last control node. “Fig. 4,” shows how the messages sent to the check node m are
calculeted in the HS decoding.
The most advantage of this type of scheduling is that it updates a node as soon as a new information is available.
IV. SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATIONS Using the HS scheduling in MSA algorithm allows to optimize the performance compared with the LLR-BP algorithm.
A. Simulation results We launched a Matlab simulation to compare the LLR-BP,
MSA and MSA-HS algorithms.
By using the newly updated check-to-variable messages immediately, MSA-HS decoding converges faster than LLR-BP decoding, which has been verified in this simulation.
Note that the use of the HS scheduling improves the performance of the MS algorithm in terms of BER (Gain=0.25dB for a BER of 10-4) “Fig. 5,”. In addition, the number of iterations necessary for decoding has decreased (“Fig. 6,”).

Gain= -0.35dB

Fig. 4. Horizontal-Shuffled scheduling steps

Fig. 3. LLR-BP and MSA comparison: BER vs. SNR of the 576-bit codeword with Rate = 0.5 and irregular LDPC code.

Gain=0.25dB Fig. 5. Performance comparison of various LDPC decoders

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:32:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 6. Spread of the number of iterations for (576,288) LDPC decoder
B. DSP implementation The three algorithms LLR-BP, MSA and MSA-HS were
codded in C language and implemented on the embedded TMS320C6713 floating-point DSP processor of Texas Instruments (TI).
DSP Board characteristics: • TMS320C6713 DSP: 225 MHz, floating point, 256 Kb
internal RAM/Cache. • External SDRAM – 16 Megabytes. • External Flash - 512Kbytes. The LDPC decoder has been developed on the Code Composer Studio (CCS4) Simulator from Texas Instruments. An LDPC decoder with a codeword length of 40 bits was implemented and successfully tested. “Fig. 7,” and “Fig. 8,” illustrate the implementation results (With: the number of maximum iterations set to 5, and Rate=0.5). “Fig. 7,” shows the comparison between the LLR-BP algorithm, MSA algorithm and MSA algorithm with the HS scheduling (MSA-HS). In the case of a regular LDPC C(40,20) code, a gain of 0.25dB is obtained for a BER of 10-2 illustrating the better performances of the decoding following this type of scheduling. “Fig. 8,” presents the comparison results of the iteration number for the three algorithms. According to these results, we notice that the number of iterations required to decode information is highly reduced.
V. CONCLUSION In this paper, we proposed to use Horizontal Shuffled scheduling to implement the simpler version of the LLR-BP algorithm on a DSP platform of Texas Instruments to improve the speed of convergence. Our implementation results lead to faster convergence with a reduced iterations number. Note that the processing time has decreased and thus makes the decoding faster and more efficient.

Fig. 7. BER performance of the C(40, 20) regular LDPC code decoding algorithms.
Fig. 8. Comparison of average number of iterations of the C(40, 20) regular LDPC code decoding algorithms.
Thus, the MSA-HS algorithm is a good candidate for the binary LDPC code decoder for new technologies because of its lower complexity compared with other existing algorithms. In addition, the performance degradation observed is negligible.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Unal, A. Akoglu, F. Ghaffari and B. Vasic, “Hardware implementation and performance analysis of resource efficient probabilistic hard decision LDPC decoders,” IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems, vol. pp. 111, April 2018.
[2] A. Ait Madi, A. Mansouri and A. Ahaitouf, “A new PWL approximation for the self-adjustable offset min-sum decoding with a highly reducedcomplexity,” International Journal of Computer Applications 61(19), 1– 6, (2013).
[3] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, H. Imai, E. Eleftheriou, M.P.C. Fossorier, and X.Y. Hu, “Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on information theory, vol. 53, pp. 1288–1298, Aug 2005.
[4] W. Ji, M. Hamaminato, H. Nakyama, and S. Goto, “Self-Adjustable Offset MinSum Algorithm For ISDB-S2 LDPC Decoder,” IEICE Electronis Express, vol. 7, 1283–1289, Aug 2010.
[5] Y. Yang, J. Z. Huang, S. Tong and X. M. Wang, “Replica horizontalshuffled iterative decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:32:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Journal of China Universities of Posts and Telecommunications, vol. 17, pp. 32–40, Dec 2010. [6] R.G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes” Ph.D. thesis. MA: MIT Press, Cambridge, 1963. [7] X. Liu, Y. Zhang and R. Cui, “Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE communications letters, vol. 19, pp. 147-150, Feb 2015. [8] X. Liu, Z. Zhou, R. Cui, E. Liu, “Informed decoding algorithms of LDPC codes based on dynamic selection strategy,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 64, pp. 1357-1366, April 2016. [9] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, , K. Cai and G. Han, “Informed fixed scheduling for faster convergence of shuffled belief-propagation (BP) decoding,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 21, pp. 32-35, Jan 2017.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:32:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

