2019 The 7th International Conference on Information, Communication and Networks
Improved MS LDPC Decoder Based on Jacobian Logarithm

Ruizhen Wu Intel Mobile Communications
Technology (Xi’an) Ltd Xi’an, China
ruizhen.wu@intel.com

Lin Wang Intel Mobile Communications
Technology (Xi’an) Ltd Xi’an, China
lin.b.wang@intel.com

Tao Yuan Intel Mobile Communications
Technology (Xi’an) Ltd Xi’an, China
tao.yuan@intel.com

Mingming Wang Intel Mobile Communications
Technology (Xi’an) Ltd Xi’an, China
mingming.wang@intel.com

Abstract—An improved MS LDPC decoder is proposed in this paper. The degradation factor of BP to MS is found and optimized based on Jacobian Logarithm and hardware working mode. An offset factor is added to improve the decoding accuracy rate and is optimized to two constants for different SNR environments thus only need an adder and a selector as hardware cost to implement it. The simulation is based on LDPC NR 3GPP 38.212 release and the comparison results showed the proposed improved MS LDPC decoder have a better BER and iteration time performance than other existing decoders in different SNR environments.
Keywords—LDPC, Min-Sum, LDEC, offset
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC (Low density parity check) codes was proposed by R.Gallager in 1963 [1], and has gained a lot of interest because of its outstanding error-correction performance. There are lots of decoding algorithms which demonstrate different advantages for decoder implementation. The MS (Min-sum) algorithm [2] is the most used decoding algorithm in modem SoC design because of the reusability between NR and LTE decoder modules and the less complexity of hardware implementation. It allows to achieve attractive tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity. The belief propagation (BP) algorithm [3] provides a powerful tool for iterative decoding of LDPC codes. The MS approximation which using the so-called BP-based approximation is well known for hardware implementation because of it can greatly reduce the implementation complexity with the cost of a degradation in decoding performance. This has led to the development of many balanced variants of the MS algorithm [4]–[8] that nonetheless deliver near-optimum decoding performance.
J. Li and X.D. Zhang proposed a novel dual-min-sum decoding algorithm in [9], the check-node updates of the BP algorithm are simplified by using a dual minimum term approximation. The proposed algorithm can nearly achieve the performance of the BP algorithm. Compared with the min-sum algorithm, the proposed algorithm bridges the error performance between the min-sum algorithm and the BP algorithm with a small increase in decoding complexity.
N. Maammar proposed a layered offset min-sum algorithm for the decoding of LDPC codes in [10], which utilizes an adaptive offset factor to improve the accuracy of the soft information transferred during the iterative decoding process, and it provides good performance accordingly. And can be used to bridge the error Performance between the conventional max

log-MAP and log-MAP decoding algorithms of turbo codes or constellation de-mapping.
This paper investigates the relationship between BP algorithm and MS algorithm and find the reason of degradation. Introduced an improved MS LDPC decoder based on the Jacobian Logarithm and hardware working mode. The algorithm can achieve a better performance in BER (Bit Error Rate) and reduce the iteration numbers compared the MS algorithm with the minor cost of hardware implementation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Related works are discussed in Section 2. Section 3 illustrates the proposed decoder. Section 4 describes the comparison results and Section 5 concludes this paper.
II. RELATED WORKS Over the last few years there has been an increased interest in investigating the behavior of LDPC decoders. The most attention attracted algorithm of LDPC decoding is the MS decoding algorithm which is the simplification method of BP decoding algorithm. These algorithms will be introduced in this section.
A. BP decoding algorithm BP algorithm also called sum-product algorithm, is a well
performed decoding algorithm [10]. Its procedure begins with the initial likelihood ratio of probability calculation as equation (1) showed.

With the initial likelihood ratio, the check nodes information can be updated. In its kth iteration, the formula of information of check nodes is:

For any variable node i and its neighboring check node j, in its kth iteration the formula of the information of variable node is:

With the check nodes and variable nodes information the hard decision decoding can be made by equation (4) and (5):

978-1-7281-0426-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

53

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

 “x”. Then the equation (10)’s variation characteristic can be speculated as Fig. 1 showed.



BP decoding algorithm has to set a max iteration value first. The decoding iteration will stop at decoding correct or the iteration number equals the max value. In other case, the equations (2)-(4) will be iterated every time to calculate different hard bit.
B. MS decoding algorithm The BP decoding algorithm [2] can have best performance
on BER. But there are too many multiplication calculations which is very difficult for hardware implementation. Consequently, MS decoding algorithm was introduced to reduce the complexity.
The MS decoding algorithm simplifies off the equation (2)’s multiplication calculation to a minim value searching, which means the equation (2) is updated to:

where the α and β is:


In (7) the α is the symbol multiplication value and can be evolved by the number of negative symbol in hardware implementation. The β from equation (8) is the absolute value and can be easily take by bits operation.
The other parts of MS are same as BP decoding algorithm. It reduces the complexity of hardware implementation by simplified the multiplication calculation to minimize value searching at the cost of BER. It is a good choice for hardware implementation.

Figure 1. Variation characteristic of equation (10)
And the tanh-1 can be transferred to :

Which means the equation (11)’s variation characteristic can be speculated from equation (10)’s output range as Fig. 2 showed.

III. IMPROVED MS DECODER
As section 2 introduced the BP decoding calculation mainly depends on equations (2) and (3). Consequently the modification is always based on these two equations.
The MS decoding algorithm simplified the equation (2) by using minimum search replace of multiplication calculation, which introduced new error but reduced hardware implementation. Find the difference between MS and BP will explain the reason of degradation. And the offset based on these reasons should achieve a better performance in BER.
Consider the BP equation (2)’s original calculation. The tanh can be transferred to:

As we already known the matrix characteristic of the LDPC can acquire the sign of variable nodes much easier. So the calculation of equation (10) is based on the absolute value of

Figure 2. Variation characteristic of equation (11)
The equation (3) is an add calculation using equation (2)’s output, which is linear so the final hard decision is mostly based on the equation (2)’s variation characteristic. And from Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 we can summarize the final output of equation (2) is mostly decided by the minimum value of equation (2)’s input value x which is the absolute LLR value.
Take “x” as the minimum absolute value of all LLR value calculate the equation (10) and (11) we can obtain:


54
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

That is exactly the MS decoding algorithm which means the degradation from BP to MS is because of the omitted calculations of LLR besides the minimum value. So to achieve a better performance in BER without much complexity we introduced the second minimum LLR value to compensate the MS decoding algorithm. Back to equation (10) and (11) it should be:



The “x” here is the minimum absolute value of LLR as equation (12) showed and the “y” is the second minimum absolute value of LLR. Use equation (12) to calculate the equation (11):

Consider the Jacobian Logarithm as equation (15) showed: 
Using the Jacobian Logarithm twice to express the equation (14) we can get:

Here the “2min” means the second minimum value of soft bit searched in horizontal. And the vertical calculations are same as equation (3), (4), (5) showed. The MS decoder architecture of section II.B is showed in Fig. 3.

LDPC_INPUT_TOP

LDPC_LMEM_top

LDPC_SHIFT_top



LDPC_horizontal

LDPC_vertical

Here the “x” and “y” already the absolute value and “y” must bigger than “x” because the search module designed to find the minimum value as “x” and “y” as second minimum. From equation (16) we can see the difference between (16) and MS are the two “ln” calculations. But they are quite difficult to be implemented in hardware so we need to find an approximate solution. Take the “ln” calculation as equation (17) showed:

LDPC_BIT_Top

LDPC_MATRIX_top

LDPC_OUTPUT_TOP

Figure 3. Hardware architecture of MS decoder


As Taylor series showed the f(x) can be expressed as:

And from the Gaussian distribution we can summarize the probability of soft-bit value (“x”) is nearly 96% to between “0~1” for absolute value. So the equation in equation (17) can use McLaughlin's formula to find the approximate value ln(2) as offset value for MS decoding algorithm. And this value need a fine tuning to satisfy the extreme cases based on the hardware working mode.
To modify the MS decoding algorithm the equation (8) can transfer to:

Soft bits received by the LDPC_INPUT_TOP and send to LDPC_LMEM_top first to check the shifting size and which BG to use. Then do the shifting operation in LDPC_SHIT_top to check the received bits whether can meet the shifted matrix modulo 2 addition needs. If it need decoding then use LDPC_horizontal and LDPC_vertical to do calculation (6)-(8) and (3)-(4). The LDPC_BIT_Top works as equation (5) showed. And LDPC_MATRX_top will check whether the decoding correct and output the final bits by LDPC_OUTPUT_TOP.
The proposed improved MS decoder only need to add a comparing unit for second minimum value “y” of equation (19) and a adder for the updated value from LDPC_horizontal to LDPC_Vertical. The other modules are all the same as MS decoder. And the comparing unit for second minimum value can reuse the same modules from LDPC_horizontal which means only need an adder and a selector as hardware cost as Fig. 4 showed in dotted line for this proposed algorithm’s implementation.

55
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

0.5 0.7
LDPC_horizontal 0

Adder

LDPC_Vertical

Figure 4. Hardware architecture of proposed improved MS decoder
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The hardware of proposed decoder is successfully implemented in Verilog. The hardware architecture is fully verified at RTL level and synthesized with Intel 14nm technology lib.
The simulation were carried out for LDPC NR 3GPP 38.212 release using BG1 and z=256. The LDPC decoding algorithm max iteration numbers are all set to 50. And the SNR is troughed from 1dB to 3.8dB each for 10000 times to get average value for BER and iteration number comparison between MS, [9], [10] and proposed improved MS decoder. The BER result is showed in Fig. 5.

From the Fig. 5 we can see the proposed decoder can have better BER performance than other decoders and almost no error left when the SNR is good enough.
The average iteration time means how many times the calculation from horizontal to vertical need the to give a final output. In hardware the average iteration time indicates the speed of decoder working. And that comparison results are showed in Fig. 6.
The iteration time of proposed is less than other decoders as Fig. 6 showed which means the hardware can have better speed performance than other decoders.
V. CONCLUSION
A improved MS decoder based on Jacobian Logarithm is proposed in this paper. The decoder used the Jacobian Logarithm to calculate the omitted part between MS and BP algorithm and find a simplified way to realize this omitted calculations. The proposed decoder is verified at RTL level and synthesized with Intel 14nm technology lib and the results showed the proposed decoder can have a better BER and iteration time performance than other decoders with a minor hardware cost.
The future work will focus on the hardware implementation optimization.
REFERENCES

Figure 5. BER comparision of different decoder

[1] R.G. Gallager, “Low-Density-Parity-Check Codes,” J. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, January 1962.
[2] S. Lida and S. Mohammad-Reza, “FFT Based Sum-Product Algorithm for Decoding LDPC Lattices,” J. IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16, pp. 1504-1507, August 2012.
[3] H. Zhang and S. Chen, “Residual-Decaying-Based Informed Dynamic Scheduling for Belief-Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Access, Vol. 7, pp. 23656 – 23666, February 2019.
[4] S.L. Howard, C. Schlegel, and V.C. Gaudet, “A degree-matched check node approximation for LDPC decoding,” Proceedings. International Symposium on Information Theory, 2005, pp. 1131 – 1135.
[5] M.P.C. Fossorier , M. Mihaljevic and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, pp. 673 – 680, May, 1999.
[6] J. Chen, A. Dholakia and E. Eleftheriou, et al, “Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 53, pp. 1288 - 1299 , August, 2005.
[7] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A Reconfigurable LDPC Decoder Optimized for 802.11n/ac Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26, pp. 182 – 195, January, 2018.
[8] T. Nguyen-Ly, V. Savin and K Le, et al, “Analysis and Design of CostEffective, High-Throughput LDPC Decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26, pp. 508 – 521, March, 2018.
[9] J. Li and X.D. Zhang, “Reduced-complexity belief propagation decoding for low-density parity-check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 44, pp. 220 – 222, January, 2008.
[10] N.E. Maammar, S. Bri and J. Foshi, “Layered Offset Min-Sum Decoding for Low Density Parity Check Codes,” International Symposium on Advanced Electrical and Communication Technologies, 2018, pp. 1-5.

Figure 6. Iteration time comparision of different decoder

56
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

