Performance Analysis of Layered Normalized  
Min-Sum for LDPC Codes over Weibull Fading 
Channels 
    Nejwa El Maammar, Jaouad  Foshi 
Electronics, Instrumentation and Measurements 
      Faculty of sciences and technologies 
            Moulay Ismail University 
                Errachidia, Morocco 
      nejwa.elmaammar@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Normalized  Min-Sum  Algorithms  (NMSA)  are  
extensively employed  in trading LDPC (Low Density Parity 
Check)  decoders due  to their  low  complexity  and reasonable  
performance close to the performance of sum product algorithm 
in terms of Error Rate. Our work is focused on the enhancement 
of error rate performances of NMS algorithm for the decoding of 
LDPC decoding. In this context we have proposed a Layered 
Normalized Min-Sum algorithm (LNMS), which employs an 
adaptive normalization factor to ameliorate the reliability of the 
information transmitted during the decoding process. To 
perform this analysis study LDPC coded communication system 
has been examined over Weibull fading channels and was 
analyzed for different decoding techniques by the help of 
comparative computer simulations. Simulation results indicate 
that the proposed decoding algorithm can achieve better Bit 
Error Rate (BER) performances closer to SP algorithm with the 
preservation of the principal characteristics of the MS algorithm. 
Keywords— Ldpc codes; Offset min-sum; Normalized min-sum; 
AWGN; Rayleigh;Weibull Fading channel. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
     Thanks to their excellent performance, Low-Density 
Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are one of the current topics in 
information coding theory. They are considered one of the 
strongest error correction techniques that have been invented 
by Gallager [1] in the early 1960s and have been rediscovered 
by MacKay and Neal in the late 1990s [2]. Moreover, LDPC 
codes 
have 
achieved 
a 
great 
progress 
in 
wireless 
communication systems due to their capabilities in correcting 
errors near to Shannon limit capacity.  
    Recently, several works have been evaluated shedding light 
on both the amelioration of error rate performance and the 
decreasing in complexity of decoding. Among the different 
decoding algorithms: the renowned Sum-Product (SP) 
algorithm [3] can reach en effective decoding performance but 
it implies complicated check-node calculation and requires a 
high 
hardware 
complexity. 
However, 
the 
elevated 
computational complexity of the calculation of its check node 
results in high hardware overhead in the designing of an 
LDPC decoder. 
    To reduce the hardware complexity of SP in terms of 
acceptable performance defacement Min-Sum (MS)-based 
algorithm was proposed [4]. Min-Sum is presented in [11] as a 
simplification of LLR-SPA computation by employing 
minimum operation rather than a complex implemented tanh 
and tanh-1 functions.  
    In order to increase the performance of MS algorithm with 
acceptable augmentation in decoding complexity several 
developed versions of Min-Sum algorithm were suggested in 
the literature [5]. Chen and Fossorier [6] were presented the 
Offset Min-Sum and Normalized Min-Sum algorithms. These 
algorithms share the notion that the degradation of 
performance can be retrieved by decreasing the of check-node 
amplitudes. 
    The rest of the paper is subdivided into four sections: 
Section II, indicates the encoding and iterative decoding 
processes, such as the SP algorithm, MS-based algorithm and 
the modified versions of MS-based algorithm; Section III 
explains our proposed algorithm. While Section IV illustrates 
the model of the analyzed system over Weibull fading 
channel. The simulation results are described in section V, and 
the conclusion is presented in section VI. 
 
II. 
ENCODING AND DECODING PROCESSES FOR LDPC 
CODES 
A. Encoding Process 
In this work we assume (N, K) LDPC code is a binary 
code characterized by a sparse parity check matrix H which 
contains mainly zeros (0s) and a few number of one (1s). It is 
required to set (N − K) × N as the size of the H matrix, where 
(N − K) is the number of rows, N is the number of columns 
and K is the number of message bits. The number of „„1‟‟ bits 
in each row of the H matrix H is called row weight (  ), and 
similarly, the number of „„1‟‟ bits in each column of the 
matrix H is called column weight (  ). A typical parity-check 
H matrix for a (8, 4) regular LDPC code with    = 2 and    = 
4 is given in Eq. (1): 
 
 
  Seddik Bri, Soufiane Oukili                          Abdelhak Babaoui 
Materials and Instrumentation (MIN)               Sciences and Engineering of  
      High School of technology                                       Materials 
        Moulay Ismail University                            Moulay Ismail University 
              Meknes, Morocco                                     Errachidia, Morocco 
           Briseddik@gmail.com 
978-1-5386-7850-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
   
 
   An LDPC code can be also presented by a bipartite graph 
called Tanner graph which contains n{1…..N} called variable 
nodes and m{1…..M} called check nodes. We denote by 
N(m) the set of variable nodes n connected to a certain check 
node m. A variable node n is related to the check node m if 
nN(m). Furthermore, the set N(m)\n denotes the set of 
variable nodes linked to the check node m excluding n . 
Similarly, the set of check nodes related to a certain variable 
node n is denoted by M(n). A check node m is connected to 
the variable node n if mM(n). The set M(n)\m denotes the 
ensemble of check nodes linked to the variable node n 
excluding m . A Tanner graph for Eq. (1) is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     Fig. 1.  Tanner graph representation for (8, 4) regular LDPC Code  
 
B. Decoding Process 
     The process of LDPC decoding can be performed using 
hard or soft decision decoders. In the following, we assume 
  [           ] the codeword of a regular LDPC 
code. In our work we consider that LDPC coded bit is 
modulated using BPSK modulation and transmitted over an 
Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel. Before 
transmission, the codeword is mapped to a signal constellation 
t to obtain the vector,    [            ]  , 
Where 
                                                                     (2) 
 
Equivalency for n = 1, 2,. . ., N.  
At the receiver, after the demodulator we get the received 
vector     [          ]       
       
Where;                    =                                       (3)              
and     is a random variable with  mean zero and variance of 
   
  
  . 
 
Let hard decision vector,    [            ]  Be: 
                                   
 
Where;               
 
The notations below regard message-passing algorithms 
executing on the Tanner graph of an LDPC code, and will be 
employed in the whole paper. 
 
  :  the a-priori information  in the form of  log-likelihood   
ratio (LLR) of the variable node n. 
  ̃  :  the a-posteriori information  in the form of log-likelihood     
ratio (LLR) of the variable node   , 
     : the variable-to-check message from   to 𝑚, 
     : the check-to-variable message from 𝑚 to  , 
 
1) Sum Product Algorithm 
          Iterative decoding of LDPC codes has received great 
interest, belief propagation also known by sum-product 
algorithm can attain significant improvement in term of BER 
performance but it is too complex to be implemented. The 
sum–product algorithm can be changed to decrease the 
implementation complexity of the decoder [7]. The tanh-based 
SPA can be described in the following steps:  
 
 Step 1: Initialization 
A priori information,           
Bit to check message initialization,             
 
   Step 2: Calculation of  the Horizontal step 
Processing of Check node: 
 
        
  ∏
      
      
  
⁄  
         
  ∏
      
      
  
⁄  
         
 
  Step 3: Calculation of  the Vertical Step 
The a-posteriori information: 
                   ̃        ∑
     
      
 
   Processing of Bit node: 
             
∑
    
       
 
   Step 4: Decoding 
       ̃        
̅̅̅                
̅̅̅     
If      
̅̅̅̅       the algorithm arrest and    is regarded 
as a valid decoding results, furthermore, it goes to the next 
iteration until iteration number attain its maximum limit. 
 
(1) 
   1    0    0    1     1    0   1   0 
   1    1    1    0    0   1    0    0     
   H = 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
𝑣 
𝑣3
𝑣5
𝑣4
𝑣 
𝑣6
𝑣7
𝑣8
  0    0   1    0    0   1    1     1    
    0     1   0    1     1    0    0    1 
(4) 
(6) 
(5) 
1      𝑦𝑛 > 0 
0     Otherwise 
(7) 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
2) Min-Sum Algorithm  
          MS algorithm is the simplified form of the SP 
algorithm.  It is composed of the identical steps like the tanh-
rule SPA with just simple modification in the computation of 
the horizontal step. This can be executed by modifying the 
Horizontal step: 
               
  ∏
      
      
  
⁄  
         
  ∏
      
      
  
⁄  
         
 
 
Employing this relationship: 
                                         
   
    
The modification of equation (8) can be expressed as:  
                ∏    (    𝑚 )  ∏     (|    𝑚 |
 
⁄ ) 
 
    The above algorithm can readily be implemented as it gets 
rid of the calculation of tanh, it facilitates the calculation of 
equation (10) and it only approaches the horizontal step 
computation by a minimum operation as indicated in (11) 
          ∏    (    𝑚 ) 𝑚            
 
|    𝑚 |    
 
3)  Normalized and Offset min-sum Algorithm 
              In order to enhance the performance of the MS 
algorithm, and get it closer to the performance of SPA 
algorithm, we apply a normalizing factor η (η < 1) to the check 
node equation (Horizontal step) in all iterations. Figure 2 
illustrate the flow chart blocks of NMS algorithm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   η  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Flow chart of NMS Algorithm. 
 
 
 
NMS and OMS algorithms further modify the min sum 
algorithm to correct the MS algorithm output by employing a 
constants multiplied/additive factor    /β.  
 
               ∏    (      ) 𝑚            
 
|      | 
 
 
Where,   is the normalization factor generally identified 
beforehand. A standard is given for the conventional NMS 
algorithm, in which makes  |    
    |  and  |    
    |   
equal, i.e. 
 
 [|    
    |        |    
    |]    
 
For the calculation of Offset Min-Sum Algorithm, it can be 
performed as follows: 
 
                                          | - 𝜉, 0}       (14) 
 
 Where, 𝜉 is the offset factor. The OMS and NMS algorithms 
are both considerably trade-offs between the performance 
improvement and reducing of decoding complexity. 
 
III. 
 PROPOSED LAYERED NORMALIZED MIN-SUM 
ALGORITHM 
 
  In order to enhance the decoding performance of the NMSA, 
we have proposed Layered normalized Min-Sum algorithm. In 
the decoding process, we regard for the first layer an ensemble 
of variable nodes which has a lower value of the intrinsic 
information    for the bit   .  
Where; 
             
⁄
    
      
⁄
    Indicate the    intrinsic information 
which is connected to the received value    . 
                      
               
Indicate 
the 
    extrinsic 
information which is the improved information gated by 
considering that the coded symbols respect the parity check 
constraints. 
The purpose of the proposed decoder is to find the most 
probable codeword   [           ] to have been transmitted 
over the channel, based on the received word   
[          ]. In this context we calculate the log-likelihood 
ratio    (LLR) of   , which is defined by : 
                 
          
 
Equivalency for:    ; n =1,2,….,N, a decoder uses its     LLR) 
 which can be defined d as follows: 
                                       =    +    
Where    is the global information of the bit   . 
 
(8) 
(9) 
𝑛  𝑁 𝑚  𝑛 
𝑛  𝑁 𝑚  𝑛 
(10) 
(12) 
𝑛  𝑁 𝑚  𝑛 
(13) 
Initialization 
Updating of check node  
𝑛  𝑁 𝑚  𝑛 
Updating of Bit Node  
Check node 
Termination 
Output 
 (15) 
(11) 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Proposed Decoding algorithm 
     In our proposed method, we take the same notation 
previously mentioned in section II:               } 
which denotes the ensemble of all variable nodes and    
           𝑚} which denotes the ensemble of all check 
nodes. The Layered Normalized Min-sum Algorithm is 
presented as follows: 
Initialization: 
   For every variable node        we compute the intrinsic 
information    . 
  Choose  in the ascending order the variable nodes        
which correspond to the absolute values of the intrinsic 
information    
  Group the variable nodes into subgroups    for    
        )  
  For the first layer  , we regard the subset of variable nodes 
which has a lowest value of    . 
 are initialized of all check node messages to 0: 
      𝑚  
        For variable node         . 
     and iteration  l = 1 
Iterative Processing: 
  Compute  the variable node updated message to its adjacent 
check nodes      M(n) for each variable node         
        
∑
     
      
       
      
         
Check node update: For each check node      M(n), we 
calculate the updated message to its adjacent variable nodes   .  
Calculation of Check node using normalized factor α : 1      
            
      
 
  ∏    (         
       )
 
 
 𝑚  |         
       | 
Decision rule:       = 0  if    > 0   and      = 1 if    < 0 
IV. 
LDPC CODED COMMUNICATION SYSTEM AND 
CHANNEL MODEL  
A. Channel Model 
The Weibull fading is a simple statistical model based on 
the Weibull distribution and used for designing multipath 
fading signal amplitude and has been proposed as effective 
model to characterize multipath fading channels for both 
indoor 
and 
outdoor 
environments. 
Experimental 
data 
supporting the propriety of Weibull model described in [9]. 
Hashemi regarded the use of Weibull channel as a model for 
indoor fading channels [10]. In recent evaluations  done by 
Babich and Lombardi it have revealed that the distribution of 
Weibull offer the appropriate fit to a path-loss model of a 
narrow-band improved wireless telecommunications system at 
reference frequency 1.89 GHz [3]. 
Take into consideration the Weibull fading environment, the 
required received signal r(t) may be expressed as: 
            [ (                )]       
Where     denotes the frequency of carrier,      denotes the 
phase which carries the information,      indicates the 
random of phase uniformly distributing in [0,2  ),       is the 
AWGN noise denotes the random variable with mean of zero 
and variance N0/2, and      is Weibull random amplitude 
procedure with the probability density function (PDF) given  
by Sagias et al: 
      
 
          
  
   
Where    [  ] and (E [·] denotes the expected value 
operator),   represents the scaling parameter, and β is the 
parameter of Weibull fading which can take different values 
between 0 and ∞. For a particular case if      the Weibull 
distribution be can an exponential distribution; when   = 2, the 
Weibull distribution concentrates to a Rayleigh distribution. 
 
B. LDPC coded with Weibull fading channel 
      The 
basic 
block 
diagram 
of 
the 
LDPC 
coded 
communication system is showed in figure 3. The system 
process is performed using four different decoders employed 
and using Weibull fading channel. The process is implemented 
for a regular LDPC code with ½ code rate and (1008, 504) 
block length. At the transmitter side, first, the random data 
symbols are produced as an input message and then are 
applied to LDPC encoding block to execute channel-coding 
process. After the channel coding the system is modulated 
using BPSK modulation. After the modulation and channel 
coding 
processes, 
message 
bits 
are 
applied 
to 
the 
communication channel which is composed of a Weibull 
fading channel and AWGN noise. At the output of channel the 
message information is applied to the demodulator block. The 
demodulator block performs the demodulation and LDPC 
decoder block performs the decoding process according to PS, 
OMS, NMS and decoder and finally we get the received data. 
 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
The simulations results of LDPC coded communication 
systems are evaluated by Matlab  software and carried out 
using Weibull fading channels, the BER performance results of 
the system with 1008, 504 LDPC code length are shown in 
figures 4-5-6-7.The soft and hard decision decoders are 
employed. All simulations are performed to compare the 
performance of Layered Normalized Min Sum (LNMS) using 
various decoding algorithms which are OMS, NMS and SP 
algorithms where the maximum number of iteration is set to 30 
for each LDPC decoder employed. In all simulations the 
parameter   is set to1 while the effect of the Weibull channel 
is incorporated into the simulation when we vary the value of 
β. 
(16) 
(17) 
(19) 
(18) 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
Figure 4 illustrate the performance comparison of Layered 
Normalized Min-sum algorithm through AWGN, Rayleigh, 
and Weibull fading channels. It is clearly shown that the BER 
performance changes with the fading variation. we can 
observed that the BER performance is better when the fading is 
not considered in additive white Gaussian noise channel and 
the error performances degrades in the other case of channel 
models according to the degree of fading. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 present the BER performance results of (1008, 504) 
LDPC coded communication systems. The comparison among 
SP algorithm, OMS algorithm, NMS algorithm, and proposed 
LNMS algorithm are shown in this figure. Simulations are 
performed for 30 iterations and the system is runs in weibull 
channel where the fading parameter   is set to 2. It is shown 
from the figure that for the level of      the BER performance 
of our proposed algorithm can achieve nearly 0.4 dB decoding 
gain comparing to NMS decoder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Message 
Generator 
LDPC 
Encoder 
Weibull 
fading 
Channel 
Demodulation 
 
Received 
Data 
Offset min-sum 
Decoder 
 Layered 
Normalized Min-
Sum Decoder
Normalized  
Min-sum 
Decoder 
SP 
Decoder 
n(t) 
Fig 3. The Block Diagram of LDPC system using different decoder schemes through Weibull fading 
channel. 
 
Modulation 
 
 
Fig. 5.   BER performance of LDPC code in the Weibull fading channel 
with β = 2. 
Fig. 4.  BER performance comparison of LNMS in AWGN, Rayleigh, 
and Weibull channels. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 depicts the performance of the LDPC coded system 
when weibull fading parameter is raised to 2.5. It is clearly 
seen that the error performance of the SP decoder is better than 
obtained in other decoders. Even though the hard decision 
decoders give better results comparing to the previous analysis. 
We can also observed that the (LNMS) algorithm is improved 
when is compared with different decoders case. The 
improvement achieved by the proposed algorithm is nearly 
0.02 dB for BER level of     . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The last analysis illustrates the performance curves which are 
performed by increasing the weibull parameter β to 3 for the 
same system.  As can be seen, the SP decoder surpasses the 
other hard decision decoders, and always shows best results 
when comparing with other decoders. We can observed for 
this case that the curves of OMS NMS decoders are close to 
each other and the BER performances of our proposed decoder 
is clearly near to SP decoder and give much better results 
comparing to previous analysis. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
    In this work we have proposed  a  Layered  Normalized  
Min–Sum algorithm,  which  can  ameliorate the  Normalized  
min-sum algorithm by inserting  an  adaptive  normalization  
factor.  The system model was performed using different value 
of Weibull parameter and the BER performance of LDPC 
codes in Weibull fading channels was analyzed for various 
decoding rules by means of comparative computer simulations 
and eventually shows that our proposed algorithm can upgrade 
the error rate performances comparing with Min-Sum  
algorithm  and  Normalized  Min  Sum  algorithm  in 
exchange  of  a  insignificant  augmentation  in  complexity.  
This adaptive algorithm is also appropriate for Offset min-sum 
algorithm (OMSA) for the LDPC decoding.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Cambridge, MA: 
M.I.T. Press, 1963. 
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of  
low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 
August 1996. 
[3] M. R. Islam, D. S. Shafiullah, M. M. A. Faisal and I. Rahman 
“Optimized Min-Sum Decoding Algorithm for Low Density Parity 
Check Codes,” International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and 
Applications, vol. 2, pp. 168-174, 2011. 
[4] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced Complexity 
Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based on Belief 
Propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, May 1999. 
[5]  V. Savin, C. Leti and, Minatec “Self-Corrected Min-Sum decoding of 
LDPC codes,” January 2009. 
[6] J. Chen, M. P. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation 
based decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. on 
Comm., vol. 3, pp. 406–414, 2002. 
[7] X. Wu, Y. Song, M.Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Adaptive-Normalized/Offset 
Min-Sum Algorithm,” IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, vol. 14, 
pp. 667–669, July 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. BER performance of LDPC code in the Weibull fading channel 
with β = 2.5 
 
Fig. 7. BER performance of LDPC code in the Weibull fading channel 
with β = 3 
[8]    Maheshwari, S. A. Kumari, “implementation of LDPC using min-sum 
decoding algorithm,” International Journal of Engineering & Science 
Research, vol. 5, pp. 862-868, July 2015. 
[9]     N. H. Shepherd, “Radio wave loss deviation and shadow loss at 900 
MHz,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 26, pp. 309–313, November 
1977.  
[10]    H. Hashemi, “The indoor radio propagation channel,” Proceedings of 
the IEEE, vol. 81, pp. 943–968, July 1993. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:35:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
