516

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 2, APRIL 2019

Protograph-Based Folded Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes for Burst Erasure Channels
Inayat Ali , Hyunjae Lee, Ayaz Hussain, and Sang-Hyo Kim

Abstract—In this letter, protograph-based folded spatially coupled (FSC) LDPC codes are proposed. The new folded-type structure is obtained by folding the spatial coupling chain of a conventional spatially coupled (SC) LDPC protograph and interlacing the nodes at staggered spatial positions. The proposed codes outperform the SC LDPC codes over single and multiple random-burst erasure channels. We extend the construction of the folded-type structure by connecting multiple one-sided SC LDPC chains for higher resilience to burst erasure channels. The FSC LDPC codes are also compatible with windowed decoder and outperform conventional SC LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Spatially coupled LDPC codes, windowed decoder, burst erasure channels, protograph-based codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
S PATIALLY coupled (SC) LDPC codes have capacity achieving performance over binary-input memoryless symmetric-output (BMS) channels [1]. The belief propagation (BP) threshold of these codes saturates to the maximum a posteriori (MAP) threshold of same degree distribution uncoupled block-LDPC codes when the coupling length ‘L’ tends to infinity, which was proven for BMS channels in [2]. Good performance of these codes is due to the wave-like propagation of reliable information from two terminated sides of the graph during BP decoding. This wave-like progress of decoding can halt when a burst of erasures is introduced. Therefore, it was shown that, despite their good performance in memoryless channels, the SC LDPC codes perform far from the Singleton bound for burst erasure channels [3]. An extensive finite-length analysis of SC LDPC codes over different burst erasure channels was done in [8] and tight bounds on erasure probability are shown.
To improve the burst erasure correcting capability of SC LDPC codes, convolutional interleavers are used to scatter the erasures in a burst [4]. Multidimensional SC LDPC codes are introduced in [5] to overcome burst erasures, but these codes have a higher rate loss than the conventional SC LDPC codes. The complexity of designing finite-length multidimensional SC LDPC codes is also higher. In [6], the band-splitting permutation technique for the SC LDPC codes is proposed,
Manuscript received August 17, 2018; accepted October 21, 2018. Date of publication October 30, 2018; date of current version April 9, 2019. This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education under Grant (NRF-2015R1D1A1A01058975) and Grant (NRF2018R1A2B6004195). The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was I. Land. (Corresponding author: Sang-Hyo Kim.)
The authors are with the College of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, South Korea (e-mail: inayat@skku.edu; dlguswo77@skku.edu; ayaz@skku.edu; iamshkim@skku.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LWC.2018.2878562

and asymptotic optimality is shown for burst erasure channels. The splitting of the convolutional structure into multiple bands at different location makes windowed decoding impossible; so the low latency continuous decoding property of SC LDPC codes is lost by this splitting technique. Asymmetric spatially coupled LDPC codes are proposed in [7] to enhance the burst erasure correcting capability.
In this letter, we propose a protograph-based design of folded-type SC LDPC codes, which are formed by simply folding the spatial structure of the conventional SC LDPC codes. The sub-blocks, each of which is a subset of variable nodes at a spatial position, are interlaced between each other, which introduces an interleaving effect when codewords are transmitted over the burst erasure channels. The newly structured codes outperform the conventional SC LDPC codes in the asymptotic analysis and simulations. With the folded structure, the low latency windowed decoding can still be conducted while keeping regularity in the protograph structure. It should be noted that the idea of folding was also suggested in [11] to get one-sided SC LDPC codes, which have a smaller rate loss. However, we use a different idea of folding that comes with interlacing. The scheme is extended by constructing generalized-FSC LDPC structure from multiple one-sided SC LDPC codes for better resiliency to burst erasures.

II. CODE CONSTRUCTION A. Folded SC LDPC Codes

Spatial coupling of multiple LDPC protographs results in a base matrix with a convolutional diagonal band structure [9]. Let us consider a regular (J, K) LDPC protograph with base matrix B, where, J and K are variable and check node degrees, respectively. The diagonal band in the base matrix depends on the edge spreading pattern. Different ensembles of SC LDPC codes can be obtained by using different edge spreading rules [9]. To preserve the degree distribution of the underlying (J, K) LDPC base matrix, the valid edge spreading condition that must be satisfied is given by

w

Bi = B,

(1)

i =0

where Bi ’s are component base matrices that define edge spreading. In this letter, two (3, 6) ensembles are considered for performance evaluation. Ensemble A is defined by component base matrices B0 = B1 = B2 = [1 1], whereas ensemble B by B0 = [2 2], B1 = [0 1], B2 = [1 0]. For constructing finite length codes, we follow the procedure
defined in [9] and [10].
The FSC LDPC codes are obtained by folding the chain
structure of SC LDPC codes as illustrated in Fig. 1. Two

2162-2345 c 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:34:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI et al.: PROTOGRAPH-BASED FSC LDPC CODES FOR BURST ERASURE CHANNELS

517

Fig. 2. Generalized FSC LDPC protograph constructed from m one-sided SC LDPC chains (Li = 4).

Fig. 1. FSC LDPC protograph constructed by folding and interlacing an L = 8 SC LDPC protograph of ensemble A.

wings of the coupled chain are aligned to be parallel and then
interlaced in such a way that the spatial positions are indexed
alternatively from the wing-tips to the pivot. Let x = [xj ] be a proto-codeword of the conventional SC
LDPC code, where xj denotes the set of protograph symbol nodes at spatial position j ∈ {1, . . . , L}. Note that xj will later become a sub-block of an explicit code constructed by code lifting. Let z = [zk ] be a proto-codeword of FSC LDPC codes, whose entry is then determined by

zσ(j ) = xj , σ(j ) =

2j − 1, 2(L − j + 1),

for j ≤ L/2 , otherwise,

where σ(·) is bijective in [1, L]. The new proto-codeword z is

transmitted symbol by symbol sequentially. This permutation

can be regarded as a special interleaving. However, the new

code does not require an interleaver in the encoder nor a dein-

terleaver in the decoder; because the structure is compatible

with sequential encoding and windowed decoding thanks to

the diagonal band structure in the corresponding base matrix. Note that the base matrix BA[1,L] of FSC LDPC ensemble A has a diagonal band. Lifting is applied to construct a practi-

cal FSC LDPC code. Each zk at spatial position k forms a sub-block of variable nodes in the lifted graph.

Since the two terminated sides of conventional SC LDPC

codes are now positioned at the same side after folding the

structure, the BP decoding wave progresses from only one side

to the other. In conventional SC LDPC codes, the windowed

decoding starts from only one terminated side of the code. But

for the FSC LDPC codes, the windowed decoding is equivalent

to a parallel realization of two windowed decoders with a

half-sized window that starts from the two terminated sides of

the conventional SC LDPC codes. The smaller window size

may cause performance degradation under a random erasure

environment.

⎡

⎤

11

BA[1,L]

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢

0 1 0 1

0 1 0 1

11 00 11 00 11

. . . .

. . . .

. . . .

11 00 11 00

11
00 11

1 1

11⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

(2)

11 11 11

B. Generalization by Using One-Sided SC LDPC Code Chains
The FSC LDPC codes introduced in the previous subsection can be regarded as the folded graph obtained by connecting two one-sided SC LDPC codes. Two one-sided SC LDPC chains are overlayed by taking node positions alternatively and their non-terminated sides are connected by exchanging edges. The FSC LDPC code construction can be generalized to a construction from m one-sided SC LDPC chains of length Li as depicted in Fig. 2, where i ∈ {1, . . . , m} is the index of chains. We denote the generalized ensemble by L(J , K , m, Li ). Fig. 2 shows an example of edge connections which is a special case of possible connections. The entry of the proto-codeword of ensemble L(J , K , m, Li ) is determined by
zˆσ(j ,i) = xˆ(j ,i) , σ(j , i ) = m(j − 1) + i , ∀ j ∈ {1, . . . , Li }.
This interlacing from m copies of SC LDPC chains gives a distance of m between adjacent sub-blocks. The burst erasure correction capability is increased due to this spacing in the constructed FSC LDPC code.
III. CHANNEL MODELS AND ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS OVER BURST ERASURE CHANNELS
We consider the channels with single or multiple bursts of erasures as a class of correlated erasure channels. In a single random-burst erasure channel (SBC), a single block of consecutive bits of length lb in the codeword undergoes bursty erasures (i.e., with a high erasure rate εb ), whereas other codeword bits undergo a standard random erasure channel with erasure rate ε [4]. Therefore, SBC is characterized as a twostate binary erasure channel (BEC) with ε εb . The position of the starting bit of the burst is uniformly random, with a boundary condition such that the burst length remains constant. Thus, the last possible position of the burst is N − lb + 1 (where N is the code length). We also considered a multiple random-burst erasure channel (MBC), where nb random bursts of fixed length lb and burst erasure rate εb occur uniformly at random over the range of burst positions. However, the bursts can overlap in this channel model, so the number of resolvable bursts can be smaller than nb . Note that the two channel models have a similarity of nonergodicity with the wireless block-fading channels [13].
The asymptotic behavior of L(J , K , m, Li ) code ensemble over burst erasure channels can be analyzed by the density evolution (DE) technique [9] for protograph-based ensembles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:34:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

518

IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 2, APRIL 2019

TABLE I SC & FSC LDPC THRESHOLDS FOR DIFFERENT lb & εb

Fig. 3. BEC threshold (ε∗) vs burst erasure rate (εb ) for a single burst located at the center of the protograph (lb = 6).

In asymptotic settings (i.e., when M → ∞, here M is lifting
factor of graph), we assume that an erasure burst applies in terms of only complete spatial positions. Therefore, lb is the number of spatial positions that a burst spans. The erasure rate threshold for a given burst erasure rate εb is defined as

ε∗ = sup{ε ∈ [ 0, 1 ] | PiBP (ε, εb ) −i−→−−∞→ 0 , ε < εb }, (3)

iwthheritee,raPtiiBoPn

(ε, of

εb ) is the DE. The

resulting erasure probability at the thresholds of SC and FSC LDPC

codes are compared for different lb and εb in Table I. To find these thresholds, the position of the erasure burst is fixed at

the center of the protograph such that the starting position of

the burst is j = k = (L−lb )/2 . It can be noted that the FSC LDPC codes have higher thresholds when lb and εb increase.
Because of the interlacing, the disjoint nodes between the con-

nected nodes split the burst into two from the perspective of

the original SC LDPC chain. However, if the erasure burst is

located at the pivot of the FSC LDPC protograph, the split

bursts are not separated.

Figure 3 shows the improvement in burst erasure correcting capability of proposed FSC LDPC codes. The threshold ε∗ of

SC LDPC codes decreases to zero at low εb (i.e., εb = 0.5573 and 0.538 for ensemble A and B, respectively), whereas it can

be seen that the FSC LDPC codes outperform SC LDPC codes

by attaining the same threshold at a much higher burst era-

sure rate. More considerable gain is attained with the ensemble

L(3, 6, 3, 51). The lb = 6 and the burst location is at the center of the protograph for Fig. 3. The thresholds for different burst locations are shown in Fig. 4. It is observed that ε∗ gets

higher when the burst is located at the terminated side for both SC and FSC LDPC codes. Although ε∗ becomes lower

Fig. 4. BEC threshold (ε∗) calculated for a burst at different locations in the protograph (lb = 4, εb = 0.6 and 0.57 for ensemble A and B, respectively).
TABLE II AVERAGE THRESHOLDS FOR RANDOM BURSTS
for FSC LDPC codes when the burst location is at the pivot of the folded structure, this case does not dominate the overall performance due to the random location of a burst in the SBC. The average threshold ε∗avg for SC and FSC LDPC codes are shown in Table II. From these observations, we note that FSC LDPC codes perform better on average, but do not help in the worst case, i.e., the pivot location. Moreover, it can be noted that ensemble L(3, 6, 3, 51) has a relatively better threshold at pivot because of the degree of freedom to choose better connectivity among multiple chains. The thresholds of convolutional interleaved SC LDPC codes [4] are also shown in Fig. 3 and 4 for comparison. We selected the structure of convolutional interleaver such that it has the same memory as that of FSC LDPC codes. However, this interleaver incorporates some delay due to its structural weakness and it also requires more hardware block to interleave and deinterleave the data.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS The performance of FSC LDPC codes is evaluated and compared with that of conventional SC LDPC codes over SBC and MBC. The finite length codes from ensemble A and B are constructed with the code parameters set as L = 50 and M = 512, so that we obtain code length N = 51200. The girth of the constructed codes was kept larger or equal to 10. For all the constructed codes, the code rate R = 0.48 is obtained because

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:34:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALI et al.: PROTOGRAPH-BASED FSC LDPC CODES FOR BURST ERASURE CHANNELS

519

performance in different environments. Windowed decoding
performances are shown in Fig. 6 for varying window size W, where εb = 0.8. As can be noted, FSC LDPC codes outperform conventional SC LDPC codes in full block BP and
windowed decoding. Figure 7 exhibits the FER performances
confirming the superiority of the proposed FSC LDPC codes over the MBC, where the number of random bursts and εb are set at 6 and 0.7, respectively.

Fig. 5. FER performances for full block BP decoding of SC and FSC LDPC codes with m = 2 constructed from ensembles A and B over SBC.

V. CONCLUSION
We propose a family of windowed-decodable codes called FSC LDPC codes, whose structure is formed by folding and interlacing the protograph of conventional SC LDPC codes. The DE analysis showed that the FSC LDPC codes are suitable for transmission over burst erasure channels. We also proposed a construction method of generalized structures based on the idea of folding SC LDPC chains. The generality of the result is confirmed by examining multiple protograph-based ensembles. By comparing the simulated FER curves, a significant gain in performance of FSC LDPC codes is observed over single and multiple random-burst erasure channels under full block BP and windowed decoding.

Fig. 6. FER performances for windowed decoding of SC and FSC LDPC codes with m = 2 constructed from ensembles A and B over SBC (εb = 0.8).
Fig. 7. FER performances for full block BP decoding of SC and FSC LDPC codes with m = 2 constructed from ensembles A and B over MBC with 6 random bursts and εb = 0.7.
of the termination. We apply the standard flooding schedule for full block BP and windowed decoding [10]. The maximum number of iterations (IMAX ) is set as 100.
Figure 5 shows the frame error rate (FER) performances of SC and FSC LDPC codes from ensemble A and B, respectively, decoded with full block BP decoder over the SBC. We simulated the transmission of the codes over the SBC with εb = 0.8, 0.9 and lb = 2048, 2560 to investigate the

REFERENCES
[1] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[2] S. Kumar, A. J. Young, N. Macris, and H. D. Pfister, “Threshold saturation for spatially coupled LDPC and LDGM codes on BMS channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7389–7415, Dec. 2014.
[3] A. R. Iyenger et al., “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[4] R. A. Ashrafi and A. E. Pusane, “Spatially-coupled communication system for the correlated erasure channel,” IET Commun., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 755–765, May 2013.
[5] R. Ohashi, K. Kasai, and K. Takeuchi, “Multi-dimensional spatiallycoupled codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 2448–2452.
[6] H. Mori and T. Wadayama, “Band splitting permutations for spatially coupled LDPC codes achieving asymptotically optimal burst erasure immunity,” IEICE Trans. Fundam., vol. E100-A, no. 2, pp. 663–669, Feb. 2017.
[7] Z. Zhang and Y. Li, “Asymmetric spatially coupled LDPC codes for multiple-burst erasure channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 1695–1698, Aug. 2017.
[8] V. Aref, N. Rengaswamy, and L. Schmalen, “Finite-length analysis of spatially-coupled regular LDPC ensembles on burst-erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3431–3449, May 2018.
[9] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[10] I. Ali, J.-H. Kim, S.-H. Kim, H. Kwak, and J.-S. No, “Improving windowed decoding of SC LDPC codes by effective decoding termination, message reuse, and amplification,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 9336–9346, 2017.
[11] M. R. Sanatkar and H. D. Pfister, “Increasing the rate of spatiallycoupled codes via optimized irregular termination,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Brest, France, Sep. 2016, pp. 31–35.
[12] P. M. Olmos, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. Truhachev, and D. J. Costello, “A finite length performance analysis of LDPC codes constructed by connecting spatially coupled chains,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Sevilla, Spain, Sep. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[13] I. Andriyanova, N. Ul Hassan, M. Lentmaier, and G. P. Fettweis, “SC-LDPC codes over the block-fading channel: Robustness to a synchronisation offset,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Black Sea Conf. Commun. Netw. (BlackSeaCom), Constanta, Romania, May 2015, pp. 97–101.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:34:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

