560

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 4, APRIL 2019

Error Performance Prediction of Randomly Shortened and Punctured LDPC Codes
Adriaan Suls , Yannick Lefevre, Jeroen Van Hecke, Mamoun Guenach , and Marc Moeneclaey

Abstract— In this contribution, we show that the word error rate (WER) performance in the waterfall region of a randomly shortened and punctured low density parity check code can be accurately predicted from the WER performance of its finitelength mother code. We derive an approximate analytical expression for the mutual information (MI) required by a daughter code to achieve a given WER, based on the MI required by the mother code, which shows that the gap to the capacity of the daughter code grows the more the code is punctured or shortened. The theoretical results are confirmed by simulations (where the random shortening and puncturing pattern is either selected independently per codeword or kept the same for all codewords) for practical codes on both the binary erasure channel and the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel.
Index Terms— Channel coding, parity check codes, mutual information.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE communication system performance improves when the rate of the error correcting code is adapted to the varying channel conditions. Two effective techniques for deriving a multitude of daughter codes from a single mother code are shortening (i.e., using the subset of codewords with zeros at known positions, to improve the error performance while reducing the code rate) and puncturing (i.e., not transmitting some codeword bits at known positions, to increase the code rate at the expense of a worse error performance); the resulting daughter codes can be handled at the receiver by using the same decoder as for the mother code. Shortening and puncturing of LDPC codes are part of the IEEE 802.11-2016 standard [1].
Shortening and/or puncturing of LDPC codes has been widely investigated. For instance, assuming an infinitecodelength regime, the decoding threshold has been minimized over the puncturing distribution for a given mother code in [2], and over the degree of each column of the mother code paritycheck matrix for given shortening and puncturing positions in [3]. For finite-length structured LDPC codes, optimized
Manuscript received November 23, 2018; revised January 7, 2019 and February 11, 2019; accepted February 18, 2019. Date of publication February 22, 2019; date of current version April 9, 2019. This work was supported by the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) under Grant no. EOS30452698 and no. G.013917N and by the VLAIO HBC.2016.0055 “Fifth generation broadband access (5GBB)” project. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Baldi. (Corresponding author: Adriaan Suls.)
A. Suls, J. Van Hecke, and M. Moeneclaey are with the Department of Telecommunications and Information Processing, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium (e-mail: adriaan.suls@ugent.be).
Y. Lefevre and M. Guenach are with Bell Labs, Nokia, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium.
M. Guenach is with the Department of Telecommunications and Information Processing, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium, and also with Bell Labs, Nokia, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2900893

patterns have been derived for puncturing in [4], for shortening in [5], and for joint shortening and puncturing in [6]. Random puncturing has been recently investigated in [7], where it is shown that, in the infinite-codelength regime, the decoding threshold of the punctured code can be accurately predicted by means of a simple function of only the puncturing fraction and the threshold of the mother code; this is unlike optimized puncturing, for which a similar relation does not exist.
The present contribution extends the results from [7] in two ways: (i) both random shortening and puncturing are considered; and (ii) the WER performance resulting from the shortening and puncturing of practical finite-length LDPC codes is predicted, from only the shortening and puncturing fractions and the WER performance of the mother code.
The shortening and puncturing operations, along with the models for the binary erasure channel (BEC) and the binaryinput additive white Gaussian noise channel (BI-AWGNC), are described in Section II. From the WER performance of the mother code, we derive in Section III an approximate analytical expression for the average mutual information (MI), between a coded bit of the daughter code and the corresponding log-likelihood ratio (LLR), which is required to achieve a given WER. These analytical results are validated by means of Monte Carlo (MC) simulations in Section IV.
II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
We consider a (N, K) LDPC mother code, characterized by its (N − K) × N parity-check matrix H0. Any codeword c0 = (c0(1), c0(2), . . . , c0(N )) from the mother code satisfies H0cT0 = 0. By means of shortening (s bits) and subsequent puncturing (p bits), a (N − s − p, K − s) daughter code is obtained. When applying shortening and puncturing, we make no distinction between information bits and parity bits.
First, the mother code is shortened, by keeping from the mother codebook only the codewords which have zeros at the s shortening positions (n1, n2, . . . , ns), with 1 ≤ n1 < n2 < . . . < ns ≤ N . The s zeros at the shortening positions are not transmitted; hence, a codeword from the shortened code is denoted cs = (cs(1), cs(2), . . . , cs(N − s)). Denoting by Hs the (N − K) × (N − s) matrix which results from removing from H0 the columns with indices (n1, n2, . . . , ns), we have HscTs = 0. The shortening positions must satisfy the constraint that Hs has rank N − K (this requires s ≤ K), so that the number of distinct codewords cs equals 2K−s; this results in a (N − s, K − s) shortened code. As Hs is full-rank, the encoder computes N − K bits from cs (with positions corresponding to the column indices of a full-rank (N − K) × (N − K) submatrix of Hs) as linear combinations of the remaining K − s bits.

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SULS et al.: ERROR PERFORMANCE PREDICTION OF RANDOMLY SHORTENED AND PUNCTURED LDPC CODES

561

Next, the (N − s, K − s) shortened code is punctured:
p bits are removed from the shortened codeword cs, at the puncturing positions (n1, n2, . . . , np ), with 1 ≤ n1 < n2 < . . . < np ≤ N − s; this results in the codeword cd = (cd(1), cd(2), . . . , cd(N −s−p)) of the daughter code. Denoting by Hp the (N −K)×p matrix which contains the columns
from Hs at the puncturing positions, the puncturing positions
must satisfy the constraint that Hp has rank p (this requires p ≤ N − K), so that the number of distinct codewords cd equals 2K−s. This results in a (N − s − p, K − s) daughter
code; its code rate Rd is given by

Rd

=

1

R0 − αs − αs − αp

(1)

where αs = s/N and αp = p/N are the shortening and puncturing fractions, respectively, and R0 = K/N denotes the code rate of the mother code. Note that 0 ≤ αs < R0 and 0 ≤ αp < 1−R0; the pathological cases αs = R0 (the all-zero codeword is the only codeword) and αp = 1 − R0 (uncoded transmission) will not be considered in what follows.
The N − s − p bits of the codeword cd are transmitted over a time-invariant memoryless channel. This channel is charac-
terized by the conditional probability density function (pdf) p(y|c), where c ∈ {0, 1} and y are the values of a generic transmitted bit and the corresponding channel output. The transmission of a codeword cd from the (N − s − p, K − s) daughter code can be interpreted as the transmission of a codeword c0 from the (N, K) mother code over an equivalent channel, where the s bits at the shortening positions are correctly received, the p bits at the puncturing positions are lost, and the N − s − p bits from cd experience a channel characterized by the conditional pdf p(y|c), respectively.
The shortening and puncturing positions are known to
the receiver. The receiver makes use of an iterative belief
propagation (BP) decoder for the mother code, so that the same decoder can be used for different (s, p). This decoder is supplied with the N LLRs of the bits from the mother codeword c0; the LLRs of the bits at the shortening positions and the puncturing positions equal +∞ and zero, respectively, whereas the LLR of a generic bit c from cd is obtained as ln (p(y|c = 0)/p(y|c = 1)), where y is the channel output corresponding to c.
The above channel model includes the binary erasure
channel (BEC) and the binary-input additive white Gaussian
noise channel (BI-AWGNC), the latter corresponding to binary
phase shift keying (BPSK).

III. DECODING PERFORMANCE
In the following analysis, we do not consider the shortening and puncturing of a mother code at specific positions, but instead study the performance of the ensemble of daughter codes resulting from all the possible shortening and puncturing patterns satisfying the rank constraints from Section II. Note that the performance of this ensemble corresponds to the performance of a daughter code for which the shortening and puncturing pattern changes from codeword to codeword, sampling all the possible patterns uniformly. As we will show in Section IV, the performance for a daughter code, where

the shortening and puncturing pattern is selected uniformly but kept the same for all codewords, lies close to that of the ensemble.
As a measure of the channel quality experienced by a codeword (c1, . . . cN ), we consider the average MI, Iavg, between a coded bit and the corresponding LLR:

Iavg

=

1 N

N

I(Ln; cn)

(2)

n=1

where I(Ln; cn) denotes the mutual information between the n-th coded bit cn and the corresponding LLR Ln.
It has been shown empirically in [8] and [9] that, for a given
LDPC code, different channels operating at the same word
error rate (WER) are characterized by average MI values (2)
that show a remarkably small spread (up to a few hundredths
of a bit, depending on the considered channels). Let us denote by I0 the value of Iavg that is required for the
(N, K) mother code to achieve a certain WER performance, i.e., WER = WER0. For instance, on the BI-AWGNC, we have I0 = f (γ0), where γ = γ0 yields WER = WER0 and f (.) expresses the MI as a function of SNR. The daughter code achieves a WER close to WER0 on the channel p(y|c), when the average MI for the mother code on the equivalent channel from Section II equals I0. On this equivalent channel, we have (i) I(Ln; cn) = 1 for each of the s bits at the shortening positions; (ii) I(Ln; cn) = 0 for each of the p bits at the puncturing positions; and (iii) I(Ln; cn) = Id for each of the N − s − p bits of the daughter code, with Id the MI corresponding to a channel characterized by p(y|c). This yields the condition I0 = (1 − αs − αp)Id + αs, from which Id is obtained as

Id

=

1

I0 − αs − αs − αp

(3)

For instance, on the BI-AWGNC, the daughter code will achieve WER ≈ WER0 when operating at γ = f −1(Id), where f −1(.) is the inverse function of f (.).
When the mother code achieves WER = WER0 at γ = γ0 on the BI-AWGNC, the prediction of the daughter code error performance assumes that the latter code yields WER = WER0 exactly at γ = f −1(Id), where Id is given by (3) with I0 = f (γ0); in other words, Id from (3) is considered as an
approximation of the average MI at which the WER of the
daughter code equals WER0. Similarly, the prediction for the BEC yields d = 1 − Id, with I0 = 1 − 0 in (3).
Introducing αd = αs + αp, which denotes the total fraction (s + p)/N of shortened and punctured bits, we express Id in terms of (Rd, αd): from (1) and (3) we obtain

Id

=

Rd

+

I0 − R0 1 − αd

(4)

Defining the capacity gap of the mother code as I0 − R0, it follows from (4) that the predicted gap Id − Rd of the daughter code grows with increasing αd, because I0 > R0.
When only shortening is applied, we have αp = 0, yielding αd = αs. Eliminating αs from (1) and (3), we obtain

Is = θsRs + (1 − θs)

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

562

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 4, APRIL 2019

where

θs

=

1 − I0 1 − R0

(6)

and we have replaced the subscript “d” by the subscript “s”,

referring to shortening. As R0 < I0, we have θs < 1. Expression (5) indicates that varying αs yields points (Is, Rs) which are located on a straight line going through (Is, Rs) = (1, 1).

When only puncturing is applied (αs = 0), we obtain

Ip = θpRp

(7)

where θp = I0/R0 > 1 and the subscript “d” has been replaced by “p”, referring to puncturing. According to (7), varying αp between 0 and R0 gives rise to points (Ip, Rp) which are located on a straight line going through the origin (Ip, Rp) = (0, 0). When I0 and Ip denote the MIs corresponding to the decoding thresholds (implying increasing codeword length and vanishingly small WER0) for the mother code and the punctured code, (7) is equivalent to the result from [7].
It can be verified from (1) and (4) that the smallest gap to capacity for given Rd is achieved for shortening only (when Rd < R0) or puncturing only (when Rd > R0). Joint shortening and puncturing is required when both Id and the daughter code length (1 − αd)N are given, e.g., to fit an integer number of codewords inside a multicarrier symbol [1]. For instance, imposing that Id from (3) equals I0 (so that the mother and daughter code yield nearly the same WER on the same channel), yields the condition αs(1 − I0) = αpI0, which indicates that the MI removed by puncturing has to be compensated for by shortening; for given αd, the resulting daughter code rate is obtained as

Rd

=

R0 − αdI0 1 − αd

≤

R0

(8)

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section we first investigate how well Id from (3) approximates the average MI required by a daughter code to achieve a given WER. Next, we evaluate the prediction of the daughter code’s WER performance from the simulated mother code performance.
We present numerical results related to the random shortening and/or puncturing of various irregular LDPC(N, K) mother codes from the G.hn standard [10] (i.e., (N, K) ∈ {(1152, 960), (1440, 960), (1920, 960)}) and the DOCSIS standard [11] (i.e., (N, K) ∈ {(1120, 840), (5940, 5040)}). The shortening and puncturing patterns satisfy the rank constraints, and are either variable (the patterns are selected uniformly, and independently from one codeword to the next) or fixed (the patterns are selected uniformly, and kept the same for all codewords); in practical applications, fixed patterns are more convenient.
The shortening and puncturing fractions are expressed as αs = βsR0 and αp = (1 − R0)βp, with both βs and βp in the interval [0, 1). For given (βs, βp), we determine by means of MC simulation the value of d (BEC) or γd (BI-AWGNC) for which the daughter code achieves WER = 10−3, from which we compute the corresponding values of the MI. We display

Fig. 1. Simulated (markers) and predicted (solid lines) performance for the shortened (a) and punctured (b) codes on the BI-AWGNC.

the rate Rd of the daughter code versus the simulated MI,

along with the capacity formula Rd = MI, in the cases

of

shortening

only

(Fig.

1

(a)

with

βs

∈

B

=

{

i 10

,

i

=

0, 1, . . . , 6}) and puncturing only (Fig. 1 (b) with βp ∈ B).

Both figures depicted are for the BI-AWGNC. For the BEC

similar figures were obtained, but are not shown for concise-

ness. As predicted by (4), the capacity gap of the daughter

codes is seen to increase with βs and βp. Also shown are the straight lines corresponding to (5) and (7), where θs and θp have been computed using the simulated value of I0; we

observe that the simulation points are close to these straight

lines: the deviation in MI between a simulation point and the

straight line does not exceed about 0.032 bit. The simulation

results pertain to a variable pattern; virtually the same results

(not shown to avoid overloading the plot) are obtained for a

fixed pattern.

For αd

∈

{

i 24

,

i

=

0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6}, we consider joint

shortening and puncturing of the rate 2/3 LDPC(1440, 960)

code under the constraint that Id from (3) equals I0, where I0
is the value of the average MI for which the mother code yields WER = 10−3. MC simulations are performed to determine

for each daughter code the erasure probability d (BEC) and the SNR γd (BI-AWGNC) giving rise to WER = 10−3,

from which the corresponding average MI is determined.

Table I shows, for a variable pattern (nearly the same results

are obtained for a fixed pattern), that the daughter codes achieve WER = 10−3 at slightly worse channel conditions

(smaller MI) than the mother code (αd = 0); the difference

between MI values is largest for the BI-AWGNC (about

0.017 bit).

For a mother code and its daughter code, we determine by

MC simulation the WER versus  (BEC) or γ (BI-AWGNC).

We also predict the WER performance of the daughter code

from the WER of its mother code, as outlined in Section III.

For three daughter codes, the predicted WER, the simulated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SULS et al.: ERROR PERFORMANCE PREDICTION OF RANDOMLY SHORTENED AND PUNCTURED LDPC CODES

563

TABLE I SIMULATED MI FOR JOINT SHORTENING AND PUNCTURING WITH Id
FROM (3) EQUAL TO I0 (αd = 0 DENOTES MOTHER CODE)

the LDPC(1120, 840) mother code is punctured with βp = 0.7, the predicted and simulated WER floors (about 9.10−2 and 3.10−4, respectively) differ considerably. This example illus-
trates that the presented analysis is not suited for predicting
the error-floor performance of finite-length punctured codes.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this contribution we considered the random shortening and puncturing of a LDPC mother code. We presented a simple closed-form approximation for the average MI (between a coded bit and the corresponding LLR) needed to achieve a given WER for the daughter code, as a function of the required average MI for the mother code and the shortening and puncturing fractions. This approximation allows predicting the WER in the waterfall region of the daughter codes (with random shortening and puncturing patterns that either are selected independently per codeword or kept the same for all codewords) from the WER performance of the mother code, hence eliminating the need for simulating the decoding of the daughter codes. The resulting prediction accuracies are in the order of 0.1 dB in SNR (BI-AWGNC) and 0.01 in erasure probability (BEC).

Fig. 2. Comparison of predicted and simulated WER performance on BEC (a) and BI-AWGNC (b).
WERs resulting from a variable pattern and from five different fixed patterns are shown in Fig. 2 (a) for the BEC and in Fig. 2 (b) for the BI-AWGNC. We observe that the fixed patterns and the variable pattern yield similar WER performances. At WER = 10−3, the simulated and predicted performances yield values of  (BEC) and γ (BI-AWGNC) that differ by at most about 0.007 and 0.1 dB, respectively. This validates the simple prediction of the value of  or γ for which the daughter code achieves a given WER.
It follows from (3) that Id = 1 for I0 = 1 − αp. Hence, (3) predicts that a daughter code operating at γ → ∞ (so that Id = 1) exhibits a WER floor, which equals the WER of the mother code at γ = f −1(1 − αp). However, when for instance

REFERENCES
[1] Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.11, 2016.
[2] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[3] T. Tian and C. R. Jones, “Construction of rate-compatible LDPC codes utilizing information shortening and parity puncturing,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2005, no. 5, Dec. 2005, Art. no. 692121.
[4] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Ratecompatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 728–738, Feb. 2006.
[5] X. Liu, X. Wu, and C. Zhao, “Shortening for irregular QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 612–614, Aug. 2009.
[6] Y. Wei, Y. Yang, M. Jiang, W. Chen, and L. Wei, “Joint shortening and puncturing optimization for structured LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2060–2063, Dec. 2012.
[7] D. G. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Randomly punctured LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 408–421, Feb. 2016.
[8] M. Franceschini, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “Does the performance of LDPC codes depend on the channel?” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 2129–2132, Dec. 2006.
[9] Y. Li and W. E. Ryan, “Mutual-information-based adaptive bit-loading algorithms for LDPC-coded OFDM,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1670–1680, May 2007.
[10] Unified High-Speed Wireline-Based Home Networking Transceivers— System Architecture and Physical Layer Specification, document ITU-T Rec. G.9960, 2010.
[11] Data-Over-Cable Service Interface Specifications: DOCSIS 3.1: Physical Layer Specification, document CM-SP-PHYv3.1-I07-150910, 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

