Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks
This article reviews adaptive coding techniques for achieving energy efficiency in wireless communications. It analyzes and presents fundamental limits of adaptive coding techniques.
By HAEWON JEONG AND PULKIT GROVER

ABSTRACT | In an era of ever-increasing dynamicity and heterogeneity of wireless networks, energy is fast becoming the most constrained resource. First, we review recent studies that suggest that using one single error-correcting code (ECC) designed to meet the worst case requirement is inefficient in terms of energy consumption when there are many heterogeneous nodes in the network. These works extend the classical Shannon theory and incorporate circuit energy and signal transmit energy to optimize total energy/power consumption of today’s communication systems. Then, we survey recent work on designing adaptive ECCs to operate energy efficiently even in the presence of extremely large heterogeneity in requirements and conditions. Two constructions of energyadaptive codes are summarized: energy-adaptive low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and energy-adaptive polar codes. These constructions have shown theoretically and empirically that having adaptivity in code design can save substantial energy, especially when the network has very diverse communication scenarios. Finally, we suggest a few possible applications where energy-adaptive codes can be employed and outline interesting future directions and challenges.
KEYWORDS | 5G mobile communication; error correction codes; Green computing; Internet of Things; millimeter wave communication.
Manuscript received December 5, 2018; revised December 28, 2018 and January 21, 2019; accepted January 28, 2019. Date of publication March 12, 2019; date of current version March 25, 2019. This work was supported in part by the SRC SONIC Center, in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Enhancing Access to the Radio Spectrum (EARS) Program, and in part by the NSF Faculty Early Career Development Program (NSF CAREER). (Corresponding author: Haewon Jeong.) The authors are with Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail: haewon@cmu.edu; pulkit@cmu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JPROC.2019.2898366

I. I N T R O D U C T I O N
The goal of this paper is to survey results in fundamental limits on the energy of communication systems and practical designs of error-correcting coding for making dynamic, heterogeneous, and scalable networks energy efficient. Let us begin by examining the concrete case of the IEEE 10GBASE-T standard to illustrate the role of coding in potentially making a heterogeneous network energy efficient. 10GBASE-T is a high-speed Ethernet standard popularly adopted in data center networks. The standard design was motivated by a classical “division-of-labor” philosophy: the physicallayer strategy in the 10GBASE-T standard, including the error-correcting code (ECC), was chosen first, and then, circuits were designed to minimize energy consumption over the link. Consequently, the physical-layer strategy does not change significantly with changing cable lengths. The strategy for each link is designed for the worst case distance, i.e., for a cable length of 100 m, despite the average link length being less than 14 m [ [1], [2], and Fig. 1(a)]. Furthermore, the ECC was chosen based on the classical Shannon-theoretic analysis [the “Shannon waterfall curves”; see Fig. 1(b)] which only accounts for transmit power but ignores the encoding/decoding power consumed on a circuit. This forces severe requirements on processing power—more than 500 mW of decoding power at 10 Gb/s [3], [4] and comparable power in other circuit components [2, p. 9]—even if the hardware performance is relaxed at short distances [5, Slide 7]. Because energy consumed in these Ethernet links is 10%–20% of the energy of a data center [6]–[8], back-of-the-envelope calculations show that even a factor of 2 energy savings in Ethernet links could save hundreds of millions of dollars per year within the United States.

0018-9219 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 | PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 765 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

Fig. 1. (a) Distribution of link lengths in data centers. (b) Figure found in the documentation of 10 GBASE-T standardization.

Now, data center networks only have limited heterogeneity. The upcoming networks of the Internet of Things (IoT) will be much more diverse and dynamic. Communication distances, reliability, data rates, energy availability, and the number of users in the same channel will change dynamically and will require IoT devices to adjust and adapt. Nonadaptive worst case design of physical layer will result in highly suboptimal designs, ruling out many applications. Achieving energy efficiency in such environments will require the entire system to be energy adaptive that optimizes total system energy for each different scenario.
Empirically optimizing total system energy (or even just encoding + transmit + decoding) [9], [10] has limitations because the space of ECCs we have to search is too huge to test all possibilities. To replace Shannon’s capacity theorem, which has been the guiding principle for designing communication systems for several decades, we need a new fundamental theory for the new era of diversified communication technologies that can guide system engineers to optimize the total system power of communication. In the first part of this paper (Section II), we will review recent works in this direction. For instance, [11]–[14] have arrived at a mathematical framework to integrate transmit power and circuit power by connecting Shannon’s communication theory with “very-large-scale integration (VLSI) theory” [15], [16]. VLSI theory was a result of circuit advances in the 1980s and is aimed at guiding the design of very-large-scale integrated circuits. The most significant finding of these recent studies is best understood in contrast with the classical Shannon theory. Shannon showed that for a fixed signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), if the information rate R is smaller than the channel capacity C, one can achieve arbitrarily small error rate. Alternatively, for fixed information rate R, if the transmit power is above some threshold (Pth), one can achieve arbitrarily small error rate. ECCs that achieve this capacity C, i.e., transmit power PT approaching the threshold Pth (for fixed rate) or rate R approaching C (for a fixed PT ), are called capacity-achieving codes. This indicates that capacity-achieving codes require bounded transmit power even when the target error probability Pe is lowered to zero. However, this analysis focuses almost exclusively on transmit power. The recent works found that when we factor in encoding/decoding power into the analysis, any

communication strategy must consume infinite power and infinite energy-per-bit to achieve arbitrarily small error
Ô rate. To be more precise, it was shown [17], [18] that total
energy-per-bit is lower bounded by Ω( 3 log(1/Pe)). How does this finding change our view on designing
codes? A first suggestion is that our code choice should change with communication distances and/or target error probability: the energy-optimal codes for short distance communication, or higher error probability, are “simple” codes requiring smaller circuit energy even at the cost of increased transmit energy. At long distances, energyoptimal codes operate closer to capacity because circuit power matters less and less in overall system-level power optimization. Experimental results also support the claim that it is more energy efficient [19], [20] to use different codes for different Pe requirements.
We now ask a more practical question: can we implement an optimized encoder/decoder for all the diverse scenarios a device will face? Consider IoT technology that will connect myriad devices that are aimed at diverse applications. These devices will have markedly different operating conditions such as energy-constrained situations (e.g., wireless sensor networks [21], [22]), widely varying data-rate and reliability (target error probability) requirements, and will operate at both small and large distances. As the number of possible combinations of scenarios increases, it will be impossible to build a dedicated ECC for each different scenario, let alone design those encoding/decoding circuits and fit them on a single device. This motivated the construction of a new class of codes, called “energy-adaptive codes” [23], [24]. These codes can be implemented on a single decoder, saving precious area resource, while enabling the implementation to adapt its decoding energy to suit different communication requirements. A brief overview of energy-adaptive codes is given in Section III. These constructions are based on the state-of-the-art ECCs, namely, low-density parity check (LDPC) codes and polar codes. The latter are now adopted as new ECCs in 5G standard. While energyadaptive LDPC codes are shown in simulations to provide energy saving capabilities by having adaptivity, advantages of energy-adaptive polar codes were characterized theoretically, showing that adaptive codes can save energy in the scaling sense as compared to conventional nonadaptive codes.

766 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

Fig. 2. (a) Comparison of Shannon limit which only includes transmit power (PT) and lower bounds on total power (Ptotal) obtained using the node model. Note that the optimal P∗T is bounded in the node model [11]. (b) Lower bounds on total power (Ptotal) obtained using the wire model [45]. Unlike the node model where P∗T is bounded, in the wire model PT∗ grow to infinity as Pe approaches 0. Also, the rightmost black line shows that Ptotal is suboptimal when we use bounded transmit power. (c) Illustration of information friction model [18]. As moving
an object requires energy due to frictional loss proportional to the weight of the object, the information friction model assumes that there is
an energy cost when moving information, and the energy is proportional to the number of bits in the information. µIF is the coefficient of
information friction, which depends on the substrate the information is transmitted on.

We conclude this section with a more general view on the necessity of universal energy-adaptive codes, an open problem. Despite the wide and increasing adoption of IoT technology, no one fully understands where and how IoT technology will be applied in the future. Most believe that IoT’s “killer” application is yet to be found. Now, optimizing the design of encoder/decoder circuitry requires multiple highly skilled personnel (e.g., multiple Ph.D. theses; see [3]), the required skilled manpower to design an optimized code for the era of 1000 wireless devices per person simply does not exist. Without any change in our design approach, it is likely that a vast majority of these devices would operate in suboptimal energy efficiency regimes. Designing universal codes that can adapt their rates and energy to suit a wide range of conditions and system requirements can save significant energy as networks scale not only in quantity but also in their variety (heterogeneity).
II. O P T I M I Z I N G T O T A L S Y S T E M E N E R GY F O R C O M M U N I CAT I O N : FU N DA M EN TAL L IM IT S
It has been established that, fundamentally, the total energy of communication must grow unboundedly as the target error rate is lowered to zero. Why is this different from commonly used “Shannon waterfall” curves [see Fig. 2(a)], which show that one can achieve arbitrarily small target error rate with finite transmit power? It is because Shannon’s limits do not account for circuit energy spent on decoding. Before we explain how circuit energy can be incorporated into the picture using theoretical models, let us begin with two motivating questions.
Is the energy required in decoding really significant? Consider the existing implementations of indoor wireless systems operating in the 60-GHz band [25], [26]. While communicating a few meters only requires tens of milliwatts in transmit power [25], [27], even at a few gigabytes per second, this power increases at least quadratically with distance. On the other hand, decoders

of even moderately sophisticated low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, operating at a few gigabytes per second decoding throughput, often require hundreds of milliwatts of power [2], [25], [28], [29]. In comparison with the other components of circuit power (e.g., analog-todigital converter and equalizer), the energy consumed by decoders of sophisticated codes can still dominate [25] (see Fig. 3). Hence, in this paper, we focus on adapting decoders. Adapting the other components of the circuit is an intriguing future direction.
Do we need a theoretical approach to study this joint design issue, or can it be studied empirically? While empirical approaches have been tried (see [9] and [10]), without theoretical guidance, the sheer number of possibilities is too large to test. There are superexponentially many codes for any given block length, many encoding/decoding algorithms for each code, and far too many implementations for each encoding/decoding algorithm. Also, there is the possibility of yet undiscovered codes, myriad network situations, and innovative implementation architectures. Without a systematic approach, a satisfying understanding of total-energy-efficient coding is almost impossible.
To obtain a systematic understanding of circuit energy, one might think that the thermodynamic understanding of computation energy [34] might help. However, the
Fig. 3. Simple system diagram of the transmitter and receiver that consists of encoder, power amplifier, low-noise amplifier, analog-to-digital converter (ADC), equalizer, and decoder. Power consumption of each component [25], [28], [30]–[33] shows that not one component dominates, and decoder’s power consumption is a significant portion of the total power consumption.

Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 | PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 767 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

Fig. 4. (a) Thompson’s VLSI Model for computing [16]. A circuit is modeled as a set of computational nodes placed on a grid and wires interconnecting them. (b) Summary of tools used to obtain fundamental limits on total communication power.

physicists’ main goal there was not energy in modern computation systems, but to resolve “Maxwell’s demon”: a paradox that seemingly violated the second law of thermodynamics [34]. To that end, they assumed that friction and noise can be made as small as desired (see [35]–[37]), which is not only unrealistic but also assumes away the crux of the engineering problem. Friction and noise can be reduced but not eliminated. Shannon [38] took a more engineering approach by modeling both the noise and frictional path loss. To incorporate processing energy, we have to go a step further and include frictional losses and noise in communication circuitry. Just as path loss and channel noise in channel models help compute the required transmit power, friction, and noise in our implementation models can help to find the required computation power. To this end, different variants of the “VLSI model of computing” [15], [16] were adopted, which models circuits as a 2-D communication graph with edges as wires that connect computational nodes (the graph can also have multiple 2-D layers [16] as most circuits today do [39]). Then, the information flows in encoding/decoding implementation graphs were analyzed using tools from network information theory—such as the cut-set bound [40] and finite-length analyses [41], [42]— and tools from communication complexity theory [15], [16] [summarized in Fig. 4(b)].
Interesting fundamental limits obtained from three different circuit models are summarized as follows.
1) The Node Model: This models energy consumed by computational nodes in the VLSI model. When operating close to capacity, the required number of decoder clock cycles τ is lower bounded by τ log(log(1/Pe))/((C − R)2) [43], [44], for any code, and any decoding algorithm implemented in the VLSI model, where Pe is the target block-error probability, C is the channel capacity, and R is the code rate. Thus, if each node consumes fixed energy per clock cycle, the total power must diverge to infinity as Pe → 0, compared with the traditional Shannon limit that predicts bounded transmit power requirements. Furthermore, the optimal strategy must operate at a gap from the Shannon limit, otherwise τ , and hence, the decoding power, explodes.

2) Wire Model: Since wiring energy increases roughly linearly with wire length [15], [16], and each wire has a fixed width, the product Awiresτ , where Awires is the area occupied by on-chip wires, has been used as an estimate of wiring energy [16]. The results
Ô in [45] show that wire model encoding/dec√oding
power is lower bounded by Ω( log(1/Pe)/ PT ), where PT is the transmit power. Optimizing over PT ,
Ô the total power must diverge to infinity as Pe → 0 at
least as fast as Ω( 3 log(1/Pe)), which is significantly faster than the divergence for the node model. This means that in the asymptotic limit of Pe → 0, wiring power will dominate node power. Furthermore, in the wire model, the optimal transmit power PT∗
Ô should also diverge to infinity, without which,
the total power increases as Ω( log(1/Pe)). The key intuition here is that if there is not enough mixing of information in the encoding or decoding circuit, then the circuit is not exploiting the code’s entire length, and the code can effectively be broken down into smaller codes building on existing circuit cutting techniques [15], [16], [46]. Lower bounds on Pe are then obtained by an error-exponent-style analysis. 3) Information Friction Model: The “informationfriction” model [17], [18] generalizes the wire model by counting the required “bit-meters” (i.e., the product of number of bits and the distance to which they are moved during the computation), abstracting away from the detailed wiring complexity examined in [13], [17], [45], [47], and [48]. The results obtained from the information friction
Ô model are similar to the wire model, such as the
total power growing as Ω( log(1/Pe), but the proof techniques [17], [18] are cleaner and simpler. The results also hold for a broader class of implementations. Importantly, the information-friction model allows for arbitrary (but predetermined) scheduling of message passing in computing, allowing parts of the circuit to sleep (unlike in [15], [16], and [45]). These models have been experimentally validated to some degree. Specifically, Ganesan et al. [20] performed rigorous circuit simulations in 65-nm technology to obtain detailed models of energy consumption in decoding

768 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

circuits for message-passing decoders of LDPC codes, including energy consumed in wires and nodes. Using these models, they confirmed that the total energy diverges to infinity as Pe → 0 and that the code must adapt with distances (for fixed Pe): for short distances, a shorter code with shorter wires is desirable. For long distances, a longer code is desirable. Similar results were shown in [27] using 90-nm technology.
While the aforementioned results provide a fundamental limit to any type of code constructions, the bounds can be loose when applied to a specific type of codes as they do not capture the code-specific features. Blake and Kschischang [49]–[51] and Blake [52] used a similar approach to analyze decoders for LDPC and polar codes. They showed that carefully designed generalized polar encoders and decoders can achieve within polylogarithmic factors of the fundamental lower bounds. Furthermore, with LDPC coding, fundamental limits can be achieved subject to a conjecture on the number of iterations needed to reach close to optimal error probability.
The obtained understanding can be extended to incorporate other components in point-to-point communication. For example, Grover et al. [53] incorporate the equalizer and obtain tradeoffs between equalization, transmission, and encoding/decoding power. Going beyond point-topoint setup, Grover et al. [44] bring out another nuance in the problem: transmission and encoding/decoding power are not exchangeable. In network problems, increase in transmit power pollutes the channel for others by causing interference [54]. Thus, one needs to carefully tradeoff resulting interference, number of users, improved reliability, and total energy as the network scales.
Broader Efforts in “Green” Communications: While the Turing complexity of algorithms has been analyzed for various codes and decoding algorithms (see [55]–[59]), there is little work explicitly on encoding/decoding energy using circuit models. Design of codes for easier implementation has been studied with afocus on wiring complexity [60]–[63]. Problems, where power consumed by the transmitter/receiver circuitry, are modeled as a constant when turned on have been addressed [64]–[69]. More recently, sampling energy has received attention [70], [71], partly because of its influence on energy consumed in analog-to-digital conversion (ADC). Coding for a specified precision of ADC has been studied [72]. A substantial amount of recent work has also been dedicated to understanding energy-harvesting-based communication techniques for battery constrained networks [73]–[80].

energy optimal codes, energy-adaptive codes were suggested recently. The concept of energy-adaptive codes is using one code with an adjustable decoding circuit so that it can adapt the circuit energy consumption as target error probability changes. Using ECCs in an adaptive fashion is not a new idea. Rate-adaptive (rate-compatible) codes that use a single encoder/decoder pair for codes with different rates were proposed to maximize communication rate when channel is time-varying [81]–[86]. Our approach is similar to previous adaptive coding ideas in the sense that we reduce circuit area by building an ECC solution that uses one encoder/decoder pair for many different situations. However, the goal of adapting a code is not only to maximize the data transmission rate but also to minimize decoding energy. Two energy-adaptive code designs introduced here assume that the data transmission rate is fixed.
In this section, we will provide a summary of two constructions of energy-adaptive codes: energy-adaptive LDPC codes and energy-adaptive polar codes. Even though the two constructions are based on different codes, the basic underlying idea is the same. An energy-adaptive code can have L adaptive levels where the complexity of the code reduces as the level goes down. In other words, at level L, the code is the most powerful (can correct the most errors), and at level 1, the code is the weakest (can correct the least errors). Going from level-l code to level-(l − 1) code is simple: just turn off a few wires. The construction is based on a key observation that long wires consume more energy than short wires, so we should turn off the long wires first to reduce energy consumption.
In each section, we will start with a short overview of LDPC codes and polar codes and discuss how we convert them into the energy-adaptive version. The main contribution of energy-adaptive LDPC codes is showing that the two-level adaptive code can save almost 2× energy as compared to its nonadaptive counterpart through simulations. Energy-adaptive polar code construction showed that we can build O(log N) levels of adaptivity for the code of block length N and proved theoretically that we can achieve scaling energy gain by using the adaptive construction.
A. Energy-Adaptive LDPC Codes
Throughout the paper, we will use the notations given in Fig. 5 to describe codes.
1) LDPC Codes and Message-Passing Decoder: LDPC codes were first suggested by Gallager [87] and gained an attention again in the past 20 years as they were shown to achieve capacity [88], [89]. LDPC codes are a class of

III. E N E R G Y - A D A P T I V E E R R O R CORRECTING CODES

In the previous section, we have established that it is more energy efficient to use different codes for different target error requirements than using one code for all. To minimize the circuit area overhead of building many

Fig. 5. Simple communication system diagram with encoder and decoder.

Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 | PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 769 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

Fig. 6. Example parity check matrix for ´n 10, k 5µ and the bipartite graph representation of the matrix H. Highlighted entries in H correspond to bold edges in the graph. For instance, there is an edge between v2 and c3. There are ten variable nodes and five check nodes.

linear codes, which means that a k-bit message vector u is mapped to an n-bit codeword x through a linear equation x = Gu. When decoding, one can detect an error by checking if the received message y lies in the column space of G. One way to check is to see if Hy = 0 where H is an (n − k)-by-k matrix called “parity-check matrix” that satisfies HG = 0. What defines LDPC codes is the low density of H matrix, that is, most entries in H are 0 and only few of them are 1.
Thanks to the sparsity of the matrix H, there exists a low-complexity message-passing decoder which is based on the graph representation of H (see Fig. 6). A parity check matrix H can be represented as a bipartite graph where each column of H corresponds to a variable node and each row of H corresponds to a check node. There is an edge between a variable node vi and a check node cj only when H(i, j) = 1 where H(i, j) denotes the (i, j)th entry in matrix H. Variable nodes contain the initial belief on the received bits, and then they propagate their beliefs to check nodes. Once check nodes receive all the beliefs from its connected variable nodes, they update the belief of each bit by checking parity check equations (Hy = 0), and send back the updated beliefs to variable nodes. After a few rounds of message exchanges, the beliefs on the bits will converge. Computations at variable and check nodes to update beliefs are simple elementary operations [90] that can be easily implemented on a circuit. Message-passing decoders can be straightforwardly mapped to a node-and-

wire circuit model where variable nodes or check nodes will be computational nodes on a circuit and edges will be wired on a circuit. As LDPC parity check matrices are randomly constructed, there will be long and short wires dispersed over the whole circuit.
2) Main Result: To build energy-adaptive LDPC codes, a hierarchical structure was introduced to the conventional LDPC parity check matrix H. The hierarchical structure in a code divides the code into local and global structures. In the example for two-level adaptive codes shown in Fig. 7(a), level 1 blocks are local structures and level 2 block is a global structure. If we look at the messagepassing decoder implementation of this energy-adaptive parity check matrix, wires connecting the two level 1 blocks are only in level-2 block [see Fig. 7(b)]. Wires within level 1 blocks are constrained in the local region, and hence, they are substantially shorter than the wires in level 2 that connect nodes across two local structures. When the desired Pe is relatively high, we can turn off level 2 nodes and use only Level 1 subcode. This strategy can save substantial decoding energy by turning off all the long wires in the global structure. We can further extend a simple two-level structure to a hierarchical code with more levels. Fig. 7(a) shows how we build a three-level adaptive code by using two-level codes as subblocks and adding level 3 block to interconnect those two subblocks. By doing this layering repeatedly, we can make a code with the arbitrary level of hierarchy as shown in Fig. 7(a).

Fig. 7. (a) Structure of parity check matrices for energy-adaptive LDPC codes. (b) Circuit layout of two-level energy-adaptive LDPC codes. Edges in Level 1 are in dark gray color and edges in Level 2 are in light gray color. When we use Level 1 code, the light gray wires are turned off, and only local wires (dark gray) are used.
770 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks
analysis [50], it was shown that the gap between decoding energy of energy-adaptive codes and nonadaptive codes goes to infinity as the worst case error requirement approaches 0 [24]. We will first provide a short description of polar codes, and we refer the interested readers to more comprehensive reviews such as [95].

Fig. 8. Comparison of BER performance of a two-level adaptive code and a nonadaptive code with the same rate and the same block length. Our adaptive strategy will only use level 1 subcode until the switching point, and then turn on level 2 when BER becomes smaller than the switching point. At BER 10−4, the adaptive code consumes approximately 2× less energy than nonadaptive one.
Turning off wires for lower error protection is similar to parity puncturing, which is a commonly used method to build rate-compatible codes [81], [91], [92]. In fact, moving from level 2 to level 1 can be considered as a special case, albeit more structured than usual, of puncturing. However, in energy-adaptive coding, the goal of removing parity bits is very different. Puncturing, classically, is aimed at minimizing the gap to capacity. Energy-adaptive coding is aimed at enabling hardware that minimizes circuit energy consumption. Simply utilizing the capacityoptimal puncturing scheme is inefficient from an energy perspective because longer wires in the circuit are still being used. Energy-adaptive coding, as described earlier, removes wires in a careful, systematic fashion so that only shorter wires are used when possible.
The simulation results that compare an adaptive code with a two-level hierarchy and a nonadaptive code with the same rate are shown in Fig. 8. Note that the circuit energy on the x-axis is theoretical estimate based on the nodeand-wire model, and hence, there is no unit. The bold line illustrates the adaptive strategy we use at different target error probabilities. Before the switching point, it is better to use only level 1 at the given target block-error-rate (BER), and after the switching point, we have to switch to level 2 as level 1 code reaches the error floor. At target BER = 10−4, the nonadaptive code requires about two times more circuit energy than the adaptive code. Another thing to notice is that even though level 2 code and the nonadaptive code have the same length and the girth, the nonadaptive code always performs level 2 adaptive code. This is because the additional local structures we impose on adaptive codes degrade the decoding performance of LDPC codes.
B. Energy-Adaptive Polar Codes
By using polar codes, the simulation-based analysis in energy-adaptive LDPC codes was complemented with a theoretical analysis. By combining finite-length scaling analysis [93], [94] and VLSI energy complexity

1) Polar Codes and SC Decoders: Polar codes are the first explicit code construction [96] that provably achieves capacity. The name “polar” comes from its interesting property, called “channel polarization.” Let us consider sending k bits of message u over a channel W , and we will encode k bits into N bits of codeword x (N > k). Let us denote y as the channel output, and W (yi|xi) as the channel transition probability of the channel W for i = 1, . . . , N . To understand the channel polarization, instead of looking at W (y1|x1), . . . , W (yN |xN ), we will consider a different set of N channels that are given by the following transition probabilities:

WN(i) = W (y1N , ui1−1|ui), for i = 1, . . . , N.

(1)

These are the channels between the ith bit of the original message, and the entire output y and the previous bits of the original message ui1−1. The encoding of polar codes makes these N channels, WN(i)’s (i = 1, . . . , N ), polarize, i.e., some of them become perfect channels (I(WN(i)) ≈ 1), and the others become completely garbage channels (I(WN(i)) ≈ 0). Moreover, the fraction of channels that become perfect converges to I(W ), and the fraction of channels that become garbage converges to 1 − I(W ) as n goes to infinity. Hence, as long as R < I(W ), with large enough N, one can find RN perfect channels to transmit messages, and leave the bits on the garbage channels
frozen. Since which channels will be garbage is dependent on W , we denote (N, R, W ) polar code as the polar code of length N and rate R designed for the channel W .
The encoding function of polar codes is constructed recursively, that is, a polar code of length n is constructed from two polar codes of length n/2. As the recursive nature of polar codes is a key component of constructing
energy-adaptive polar codes, we will briefly describe the recursive construction. The simplest polar code with n = 2 is constructed as follows:

x = uG2,

G2 = F =

1 1

0 1

.

(2)

Then, the encoding matrix for polar codes of length n can be constructed recursively from the following equation:

Gn = (In/2 ⊗ F )Rn(I2 ⊗ Gn/2)

(3)

where ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product, In/2 (I2) is the identity matrix of size n/2-by-N/2 (2-by-2), and Rn is

Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 | PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 771 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

Fig. 9. (a) Recursive structure of polar encoder [96]. Note that two WN/2 blocks on the left can be used as encoders of length-N/2 polar codes. They are then connected to the RN block to build a polar code of length N. (b) SC decoder network example for N 8. There are NlogN computational nodes on the network and N input nodes (right). The leftmost nodes are the output nodes.

a permutation matrix known as bit-reversal matrix. This

recursive construction is shown in Fig. 9(a).

Finally, we want to discuss a decoding algorithm of polar

codes, called “successive cancellation” (SC) decoding.

SC decoding is closely linked to the channel polarization process of N channels. WN(i) = W (y1N , ui1−1|ui) can be used for guessing the ith message bit from the channel

output y1N given that you have decoded the first i − 1

bits correctly. SC decoders approximately simulate these

channels by sequentially decoding from the first bit to the

Nth bit and skipping the frozen bits. The decoding rule is

as follows:

´

ui = 0, if LR(Ni) > 1

(4)

1, otherwise

where LRN(i) is the likelihood ratio: LR(Ni) = (W (y1N , uˆ1i−1|uˆi = 0))/(W (y1N , uˆ1i−1|uˆi = 1)).
Using an SC decoder, block error probability Pe is at most 2N−0.49 for any rate R < I(W ) and large N [97].

2) System Model: We consider a scenario where a wide
range of target Pe requirements exist. Especially, we care about two target Pes: the worst case target block error probability Pe,worst and typical target block error probability Pe,typ, by which we mean informally the most frequently
required error probability. For instance, if a device requires error rate 10−3 for 70% of the time, and 10−6, 10−9, and 10−12 for 10% of the time each, Pe,typ = 10−3, and Pe,worst = 10−12. We make a crucial assumption here that

Pe,typ is remained at a moderate level, and Pe,worst goes to 0, and we denote this as (Pe,typ, Pe,worst) scenario.
3) Main Result: The construction of energy-adaptive polar codes harnesses the existing hierarchical structure in polar codes. As shown in Fig. 9(a), a length-n polar code is built by connecting two smaller polar codes of length n/2. For an L-level energy-adaptive polar code of length n, the Lth level adaptive code (the most powerful form) would be a polar code with length n. Then, the (L − 1)th level coding scheme switches off interconnections that connect two subblocks of n/2 and use them as separate length(n/2) polar codes. At the (L − 2)th level, the subblocks of length n/2 will be divided into two again, and it is equivalent to using four separate polar codes of length n/4. This, in nature, is analogous to energy-adaptive LDPC codes which had two smaller blocks of level 1 codes which were then connected to each other by global edges in level 2. An example of a three-level adaptive polar code of length 16 and rate 0.75 is given in Fig. 10(a).
Similar to energy-adaptive LDPC codes, having the hierarchical structure lets us turn off long connections on the circuit when using lower levels. To analyze circuit energy, we consider an SC decoder implemented on a mesh network.1 An example of mesh-network implementation of three-level adaptive polar code is given in Fig. 10(b).
1As described in Fig. 9(b), a straightforward implementation of SC decoder requires n log n computational nodes as there are n nodes aligned in log n stages (excluding the first input nodes). However, computations required at each node are repetitive. We thus compress n log n nodes√to n no√des and reuse each node log n times, and we align n nodes on a n-by- n mesh network. Mesh-network implementation is a space-efficient way of laying out nodes with simple wiring, but as nonadjacent nodes have to communicate through many rounds of routing, it can be slower than the straightforward implementation which has direct edges between each connected nodes.

772 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

Fig. 10. (a) Example of ´16, 0.75, W, L 3µ adaptive polar coding strategy where W is a binary-symmetric channel with flip probability pch 0.05. Each box represents 1 bit and the crossed boxes represent frozen bits. level 1 coding scheme consists of four blocks of ´4, 0.75, Wµ polar codes, and level 2 consists of two blocks of ´8, 0.75, Wµ polar codes. Finally, level 3 scheme is equal to the ´16, 0.75, Wµ polar code. Note that the locations of frozen bits are different at different levels. (b) Example mesh-network decoder implementation for a three-level energy-adaptive polar code with N 16. At level 1, cells only have to communicate within four-cell submeshes which are marked with the gray-shaded rectangles. At level 2, cells need to communicate within eight-cell submeshes which are the rectangles with thick gray boundaries. Finally, at level 3, cells have to communicate globally all over the mesh.

When level 1 code is used, decoding only requires communication within a two-by-two grid. When level 2 code is used, decoding requires communication within twoby-four grid, and when level 3 code is used, there is communication across the entire mesh. All 16 cells are used in all levels, but by changing the communication pattern from global to local, we can save substantial decoding energy. At the same time, because we exploit the existing structure of polar codes, there is minimal amount of overhead to implement multiple levels of adaptive decoding. This result is summarized in the theorem below.
Theorem 1 [13, Th. 3]: Under a (Pe,typ, Pe,worst) scenario, circuit energy required to achieve Pe,typ for adaptive and nonadaptive codes have the following relationship:

Enon-adap/Eadap = Θ

log 1 Pe,worst

.

(5)

Furthermore, adaptive and nonadaptive codes have the same circuit area in scaling sense, that is

Anon-adap/Aadap = Θ(1).

(6)

Proof: See the full version of [24].2 The theorem states that when one just wants to achieve Pe,typ ( Pe,worst), nonadaptive polar codes designed for the worst case spends Θ(log(1/Pe,worst)) times more energy than the adaptive polar codes. This gap goes to infinity as Pe,worst approaches 0. Furthermore, (6) shows that the circuit area requirement for adaptive codes is only constant times bigger than the nonadaptive codes. As we are utilizing the existing hierarchical structure present in polar codes, additional components required for adaptive codes are minimal.

2http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/haewonj/documents/isit17_full _jeong.pdf

C. Energy-Adaptive Codes in the Real World
Emerging IoT devices that are being implemented for various applications such as health, transport, manufacturing, and agriculture have diverse requirements and operating conditions. Especially, IoT sensors and actuators are usually limited in energy [98]–[101], and sometimes rely on harvested energy from the environment. Furthermore, they are often required to maintain a small device size. Energy-adaptive codes with many adaptive levels can be an attractive solution here for a more fine-grained control of energy usage without increasing the device size significantly.
There can be mainly two different adaptation triggers: battery constraints and application’s requirements.3 For these triggers to be implemented, there should be a control sequence between applications and operating systems to low-level communication chip settings. For example, one can implement a flag on the communication circuitry that sets adaptive levels, and applications and operating systems can access and change the flag. Let us discuss how this can be implemented with a few examples.
1) Mobile Robots: Let us think about mobile robots that constantly communicate their locations with each other in order for them to meet at a common location as soon as possible. When they are relatively far away, they just have to move roughly in the right direction. On the other hand, when they are close by, more accurate location information should be communicated to converge into a desired formation without collision. Hence, a location control application will set the decoding flag on the communication circuit to level 1 when the distance is large, and when the distance becomes below some threshold, it can change the decoding flag to level 2 for higher precision of location communication.
3Channel information is another crucial adaptation trigger, but a design of energy-adaptive codes for varying channel information is remained as an open problem and will be discussed further in the next section.

Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 | PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 773 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

2) IoT Sensors: When an IoT sensor is in a low-battery setting (e.g., harvested solar energy is running out), it can compromise on the accuracy of communication. For instance, when the operating system detects that the battery is low, it can set the decoding flag to level 1 and decode up to BER 10−9, and when it is back to sufficient energy state, it can set the decoding flag to level 2 and decode up to BER 10−15. They can also adapt decoding level depending on the applications. While the current IoT sensors mainly focus on sending the measured data to some central servers, in the future, sensors themselves can perform data processing by communicating with each other. When they are communicating for machine learning algorithms, the data could be transmitted with lower precision because of the following. a) For training, some machine learning algorithms are known to perform better with small noise (bit flips in the least significant bits) in the training data. Also, assuming that the training is done on a large scale data, machine learning algorithms are usually resilient to few outliers (bit flips in the most significant bits). b) For inference, machine learning algorithms make an inference fusing data from many sensors, such that the noisy data from a few sensors might not affect the inference result, especially if the noisy sensor is considered as an insignificant dimension for the inference. However, for file transfer from a sensor (e.g., compressed images), data transmission should have a high precision because even a single bit flip can corrupt the entire file. These different communication applications are aware of these Pe requirements themselves, and it will set the decoding flags accordingly.
3) Mobile Phones: For voice communication or video streaming, some errors can be tolerated, while data packets for program instructions have very low error tolerance. We can predefine the required Pe for each application, and after the handshakes for a given application are complete, we can set the decoding flags to the predefined level for that application.
Finally, we want to make a remark on mm-wave IoT. The IEEE 802.11ad standard for 60-GHz mm-wave band allows for use of several codes (LDPC codes with different rates and Reed-Solomon codes) [102, p. 33]. This is a step in the right direction, but the number of configurations available might be too limited to enable severely energy-constrained IoT applications. In this context, energy-adaptive coding, and overall, energy-adaptive system design can enable harnessing the full potential of mm-wave technology.
IV. C O N C L U S I O N A N D O P E N PROBLEMS
In this paper, we argued that the classical Shannontheoretic view of error-correcting codes is insufficient

for emerging networks with dynamically varying environments and heterogeneous nodes. We summarized the recent theoretical and experimental results that showed to minimize total system energy; we have to use different codes for different environments. Then, we introduce the concept of energy-adaptive codes, codes that adapt their structures with the aim of minimizing energy consumption for different environments, and review the first two constructions of energy-adaptive codes that are based on the state-of-the-art codes, namely, LDPC codes and polar codes.
The problem of optimizing total system energy is a relatively new, and code designs of energy-adaptive coding need to be studied more thoroughly. A lot remains to be done, and it requires a close interaction between theory, simulations, and experiments.
A. Energy-Adaptive Codes for Varying Channels:
Currently, energy-adaptive codes focus on the problem of dynamically varying reliability (target Pe) requirements under the fixed channel. However, it is important to address adapting codes for varying channels. Especially in wireless networks, depending on the interference and obstructions in the environment, a communication device can face a wide range of SNRs. Intuitively, existing energyadaptive codes can work similarly in this situation too— use higher levels for low SNR and lower levels for high SNR. However, we might have to go one step further for adapting to different channels. Remember that the existing energy-adaptive code designs have the same information rate regardless of the number of levels. A time-varying channel will have time-varying channel capacity. If we fix our rate for the worst case channel, we not only waste bandwidth but energy as well, because we have to spend more energy on sending and receiving a longer stream of bits. Hence, this requires an energy-adaptive design that cooptimizes rate and energy.
B. Energy-Adaptive Codes for Larger Class of Codes
The current understanding of energy-adaptive coding is limited to very specific type of codes and decoders. Adapting other classes of codes into energy-adaptive codes, such as spatially coupled codes or more classical codes, e.g., Reed–Solomon codes, needs to be studied for improved comparison. Even for LDPC codes and polar codes, different decoder architectures can be explored, such as peeling decoder for LDPC codes and list decoder for polar codes. After carefully examining different code architectures, an important next step would be joint circuit and code design.
C. Energy-Optimal Design for the Overall System
Ensuring energy efficiency in dynamic environments will require each component of the system (see Fig. 3) to be

774 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

energy adaptive. A question that remains to be understood is how to optimize the overall system, not only just transmit power and encoding/decoding power but also other components such as the ADC, the equalizer, the mixer, the beamformer, and the multiple-input–multiple-output decoder. We believe that understanding various components of communication circuitry will raise new theoretical formulations that have both intellectual and practical importance.
D. Coding Beyond the Physical Layer
Finally, coding need not only be applied to the physical layer. For instance, there are new fault tolerance

strategies suggested for computing at data centers, called “coded computing,” which is applying ECCs to specific numerical operation at the application level [103]–[108]. Since coded computing technique is implemented in the software, it can adapt more flexible. Using a more powerful coded computing technique at the application layer could reduce the amount of encoding/ decoding required at the physical layer. Understanding the interplay between coding for computing and ECC for communication and finding the optimal point that minimizes total energy consumption of data centers is an interesting open question that goes beyond optimizing only physical-layer components.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Flatman. Data Centre Link Lengths. Accessed: Mar. 2011. [Online]. Available: http://tinyurl.com/FaltmanCablingSurvey
[2] H. Barrass et al., “10GBASE-T: 10 gigabit ethernet over twisted-pair copper,” in Proc. Ethernet Alliance, Cambridge, MA, USA, Aug. 2007, p. 9.
[3] Z. Zhang, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance,” Ph.D. dissertation, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2009.
[4] T. Mohsenin, “Algorithms and architectures for efficient low density parity check (LDPC) decoder hardware,” Ph.D. dissertation, UC Davis, 2010.
[5] P. Wu, G. Parnaby, and W. Lo. NGBASE-T Requirements: Learning from 10GBASE-T. Accessed: Jan. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/3/NGBASET/ public/jan13/WuParnaby_01a_0%113_NGBT.pdf
[6] D. Abts, M. R. Marty, P. M. Wells, P. Klausler, and H. Liu, “Energy proportional datacenter networks,” ACM SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 338–347, 2010.
[7] B. Heller et al., “Elastictree: Saving energy in data center networks,” in Proc. NSDI, vol. 3, 2010, pp. 19–21.
[8] Y. Shang, D. Li, and M. Xu, “Energy-aware routing in data center network,” in Proc. 1st ACM SIGCOMM Workshop Green Netw., 2010, pp. 1–8.
[9] E. Erkip, Y. Wang, D. Goodman, Y. Wu, and X. Lu, “Energy efficient coding and transmission,” in Proc. IEEE VTS 53rd Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Spring), vol. 2, May 2001, pp. 1444–1448.
[10] S. L. Howard, C. Schlegel, and K. Iniewski, “Error control coding in low-power wireless sensor networks: When is ECC energy-efficient?” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2006, Dec. 2006, Art. no. 074812.
[11] P. Grover, K. Woyach, and A. Sahai, “Towards a communication-theoretic understanding of system-level power consumption,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1744–1755, Sep. 2011.
[12] K. Ganesan, P. Grover, and A. Goldsmith, “How far are LDPC codes from fundamental limits on total power consumption?” in Proc. 50th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2012, pp. 671–678.
[13] P. Grover, A. Sahai, K. Ganesan, and J. Rabaey, “‘Green codes with short wires at the decoder: Fundamental limits and constructions,”’ in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), Feb. 2011, pp. 1–4.
[14] C. G. Blake and F. R. Kschischang, “Energy consumption of VLSI decoders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3185–3198, Jun. 2015.
[15] C. D. Thompson, “Area-time complexity for VLSI,” in Proc. 11th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput. (STOC), New York, NY, USA, 1979, pp. 81–88.
[16] C. D. Thompson, “Communication in networks for coordinating behavior,” Ph.D. dissertation, Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 1980.
[17] P. Grover, “‘Information-friction’ and its impact on minimum energy per communicated bit,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Istanbul, Turkey,

Jul. 2013, pp. 2513–2517. [18] P. Grover, “Information friction and its implications
on minimum energy required for communication,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 895–907, Feb. 2015. [19] K. Ganesan, P. Grover, and J. Rabaey, “The power cost of over-designing codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), Oct. 2011, pp. 128–133. [20] K. Ganesan, P. Grover, J. Rabaey, and A. Goldsmith, “On the total power capacity of regular-LDPC codes with iterative message-passing decoders,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 375–396, Feb. 2016. [21] Z. Tian, D. Yuan, and Q. Liang, “Energy efficiency analysis of error control schemes in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), Aug. 2008, pp. 401–405. [22] S. L. Howard, C. Schlegel, and K. Iniewski, “Error control coding in low-power wireless sensor networks: When is ECC energy-efficient?,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2006, Dec. 2006, Art. no. 074812. [23] H. Jeong and P. Grover, “Energy-adaptive codes,” in Proc. Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Sep./Oct. 2015, pp. 132–139. [24] H. Jeong, C. G. Blake, and P. Grover, “Energy-adaptive polar codes: Trading off reliability and decoder circuit energy,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2017, pp. 2608–2612. [25] C. Marcu et al., “A 90 nm CMOS low-power 60 GHz transceiver with integrated baseband circuitry,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 3434–3447, Dec. 2009. [26] S. Kundu, A. Khairi, and J. Paramesh, “A supply-voltage scalable, 45 nm CMOS ultra-wideband receiver for mm-Wave ranging and communication,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf. (CICC), Sep. 2012, pp. 1–4. [27] K. Ganesan, Y. Wen, P. Grover, A. Goldsmith, and J. Rabaey, “Choosing ‘green’ codes by simulation-based modeling of implementations,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (Globecom), Dec. 2012, pp. 3286–3292. [28] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010. [29] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008. [30] B. Murmann. ADC Performance Survey 1997–2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.stanford.edu/˜ murmann/adcsurvey.html [31] T. L. Brandon et al., “A compact 1.1-Gb/s encoder and a memory-based 600-Mb/s decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1017–1029, May 2009.

[32] J. Chen and A. M. Niknejad, “A compact 1V 18.6dBm 60GHz power amplifier in 65nm CMOS,” in IEEE ISSCC Dig. Tech. Papers., Feb. 2011, pp. 432–433.
[33] S.-C. Shin, M. C.-H. Leung, and S.-W. Hsiao, “A temperature variation compensated 60-GHz low-noise amplifier in 90-nm CMOS technology,” in Proc. Asia-Pacific Microw. Conf. (APMC), Dec. 2011, pp. 211–214.
[34] H. Leff and A. F. Rex, Maxwell’s Demon 2 Entropy, Classical and Quantum Information, Computing. London, U.K.: Insitutite of Physics, 2003.
[35] R. Landauer, “Minimal energy requirements in communication,” Science, vol. 272, no. 5270, pp. 1914–1918, 1996.
[36] R. Landauer, “Computation: A fundamental physical view,” Phys. Scripta, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 88–95, 1987.
[37] C. H. Bennett, “Logical reversibility of computation,” IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 525–532, Nov. 1973.
[38] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, Jul./Oct. 1948.
[39] Metal Layers in Integrated Circuits. [Online]. Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_circuit
[40] T. M. Cover and A. A. El Gamal, “Capacity theorems for the relay channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-25, no. 5, pp. 572–584, Sep. 1979.
[41] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1971.
[42] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Dispersion of Gaussian channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seoul, South Korea, Jun./Jul. 2009, pp. 2204–2208.
[43] P. Grover and A. Sahai, “Green codes: Energy-efficient short-range communication,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1178–1182.
[44] P. Grover, K. Woyach, and A. Sahai, “Towards a communication-theoretic understanding of system-level power consumption,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1744–1755, Sep. 2011.
[45] P. Grover, A. Goldsmith, and A. Sahai, “Fundamental limits on the power consumption of encoding and decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2012, pp. 2716–2720.
[46] A. El Gamal, J. Greene, and K. Pang, “VLSI complexity of coding,” in Proc. MIT Conf. on Adv. Res. VLSI, Cambridge, MA, USA, Jan. 1984.
[47] P. Grover and A. Sahai, “Fundamental bounds on the interconnect complexity of decoder implementations,” in Proc. 48th Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), Baltimore, MD, USA, Mar. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[48] P. Grover, “Fundamental limits on the power consumption for lossless signal recovery,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Sep. 2012.

Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 | PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 775 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

[49] C. G. Blake and F. R. Kschischang, “Energy consumption of VLSI decoders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3185–3198, Jun. 2015.
[50] C. G. Blake and F. R. Kschischang, “Energy complexity of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2016, pp. 810–814.
[51] C. G. Blake and F. R. Kschischang, “On the VLSI energy complexity of LDPC decoder circuits,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 2781–2795, May 2017.
[52] C. G. Blake, “Energy consumption of error control coding circuits,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2017.
[53] P. Grover, A. Sahai, and J.-H. Park, “Simple models for power optimization across transmission, equalization and decoding,” in Proc. 19th Eur. Signal Process. Conf. (EUSIPCO), Barcelona, Spain, Aug./Sep. 2011, pp. 884–888.
[54] P. Gupta and P. R. Kumar, “The capacity of wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 388–404, Mar. 2000.
[55] A. J. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 2, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.
[56] G. D. Forney, “Concatenated codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 1965.
[57] I. Sason and G. Wiechman, “Bounds on the number of iterations for turbo-like code ensembles over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, to be published.
[58] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007.
[59] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity-achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[60] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” IPN Progress Rep. 42-154, JPL, 2005.
[61] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[62] M. Mohiyuddin, A. Prakash, A. Aziz, and W. Wolf, “Synthesizing interconnect-efficient low density parity check codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), New York, NY, USA, Jul. 2004, pp. 488–491.
[63] V. Nagarajan, S. Laendner, N. Jayakumar, O. Milenkovic, and S. P. Khatri, “High-throughput VLSI implementations of iterative decoders and related code construction problems,” J. VLSI Signal Process., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 185–206, 2007.
[64] S. Cui, A. J. Goldsmith, and A. Bahai, “Energy-constrained modulation optimization,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 2349–2360, Sep. 2005.
[65] P. Y. Massaad, M. Medard, and L. Zheng, “Impact of processing energy on the capacity of wireless channels,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl. (ISITA), 2004.
[66] P. Youssef-Massaad, L. Zheng, and M. Medard, “Bursty transmission and glue pouring: On wireless channels with overhead costs,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 5188–5194, Dec. 2008.
[67] V. Prabhakaran and P. R. Kumar, “Communication by sleeping: Optimizing a relay channel under wake and transmit power costs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun./Jul. 2009, pp. 859–863.
[68] X. Liu and E. Erkip, “On the Gaussian Z-interference channel with processing energy cost,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Nov. 2011, pp. 2130–2134.
[69] X. Liu and E. Erkip. (2013). “Energy-efficient communication over gaussian interference networks with processing energy cost.” [Online].

Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1301.1661 [70] Y. Chen, A. J. Goldsmith, and Y. C. Eldar. (2012).
“Channel capacity under sub-nyquist nonuniform sampling.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1204.6049 [71] H. Mahdavi-Doost and R. D. Yates, “Energy harvesting receivers: Finite battery capacity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2013, pp. 1799–1803. [72] J. Singh, O. Dabeer, and U. Madhow, “On the limits of communication with low-precision analog-to-digital conversion at the receiver,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 3629–3639, Dec. 2009. [73] K. Tutuncuoglu and A. Yener, “Optimum transmission policies for battery limited energy harvesting nodes,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1180–1189, Mar. 2012. [74] K. Tutuncuoglu and A. Yener, “Multiple access and two-way channels with energy harvesting and Bi-directional energy cooperation,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), Feb. 2013, pp. 1–8. [75] B. Gurakan, O. Ozel, J. Yang, and S. Ulukus, “Energy cooperation in energy harvesting two-way communications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2013, pp. 3126–3130. [76] B. Gurakan, O. Ozel, J. Yang, and S. Ulukus, “Two-way and multiple-access energy harvesting systems with energy cooperation,” in Proc. ASILOMAR Conf., Nov. 2012, pp. 58–62. [77] C. Raman, G. J. Foschini, R. A. Valenzuela, R. D. Yates, and N. B. Mandayam, “Power savings from half-duplex relaying in downlink cellular systems,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Sep./Oct. 2009, pp. 748–753. [78] P. Grover and A. Sahai, “Shannon meets tesla: Wireless information and power transfer,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2010, pp. 2363–2367. [79] L. R. Varshney, “Transporting information and energy simultaneously,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2008, pp. 1612–1616. [80] S. Ulukus et al., “Energy harvesting wireless communications: A review of recent advances,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 360–381, Apr. 2015. [81] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004. [82] J. Li and K. R. Narayanan, “Rate-compatible low density parity check codes for capacity-approaching ARQ schemes in packet data communications,” in Proc. Commun., Internet, Inf. Technol., 2002, pp. 201–206. [83] B. Vucetic, “An adaptive coding scheme for time-varying channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 653–663, May 1991. [84] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-36, no. 4, pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988. [85] A. Eslami and H. Pishro-Nik, “A practical approach to polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul./Aug. 2011, pp. 16–20. [86] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 1, Jun. 2004, pp. 430–434. [87] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962. [88] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001. [89] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645,

Aug. 1996. [90] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity
of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001. [91] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-36, no. 4, pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988. [92] T.-Y. Chen, D. Divsalar, J. Wang, and R. D. Wesel, “Protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes for rate compatibility with short blocklengths,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (Globecom), Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6. [93] V. Guruswami and P. Xia, “Polar codes: Speed of polarization and polynomial gap to capacity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 3–16, Jan. 2015. [94] M. Mondelli, S. H. Hassani, and R. L. Urbanke, “Unified scaling of polar codes: Error exponent, scaling exponent, moderate deviations, and error floors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6698–6712, Dec. 2016. [95] E. Sasoglu, Polarization and Polar Codes (Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory), vol. 8. 2012, no. 4. [96] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity-achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009. [97] E. Arıkan and E. Telatar, “On the rate of channel polarization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun./Jul. 2009, pp. 1493–1495. [98] P. Kamalinejad, C. Mahapatra, Z. Sheng, S. Mirabbasi, V. C. M. Leung, and Y. L. Guan, “Wireless energy harvesting for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 102–108, Jun. 2015. [99] S. Sudevalayam and P. Kulkarni, “Energy harvesting sensor nodes: Survey and implications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 443–461, Sep. 2011. [100] X. Lu, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D. I. Kim, and Z. Han, “Wireless networks with RF energy harvesting: A contemporary survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 757–789, 2nd Quart., 2015. [101] S. S. Kumar and K. R. Kashwan, “Research study of energy harvesting in wireless sensor networks,” Int. J. Renew. Energy Res., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 745–753, 2013. [102] J. Harmon. Understanding IEEE 802.11ad Physical Layer and Measurement Challenges. Accessed: May 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www. keysight.com/upload/cmc_upload/All/22May2014 Webcast.pdf [103] K. Lee, M. Lam, R. Pedarsani, D. Papailiopoulos, and K. Ramchandran, “Speeding up distributed machine learning using codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 1514–1529, Mar. 2018. [104] R. Tandon, Q. Lei, A. G. Dimakis, and N. Karampatziakis. (2016). “Gradient coding.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.03301 [105] S. Dutta, V. Cadambe, and P. Grover, “Short-Dot: Computing large linear transforms distributedly using coded short dot products,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 2092–2100. [106] M. Fahim, H. Jeong, F. Haddadpour, S. Dutta, V. Cadambe, and P. Grover, “On the optimal recovery threshold of coded matrix multiplication,” in Proc. 55th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Oct. 2017, pp. 1264–1270. [107] V. Cadambe and P. Grover, “Codes for distributed computing: A tutorial,” IEEE Inf. Theory Soc. News Lett., vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 3–15, Dec. 2017. [108] Y. Yang, P. Grover, and S. Kar. (2017). “Coding method for parallel iterative linear solver.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.00163

776 PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE | Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Jeong and Grover: Energy-Adaptive Error Correcting for Dynamic and Heterogeneous Networks

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Haewon Jeong received the B.S. degree from the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea, in 2014, and the M.S. degree from Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, in 2016, where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
Her main contributions to science are toward solving a 60-year-old problem that was raised by Von Neumann: Can we reliably compute in the presence of noise? By connecting classical theory of error correcting codes and large-scale parallel computing, she has developed several computing strategies using unreliable processors (coded computing), including her recent work on an optimal matrix multiplication strategy under uncertainty in computing. She is also interested in green communication, and came up with an idea of energy-adaptive codes.
Ms. Jeong received the 2014 NSDI Community Award and the 2014 Samsung HumanTech Paper Award.

Pulkit Grover received the B.Tech. and M.Tech. degrees from IIT Kanpur, Kanpur, India, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California at Berkeley (UC Berkeley), Berkeley, CA, USA, in 2010.
He is currently an Associate Professor with Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. His main contributions to science are toward developing and experimentally validating a new theory of information (fundamental limits, practical designs) for efficient and reliable communication, computing, sensing, and control, e.g., by incorporating novel circuit-energy models and developing new mathematical tools for information flow analyses. To apply these ideas to a variety of problems including novel biomedical systems, his lab works extensively with system and device engineers, neuroscientists, and doctors.
Dr. Grover received the 2010 Best Student Paper Award at the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control; the 2011 Eli Jury Dissertation Award from UC Berkeley; the 2012 Leonard G. Abraham Journal Paper Award from the IEEE ComSoc; a 2014 NSF CAREER Award; and a 2015 Google Research Award. In 2018, he received the Inaugural Award from the Chuck Noll Foundation for Brain Injury Research and the Joel and Ruth Spira Excellence in Teaching Award. He has presented an ISIT’17 tutorial on coded computing, an emerging science of computing in presence of faults, delays, and errors.

Vol. 107, No. 4, April 2019 | PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE 777 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

