2019 IEEE International Black Sea Conference on Communications and Networking (BlackSeaCom)
Interleaved Cyclic Group Decomposition Length Adaptive MET QC-LDPC Codes
German Svistunov†, Usatyuk Vasiliy† †Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd, Moscow, Russian Federation svistunov.german1@huawei.com, usatyuk.vasily@huawei.com

Abstract—We introduce quasi-cyclic extension method for performance improving of the length adaptive Multi-Edge Type (MET) Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes below the Block Error Rate (BLER) 10−5. Proposed method allows to construct MET QC-LDPC Codes for variable code length with the modular lifting of 5G eMBB Base Graph 2. Simulation results under 50 iterations of sum-product decoding over an AWGN channel with QPSK modulation are provided. It shows near same performance for information length k < 600 and from 0.1 − 0.3 dB gain on k > 600 compared with 5G eMBB codes.
Index Terms—Length adaptation; k-step recoverable; eMBB; modular lifting; Simulated annealing lifting; Quasi-cyclic; MultiEdge Type LDPC; MET-LDPC; Cyclic group decomposition
I. INTRODUCTION
MET QC-LDPC codes currently applied to many modern standards: 5G eMBB [1], TV physical layer standard ATSC 3.0 [2], Deep Space Communication [3], GPON-fiber communication IEEE P802.3ca 50G-EPON [4]. MET QC-LDPC codes in 5G eMBB were constructed to provide the best performance at BLER 10−2. It is a reason why at BLER 10−5 it suffers from error-floor. In wireless communication systems a granularity of information length (transport block size) and compact representation of code specification are required. Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes allows to vary information length (length adaptation) by using different size of circulant, puncturing and shortening.
The main contribution of the paper is a method for cyclic group decomposition based on modular lifting of length adaptive MET QC-LDPC codes. A method of block interleaver construction (permutation in protograph) for improving performance of codes was used as well.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we introduce QC-LDPC codes definitions and notations. In Section III, we describe methods for length adaptive MET QCLDPC codes construction. In Section IV we describe method for Simulated annealing MET QC-LDPC codes lifting with cycle (graph) properties constrains from 5G eMBB protograph (BG2). An improving of short length code properties using k−step recoverable based circular buffers interleaver described as well. The performance of MET QC-LDPC codes obtained by the proposed method is investigated by simulations in Section V.
II. QC-LDPC CODES
A QC-LDPC code described by a parity-check matrix H consists of square blocks which could be either zero matrix or

circulant permutation matrices [5]. Let P = (Pij) be the L×L circulant permutation matrix defined by

1, if i + 1 ≡ j mod L Pij = 0, otherwise.

Then P k is the circulant permutation matrix (CPM) which

shifts the identity matrix I to the right by k times for any

k, 0 ≤ k ≤ L − 1. For simplicity of notation denote the zero matrix by P ∞. Denote the set {∞, 0, 1, . . . , L − 1} by AL.
Let the matrix H of size L × L be defined in the following

manner

 P a11 P a12 · · · P a1n 

 P a21 P a22 · · · P a2n 

H =  

...

...

...

...

,  

P am1 P am2 · · · P amn

where ai,j ∈ AL. Further we call L the circulant size of H.

In what follows a code C with parity-check matrix H will be

referred to as a QC-LDPC code.

Let E(H) = (Eij(H)) be the exponent matrix of H given

by:  a11 a12 · · · a1n 

 a21 a22 · · · a2n 

E(H) =   

...

...

...

...

,  

am1 am2 · · · amn

i.e., the entry Eij(H) = aij. The protograph mother matrix or (base graph) M (H) is a
m × n binary matrix obtained from replacing −1’s and other integers by 0 and 1, respectively, in E(H).
If there is a cycle of length 2l in the Tanner graph of M (H) it is called a block-cycle of length 2l. Any block-cycle in M (H) of length 2l corresponds both to the sequence of 2l CPM’s {P a1 , P a2 , . . . , P a2l } in H and sequence of 2l integers {a1, a2, . . . , a2l} in E(H) which will be called exponent chain. The puncturing o variable nodes in the MET QC-LDPC codes allows to improve iterative decoding threshold comparing with the irregular codes at the same size of protograph [6].

III. LENGTH ADAPTATION OF MET QC-LDPC CODES
Consider a QC-LDPC code with mL0 × nL0 parity-check matrix H0 where L0 is the circulant size, m × n exponent matrix E(H0) = (Eij(H0)) and mother matrix M (H0). For

978-1-7281-3234-1/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:19:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE International Black Sea Conference on Communications and Networking (BlackSeaCom)

Fig. 1: Modular lifting of QC-LDPC codes as cyclic group decomposition

a given set of circulant sizes {Lk}, Lk < L0, lifting is a method of constructing QC-LDPC codes with mLk × nLk parity-check matrices Hk from H0, which have the same mother matrix M (Hk) = M (H0) and entries of exponent matrices E(Hk) satisfy Eij(Hk) ∈ ALk . Therefore, it suffices to specify a formula to recalculate each value of E(Hk) from E(H0). Length adaptation methods theoretical analysis and its generalization was proposed at paper [7].
Modulo lifting is determined by the following equation [7]:

Eij (Hk) =

Eij(H0) mod Lk, if Eij(H0) = −1,

−1,

otherwise.

(1)

To improve properties of modular lifting in 5G standard, 8 cyclic group are used, Fig. 1:

Lk = a · 2i,

(2)

where i = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}− set of index, a = {2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15}− code’s family lifting values, Lk− set of lifting sizes, (”Table 5.3.2-1” from [1]).

IV. METHOD FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LENGTH ADAPTIVE MET QC-LDPC CODE

Consider a family of MET QC-LDPC codes with mLk ×nLk

parity-check matrix H where Lk is the circulant sizes, m × n

exponent matrix E(H) and mother matrix M (H). Code length

N

=

Lk × n, code rate R

=

n−m−s n−p−s

,

where n define a

number of variable nodes in the mother matrix (protograph),

m− number of check nodes in the mother matrix, p− number

of punctured CPMs, s− number of shortened CPMs. Con-

sider mother matrix M (H) of Base graph 2 (BG2) with size

m = 32, n = 22, p = 2, code rate 1/3 and 8 cyclic group

families Lk. For the first step of our construction algorithm

we generate 8 different exponent matrix for each family of

cyclic group E(H) = maxM (H). We will use simulated

girth,EM D
annealing method with maximization of Tanner graph girth

and the Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD) metric for every

circulant size E(H) = SALif t(M (H), Lk). The method (with

source code) described at [8]. This method is superior to

the previously proposed methods: Hill-Climbing and improved

PEG by success rate and cycles properties of the Tanner graph,

[8]. These properties are very important because length adaptive code require construction of more than 100 different lengths. The usage of graph properties optimization allows to construct codes achieving up to 0.3 dB gain under F ER = 10−5 compared with eMBB 5G code for information lengths from 600 to 1600 (Fig. 2). But those codes still have 0.6 gap for information length below 232 (Fig. 3). There are three possible solutions of this problem:
1) do not use that troublesome range of information lengths; 2) to find a Quasi-Cyclic block permutation of variable
nodes which could prevent catastrophically behaviour (error-floor) due to code distance and convergence properties; 3) to construct 8 cyclic group families from BG2 protograph lifting without permutation of variable nodes which will not have catastrophically behaviour for every circulant sizes, puncturing and shortening patterns due graph (EMD) properties and code (code distance) properties.
First solution is the simplest one, but it decrease granularity of numerology and overall efficiency. Third one is the most elegant but the most complex solution of this problem. In this paper we shall describe second solution. We propose to use permutation of variable nodes to solve problem of code convergence. Maximal performance loss for the codes in 5G standard observed for the cases where the number of information symbols in mother matrix was decreased: from 10 to 6 variable nodes for transport block size below 192 and 8 for [192, 560], (p. 10 [1]). To improve the code convergence we propose the interleaving of circular buffers (rate matching) which improve code convergence on the defined region of information length. It is equivalent to choosing of the best block permutation for rate matching. The search of the best permutation of protograph nodes for improving the code convergence could be described by the following pseudo code, Alg.1. Function Group&Sort use the k-step recoverable method to choose the group of the most reliable variable nodes and make this permutation nested for different sizes of CPMs Lk, [9]. Consider a parity-check matrix H of the (N, K) MET QC-LDPC code. Define V N as a set of variable nodes (size of N) and CN as a set of check nodes (size of N − K) for the Tanner graph representation of matrix H. For any arbitrary node j (no matter V N or CN ) we can define a set of neighbors N Ej – a set of nodes connected with j over one edge only and a power of node j as a size of N Ej. Now consider punctured variable node v ∈ V N . It will be recovered during decoding iterations as soon as it will get at least one nonzero message from any of its neighbors. On the other hand a check node c ∈ N Ev could determine its message to the node v only if there is no more punctured nodes in N Ec except v. Thus we can define a punctured variable node v as one-step-recoverable (1-SR) if it has at least one neighbor c, called the survived check node, such that all variable nodes from the set N Ec\{v} are unpunctured. In general, a punctured variable node v is called s-step recoverable (s-SR) if v has at least one neighbor c, called the survived check node, such that the set N Ec\{v} contains

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:19:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 IEEE International Black Sea Conference on Communications and Networking (BlackSeaCom)

at least one (s-1)-SR node while the others are i-SR, where 0 ≤ i ≤ s−1.
The task of Group&Sort algorithm is to separate all variable nodes V N into several groups according to its recoverability (a number of steps s required for the recovering) and determine the order of puncturing inside those groups. It is assumed that nodes requiring less number of steps for the recovering (nodes with better recoverability) under should be punctured first.

Algorithm 1 MET QC-LDPC codes rate matching search

Require: Exponent matrices E(H), Lk−circulant size, p−puntured bits for rate match, pM ET − MET-LDPC

punctured CPMs for improving threshold, s−shortened

bits, seed− a seed to be used in a pseudo-random

number generator, num−number of puncturing chains,

it−maximal erasure recover iterations

1:

R=

n·Lk −m·Lk −s n·Lk−p−pM ET ·Lk−s

2: for i = 0; i < num; i = i + 1 do

3: for ind = 0; ind < n − pM et; i = i + 1 do

4:

Fig. 2: SNR required to achieve 10−5 FER for information lengths k

[Pi,ind, step] = Group&Sort(E(H), R, ind, seed, it),

where P −nested sequence of puncturing, ind− index of CPMs for rate matching puncturing, step−granularity of resulting information length for fixed rate 5: end for 6: end for 7: P = max length(Pi,j)
i,ind 8:
return Permutation of V N according P .

On the input we use the initial code rate according to the MET puncturing and puncturing for the length adaptation under fixed rate. The source code of proposed method available at [10].
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
Performance of length adaptive MET QC-LDPC codes under sum-product decoder with 50 iterations over an AWGN channel with QPSK modulation was analyzed by computer simulations. Figure 2, 3 shows the SNR value required to achieve 10−5 FER performance for information lengths k = 80 to 1600 for QC-LDPC codes with rate 1/3, 104 different lengths, from 80 to 512 with granularity 8, from 512 to 1024 with granularity 16 and till 1600 with granularity 32. Simulation done by collected at least 200 frame errors per each length. Code A is simulation result for 5G standard BG2 codes, [1]. Code B is simulation result of code constructed from BG2 protograph using simulated annealing method with maximization of girth and EMD, [8]. Code C is the Code B with interleaver P constructed using proposed method for k = [104, 232].
VI. CONCLUSION
Proposed method for construction of length adaptive MET QC-LDPC codes allow to improve cycle properties of BG2

Fig. 3: SNR required to achieve 10−5 FER for information lengths k.
codes. Compared with the 5G eMBB codes it shows near same performance for the information length below 600 and up to 0.3 dB gain for the length more than 600.
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP TS38.212V15.4.0:NR;Multiplexing and channel coding(Rel. 15) [2] Kim, K.-J. et al., Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for ATSC 3.0. IEEE
Transactions on Broadcasting, 62(1), 189–196. [3] CCSDS 131.0-B-3 Standard, Issue 3 Sep., 2017, Washington, DC, USA [4] IEEE P802.3ca 50G-EPON, November 6-9, 2017, Orlando, FL, USA [5] R. M. Tanner, D Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC
codes,” Proc. ISCTA 2001, Ambleside, England, 2001 [6] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” Workshop
Honoring Prof. McEliece on his 60th birthday, Caltech, 2002 [7] Vorobyev I.,Polyasnkiy N. et al.,”Generalization of Floor Lifting for QC-
LDPC Codes: Theoretical Properties and Applications,” 2018 IEEE EastWest Design & Test Symposium (EWDTS), Kazan, 2018, pp. 1-6. [8] Usatyuk V.,Vorobyev I. ,”Simulated Annealing Method for Construction of High-Girth QC-LDPC Codes,” 2018 41st International Confer. on Telecom. and Signal Processing (TSP), Athens, 2018, pp. 1-5. [9] Jeongseok Ha et al. ”Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 728-738, Feb. 2006. [10] Proposed code construction methods with length adaptive MET QCLDPC codes, https://github.com/Lcrypto/puncturing-optimization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:19:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

