The Probabilistic Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoder

for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

Fakhreddine Ghaffari∗, Khoa Le∗† and David Declercq∗ ∗ ETIS, UMR-8051, Universite´ Paris Seine, Universite´ de Cergy-Pontoise, ENSEA, CNRS, France † Faculty of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Hochiminh City University of Technology, VNU-HCM, Vietnam
{fakhreddine.ghaffari,khoa.letrung,declercq}@ensea.fr; khoa.le@hcmut.edu.vn

Abstract—We propose in this paper a new approach of applying the Non-Surjective Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoder (NS-FAID) for the Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) decoding. Differently from the NS-FAID which applies a fixed nonlinear function by using a fixed Look-Up-Table (LUT) on the variable node messages, the proposed method, called Probabilistic FAID (PFAID), uses more than one LUT in a probabilistic way. By using the density evolution, we show that this method provides a significant improvement in performance compared to the NSFAID and the traditional MS. The advantage of PFAID is shown by the fact that, a PFAID with low message quantization level can reach or even surpass the performance of the higher level quantization MS decoder. Furthermore, we show that PFAID can be efficiently implemented with no hardware overhead compared to Min-Sum (MS) or NS-FAID with the same message quantization level. The hardware complexity analysis and decoding simulation performance are provided as superiority evidences of PFAID over the referenced benchmarks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have been adopted in several communication standards thanks to their powerful error correction capability [1][2]. LDPC decoding algorithms are based on the iterative message passing principle where the messages (or belief) are passed between the two groups of processing nodes: the variable nodes (VNs) and the check nodes (CNs). While the Sum-Product (SP) LDPC decoding algorithm provides the best error correction performance thanks to the intensive computations of hyperbolic tangent functions and the floating point representation of messages, its approximate algorithms such as Min-Sum (MS) or Offset Min-Sum (OMS) offer a significant reduction in decoding complexity at the price of some decoding performance loss [3]. Furthermore, these approximation algorithms can be efficiently implemented in hardware where the exchanged messages are presented in a finite precision, i.e., the messages are quantized by a limited number of bits, called quantized decoders [4][5], which make LDPC code a practical solution. The concept of Non-Surjective Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoder (NS-FAID) was recently introduced in [6], providing a method to improve the decoding performance of quantized decoders. In NS-FAID, the VN operations of quantized MS decoder are preserved and the VN messages are modified by a function (realized by an optimized LUT) before being sent to the CNs. The NSFAID is shown to improve the error correction performance, much better than the traditional MS or OMS performance, while reducing the complexity of implemented decoder such as memory size and number of connection wires.
Recently, several works have introduced an approach where the inaccuracy/probabilistic computations in the decoding can be used and they provided impressive improvements in LDPC decoding performance [6][7]. In line of this direction, we present in this paper a new NS-FAID-based decoding approach

where the probabilistic feature is applied in using LUTs, called Probabilistic FAID (PFAID). In PFAID, two or more LUTs are designed for each VN processing unit. These LUTs are used probabilistically along to the decoding process. The LUTs, as well as the corresponding probability, are optimized using the density evolution (DE). The DE shows that, the decoding threshold of PFAID is better than when only one LUT is used (i.e in the NS-FAID). This threshold is even better than that of the MS decoder with higher message precision. The superiority of PFAID is confirmed by the simulation results on a practical LDPC code. More interestingly, the advantage of PFAID comes without any additional hardware resource when being implemented, compared to NS-FAID or MS decoders. Indeed, PFAID can be implemented by an architecture called Variable-Node Shift Architecture (VNSA) where the probabilistic behavior can be realized without a real random generator implemented [8]. All the computing units of PFAID implemented by VNSA are similar or equivalent in term of complexity to the NS-FAID or MS decoders.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II recalls the concept of the original NS-FAID and introduces the principle of our proposed PFAID. The optimization of the PFAID by density evolution is presented in Section III. The decoding performance for the test code is also introduced in this section. The hardware complexity to implement PFAID is analyzed in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper.
II. THE PROBABILISTIC FINITE ALPHABET ITERATIVE DECODER
A. Preliminaries
A binary LDPC code is defined by a sparse parity check matrix H(M × N ) with M rows corresponding to M parity check functions and N columns corresponding to N coded bits. An LDPC code is also represented by a bipartite graph, composed by a set of N variable-nodes (VNs) and a set of M check-nodes (CNs). In this bipartite graph, a VN n (1 ≤ n ≤ N ) is connected to a CN m (1 ≤ m ≤ M ) by an edge (or connection) if the entry H(m, n) = 1 and they are called the neighbors. We define the all neighbors of CN m as N (m) and those of VN n as N (n). The number of connections connecting a VN (CN) to its neighbors is called the VN (CN) degree, denoted by dv (dc), i.e. dvn = |N (n)| and dcm = |N (m)|. In the LDPC encoder, to an information vector with length K = N − M , M additional bits is added to form a vector x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn) with length N such that HxT = 0 and x is called a codeword. x is then BPSK (Binary Phase Shift Keying) modulated and sent through a communication channel and we denote y = (y1, y2, . . . , yn) (|y| = N ) as the channel output: yn = xn + zn where zn is a white Gaussian noise with zero mean and variance σ2. The quantized LDPC decoders require the quantized version of y,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

denoted by γ as their inputs (|γ| = N ), where γn = [µ.yn] and [δ] returns the closest integer of δ in the integer set M = (−Q, . . . , −1, 0, +1, . . . , +Q), (Q = 2q−1 − 1), i.e. γn is represented in a length of q bits. µ > 0 is referred as the channel gain factor, which needs to be optimized to have a
good error correction performance of quantized decoders [6].
The class of NS-FAID is a quantized message-passing
LDPC decoder where the messages are iteratively passed between the VNs and the CNs. The NS-FAID takes γ as its
inputs and its iterative process is continuously proceeded until
the correct codeword is found or the maximum number of iterations (denoted by Itmax) is reached. In the former case, a decoding success is declared while the latter is a decoding failure. In this work, the message sent from VN n to its neighbor CN m is denoted by αn,m and the one sent from CN m to VN n is referred by βm,n, (αn,m, βm,n ∈ M). For iteration k-th (1 ≤ k ≤ Itmax) CN computes the βm,n messages by following (1) where sgn(δ) = +1 if δ ≥ 0, otherwise it returns −1.

βm(k,)n =

sgn(αn(k−,m1))n ∈Nm(imn )\n|αn(k−,m1)| (1)

n ∈N (m)\n

In the NS-FAID VN processing, the messages are com-

puted as in (2) where sM(.) is a saturating function such

that sM(δ) = sgn(δ).min(|δ|, Q). Note that, the element

sM(γn +

βm(k),n) is the VN message calculation

m ∈N (n)\m

of the traditional MS decoder and the NS-FAID differs by

applying a function F (.) on that calculation results. The func-

tion F : M → M is called the framing function. F satisfies

some properties such as F (−x) = −F (x), non-decreasing and

non-surjective, i.e. image set of F is strictly a subset of M

(Im(F ) ⊂ M). Also, F (0) = 0 and F (δ) ≥ 0, ∀δ > 0. Hence,

|Im(F )| is an odd number and 1 ≤ |Im(F )| ≤ 2Q + 1. The

detailed properties of F can be found in [6]. F is realized by

a Look-Up Table (LUT) optimized by the density evolution.

αn(k,m) = F (sM(γn +

βm(k),n))

(2)

m ∈N (n)\m

It can be seen in NS-FAID that, only one LUT is applied for each VN. That LUT is similar for all same-degree VNs and all decoding iterations. This limitation may reduce the diversity of the original FAID proposed in [9], which is shown to help the decoder correct more errors and improve the decoding performance.

B. The Probabilistic Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoder

We introduce in this section the principle of the proposed

Probabilistic Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoder, which adopts

the diversity of the original FAID in the decoding process

by applying different framing functions for each VN from

one iteration to another and with a probabilistic approach.

We denote the set of all possible framing functions by

F = (F1, F2, . . . , FX ) (|F | = X). All possible framing

functions here is defined by all functions F : M → M that

have 1 ≤ |Im(F )| ≤ 2Q + 1. The number of all possible

framing functions varies depending on Q. For example, when

q = 3, Q = 2q−1 − 1 = 3 then X =

Qj=0(

Q j

)2

=

20.

We

define also a vector with real number P = (p0, p1, p2, . . . , pX ),

|P| = X + 1, such that 0 = p0 ≤ p1 ≤ p2 ≤ . . . ≤ pX = 1.

αn(k,m) = F (k)(sM(γn +

βm(k),n))

(3)

m ∈N (n)\m

The proposed PFAID follows precisely the decoding steps
of the NS-FAID decoders. The main modification in PFAID,
compared to the NS-FAID, is the variation of the framing function F of the VN message computation, as described in (3), where F (k) is one function in the set F . Instead of using the same framing function for all decoding iterations (in NS-
FAID), in PFAID this function is different from one iteration to
another. The idea behind comes from the observation that, even
though the optimized LUT in NS-FAID helps correct more
errors compared to MS, this optimized (but fixed) LUT can
not correct some error configurations while other LUTs can.
Therefore, using more LUTs in a decoder will improve the
error correction capability as in [9]. In PFAID, more than one
LUT is used in a VN and to identify which framing function should be used at an iteration, a random p value with a uniform distribution U (0, 1) is drawn. When comparing p to the values of P, if pi−1 ≤ p < pi, i = 1, . . . , X, then the function Fi in F is used at that decoding iteration. For example, with P = (0, 0, . . . , 0, p10 = 0.29, p11 = 0.29, p12 = 0.29, p13 = 1, . . . , 1), there are 2 LUTs (F10, F13) used in each VN, and at each iteration, the framing function F10 is applied with Pr = 0.29 and F13 is with Pr = 1 − 0.29.
It can be seen in PFAID that, the vector P will control
which framing function should be used as well as with which corresponding probability. Therefore, P needs to be optimized
and a density evolution optimization method is used and
presented in the next section.

III. OPTIMIZATION OF PFAID
A. Density Evolution Analysis
Density evolution (DE) is a traditional analytic tool to measure the error correction capability of the LDPC message passing decoders. DE targets to recursively compute the probability mass functions (pmf) of the passed messages, which is achievable under the message independent condition. This condition is satisfied when the code length goes to infinity and the bipartite graph converges to the cycle free case [6]. The DE equations can be derived similarly to the NS-FAID in [6] where we can find more details about the equation constructions. The DE in PFAID further incorporates the values of P in the pmf calculations. Since DE assumes that the all-zero codeword is sent, the bit error probability at iteration k, pe(k), can be obtained by adding together the probabilities of all negative APosteriori Log-Likelihood Ratio (AP-LLR) information. The asymptotic error probability, p(e+∞), is then computed by p(e+∞) = lim p(ek). We define a channel threshold, θ, which
k→+∞
is the minimum Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) such that the asymptotic error probability p(e+∞) is less than a target bit error rate η, (η > 0). When using DE to make comparison between the decoders, a better LDPC decoder will provide the decoding threshold η smaller than those of the others. Note that, the value of θ of PFAID depends on: (i) the framing functions used, (ii) the channel gain factor µ and (iii) the LDPC codes i.e. the code regularity. We use the density evolution to jointly optimize the framing functions, the corresponding utilization probability and the channel gain factor µ.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Theoretical performance of PFAID on regular LDPC codes
Although the PFAID can be optimized on both regular and
irregular LDPC codes, we present in this paper the optimization for the regular LDPC code, i.e. dvn = dv, dcm = dc, ∀n, m. The code having dv = 3 and dc = 6 is used to
illustrate the analysis results. Also, we target in this work to optimize the PFAID with q = 3. Optimization for other LDPC codes (regular or irregular) and different values of q will be
presented in the extension work. In order to limit the number of DE running in optimizing process, we target to have 2 most optimized framing functions (Fi, Fj) used in a VN and hence, the vector P has 3 distinct elements and is in the format: P = (0, 0, . . . , 0, pi, . . . , pi, pj = 1, . . . , 1) (pi < 1). In short, we will put from hereafter P = (pi, pj = 1). Furthermore, it can be seen that at each iteration, a VN will apply the Fi with Pr = pi and Fj with Pr = 1 − pi.
For PFAID with q = 3 and 2 framing functions, we examine 202 = 400 combinations and list the most optimal PFAID thresholds corresponding with µ and P in Tab. I. The
optimal functions details are shown in Tab. II. The decoding thresholds θ of the MS (q = 3), MS (q = 4) and NS-FAID are
also provided for comparison. It can be seen that, the optimal PFAID (q = 3) are with (F10, F13) and (F11, F13). With the same quantization level (q = 3), these PFAID improve ≈ 0.2dB in decoding threshold compared to that of the MS (q = 3). More interesting, the optimal PFAIDs are even better than the MS with higher quantization level (q = 4). The benefit
of using the framing functions probabilistically in term of performance is emphasized when comparing PFAID (F11, F13) with the NS-FAID decoders where only F11 or only F13 is applied (note that, since F13(δ) = δ, ∀δ, the NS-FAID with F13 is simply the MS decoder). It is shown that, the decoding threshold of PFAID (F11, F13) is smaller that that of the NSFAID F11 and NS-FAID F13.

Table I. THE OPTIMIZATION OF PFAID WITH q = 3 ON THE COMPARISON WITH MS BENCHMARKS AND NS-FAID.

PFAID (F10, F13) PFAID (F11, F13)
NS-FAID (F11) MS (q = 3)
NS-FAID (F13) MS (q = 4)

θ(dB) µ

P

1.622 1.619

2.0 (p10 = 0.29, p13 = 1) 2.3 (p11 = 0.61, p13 = 1)

1.653 2.4

N/A

1.79 2.8

N/A

1.64 5.6

N/A

Table II.

THE OPTIMAL FRAMING FUNCTIONS FOR PFAID WITH q = 3.

δ F10 (δ ) F11 (δ ) F13 (δ )

0123 0112 0113 0123

To further emphasize the effect of probabilistic feature
to decoding threshold, we fix the framing functions and the
channel gain factors of the optimal PFAIDs. We plot the decoding thresholds as a function of p10 of PFAID (F10, F13) and p11 of PFAID (F11, F13) in Fig. 1 (the variables p10, p11 are called the coincident probability in the Fig. 1). It can
be seen that, varying the coincident probability will change
notably the decoding threshold and there exist the optimal
value of coincident probability providing the best decoding

threshold. The DE results on the superiority in term of decoding performance of PFAID is confirmed by the simulations, presented in section IV.

DE threshold θ (at target BER η = 1e−6)

1.8 1.78 1.76 1.74 1.72 1.7 1.68 1.66 1.64 1.62 1.6 0

MS, q = 3, µ = 2.8 MS, q = 4, µ = 5.6 PFAID (F10, F13), q = 3, µ = 2.0 PFAID (F11, F13), q = 3, µ = 2.3
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 Coincident probability

Figure 1. The decoding thresholds as a function of the coincident probability on dv = 3, dc = 6 LDPC codes.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF PFAID WITH ZERO-HARDWARE
OVERHEAD
The PFAID is shown in the previous section with a considerable improvement in error correction. We present in this section that PFAID can be implemented without any additional hardware resource compared to the traditional MS or the NS-FAID. In order to implement the PFAID, we apply an architecture proposed in [8] called the Variable-Node Shift Architecture (VNSA). VNSA is a particular architecture, proposed for implementing the Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) [10] decoding algorithms thanks to the structural connection networks in QC-LDPC decoders. It is worth to consider the PFAID on QC-LDPC codes since all the practical communication and storage standards make use the QC-LDPC codes rather than the random construction codes.
The main difference between VNSA and other implementations of LDPC decoders is the connection network carrying the messages to the memory. Although the number of connecting wires are the same for both VNSA and traditional decoder architecture, VNSA changes the connecting terminal such that the VN to CN messages are stored in consecutive memory elements. By doing that in the next iteration, each VN will be processed by the different VN implemented circuitry (called hereafter VNC) rather than the VNC of current iteration. More details of VNSA architecture can be found in [8]. The main idea of implementing a PFAID (Fi, Fj) is to implement two type of VNCs: VNC1 is with the framing function Fi implemented and VNC2 is with Fj. The VNC1 and VNC2 are allocated arbitrarily and the number of each VNC follows NV NC1/(NV NC1 + NV NC2) = pi. With VNSA architecture, the concept of PFAID is realized without requiring the control from random generator since the VNs are shifted after one iteration and they will see randomly the VNC1 with ratio pi and VNC2 with ratio 1 − pi. We illustrate the implementation of the VNCs in a QC-LDPC base column of VNSA-based PFAID in Fig. 2.
It can be seen that, with VNSA-based PFAID implementation, the VNCs are the only part which may be different

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

β γ1

β

γ2

…

β γZ

β1

β2

β3

⊕

⊕ ⊕ ⊕ α1

α2 α3

clkα1 α2 α3 M1

β1

β2

⊕

β3
…

⊕ ⊕ ⊕ α1 -

α2 α3

…
clkα1 α2 α3 M2 Fi

β1

β2

β3

⊕

⊕ ⊕ ⊕ α1

α2 α3

clkα1 α2 α3 MZ
Fj

Figure 2. The implementation of VNCs in a QC-LDPC base column of VNSA-based FAID decoder.

when compared to the MS implementation (with the same quantization level q). All other modules such as the memory, CN circuitry, the number of connection wires etc. are the same. We have implemented the VNCs with F10, F11 and the VNC of the MS (VNCs with F13) decoder on FPGA (Xilinx Virtex 6 device with ISE 14.6 software). We show the hardware resource required in the Tab. III. It is shown that all type of VNCs requires the same hardware resource and they are
equivalent to that of the MS VNC. It can be explained by the
fact that, the added LUTs require the similar complexity of the
saturation function in VNC of MS. Note that, the VNC of MS
requires the saturation module [6] while PFAID VNCs replace
this module by LUTs (framing functions). This synthesis result
reveals the fact that, implementing PFAID using VNSA may
not require any additional hardware, with respect to the MS and
NS-FAID implementations with the same quantization level.

Table III. THE FPGA HARDWARE RESOURCE WHEN IMPLEMENTING VNC WITH DIFFERENT FRAMING FUNCTIONS (FPGA VIRTEX 6, XC6VCX240T-FF1156).

FPGA LUTs

VNC with F10 37

VNC with F11 37

VNC of MS (VNC with F13)
38

We reconfirm the advantage of PFAID by presenting their decoding performance simulated on a dv = 3, dc = 6, N = 1296, M = 648 QC-LDPC code in Fig. 3. The decoding performance of the optimal PFAIDs (q = 3) is very much better than the MS (q = 3) and they are equivalent to that of MS (q = 4). The simulation results may have a small variation compared to that of the DE results since the decoders are simulated on a finite length LDPC code.
V. CONCLUSION
We introduce in this paper a new concept of applying the Non-Surjective Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoder (NSFAID) on Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) decoding, called Probabilistic FAID. With the same principle of NS-FAID where the Min-Sum variable node messages are modified by a designed formulation (or function), the proposed PFAID, however, modifies that VN messages by different functions probabilistically. The probabilistic part is shown to help PFAID be better in error correction performance compared to NS-FAID and MS decoders by density evolution and by simulations.

10−2 10−3 10−4

MS, q = 3, µ = 2.8 MS, q = 4, µ = 5.6 VNSA-based PFAID (F10, F13), q = 3, µ = 2.0 VNSA-based PFAID (F11, F13), q = 3, µ = 2.3

Bit Error Rate (BER)

10−5

10−6

10−7

10−81.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

SNR

Figure 3. Decoding comparison of VNSA-based PFAID to other decoders
on the dv = 3, dc = 6, N = 1296, M = 648, Z = 54, code rate R = 0.5 regular LDPC code. The PFAID (F10, F13) is with P = (p10 = 0.29, p13 = 1) and PFAID (F11, F13) is with P = (p11 = 0.61, p13 = 1).

More interesting, it is shown that PFAID can be effectively implemented with no hardware overhead with respect to the MS or NS-FAID at the same level of quantization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was funded by the French ANR project NAND under grant agreement number ANR-15-CE25-0006-01.
REFERENCES
[1] “Wireless lan medium access control and physical layer specications: Enhancements for higher throughput, p802.11n/d3.07,” IEEE-802.11n, Mar. 2008.
[2] “IEEE Standard for Information Technology - corrigendum 2: IEEE std 802.3an-2006 10gbase-t correction,” IEEE Std 802.3-2005/Cor 2-2007 (Corrigendum to IEEE Std 802.3-2005), Aug. 2007.
[3] D. Declercq, M. Fossorier, and E. Biglieri, “Channel coding: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications,” Academic Press Library in Mobile and Wireless Communications, Elsevier, ISBN: 978-0-12-396499-1, 2014.
[4] T. Nguyen-Ly, K. Le, F. Ghaffari, A. Amaricai, O. Boncalo, V. Savin, and D. Declercq, “FPGA design of high throughput LDPC decoder based on Imprecise Offset Min-Sum decoding,” in 2015 IEEE 13th International New Circuits and Systems Conference (NEWCAS), June 2015, pp. 1–4.
[5] T. T. Nguyen-Ly, T. Gupta, M. Pezzin, V. Savin, D. Declercq, and S. Cotofana, “Flexible, cost-efficient, high-throughput architecture for layered LDPC decoders with fully-parallel processing units,” in 2016 Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD), Aug 2016, pp. 230–237.
[6] T. T. Nguyen-Ly, V. Savin, K. Le, D. Declercq, F. Ghaffari, and O. Boncalo, “Analysis and design of cost-effective, high-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 508–521, March 2018.
[7] O. A. Rasheed, P. Ivanis, and B. Vasic´, “Fault-Tolerant Probabilistic Gradient-Descent Bit Flipping Decoder,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1487–1490, Sept 2014.
[8] K. Le, D. Declercq, F. Ghaffari, L. Kessal, O. Boncalo, and V. Savin, “Variable-Node-Shift based Architecture for Probabilistic Gradient Descent Bit Flipping on QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, pp. 1–13, 2017.
[9] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic, “Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoders, part I: Decoding beyond Belief Propagation on the Binary Symmetric Channel,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4033–4045, October 2013.
[10] L. Juane and et al., LDPC Code Designs, Constructions, and Unification. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:21:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

