A Low Latency Decoding Algorithm for Grouping Variable Nodes on TLC NAND Flash Devices
Ting Guo1, Xingcheng Liu1,2 1.School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China 2.School of Information Science, Xinhua College of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510520, China
e-mail: isslxc@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Abstract—The intra-cell characteristics of TLC NAND Flash memory are analyzed based on the channel model employed in this paper. In order to solve the read latency and the reliability degradation, caused by LDPC soft decision decoding and by the increase of flash storage density, respectively, a dynamic block grouping approach is proposed to divide all variable nodes (VNs) into three sub-blocks. To exploit the reliability of the VNs within the three sub-blocks, different update operations are performed in order. Moreover, the decoding latency is reduced with fewer iterations for the VNs in the most reliable sub-block, at the same time, the priority for updating of the reliable sub-block and the timely processing of the VNs with low-information have more useful information transmitted in the iterative decoding process, resulting in the improved convergency speed. In quantity, our simulation results show that the proposed algorithm improves the convergency rate by about 28.6% and reduces the average number of iterations by around 27.7%, compared with the VNBP-MP algorithm without compromising the error correction performance on the TLC NAND Flash devices.
Keywords—TLC NAND Flash, LDPC code, flash model, belief-propagation decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
NAND Flash storage device has the advantages of low cost, large storage capacity, small size and low power consumption, and is now widely used in smartphones, computers and electronic devices such as solid-state disks (SSDs) [1]. However, with the increasing demand for storage capacity and the scaling down of the chip size, the interference noises in the storage cells become more serious. Thus, there will be overlap regions between adjacent storage cells on the voltage distribution model, which will result in inaccurate read of the voltage for the storage cell, affecting the reliability of NAND Flash devices. Moreover, various of noises also have an un-negligible impact on the reliability of stored data [2].
With the cell storage density increasing, traditional errorcorrecting codes (ECCs) such as Hamming codes and BCH codes are hard to meet the NAND Flash devices error correction performance requirements. Because LDPC codes can maximize the approximation of the Shannon limit, and it can also achieve good error correction performance without much decoding delay in the case of high code rate. So at present, LDPC codes are major ECCs for ensuring the reliability of NAND Flash devices [3].
In recent years, many decoding algorithms based on BP (belief-propagation) algorithm are applied to the NAND Flash devices. In 2015, Wen et al., aiming at the problem of much complex calculation for soft-information on NAND

Flash for the sum-product decoding algorithm (SPA), put forward the revised soft reliabilities based iterative majority logic decoding (SRBI-MLGD) algorithm [4]. To reduce the decoding delay of BP algorithm, Aslam et al. proposed a decoding scheme based on low complexity Quantization Aware belief-propagation (QABP) over NAND Flash [5], which significantly improved the speed of decoding convergence. In 2018, Yang et al. proposed a variable-nodebased belief-propagation with message pre-processing (VNBP-MP) [6] decoding algorithm for NAND Flash, achieving better error correction performance and faster convergency speed.
However, these algorithms mentioned above don’t take full advantage of the error characteristics of the NAND Flash channel, and also have the problem of decoding delay and complexity. Thus, in this paper, we evaluate the proposed algorithm which groups all VNs into three sub-blocks dynamically, according to the error characteristics and the magnitude of the absolute values of initial LLR (|init-llr|) of VNs at each region. Based on the three sub-blocks with reliability from high to low, the VNs in the sub-block of high reliability are given priority to updating, but dropping the number of iterations for the most reliable sub-block, then the utilization of the reliable information can be improved greatly and the decoding delay can be reduced without compromising the error correction performance. Moreover, considering that there are always some VNs with lowinformation in the process at each iteration which are hard to stabilize, so an appropriate threshold is set to judge such VNs in each sub-block. Meanwhile, dealing with them effectively, so as to improve the convergency speed of the decoding algorithm.
In this paper, Section II starts from introducing the TLC NAND Flash channel model. In Section III, the proposed algorithm namely block serial belief-propagation (BlockSBP) on the TLC NAND Flash is detailed module introduction. The simulation results are presented in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Threshold Voltage Distribution Functions
Considering the effects of programming noise, cell-to-cell interference (CCI), random telegraph noise (RTN) and data retention noise to simulate the TLC NAND Flash channel. Because the essence of reading the stored data is to perceive the voltage value of the storage cells, so it is necessary to establish an actual threshold voltage distribution model. Therefore, the final threshold voltage distribution functions of the flash channel are the convolution integral of the

978-1-7281-0286-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

original voltage with these noises. Threshold voltage density

functions of the erased cell and the programmed cells can be

modeled as following [7]:

( ( ))2

σ π ps111 (v) = pe (v) ∗ prs111 (v) ∗ pt (v) =

1 2 s111

− v − Vmin − μrs111

e

2σ

2 s111

.

(1)

psp (v) = pup (v) ∗ pp (v) ∗ pt (v) ∗ prsp (v)

=

1

§ ¨ erf

§ ¨

V

p

+ ΔVpp − v − μrsp

· ¸ − erf

§ ¨

V

p

− v − μrsp

·· ¸¸.

2ΔVpp

¨ ©

©¨

2σ sp

¹¸

¨©

2σ sp

¸¹

¸ ¹

(2)

where pe (v) and pup (v) are the original voltage distributions

of the cells, pp (v) , pt (v) and prsp (v) represents the

distribution of the programming noise, RTN, and data retention noise, respectively. μrsp , σ sp are the mean value

and variance of the threshold voltage density functions of

programmed cells, Vmin =1.4, ΔVpp =0.6,Vp ∈{V1,V2 ,",Vmax } .

B. Threshold Voltage Distribution Model

3.5

3

E1

E2

E3

E4

E5

E6

E7

2.5

Voltage Distribution

2

1.5

1

0.5

D1

D2

D3

D4

D5

D6

D7

D8

0

Vmin

V1

V2

V3

V4

V5

V6 Vmax

Threshold Voltage of the Cell

Fig. 1. Threshold voltage distribution model for TLC NAND Flash.

Based on the above expressions, the threshold voltage distribution model of TLC NAND Flash under PE=13000 is presented as Fig.1, where each dashed-line represents a reference voltage based on the entropy function [7].We can observe that fourteen non-uniform read reference voltages divide the threshold voltage range into fifteen regions, which incorporate eight data regions (Di) and seven overlap regions (Ei). And all simulations in this paper are implemented based on this model.

III. SERIAL BELIEF-PROPAGATION DECODING BASED ON
GROUPING OF VARIABLE-NODES
In order to obtain the TLC NAND Flash channel error characteristics to group all VNs dynamically, we analyzed the error probability in two types of regions for LDPC codes. And we found that errors mainly occur in the overlap regions. To further analyze the characteristics of the data regions, we grouped all VNs within it into two sub-blocks based on the |init-llr| value of the VNs. The sub-block data1 contains the VNs in D1,D2,D7,D8 regions, and data2 includes in the rest VNs in the data regions. Also, we have

found that the |init-llr| value in data1 are higher than that in data2, and the |init-llr| value in overlap is the lowest [6].
Based on above, we study the average error probability of each sub-block under various PE cycles, so as to perform different operations on them upon dependability. From the Table I, we can clearly see that the significant difference in the average error probability of the two sub-blocks in the data regions. Since Pdata1 is the lowest, the number of iterations for data1 can be widely reduced without impacting on the error correction performance.

TABLE I.

AVERAGE ERROR PROBABILITY OF VNS IN EACH SUB-BLOCK UNDER DIFFERENT PE CYCLES.

Pdata1 Pdata 2 Poverlap

PE=11000 PE=13000 PE=15000 PE=17000

2.46%

3.95%

4.46%

6.61%

2.96%

5.70%

10.19%

11.57%

94.58%

90.35%

85.35%

81.82%

From the Table I, we have known the average error probability of VNs in data1 is extremely low. Because almost all VNs in data1 have the largest |init-llr| among all sub-blocks, so the VNs in it are the most reliable compared with others. Thus, we can skip updating the VNs in data1 at the beginning of the iteration, saving the computing resources and reducing the decoding delay largely. At first, we define the VNs with low-information, given as below:

Domination: If the |init-llr| or the updated |llr| value of a VN is bigger than or equal to the threshold Vlow , the VN is judged as low-information VN.

Vlow = avg(abs(init-llr[overlap[i]])),

(3)

where overlap[i] represents the VN in overlap, and init-llr[overlap[i]] is the initial LLR value of the VN in it, so
Vlow is determined by calculating average value of |init-llr| in overlap. Because low-information VNs are difficult to converge during the update process, so timely processing for such VNs preventing the unreliable information, which can improve the convergency speed of decoding.
The specific procedure of the Block-SBP scheme is divided into four steps, described as follows:
Step 1: Initialization. All the VNs are partitioned adaptively according to the characteristics of TLC NAND Flash channel and the error probability of the VNs in each region. At the same time, the threshold for judging VN with low-information is determined based on the |init-llr| value of VNs within the overlap.
Step 2: At the beginning of the iterations, skip updating the VNs in data1, but all the VNs in data2 and overlap are successively serially updated. Meanwhile, the VNs with low-information in each sub-block should be found and stored in the set L.
Step 3: After all sub-blocks are processed sequentially, the VNs in the set L are updated until there are no VN in the set.
Step 4: When iter ≥ γ ⋅ Itermax , the VNs in data1 start to be updated. Step 2 and Step3 are repeated until the decoding is successful. We set Itermax as 5 and¤as 0.625, which will have the highest throughput at the same FER.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In order to verify the performance of the proposed decoding algorithm on TLC NAND Flash devices, binary regular LDPC codes, 0.9-(3780,3402) and 0.92(8000,7360), constructed with the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [8] are employed in the simulations. And the LLRBP, VSBP, QABP [5] and VNBP-MP [6] algorithms are shown as comparisons with the proposed Block-SBP algorithm.

100

LLRBP

VSBP

QABP

10-1

VNBP-MP

Block-SBP(proposed)

10-2

FE R

10-3

10-4

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20

Iterm ax

Fig. 2. FER vs. Iterations performance for 0.9-(3780,3402) LDPC code.

Average Number of Iterations

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

LLRBP

VSBP

1.5

QABP

VNBP-MP

Block-SBP(proposed) 1 1.7 1.65 1.6 1.55 1.5 1.45 1.4 1.35 1.3 1.25 1.2

PE

x 104

Fig. 3. Average Number of Iterations vs. PE cycles performance for 0.92-(8000,7360) LDPC code.
From Fig.2 we find that the new algorithm can obtain the same frame error rate (FER) with less iterations under PE=13000, in accordance with the performance requirements of NAND Flash. The main reason is that the proposed algorithm divides all VNs into three sub-blocks according to the reliability from large to small, then the similar type of VNs within a sub-block are updated sequentially, improving the utilization of reliable information. Moreover, by reducing the iteration times for data1, the number of iterations required for decoding can be further less. What’s more, we can observe that the new algorithm achieves the least average number of iterations for (8000,7360) LDPC codes under the same PE cycles from Fig.3. It means that the proposed algorithm performs fewer iterations than other algorithms to

reach the convergency state. The average number of iterations of Block-SBP is 27.7% less than that of VNBP-MP under PE=13000, which also meets the requirement of low latency for flash devices. The above simulation results show that the decoding algorithm proposed in this paper achieves the advantages of low delay and fast convergency without reducing the error correction performance for flash devices.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, all VNs are dynamically grouped into subblocks by exploiting the inherent characteristics of the established flash model in the proposed algorithmˈgiving the priority to updating VNs within the sub-block with high reliability and reducing the number of iterations for the most reliable sub-block, data1. So, the fast convergence speed and low delay can achieve to satisfy the need of flash devices. It is that all VNs are partitioned into three subblocks with different error probabilities, and various update operations can be carried out sequentially according to the characteristics. Moreover, the process of VNs with lowinformation at each iteration can also reduce the loss of performance and speed up the convergence of decoding. Thus, it can be found from the simulation results that the proposed algorithm achieves the same FER as other algorithms of interest while it has the fastest convergence speed and the fewest iterations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work was supported by the Opening Project of Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology (Grant No. 2017B030314131) and the Special Project for Promoting Economic Development in Guangdong Province (Grant No. GDME-2018D004).
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Di et al., “Process variation aware read performance improvement for LDPC-based NAND flash memory,” IEEE Transactions on Reliability, early access, pp. 1–12, Feb. 2019.
[2] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision error correction codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 58(2): 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[3] T. Tokutomi, S. Tanakamaru, T. O. Iwasaki and K. Takeuchi, “Advanced error prediction LDPC for high-speed reliable TLC NAND-based SSDs,” in International Memory Workshop, Taipei, Taiwan, May 2014, pp. 1–4.
[4] J. Wen, G. Han, X. Lin and Y. Fang, “Performance of the modified SRBI-MLGD algorithm for LDPC codes in MLC NAND flash memory,” in Conference on Information, Communications and Signal Processing, Singapore, Dec. 2015, pp. 1–5.
[5] C. Aslam, Y. Guan, and K. Cai, “Low-complexity quantization-aware belief-propagation (QA-BP) decoding for MLC NNAD flash memory,” in Conference on Information, Communications and Signal Processing, Singapore, Dec. 2015, pp. 1–5.
[6] G. Yang, X. Liu, X. Chen, and Z. Wang, “An improved variablenode-based BP decoding algorithm for NAND flash memory,” in International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT), Chongqing, China, Oct. 2018, pp. 109–114.
[7] C. Aslam, Y. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for Multi-Level-Cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, 64(4): 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[8] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 51(1): 386–398, Jan. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

