Abouth Multi-Threshold Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

A. A. Ovchinnikov, Member, IEEE
Saint-Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation Saint Petersburg, Russia
mldoc@ieee.org; ovchinnikov@media-publisher.ru

D. V. Ilina
Saint-Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation Saint Petersburg, Russia idaria@k36.org

Abstract — Low-density parity-check codes are one of the most common forward error-correction techniques used in many existing and perspective standards including 5G wireless transmission standards and ultra-high-rate (400 Gbit/s and more) fiber-optic transmission standards. These codes should combine scalability of codelength from dozens to dozens of thousands bits and of coderate from low to very high with outstanding error-correcting performance when operating under severe practical limitations both from the point of view of decoding error and complexity issues. In many practical cases most widely used decoders suffer either from complexity out of system restrictions or from error performance penalties. In this paper the performance-complexity trade-off approach is considered, based on improved hard-decision decoders. Decoding of low-density parity-check codes with bit-flip algorithm is considered. The multi-threshold decoder based on the bit inversion algorithm is described using dynamically changed threshold during the decoding iterations, as well as the simplest empirical method is proposed for thresholds calculation. Simulation results in Gaussian channel with hard decision demodulation are given.
Keywords— low-density parity-check codes, bit-flip algorithm, multi-threshold decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Codes with low density of parity checks (LDPC, lowdensity parity-check) were proposed in 1962 by R. Gallagher [1] and later studied in many works [2-4]. But despite this, LDPC-codes were not in demand for a long time because of the complexity of algorithms for codes with a length of several thousand bits, which is typical for LDPC codes.
During the last 20 years, low-density codes have found their application in digital broadcasting systems, telecommunications standards, satellite communication standards. This is due to the fact that codes with a low density of parity checks are characterized by an exponential decrease in the probability of error with an increase in the length of the code with a logarithmic increase in the number of operations required to decode one symbol of the code word. This leads to the fact that codes with a low density of parity checks are used both in wireless communication channels, where the transmission is in areas of relatively low signal/noise ratios, and in wired optical channels [5-7], where, along with the requirements to provide extremely low error probability it is necessary to use extremely fast encoding and decoding

procedures, since the transmission rate in such channels can reach 400 Gb / s and higher.
In the study of these codes, various cyclic or quasi-cyclic constructions of LDPS codes were proposed, which allowed not only fast encoding, but also to offer effective decoding algorithms.
Despite the fact that traditionally during last several decades the error-correction capability of the code is estimated through simulations in the channel model with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), in many practical cases (both for hardware and software architectures of the decoder) the fixedpoint implementations are used, either because of architectural limitations, or to speed-up the implementation, which leads to degradation of classical “soft”-decision belief propagation decoding algorithm [6, 8, 9, 10]. This formulates the problem of the development of trade-off decoding, which would provide near-“soft”-decision error-correcting performance with near-“hard”-decision complexity.
This paper is organized as follows. In section II the main facts about LDPC codes are given, section III is dedicated to description of hard-decision decoder’s scheme. Section IV contains simulation results in Gaussian channel with harddecision demodulation (so the hard-decision decoders may be applied), and section V concludes the paper.
II. LDPC CODES The low density parity check code is given by its paritycheck matrix H containing a small number of nonzero elements (in the future we will consider only the case of binary codes). Often LDPC codes are given by bipartite Tanner graph for which the matrix H is the incidence matrix. The standard requirement for the construction of low-density codes is the absence of cycles of length 4 in the Tanner graph, which would adversely affect the probability of decoding errors. In particular, one may denote (n, γ, ρ)-code as a linear code of length n, with γ and ρ are the number of non-zero positions in each column and each row of the parity-check matrix, respectively. In practice, the values of n are usually quite large and amount to thousands, sometimes tens of thousands, but the weight of the rows and columns of the parity-check matrix remains quite small, usually within units for γ and tens for ρ. Increasing n while maintaining the values

978-1-7281-2288-5/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of γ and ρ on average gives a code with better characteristics [11].
The usual parameter characterizing the error-correcting performance of linear codes is the minimal distance d0, i.e. every combination of less than t errors may be corrected if the relationship d0 = 2t+1 is holds. The minimal distance of LDPC codes is usually very small, nevertheless, these codes show excellent error-correction performance under iterative message-passing decoders [8]. From the other hand, usually no guarantees can be given regarding the number of correctable errors, and the error-correcting performance may be estimated primarily through extensive simulations, and highly dependent on the structures and sub-structures of the parity-check matrix of the LDPC code, or equivalently, on the corresponding Tanner graph.

A. Block-permutation construction Modern LDPC codes are most often specified by a block-
permutation construction. In general form the blockpermutation construction of LDPC-code is defined by the parity-check matrix H, consisting of blocks:

C11 C12 … C1ρ 

H

=

C21 …

C22 …

… …

C2ρ …

  

.

Cγ1

Cγ2

…

C γρ

 

where Cij are the (m × m) -blocks which are typically degrees of a cyclic permutation matrix

0 0 0  0 1

 

1

0

00

0

 

C =  0 1 0  0 0 .

     

 0 0 0  1 0 

Such construction is used in many communication standards [5, 12, 13] and was the basis for LDPC coding in recent 5G standard [14]. This scheme may be easily turned out to more general irregular construction by zero-blocks masking [15], which are used in many code ensembles optimization techniques [16]. These codes essentially defines quasi-cyclic LDPC сodes (QC-LDPC) with low-complexity encoding and decoding procedures [8].

Defining of LDPC codes by the parity-check matrix is traditional and follows R. Gallager [1], though during the last years the constructions based on Tanner graph search are extensively developed. However, following the standard parity-check matrix description the H may be considered as the set of the parity-checks (rows), defining the relationship between symbols of the codeword. If each two rows have no more than one common non-zero positions, these rows are called orthogonal, and majority-logic decoding techniques may be applied (this is equivalent to the absence of 4-cycles in the Tanner graph, see next section). However, such majority-

logic techniques may be reasonable if the number of non-zero positions in the columns of H are not very low. In this case one may hope to obtain better results from the hard-decision decoding methods as those considered in section III. B. Tanner graph
Often codes are also provided by a bipartite Tanner graph. R. Tanner presented a graphical representation of LDPC codes in the form of a graph [17]. Such graph is a bipartite graph, a graph whose vertices can be divided into two types, with edges connecting only vertices of different types. The two types of vertices in the Tanner graph are character nodes (CN), corresponding to the columns of the parity-check matrix, and variable nodes (VN), corresponding to the rows of the [aritycheck matrix. The edges connecting the vertices of the graph correspond to non-zero positions in the matrix. An example of a graph and its parity-check matrix (incidence matrix) are shown in figures 1 and 2.
Fig. 1. The Tanner graph of LDPC code
Fig. 2. The parity-check matrix of LDPC code
The standard requirement in the construction of low density codes is the absence in the Tanner graph of cycles of length 4, which would have a negative impact on the probability of decoding errors. In this case, the girth of the graph (the length of the minimum cycle) is not less than 6 (an example of length-6 cycle is given in figure 1 by bold edges).
III. DECODING OF LDPC CODE To analyze the probability of error in the decoding of LDPC-codes the asymptotic analysis are mainly used for probability ensembles of codes, and to assess the error correction capability of specific LDPC-codes at finite lengths the simulation is widely used. This is due to the fact that the relationship of the code structure with the probability of error provided by the decoder is extremely difficult to identify and evaluate. In the most frequent case, the transmission over the channel with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) is modeled. R. Gallager proposed the belief propagation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithm [1], which takes "soft "decisions of the demodulator as an input, usually in the form of a logarithm of the likelihood ratio (LLR) [8].
Despite the fact that the complexity of the implementation of the belief propagation algorithm in modern computing systems is not so large, the requirements for computational efficiency of modern decoders are also often extremely high, this leads to the need to simplify the decoder, often due to losses in the probability of error, and in some cases to fulfill computational constraints of the communication system the "hard" decoding is needed, which is much simpler than the "soft" algorithm, but significantly loses in the probability of error. Thus, the actual problem is the construction of decoders, the complexity of which is actually comparable to hard decoding, and the loss in the probability of error compared to soft decoding is not so great.
Classic "hard" decoding algorithm of LDPC codes had also been proposed by R. Gallager [1] and is called the bit-flip algorithm. Let r - the word received from the channel, and H the parity-check matrix of the low-density parity-check code. Then the bit-flip algorithm can be described as follows [8]:
1) Calculate the syndrome S = rHT in the GF(2) field. If S = 0, return r , which is a code word.
2) Calculate f = S H in the ring of integers. 3) Determine the elements of f that is not smaller than
some b – predetermined threshold, and convert the corresponding elements in r (in the simplest case the threshold can be selected as b = max{f}). 4) If the maximum number of iterations is not reached, return to step 1. Otherwise, return r. The property of this algorithm, as well as almost all other low-density code decoding algorithms, is that it makes a decision on each received symbol separately, conducting a number of iterations, the number of which does not exceed a predetermined limit. At the same time, despite the fact that the simulation shows extremely low probability of decoding errors of low-density codes, in general case there is no evidence that with the help of these decoders any set of errors can be guaranteed to be corrected, especially with a limited (and in some cases quite small) number of iterations. Note that the bit inversion rule described in step 3 is extremely simple and the most common, but it is known that this rule is not optimal in terms of the error probability provided. Other rules for inverting are known [18], in addition, it is known that at a certain choice of threshold b, the bit flipping algorithm coincides with the majority-logic decoding, which provides a much worse error probability at a high number of errors at the decoder input, but guarantees the correction of all errors in one iteration, if the number of input errors does not exceed γ/2 [19]. In general, we can assume that the decoding threshold depends on the input noise level: the higher the noise, the higher the bit inversion threshold should be, but with a decrease in noise (for example, during decoding iterations), a decrease in the inversion threshold will improve the error probability. This leads to the idea of using dynamically

changing thresholds of decoding in the process of execution of iterations of the bit-flipping algorithm, however the problem of determining rules for changing the thresholds is open, and at the moment can be resolved only by empirical methods.
IV. SIMULATIONS To determine the rule for changing thresholds, consider the following technique. Determine the average number of errors tin(1) at the input of the decoder in accordance with the noise value in the channel. With the help of modeling, we determine the average number of errors to(u1t) at the output of one iteration. We solve the optimization problem by minimizing the value to(u1t) by changing the inversion threshold b. If to(u1t) < tin(1) (otherwise, the decoder cannot provide error correction at this noise level), we assume that the input of the second iteration on average receives to(u1t) errors, take a new value tin(2) = to(u1t) and then similarly minimize the value to(u2t) . This procedure can be repeated up to the maximum number of decoding iterations (usually less than 10).
It should be noted that the idea of multi-threshold decoding is considered in several works (see, for example, [20]), and in fact, the values of thresholds for this decoding is the subject of the optimization problem, when optimal threshold schedule should be found minimizing the decoding error probability. One may limit consideration by only static threshold values as in classical bit-flip algorithm, or allow dynamic changing of the threshold as the function of decoding iteration number and, possibly, word position number. In this paper we consider “greedy” approach of local optimization to approach the global optimization task, however, there is clearly no evidence that this global optimization is achieved and this important task should be the future research problem.
Simulation results in Fig. 3 are given for transmission in a Gaussian channel under demodulation with hard decision for a block-permutation (1524,762) LDPC code. The probability of decoding error by using the bit flipping algorithm with 5 iterations is estimated, as well as the decoding scheme wherein the specific threshold for each iteration was set. It may be noted that the threshold decoder with dynamic thresholds can decrease the probability of error.
100

10-1

10-2

Pe

10-3

BER Single T

BER Multi T

10-4

FER Single T

FER Multi T

10-5

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Eb/N0, dB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. Probability of decoding error in AWGN channel
One of the directions of further research is to consider other decoding thresholds (and the rules of their determining) corresponding to the bit inverting algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION This paper discusses the possibility of dynamic threshold changes in the bit flipping algorithm. A method of empirical threshold calculation based on a greedy local optimization algorithm is proposed.
The solution of the corresponding global optimization problem (i.e. minimization of the output probability of decoder error), as well as the possibility of variation of thresholds for individual positions of the decoded word may be the directions of further research.
References
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1963. 90 p.
[2] V. V. Zyablov Estimation of the Error-Correction Complexity for Gallager Low-Density Codes, Problems of Information Transmission, 1975, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 23-36.
[3] T. J. Richardson, R. L. Urbanke, The Capacity of Low-Density ParityCheck Codes Under Message-Passing Decoding , IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Feb. 2001, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599-618.
[4] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, R. Urbanke, On the Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon Limit, IEEE Communications Letters, Feb. 2001, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58 60.
[5] ITU-T Recommendation G.975.1. Forward error correction for high bit rate DWDM submarine systems, Feb. 2004.
[6] I. Djordjevic, W. Ryan and B. Vasic, Coding for optical channels, Springer, 2010. 444 p.
[7] N. Sh. Blaunstein, E. A., Krouk, M. B. Sergeev, Optical communication: fiber optic, atmospheric , SPb.:SUAI, 2016. 286 p. (In Russ.)

[8] S. Lin, W. Ryan, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern, Cambridge university press, 2009. 710 p.
[9] Q. Huang, J. Kang, L. Zhang, S. Lin and K. Abdel-Ghaffar. Two efficient and low-complexity iterative reliability-based majority-logic decoding algorithms for LDPC codes, 2009 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Taormina, 2009, pp. 253-257.
[10] Ivanov D.O., Kozlov A.V., Ovchinnikov A.A. Low-Density ParityCheck Codes with Cyclic Structure of Macroblocks. Information and Control Systems. 2017;(2):58-66. (in Russian)
[11] Zolotarev V. V., Ovechkin G. V. Effective algorithms of errorcorrecting coding for digital communication systems, Telecommunications. 2003. No. 9. Pages 34-37.
[12] IEEE 802.11n/d1.0. Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications. Mar. 2006
[13] IEEE 802.16e-2005. Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems. Feb. 2006.
[14] 3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing and channel coding (Release 15). 3GPP TS 38.212 V15.2.0, June 2018.
[15] A.V. Kozlov, E.A. Krouk, A.A. Ovchinnikov. An approach to development of block-commutative codes with low density of parity check. Journal of Instrument Engineering (Izvestiya vysshikh uchebnykh zavedeniy. Priborostroenie). 2013. vol. 8(56). pp. 9-14. (in Russian)
[16] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke. Modern coding theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[17] R. Tanner, A recursive approach to low complexity codes, in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533-547, September 1981.
[18] E.N. Gilbert. A problem in binary encoding. In Proceedings of the Symposium in Applied Mathematics, volume 10, pp. 291-297, 1960.
[19] A. A. Ovchinnikov, D. V. Ilina, Hybrid Decoding of LDPC Codes in Discrete Communication Channels. 2018 Wave Electronics and its Application in Information and Telecommunication Systems, WECONF 2018, 26-30 November, St. Petersburg, Russia.
[20] A. V. Belogolovy, E. A. Krouk. Multi-threshold decoding of lowdemsity parity-check codes. Information and Control Systems. 2006;(1):25-31. (in Russian).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

