2019 8th MEDITERRANEAN CONFERENCE ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING (MECO), 10-14 JUNE 2019, BUDVA, MONTENEGRO

Importance Sampling Based Software Kit for LLR BP Decoding Simulation

Evgeny Likhobabin, Igor Volkov, Konstantin Zavertkin, Aleksei Ovinnikov and Vladimir Vityazev, Member, IEEE Department of Telecommunications and Foundations of Radio Engineering
Ryazan State Radio Engineering University, RSREU Ryazan, Russia
likhobabin.e.a@tor.rsreu.ru, volkov.i.y@tor.rsreu.ru, zavertkin.k.n@tor.rsreu.ru, ovinnikov.a.a@tor.rsreu.ru, vityazev.v.v@rsreu.ru

Abstract—This paper outlines a method for estimation of an error floor parameters for different LDPC codes based on importance sampling technique. The traditional approach to such estimations is based on Monte Carlo technique and has high computational complexity, especially for near-optimal decoding algorithms such as logarithmic-likelihood ratio belief propagation algorithm.
It was shown that the proposed method allows to significantly reduce the computational cost required for an estimation of frame error probability in the high SNR region.
Results of error floor estimation are presented for three LDPC codes: Margulis (2640, 1320), two quasi cyclic codes QC (22200, 5550) and QC (22200, 7400).
Index Terms—LDPC codes, error floor, trapping sets, importance sampling, Monte Carlo simulation.
I. INTRODUCTION Nowadays LDPC codes [1] are widely used in various fields of technic. Many modern communication and broadcasting standards like DVB-T2, DVB-S2, Wi-Fi, WiMax, IEEE 802.3an utilize these codes to achieve better performance. Also, LDPC codes are used in different data storage systems to guarantee data integrity. This type of codes provides very high error correction performance in a wide range of signal to noise ratios. However, LDPC codes has one major drawback there is a region on error performance curve where it doesn’t fall as quickly as before. This region is called the error floor region. This effect is known as error floor and the source of the problem for LDPC codes is known as trapping sets [2]. Lets define the frame error rate (FER) and the Eb/N0 value at which this effect appears as error floor level and error floor Eb/N0 respectively. Estimation of those level and Eb/N0 is a very important task in the process of developing systems using LDPC codes. The traditional approach to this task is based on simulation with the Monte Carlo method. Such estimations are very computationally complex and can take weeks and months to complete. Thus, it is important to have a method which allows to perform such estimation in a short period of time, even if this method provides less accurate results than Monte Carlo simulation.

In this work we presented a software kit based on the importance sampling [3] [4] method for estimation of this parameters of LDPC code. This software kit is developed on the basis of the simulation model that was presented in [5].
Importance sampling method is often used to accelerate performance evaluation process of communication systems [3], particularly for error floor analysis [6] [7]. Thus the motivation for this work was to get simulation environment for accelerating error floor analysis for quasi cyclic LDPC codes that utilises benefits of GPU usage and importance sampling method.
The paper is organized as follows. In next section, we give a brief review of importance sampling method. Section III provides the detailed description of the developed software kit that is used for the presented simulations. Simulation results for three codes are provided in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II. IMPORTANCE SAMPLING OVERVIEW
In general, this method is used to solve the following problem. Suppose it’s necessary to find the expected value.

µ = E(f (X)).

(1)

Here µ is the mean value of a random variable X. The task is complicated by the fact that the value of the function f (x) is non-zero only for a limited set of values of a random variable. We denote this set as A. In this case, the probability that X will be in set A is very small. Monte Carlo simulation in this case will take an extremely large amount of time.
To solve this problem, the importance sampling method is used. The main idea of this method is to change the distribution of random variable X in such a way, that some values of X are chosen from the set A more often.
Values obtained in this way require an adjustment, which consists in multiplying the result by a correction coefficient, called the likelihood ratio, and which is equal to the ratio of the initial distribution density of the random variable p(x) to the modified density q(x).
During the importance sampling simulation, a random variable distribution is changed in a way that a given trapping set

978-1-7281-1740-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 8th MEDITERRANEAN CONFERENCE ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING (MECO), 10-14 JUNE 2019, BUDVA, MONTENEGRO

appears with higher probability. For this reason, some specified elements of noise vector applied to the transmitted codeword are increased up to trapping set minimal actuation value Emin.
Mathematically, this can be written as follows:

µ = Ep(f (X)), X ∼ p

(2)

µ = Eq

f (X)p(X) q(X )

,X ∼ q

(3)

Consider these concepts in relation to the modeling of communication system with LDPC codes. In this case, the random variable X is the noise vector, which is added to the codeword in the communication channel. The function f (x) is the conversion of the received codeword for a given noise vector in the channel to the probability of error. The value of f (x) is zero if the codeword is decoded correctly, and is equal to one if there are errors in the received codeword after decoding. For a high Eb/N0 ratios, the words are incorrectly decoded if the noise vector causes triggering trapping set in the codeword. Thus, the set of noise vectors leading to the triggering of a set of trapping sets is exactly that set A. The probability of the appearance of such a noise vector with high Eb/N0 ratios is very small. And to obtain the error probability on high Eb/N0 ratios, which is mainly due to the presence of trapping sets in the code, a very long Monte Carlo simulation is required.
In the case of a communication system with LDPC codes simulation X is a vector of independent random variables with a normal distribution with mean a and variance σ. Then the probability density for each element of the vector is:

p(xi)

=

√1 σ 2π

·

e−

(xi −a)2 2σ2

(4)

The probability density for a vector of size N will be equal to the following product:

N
p(x) = p(xi) =
i=0

1 √ σ 2π

N

· e−

N (xi−a)2 i=0 2σ2

(5)

In order to change the distribution of a random variable so that a given trapping set will appear with greater probability, it is necessary to increase the mean of certain elements of the noise vector by the value Emin. Denote the number of such elements W . The probability density for the element of vector in this case can be written as follows:

  q(xi) = 

√1 σ 2π

· e , i −

(xi −a)2 2σ2

∈/

W

· e , i ∈ W √1
σ 2π

−

(xi

−a−Emin 2σ2

)2

(6)

Then for the whole vector the probability density will be expressed as follows ( is a current value of noise impulse):

N

q(x) = q(xi) =

i=0

=

1 √ σ 2π

N

· e−

· e N−W (xi−a)2

i=0

2σ2

−

W (xi−a− )2

i=0

2σ2

(7)

Then the likelihood ratio can be calculated as the ratio of probability densities:

p(x) q(x)

=

e−

1 2σ2

e−

1 2σ2

W j=0

(xj

−a)2

W j=0

(xj

−a−

)2

= W (x)

(8)

Then the calculation of the error probability generated by

one trapping set can be calculated as:

µT S

=

1 M

M

f (xk) · W (xk), M → ∞

(9)

k=0

The final estimation of the error probability can be obtained by calculating and summing the probabilities for all the trapping sets found. In addition, it should be noted that in the absence of information about the trapping sets present in the code and their number, it is necessary to somehow estimate the number of repetitions of each trapping set in the code.

III. SOFTWARE KIT As it was mentioned in Section I, the multi-threaded OpenCL implementation [5] of the simulation model for LDPC decoding algorithms provided a basis for development of a software model that utilising importance sampling method. To obtain this model, it was necessary to make some changes and extensions to the existing software. This changes turned out to be quite significant. And what’s more it was necessary to add several new applications which together with the basis formed a set of applications. Here we call this set as a software kit. The structural scheme of the developed software kit depicted on the Figure 1. The steps below list the changes that were needed to be made to get this software kit. First step. In the process of modeling, it is necessary to save bit positions in which errors were not corrected in a given number of iterations. This set of postions for one codeword we will call error vectors. This functionality is implemented as an extension of existing simulation model [5] in the block of statistics calculation. Error vectors are saved to a special file, ”Bad Codewords” List on Figure 1. Thus, by the end of the simulation, a file is formed with the positions of all errors, in all incorrectly decoded codewords, for all decoding iterations. Second step. The error vectors from the file obtained at the previous step are analyzed for the presence of cyclic constructions, this step is the TS Analyser block on Figure [6]. The presence of such constructions is a sign of the existence of trapping sets in the error vector. This process is based on the formation of a graph for each error vector. And then finding such parameters of this graph

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 8th MEDITERRANEAN CONFERENCE ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING (MECO), 10-14 JUNE 2019, BUDVA, MONTENEGRO

Fig. 1. Structural scheme of proposed method for frame error rate estimation using importance sampling

as: the number of code nodes w, the number of check nodes with an odd degree u and the cyclicity indicator e [6]. If the cyclicity indicator e < 0, then the graph of the considered error vector does not contain in it closed constructions - cycles. If e = 0, then the graph contains only one cycle. In the case, if e > 0, the graph contains more than one cycle [6].
Third step. According to the results of the analysis performed at the previous step, a database of potential trapping sets is formed. Which includes all structures for which the cyclicity indicator e ≥ 0. Trapping Sets Base on Figure [6].
The task of deploying and administering a trapping set database has proven to be quite difficult. To solve this problem PostgreSQL server was used.
Fourth step. Based on the collection of potential trapping sets obtained at the previous step, each trapping set is tested to cause a decoder failure.
The testing algorithm is shown at the bottom of the scheme in [6] and is summarized below.
The Noise Impulse block accepts a modulated codeword x and a tsP os error vector with the potential trapping set from the database. Noise is added to the bits xi (i ∈ tsP os) with some given level E. The result sum of the signal and impulse noise is forwarded to the LDPC decoder. Before estimating the probability of an error in a codeword, it is required to determine the minimum value of the impulse noise level Emin at which the LDPC decoder with the specified parameters cannot successfully decode the codeword. In other words, it is required to find the level of impulse noise at which the trapping set causes a decoder failure.
The value of Emin can be found as follows:
1) Two parameters are selected: some initial level E = E0, at which the codeword decodes successfully and the step of changing the level of impulse noise ∆E.
2) Impulse noise is added to the modulated codeword with the current E level.
3) If the decoder successfully decoded it, a new value of

E = E + ∆E is set and the process continues from step 2. If the decoder could not successfully decode the codeword, then Emin = E. Fifth step. Based on previous step results frame error rate estimation invoked using importance sampling method.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS At the final stage of the work, developed software kit was verified by comparison it results with results of Monte Carlo simulation [5] for the Margulis (2640, 1320) code [8], and two quasi cyclic codes (22200, 5550) and (22200, 7400), which have been specially synthesized. Frame error rates for this codes are shown on figures 2 and 3. It can be seen that difference between frame error rates for Monte Carlo simulation and simulation using developed software kit is about an order of magnitude. It is a significant difference, therefore developed kit can’t be used directly for frame error rate estimation. But it can bee seen, that error floor on the presented figures appears at the same Eb/N0 value. This observation means, that the proposed kit can be used for error floor detection. For performance evaluation of the developed software kit the following indicators were measured: • tIS time spent on obtaining the estimate for this method; • the difference between the value of the estimate obtained
by this method and the Monte Carlo method. According to the algorithm described in section III, the time tIS spent on obtaining an estimate using the importance sampling method can be represented as follows:

tis = tev + tanalyze + tne + tmodeling

(10)

Where tev is the time spent on getting a set of error vectors, tanalyze is the time spent on the analysis of the obtained error vectors, tne is the time spent on creation a database with potential trapping sets and determining the Emin values; tmodeling is the time spent on estimating the FER.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2019 8th MEDITERRANEAN CONFERENCE ON EMBEDDED COMPUTING (MECO), 10-14 JUNE 2019, BUDVA, MONTENEGRO

Fig. 2. Frame error rate estimation for Margulis code (2640, 1320) R = 1/2

Fig. 3. Frame error rate estimation for quasi cyclic codes (22200, 5550) R = 3/4 and (22200, 7400) R = 2/3

For indicator measurements the following parameters was used: Margulis (2640, 1320) code, Eb/N0 = 2.2 dB, the LLR BP decoding algorithm with Jacobi logarithm approximation.
For this example, the following tIS value was obtained:

tis = tev + tanalyze + tne + tmodeling =

(11)

= 103 + 7 + 23 + 378 min

The estimate of the frame error probability is equal to:

Pfer is(Eb/N0) = Pfer is(2, 2) = 2, 2386 ∗ 10−7 (12) After conducting a similar experiment using the Monte Carlo method, we obtain the following values. Time spent on getting the estimate:

tMC = 2023 min.

(13)

The frame error rate at a given Eb/N0 ratio:

Pfer is(Eb/N0) = Pfer is(2, 2) = 1, 602 ∗ 10−5. (14) V. CONCLUSION
Developed implementation based on importance sampling method allows to evaluate error floors existence with significant reduction in simulation time. Thus for the Margulis (2640, 1320) code and Eb/N0 = 2.2 dB simulation time reduced for 3,96 times, while the estimation accuracy decreases by almost 2 orders of magnitude.
However, even this result is sufficient, since the resulting modeling environment allows us to detect the presence of error floor and the Eb/N0 at which it appears.
It is worth noting that the difference in the estimates obtained by the Monte Carlo method and by the method based on importance sampling have approximately the same over the whole range of Eb/N0 (Figures 1 and 2). Therefore it is proposed [9] to use some heuristic adjustments to increase this accuracy. Such modification allows to estimate the error floor level without Monte Carlo simulation.
But our simulations show, that this adjustments highly dependent on code parameters, such as length, code rate, code type, row/column degree and, in general, unknown. Therefore using such amendments for error floor level estimation looks questionable and require additional research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation under Grant 17-79-20302.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, ”Low-density parity-check codes”, Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[2] T. Richrdson, ”Error floors of LDPC codes”, Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes”, in Proceedings of the 41st Allerton Conference on Commnication, Control and Computing, Monticello, Ill, USA, pp. 1426-1435, Oct. 2003.
[3] B. Xia and W. E. Ryan. ”Importance sampling for tanner trees.” IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, 51:2183-2189, June 2005.
[4] E. Cavus, C. Haymes, and B. Daneshrad, ”Low BER performance estimation of LDPC codes via application of importance sampling to trapping sets,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1886-1888, 2009.
[5] I.Y. Volkov, A.V. Kharin, A.A. Dryakhlov, E.I. Mirokhin, K.G. Terekhov, K.N. Zavertkin, A.A. Ovinnikov, E.A. Likhobabin, V.V. Vityazev , ”Flexible parallel implementation of LLR BP decoding simulation on multicores using OpenCL”, 25th Telecommunications forum TELFOR2017, Serbia, Belgrade, November 21-22, 2017.
[6] X. Zheng, F. C. M. Lau, C. K. Tse, Y. He, M. Z. Wang. Evaluation of the Extremely Low Block Error Rate of Irregular LDPC Codes, Communications, 2009. ICC ’09. IEEE International Conference on. Dresden, Germany. 14-18 June 2009.
[7] P. Lee, L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, M. Wainwright, ”Error Floors in LDPC Codes: Fast Simulation Bounds and Hardware Emulation”, Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), July 2008.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, M. S. Postol, ”Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes”, Electron. Notes Theoretical Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97-104, Oct. 2003.
[9] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikoli, M. J. Wainwright, ”Predicting error floors of LDPC codes: deterministic bounds and estimates”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 908-917, Aug. 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:22:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

