3758

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

Quasi-Cyclic Protograph-Based Raptor-Like LDPC Codes for Short Block-Lengths
Sudarsan V. S. Ranganathan , Student Member, IEEE, Dariush Divsalar, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Richard D. Wesel , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Protograph-based Raptor-like low-density paritycheck codes (PBRL codes) are a family of easily encodable ratecompatible low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. PBRL codes have an excellent performance across all design rates. Quasicyclic (QC) PBRL code families permit high-speed decoder implementations. PBRL codes designed thus far, for both long and short block-lengths, have been based on optimizing the iterative decoding threshold of the protograph of the PBRL family at various design rates. This paper introduces a design method to obtain better QC PBRL code families at short block-lengths (of a few hundred bits) for low frame error rate (FER) requirements. We first select a protomatrix for the highest design rate. To add a new row to lower the rate, we keep all the previously obtained rows of the PBRL protomatrix fixed and select the new row that maximizes an upper bound on the minimum distance of any QC-LDPC code that can be obtained from the protomatrix. The new QC PBRL code families outperform the original PBRL codes at short block-lengths by providing a significantly better low-FER performance. The standard approach to computing the aforementioned upper bounds requires complexity that grows exponentially with the size of the protomatrix. However, we show that the structure of the PBRL protomatrix lets us obtain the upper bounds with complexity that grows only linearly with the size of the PBRL protomatrix. Using the complexity reduction results, we also establish an equivalence between the exhaustive search to design a new row for the PBRL protomatrix according to the new design method and an integer linear program.
Index Terms— Channel codes, iterative decoding threshold, LDPC codes, minimum distance, permanents, PBRL codes, Raptor codes, rate-compatible codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ATE-COMPATIBLE (RC) channel codes are at the core of systems with incremental redundancy (IR). IR at the physical layer of a system allows efficient transmission over a time-varying channel. RC codes operate in phases: First,
Manuscript received September 26, 2017; revised November 19, 2018; accepted December 28, 2018. Date of publication January 25, 2019; date of current version May 20, 2019. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CIF-1618272. This paper was presented in part at the 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
S. V. S. Ranganathan and R. D. Wesel are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail: sudarsanvsr@g.ucla.edu; wesel@g.ucla.edu).
D. Divsalar is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA, and also with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109 USA (e-mail: dariush.divsalar@jpl.nasa.gov).
Communicated by M. Lentmaier, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2019.2895322

the transmitter of the system sends the highest-rate codeword of a certain size over the channel. If the receiver is unable to decode the received noisy codeword, the transmitter then sends additional codeword symbols to the receiver to allow the receiver attempt another decoding round, but now with a longer received codeword. The process continues until either a maximum number of transmissions have been attempted or the decoder succeeds in decoding the received codeword.
RC channel codes that use soft decisions at the receiver were first introduced by Hagenauer [1]. Here, the author proposed using a punctured convolutional code (See [2]) as the highest-rate code, with the transmitter sending symbols that are initially punctured as IR. These codes are called RC punctured convolutional (RCPC) codes. More recently, RC punctured turbo (RCPT) codes, introduced by Narayanan and Stüber [3], have been demonstrated to have excellent throughput performances. RCPC codes and RCPT codes are schemes that are both based on punctured convolutional codes.
Our work focuses on RC codes based on low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which were introduced by Gallager [4]. Optimized LDPC code ensembles have iterative decoding thresholds very close to channel capacity over various discrete memoryless channels (See [5]). As demonstrated by Richardson et al. [6], despite possessing a sub-optimal iterative decoder, irregular LDPC codes designed according to optimized degree distributions of the underlying Tanner graph [7] have frame error rate (FER) performances very close to capacity at sufficiently long block-lengths. Their excellent performance comes at a cost, though, as decoders of unstructured LDPC codes have a high implementation complexity. Therefore, LDPC codes with some structure in their parity-check matrix are generally preferred in practice.
Protograph-based LDPC codes are one class of structured LDPC codes. A protograph is a small Tanner graph that can be used to obtain LDPC codes of various block-lengths with the same structural connections as the protograph. First described by Thorpe [8], LDPC codes based on protographs are amenable to tractable analysis and design procedures. It is possible to obtain the iterative decoding threshold of a protograph LDPC code ensemble using only the protograph, as shown by Divsalar et al. [9], Liva and Chiani [10], and others. The ensemble weight enumerators of a protograph can also be obtained, as shown by Abu-Surra et al. [11] and others.

0018-9448 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3759

Protograph-based quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes [12], a class of protograph codes, have parity-check matrices composed of circulant permutation matrices (CPMs) and permit very-low-complexity decoder implementations [9]. The presence of CPMs in protograph QC-LDPC codes facilitates analysis relating the connections in the protograph to the girth and minimum distance of the corresponding code. Fossorier [12], Karimi and Banihashemi [13], and others analyze the girth of a protograph QC-LDPC code by examining the protograph. More pertinent to our paper are [14] and [15]. Smarandache and Vontobel [14] derive an upper bound on the minimum distance of any QC-LDPC code that can be obtained from a protograph. Butler and Siegel [15] extend the results of [14] to QC-LDPC codes based on punctured protographs.
A. Rate-Compatible LDPC (RC-LDPC) Codes: Prior Work
Rate-compatible LDPC (RC-LDPC) codes are generally designed via one of the two following approaches. The first approach constructs the lowest-rate code and then punctures symbols to obtain corresponding codes of higher rates. The second approach, called extending, constructs the highestrate code and then constructs additional symbol as combinations of existing symbols to obtain the lower-rate codes.
Some notable works that start with a low-rate code and use the puncturing approach include [16]–[20]. Although these works construct RC-LDPC code families with good performance, Yazdani and Banihashemi [21] have observed that finite-length RC-LDPC code families obtained solely using puncturing a low-rate code do not perform competitively at relatively high rates. Further, compared with the objectives of our work to design practical codes with high-throughput decoders, Ha et al. [16], Ha et al. [17], Kim et al. [18], and Vellambi and Fekri [20] do not explicitly design structured RC-LDPC code families with high-throughput decoders. El-Khamy et al. [19] construct codes based on protographs, but they start with a low-rate code and use puncturing.
Our work constructs RC code families using the extending method. Works that have explored this approach previously include [21]–[25]. Yazdani and Banihashemi [21] show that a combination of both extending and puncturing can improve over puncturing approaches. Dolinar [22], Nguyen et al. [23], Nguyen and Nosratinia [24], and Chen et al. [25] all construct QC protograph-based RC-LDPC code families.
Our paper builds upon the work of Chen et al. [25]. Chen et al. [25] introduce protograph-based Raptor-like LDPC codes (PBRL codes). PBRL code families are a class of easily encodable RC-LDPC codes. If constructed using circulants, QC PBRL codes also lead to high-throughput decoder implementations. PBRL code families of [25], despite possessing a simple structure, have an excellent iterative decoding threshold and performance across all design rates. Chen et al. [25] design PBRL protographs for long and short block-lengths by optimizing the iterative decoding threshold of the protograph at each successively lower rate. They show that PBRL QC-LDPC code families can outperform other QC RC-LDPC codes in the literature (including the ones of [23]

and [24]), both at short (≈1000 information bits) and long (≈16000 information bits) block-lengths.
B. Contributions
This paper considers the design of structured, i.e. quasicyclic, RC-LDPC codes for very short block-lengths (fewer than 500 information bits) and for low FER requirements. The previous literature mentioned in Section I-A use iterative decoding threshold as the design metric in their RC-LDPC code design. While the iterative decoding threshold is an effective design metric for predicting the waterfall performance at long block-lengths [5], it is not a good indicator of short block-length performance or performance generally at low FERs. In particular, a good threshold does not preclude lowweight codewords, stopping sets [26], [27], trapping sets [28], and absorbing sets [29], which can lead to poor waterfall performance for short block-length codes and high error floors generally. This paper proposes the use of an upper bound on the minimum distance as a potential metric for short blocklength RC-LDPC code design.
Consider how an upper bound on minimum distance dmin relates to the size of the smallest codewords, stopping sets, trapping sets, and absorbing sets. An upper bound on dmin is an upper bound on the size (weight) of the smallest weight codeword for any linear code including LDPC codes. Consider the graph induced by the variable nodes corresponding to a codeword, which we refer to as the graph induced by the codeword. An upper bound on dmin is also an upper bound on the size of the smallest stopping set because the variable nodes of the graph induced by any codeword form a stopping set [27].
An (a, b) trapping set is a set of a variable nodes with b ≥ 0 odd-degree check nodes in the sub-graph induced by the a variable nodes. Note that the induced graph of a weight-dmin codeword has zero odd-degree check nodes and is therefore a trivial trapping set with a = dmin and b = 0. Removing a single variable node and its edges from the induced graph of the codeword generates a trapping set with a = dmin − 1 and b equal to the degree of the removed variable node. Thus for each variable node v with degree dv present in the graph induced by the smallest-weight codeword, there exists an a = dmin − 1, b = dv trapping set so that dmin − 1 is an upper bound on the minimum size of b = dv trapping sets. Thus, the dmin of the code provides an upper bound on the size of numerous trapping sets, and when dmin is small, these will affect the error floor performance.
An (a, b) absorbing set is an (a, b) trapping set where each variable node has strictly more even degree check nodes than odd degree check nodes as neighbors in the induced sub-graph. Similar to trapping sets, codewords are trivial absorbing sets and removing any degree-dv variable node from the induced graph of the codeword generates a trapping set that is also an absorbing set whenever dv is less than half the number of check nodes in the induced graph of the codeword.
As discussed above, the variable nodes of the graph induced by any codeword form a trivial stopping set, trapping set, and absorbing set. Thus dmin is an upper bound on the size of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3760

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

smallest of each of these sets. Moreover, we have shown how nontrivial trapping sets and absorbing sets of size dmin − 1 are natural consequences of the minimum-weight codeword.
Still, there are limitations to the analysis above. Indeed, dmin −1 may not be an upper bound on the size a of a trapping set or absorbing set with a other values of b. Furthermore, maximizing an upper bound on a quantity does not guarantee maximizing the quantity itself. However, we conjecture and support with results that show that selecting the rows of a PBRL incremental redundancy matrix to maximize an upper bound on dmin leads to a low-complexity design procedure that produces short block-length PBRL codes with better low-FER performance than existing design techniques of Section I-A, which make no attempt at all to directly address low-FER performance of short block-length LDPC codes.
Our contributions are as follows: 1) Permanent-Bound-Based Design Method: One contribution of this paper is a new PBRL design approach. Given a set of design rates, we design protographs for PBRL ensembles by maximizing, at each rate, the upper bounds on the minimum distance that were derived in [14] and [15]. The resulting PBRL QC-LDPC code families outperform the ones designed by optimizing the iterative decoding threshold by providing a better low-FER performance slope at each design rate. The new approach has the advantage that it is oblivious to the channel that the RC code is to be deployed, which is not the case with the method of optimizing the iterative decoding threshold. We note that the upper bounds derived in [14] and [15] have been used previously, for example, by Mitchell et al. [30] to design QC-LDPC block codes based on small protographs. 2) Reduction in Complexity of Computing the Upper Bounds for PBRL Protomatrices: The complexity of evaluating the upper bounds of [14] and [15], in general, increases exponentially with the size of the overall protograph. A second contribution of this paper is to leverage the structure of PBRL protographs to identify a significant reduction in this complexity. In particular, we show in Theorems 6, 8, and 10 and Lemma 12 that the structure of a PBRL protomatrix, given a few conditions that are satisfied for most designs, facilitates computation of the upper bounds with complexity that grows only linearly with the size of the overall PBRL protomatrix when the size of the highest-rate code protomatrix is fixed. Further, this reduction in complexity yields a very low-complexity PBRL search procedure that has a constant run-time for each row added to lower the design rate. The constant complexity is in contrast to the threshold-based optimization proposed in [25] where the complexity of the PBRL search procedure grows with each new added row. 3) Equivalence Between the Design Method and an Integer Linear Program (ILP): The results on complexity reduction lead to an equivalent way of representing the design of a row of the PBRL protomatrix. We show that the exhaustive search for a new row that maximizes the upper bounds of [14] or [15] is equivalent to an integer linear program (ILP). This paper extends our previous conference publication [31]. Our conference publication included a proof of complexity reduction only in the case of no punctured variable

nodes in PBRL designs (i.e. Section IV-A). Furthermore, Sections IV-D and V are unpublished. The conference paper also presented only parts of Sections VI and VII.

C. Organization
The paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces notation and background. Section III presents the permanentbound-based PBRL design method. Section IV shows that the structure of a PBRL protomatrix allows for a significant reduction in the complexity of computing the permanent-based upper bounds. Based on the results of Section IV, Section V establishes the equivalence between the new design procedure for a row of a PBRL protomatrix and an integer linear program (ILP). Section VI provides example PBRL protomatrices designed for short block-lengths according to the new design method. Section VII presents the results obtained from simulations of the new QC PBRL code families and compares the results against PBRL codes designed by optimizing the iterative decoding threshold. Section VIII concludes the paper.

II. PRELIMINARIES AND NOTATION

A. Protographs, LDPC Codes, and PBRL Codes

1) Protographs: A protograph [8], or a projected graph,

is a small bipartite Tanner graph with nc check nodes and nv

variable nodes forming the two node sets. The biadjacency

matrix of a protograph is called its protomatrix. In this work,

we use the terms protograph and protomatrix interchangeably.

The protomatrix can contain entries that are greater than 1.

These entries correspond to multiple edges between the same

variable-check node pair in the protograph.

2) Protograph-Based LDPC Codes: Given a protograph,

we define a two-step copy-and-permute process, also known

as lifting, to obtain an LDPC code as follows. The protograph

is first replicated M times, yielding M disconnected copies of

the graph. Then, the connections to the check nodes of the set

of M edges (across the M replicas) obtained from an edge

of a variable-check node pair in the original protograph are

permuted among the M copies of the corresponding variable-

check node pair. The same is performed independently for

every set of M edges. The second step of lifting connects

the M copies of the protograph such that the resulting LDPC

code has the same degree distribution as the protograph. The

resulting LDPC code has Mnc check nodes and Mnv variable

nodes; M is called the lifting factor.

Of the nv variable nodes in a protograph, some of the nodes

can be designated to be “punctured”. The number of such

punctured nodes is denoted n p and the remaining nt = nv −n p

nodes are called “transmitted” nodes. The design rate of a

protograph is

R

=

n v −n c nt

.

Upon

lifting

a

protograph,

all

the nodes that are copied from a punctured variable node in

the protograph are punctured in the resulting graph and all the

nodes that are copied from a transmitted variable node in the

protograph are transmitted in the resulting graph. The rate r

of a protograph-based LDPC code obtained from a protograph

with design rate R satisfies r ≥ R. We call a protograph (pro-

tomatrix) a punctured protograph (punctured protomatrix) if it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3761

contains punctured variable nodes and call it an unpunctured

protograph (unpunctured protomatrix) otherwise.

With the lifting factor being M, the set of all LDPC codes

obtainable via all possible edge permutations (in the second

step of lifting) from a protograph is collectively called the

ensemble of a protograph.

A quasi-cyclic (QC) protograph LDPC code is obtained

from a protograph by restricting the permutations used during

the lifting process to a sub-class known as circulants. Circulant

permutations lead to LDPC codes with parity-check matrices

that have blocks of circulant permutation matrices (CPMs)

and zero matrices (if there are 0’s in the protomatrix) of size

M × M.

3) PBRL Codes: A protograph-based Raptor-like (PBRL)

ensemble is defined by its protomatrix P, which has the

following general form:





P=

PHRC PIRC

0 I nc×nv

(1)

Here, 0 and I refer to the all-zeros and identity matrices of

appropriate size. The highest-rate code (HRC) of the rate-

compatible protomatrix is represented by PHRC, which is of size ncH ×nvH . We refer to this sub-matrix as the “HRC part”. The variable nodes of the protomatrix containing the identity

matrix in (1) represent the incremental redundancy symbols of

P. We denote the sub-matrix of the incremental redundancy

variable nodes by PIR. The check nodes that connect to the degree-1 variable nodes in PIR have connections to the variable nodes in the HRC part. These connections are represented by

the sub-matrix PIRC, which we refer to as the “IRC part”. The HRC part of the PBRL protograph, upon lifting,

is structurally identical to the precode part of a Raptor code

of Shokrollahi [32]. Similarly, the degree-1 variable nodes of

PIR are efficiently encoded as modulo-2 sums of the precode symbols in a manner similar to the Luby transform (LT) code

in a Raptor code.

Our convention in this work is that the n p punctured variable nodes of a PBRL protomatrix are present in the first nvH columns of the protomatrix.

Example 1: Fig. 1 shows an example PBRL protograph,

with black circles representing variable nodes and squares with

an XOR symbol representing check nodes. Rate-compatibility

starts with the highest-rate code. PIR lowers the design rate as its degree-1 variable nodes are included one at a time. The

protomatrix corresponding to the protograph of Fig. 1 is

⎡

⎤

1121210000000

P

=

⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

2 1 1 0 1 0 0

2 1 1 1 0 0 1

1 1 1 0 0 1 0

2 1 0 0 1 0 1

1 1 1 1 0 1 0

2 1 0 1 1 0 1

0 1 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 1 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 1 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 1 0 0

0 0 0 0 0 1 0

0 0 0 0 0 0 1

0 0 0 0 0 0 0

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦

(2)

1010100000001

The HRC part has a design rate of 4/6 and the seven IR variable nodes lead to the lower design rates of 4/(6 + i ).

Fig. 1. A PBRL protograph (no punctured nodes) with a highest-rate code of design rate 2/3 and its incremental redundancy nodes from sub-matrix PIR. The sub-matrix PIR lowers the design rate as its degree-1 variable nodes are included one at a time. The figure is a reproduction of [25, Fig. 1]. The protomatrix corresponding to this protograph is given in (2).
We refer the reader to [25, Sec. II] for a more detailed introduction to features of PBRL codes.
4) Other Notation and Assumptions: In this paper, we denote the set of integers {1, 2, . . . , } by []. The cardinality of a set S is represented by |S|. The indexing of rows and columns of a matrix starts from 1. Given a vector x, xi denotes the scalar value at position i ≥ 1 of x. If P is a protomatrix of size nc × nv and S ⊆ [nv], denote by PS the sub-matrix of P formed by the columns indexed by elements of S. For convenience, we always assume the columns of P that are indexed by S to appear in PS in the same order that they appear in P. If i ∈ S, we let S \i be shorthand for S \ {i }. For a set of non-negative integers, let min∗ be a function that returns the smallest non-zero value if the set has at least one positive value or return +∘ if the set is {0}. In this paper, all unpunctured protomatrices of size nc × nv are assumed to have a positive design rate, i.e. nv > nc. Likewise, we assume that all punctured protomatrices of size nc × nv with n p punctured variable nodes have a positive design rate less than 1, i.e. nv > nc, nv − nc < nv − n p. If P is a PBRL protomatrix of size nc × nv (punctured or unpunctured) with an HRC part of size ncH ×nvH , we assume that PHRC also has a positive design rate less than 1. Therefore, for a punctured PBRL protomatrix n p < ncH ≤ nc. For simplicity, we call the permanent of a square matrix of size  ×  a “permanent of size  × ”.
B. Bounding dmin of Protograph QC-LDPC Codes
A key feature of QC-LDPC codes based on protomatrices is that the minimum distance of any such code obtained from a protomatrix is upper bounded by a constant that depends only on the protomatrix and not on the block-length of the code. In order to state the upper bounds, which were derived in [14] and [15], we need to define the permanent of a square matrix.
Definition 2 (Permanent): The permanent of an × square matrix A with elements A(i, j ), i ∈ [], j ∈ [] over some

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3762

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

commutative ring is defined as


 


 

perm(A) =

A( j, σ ( j )) =

A(σ ( j ), j ), (3)

σ j =1

σ j =1

where σ refers to a permutation of [] and the summation is

over all permutations of []. The permanent, although it looks

deceptively similar to the determinant, is harder to compute

than the determinant [33]. While of computing the determinant is

Othea3r
i,thtmheetmicocsot mefpfilecxieintyt

algorithm known to matrix, due to Ryser

compute the permanent [34], is of complexity 

of ·

a2n
y.

square

Theorem 3 (Upper Bound for Unpunctured Protomatrices;

Theorem 8 of Smarandache and Vontobel [14]): Let P be an

unpunctured protomatrix of size nc × nv. Any QC-LDPC code C obtained from the protomatrix P has a minimum distance

dmin(C) that is upper bounded as

dmin (C )

≤

min∗
S ⊆[nv ],| S |=nc +1



i∈S


 perm PS\i .

(4)

Note that permanents computed from sub-matrices of a pro-

tomatrix are always non-negative.

Theorem 4 (Upper Bound for Punctured Protomatrices;

[15, Th. 9]): Let P be a protomatrix of size nc × nv.

Let the index set of punctured variable nodes, a subset of

[nv], be denoted P. Denote by C any punctured QC-LDPC code that can be obtained from P using P, and denote the

unpunctured version of the code C (with protograph P) by C.

Then, provided that C and C have the same dimensionality,

i.e. the same number of codewords in their codebooks, C has

a minimum distance dmin(C ) that is upper bounded as

dmin(C ) ≤ min∗







perm PS\i .

(5)

S⊆[nv],|S|=nc+1 i∈S\P

III. PERMANENT-BOUND-BASED PBRL DESIGN
The design of a PBRL protomatrix, as proposed by Chen et al. [25], consists of two steps: First, we choose the HRC part, PHRC, as a protomatrix by itself. Then, we obtain the IRC part, PIRC, one row at a time. In [25], Chen et al. first choose an HRC part with a degree distribution and an acceptable iterative decoding threshold. They then design each row of PIRC successively to optimize the iterative decoding threshold of the PBRL protomatrix at the rate induced by adding that row, keeping all previously obtained rows fixed. The best performing families of high-throughput RC-LDPC codes at both short and long block-lengths are the PBRL codes as designed with the heuristics proposed by Chen et al. [25].
While the work in [25] used iterative decoding threshold as the design metric at both short and long block-lengths, it is well known in literature on LDPC codes that threshold is not indicative of how a finite block-length code performs in the low-FER regime. Further, at very short block-lengths the waterfall region of an LDPC code may not yield low FERs such as 10−6. Chen et al. [25] proposed constraints on the connections in PIRC in their threshold-based designs to obtain a better slope in low-FER performance at block-lengths such as 1000 information bits and longer, but their work does

not address even shorter block-lengths such as fewer than 500 information bits. In this paper, we use the upper bounds of Theorems 3 and 4, which are applicable for QC-LDPC codes based on protographs, to design PBRL protomatrices for short block-length and practical RC-LDPC codes for low FERs.
Minimum distance, by itself, does not fully predict the lowFER performance of LDPC codes under iterative decoding. However, if one LDPC code has a better graphical structure and minimum distance properties compared to another one that has a similar or better threshold and both codes have the same block-length, then it has been observed in prior works such as [30] that the former usually performs better in terms of the slope of FER performance at low FERs once the channel parameter improves beyond the initial waterfall region. The channel parameter at which the code with the better graphical structure and minimum distance properties performs better than the one with the similar or better threshold will depend upon the difference in their thresholds as threshold indicates the channel parameter at which an LDPC code can start decoding correctly, regardless of its block-length. We show through examples in this work that designing QC RC-LDPC codes using the minimum distance upper bounds without taking into consideration the threshold yields better lowFER performance at very short block-lengths when compared to code families designed solely based on optimizing the threshold.
With Theorems 3 and 4 in hand, we propose the following PBRL design procedure that replaces iterative decoding threshold from [25] with the upper bounds on the minimum distance as the design criterion for every row of PIRC:
1) HRC selection: Choose an HRC matrix of size ncH × nvH with a desired degree distribution and complexity constraint. A common complexity constraint is to limit the weight of each column and row in the protomatrix. Note that the selection of a desirable HRC part is a code design problem by itself. In order to avoid high error floors, one usually needs to limit the number of degree2 variable nodes in the protomatrix. Design examples in Sections VI and VII provide HRC parts that lead to good performance in both waterfall and error floor regions.
2) IRC design: Select the next row of the protomatrix from a set of candidate rows to maximize the upper bound on the minimum distance via Theorem 4 or 3 (depending upon whether there are punctured variable nodes or not). If there are multiple candidates with the best upper bound, then select one at random.
3) Go to Step 2) if another row of PIRC is required. Otherwise, exit.
It is not known, in general, whether the upper bounds of (4) or (5) are achievable. But our design procedure yields better QC RC-LDPC code families at short block-lengths than the design based on optimizing the iterative decoding thresholds.
For a punctured protomatrix, care must be taken to ensure that not too many variable nodes are punctured. Otherwise, the dimensionality requirement in Theorem 4 may be violated.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3763

The structure of PBRL protomatrices and the upper bounds

of (4) and (5) lead to the following observation that will be

utilized in the rest of the paper:

Lemma 5: Let a PBRL protomatrix P be of size nc×nv. Let the HRC part, as a protomatrix by itself, have a positive and

finite upper bound dHRC, computed using (4) or (5). Then the upper bounds for each new row i = ncH + 1, ncH + 2, . . . , nc added to obtain P, irrespective of the chosen candidates for

the rows, are non-decreasing and are lower bounded by dHRC. Proof: Let us consider the design of the first row of the

IRC part and assume that the protomatrix has no punctured

cnocluHm+ns1.
Athsrsouwmeofththaet

there is overall

no non-zero integer in protomatrix except t
he

the new required

1 from sub-matrix PIR at entry ncH + 1, nvH + 1 of P. For

any set S of ncH + 2 column indices that does not include

index nvH + 1, the sum of the ncH + 2 permanents, computed

according to the upper bound of (4), is zero. For any other

set that includes index nvH + 1, the sum of the permanents is equal to one of the sums of ncH + 1 permanents computed to find the upper bound for the HRC part. Now, if the new row

is designed to have non-zero entries in the first nvH columns, the upper bound can only increase or remain the same.

Similar arguments follow if the protomatrix has punctured

columns. This completes the proof as the above arguments can

then be successively applied to each new row.

We end the section by discussing the complexity of com-

puting the upper bound of (4) for any general protomatrix

of size nc × nv with no punctured columns (similar arguments

fosouflclhsoewtsseiftStwhetehpanrtoenteodemedtaotrtiocxohmbaepsucptouennsncitcdue+rreedd1coipsleurmmnncna+svn)1e.
nT.tshF,eoenraucemhveboreyfr size nc × nc. Therefore, the overall number of permanents

tothhfaet(p4ne)eremisdatnonecnn+bvte1
ocf·o(amnspcqu+utea1dre).inmAoastrrdtihexreotcof osomibzpetaleinx×ittyheoiufspcpoemrpb·uo2tuinn
dg,

the design will eventually become prohibitively slow as we

add more rows to the PBRL protomatrix. In the next section

we show how we can take advantage of the general structure of

a PBRL protomatrix to significantly reduce the complexity of

computing the upper bounds, thereby reducing the complexity

of our design procedure.

IV. REDUCED-COMPLEXITY DESIGN PROCEDURE
In Sections IV-A, IV-B, and IV-C below, for a given PBRL protomatrix, we leverage the general structure of the protomatrix of a PBRL ensemble in (1) to reduce the complexity of computing the upper bounds in (4) or (5). Additionally, in Section IV-D below, we reduce the complexity of the design procedure by using computations completed for all the previous rows to facilitate very-low-complexity computation of the bound while designing the next row.

A. Unpunctured PBRL Protographs
This subsection deals with the case when the PBRL protomatrix has no punctured variable nodes. The following result leads to a significant reduction in both the number of permanents that need to be computed and the size of each

permanent to be computed while computing the upper bound

of (4) for an unpunctured PBRL protomatrix.

Theorem 6: Let an unpunctured PBRL protomatrix P be of

size nc × nv. Assume that the upper bound in (4) for P is a positive integer (this is satisfied whenever the HRC part has an

upper bound that is a positive integer, as a result of Lemma 5).

eTxhaecnt,lythencnsHvaH+m1e


upper bound can be obtained · (nc + 1) permanents, each

by of

computing complexity

at most 
the complexi
ty of computing the permanent of an

ncH + 1 × ncH + 1 matrix.

Before we provide the proof, we comment on the reduction

in complexity of computing (4). The complexity of computing

each permanent would, crucially, now depend only on the

number of check nodes in the HRC part, ncH , and not on nc. Also, the dominating factor in the expression for number of

permanents to be computed is the binomial coefficient, which

again would now depend only on the size of the HRC part,

ncH × nvH , and not on the size of the entire protomatrix. As a result of this theorem, the complexity of computing the

upper bound for an unpunctured PBRL protomatrix grows only

linearly with the size of the protomatrix nc × nv. We remark that such a reduction in complexity will be a recurring theme

throughout this section.

Proof: We provide the proof in three cases. The proof is

an argument that if P has a positive and a finite upper bound

(4), then due to the identity matrix structure in the columns of

PIR in a PBRL protomatrix it suffices to consider sets S that
always contain the indices of all the columns of PIR. 1) Case 1: Let us first consider the case when S ⊆ [nv],
|S| = nc + 1, and S contains the indices of the last nv − nvH cninocdHlue.xmTendhse,briey.ea.arnoeyftnshcuneHvcHc+ho1ls
uesmtuSncshfiosnermtPsI.RaT. hmNeoanttrecixt+hwa1titnchhv o−sstrneunvcHtcuo=rleunmtchn−ast

can be written as:





PS = c1 c2 · · · cncH +1 | PIR (nc×(nc+1))

(6)

where the first ncH + 1 columns are chosen from the initial

nvH

columns

of

P

and

PIR has 

the

following

structure:

PIR =

0

I







nc × nv −nvH

(7)

Because each column in PIR contains only a single 1, when

the removed column is from the PIR part of PS the co
mplexity of computing the required permanent perm PS\i is 
the complexi
ty of computing the permanent of an ncH + 1 × ncH + 1 sub-matrix.
W hen the removed column index i ∈ S is not an element of nvH + 1, nvH + 2, . . . , nv , the complexity of computing

the permanent of the remainder square matrix PS\i is the

complexity of matrix. This is

cboemcapuusteintghethperopdeurcmt anenjnc=t1oPfSa\ni (σnc(Hj

× ),

ncH j ) is

subzero

for permutations σ that select elements not in the first ncH

rows for the first ncH columns of PS\i . 2) Case 2: Now let us consider the general set S of nc + 1

column indices in [nv]. First, let us assume that







perm PS\i > 0,

(8)

i∈S

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3764

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

which implies that at least one of the nc + 1 permanents is positive. Denote by Pi∗ PS\i∗ one such nc ×nc sub-matrix of PS with a positive permanent. Assume the following definition of a permanent of a square matrix A of size nc × nc:


  nc

perm (A) =

A(σ ( j ), j )

(9)

σ j =1

There exists a permutation denoted σ ∗ that has a positive

product in (9) when computed for the matrix Pi∗ . Consider all columns indexed by j ∈ [nc] such that σ ∗( j ) > ncH . There are nc − ncH = nv − nvH such columns. Replace
all these columns of Pi∗ by the columns of the sub-matrix

PIR (whenever possible), in the following manner: Replace column j whose σ ∗( j ) > ncH with the column in PIR whose only non-zero element, 1, is present in row σ ∗( j ), unless the

column from PIR is already in the nc + 1 columns indexed by set S under consideration. Denote by P1 the newly obtained matrix of size nc × nc. P1 has a permanent that is positive

and is at most the value of the permanent of Pi∗ due to the following reasons: Permutation σ ∗ yields a positive product

with P1 because the replacements (whenever possible) only

lead to non-zero entries at locations (σ ∗( j ), j ) : σ ∗( j ) > ncH .

Furthermore, Pi∗ (σ ( j ),

each j ) in

permutation σ Pi∗ (including

that σ ∗)

yields yields

a a

positive product

product with P1

that is upper bounded by the product computed with Pi∗ . 

Let us denote by PSˆ the matrix cˆ1 cˆ2 · · · cˆncH +1 | PIR , where cˆ1, cˆ2, . . . , cˆncH +1 are the columns in PS chosen from the first nvH columns of the protomatrix P and that either were in Pi∗ and not replaced to obtain P1 or was the one column

of PS not in Pi∗ . It is now straight-forward to see from the

composition of the matrices PS and PSˆ that




 




perm PS\i ≥ perm PSˆ\i > 0.

(10)

i∈S

i ∈ Sˆ

3) Case 3: We now consider the final case of the general set of nc + 1 columns whose nc + 1 permanents sum to zero. Recall that the statement of the theorem assumes that P has
a positive upper bound in (4). Therefore, we may ignore such
a case unless these columns contain PIR, in which case we would compute the sum of nc + 1 permanents according to the complexity as shown already in Case 1.
This completes the proof as the three cases show it suffices to consider subsets S ⊆ [nv] that always contain the indices of all the columns of PIR.

B. PBRL Protographs With One Punctured Variable Node
Theorem 6 provides a considerable reduction in the complexity of the new design procedure to obtain unpunctured PBRL protomatrices. We now consider PBRL protomatrices with exactly one punctured variable node. First, we start by providing an example that shows that the proof technique of replacing columns followed in Theorem 6 for the general set S of nc + 1 column indices may not necessarily be directly applicable for PBRL protomatrices with punctured variable nodes if S contains the index of a punctured column.

Example 7: Let us consider the following PBRL protoma-

trix whose HRC part is of size ncH = 2 and nvH = 6 with the first column punctured:

⎡

⎤

1121210

⎣0 2 1 2 1 2 0⎦

(11)

1100001

Let S = {1, 2, 3, 4}, the set of indices of the first 
four columns of the protomatrix. The sum i∈S\P perm PS\i from (5) for this set has three terms in it and is equal to 17. The permanent

of the 3 × 3 sub-matrix comprised of columns 1, 3, and 4

is equal to 5. If we follow the same replacement strategy

as in Theorem 6, we need to replace column 1 by the only

incremental redundancy variable node, i.e. column 7. The new set of column indices Sˆ = {2,3, 4, 7} has no column that is punctured and the summation i∈Sˆ\P perm PSˆ\i , which
now has four terms, is equal to 19.

We show in the following result that, by dealing with the

set S that contains the index of exactly one punctured variable

node more carefully, the complexity of computing the upper

bound for protomatrices with a single punctured column can

be reduced by a magnitude similar to Theorem 6.

Theorem 8: Let a PBRL protomatrix P be of size nc × nv with n p = 1 punctured column. Without loss of generality assume that P = {1}. Assume that there exists at least one

non-zero entry in the first ncH rows of all of the first nvH columns of P (this is a requirement that will be satisfied in

any practical design since otherwise there will be an all-zeros

column in the HRC part, but we are stating this explicitly as

we will use this assumption in the proof). Assume that the

upper upper

bound bound

in (5) for P is a can be obtained

positive with at


minotesgt
ern.cnTHvHh+e1n
,·

the same (nc
 + 1)

permanents, each of size at most ncH + 1 × ncH + 1 .

Proof: If S ⊆ [nv], |S| = nc + 1, S ∩ P = φ, and S

does not contain the indices of all the columns of PIR, then the arguments in Theorem 6 for ignoring such a set S while

computing the upper bound for the protomatrix still hold.

Similarly, if S includes the indices of all the columns of PIR and any subset of columns from the first nvH columns of P, then the computational complexity arguments for computing

the sum of at most nc +1 permanents for such a set of columns

hold the same way as observed in Theorem 6.

Now consider any set S ⊆ [nv], |S| = nc+1, and S∩P = φ.

Similar to Theorem 6, assume that







perm PS\i > 0

(12)

i∈S\P

as otherwise such a set S can be ignored (unless it contains the
indices of all the columns of PIR) because of the assumption that the upper bound for the protomatrix is a positive integer. This implies that there exists an nc × nc sub-matrix PS\i with the punctured column whose permanent is non-zero. Note
that every permanent in the summation in (12) includes the
punctured column. In the rest of the proof, the permanent of a matrix Ais assumed to be computed with the equation perm (A) = σ A(σ ( j ), j ). We now prove the theorem through the following three cases:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3765

1) Case 1: Consider the case when there exists a sub-

matrix PS\i , i ∈ S \ P with a non-zero permanent wherein there exists a permutation σ ∗ that yields a non-zero product in the computation of the permanent such that σ ∗(1) ≤

ncH . For this case, since the non-zero element from the punctured column contributing to the non-zero product for

this permutation is chosen from the first ncH rows of the
sub-matrix, the replacement strategy of Theorem 6 can be employed to obtain a new set Sˆ containing the indices of

 the punctured colum
n and all the colum ns of PIR such that

i∈S\P perm PS\i ≥ 

i∈Sˆ\P
perm PSˆ\i > 0. In par-

ticular, both i∈S\P perm PS\i and i∈Sˆ\P perm PSˆ\i

have the same number of terms.

2) Case 2: Consider the nc × nc sub-matrix PS\1, the submatrix without the punctured column. This sub-matrix is not

part of the summation in (12). But, if this sub-matrix has

a non-zero permanent (assumption for this case), then for a permutation σ ∗ whose product is non-zero in PS\1 there
are ncH columns whose contributing non-zero elements to the product are from the first ncH rows. Since we have assumed that there exists at least one non-zero entry in the first ncH rows of the punctured column, there exists a column j in PS\1 with σ ∗( j ) ≤ ncH that can be replaced by the punctured column and the product for the permutation σ ∗ for this new

sub-matrix, which is one of PS\i for some i ∈ S \ P, is still non-zero. Now, this implies we arrive at Case 1 with the new

sub-matrix and therefore the replacement strategy follows for

this new sub-matrix that is included in the summation in (12).

Note that this shows Case 2 implies Case 1.

3) Case 3: For the last case, assume the complement of the

union of Cases 1 and 2 for the set S. Denote the nc+1 columns by c1, c2, . . . , cnc+1 with c1 denoting the punctured column with index 1 in the original protomatrix. Consider a sub-matrix

P1 that has a non-zero permanent in (12). According to the
nazescsrHuo.mpPprioctidkounacstpfeorrmnj c=tuh1tiaPst1ioc(σans(eσj,∗),atnjhy)atinpheatrhsmisaustnauotbino--mnzeatrthroaixtprhhoaadssuσcat(1nw)oin>thP1. Replace each column j = 1 of this sub-matrix whose σ ∗( j ) > ncH by the column of PIR whose only non-zero element, 1, is in row σ ∗( j ) if the latter is already not indexed

in S. Call the new nc × nc sub-matrix P1. This sub-matrix has a positive permanent that is upper-bounded by the permanent of P1. Denote by Sˆ the index set of nc + 1 columns that lead
to the nc columns of P1 and the one column indexed in S and was not part of the sub-matrix P1. It follows that









perm PS\i ≥

perm PSˆ\i > 0. (13)

i∈S\P

i ∈ Sˆ \P

Now, if the column indexed in S that was not part of P1 is the column from PIR whose only non-zero element is in row σ ∗(1), then the proof is complete as Sˆ would then have the indices of all the columns of PIR. If this is not the case, then we can replace the index of the punctured column in Sˆ with the index of the column in PIR whose only non-zero element is in row σ ∗(1) to obtain a set Sˆ1 (without the index of the

punctured column) that satisfies




 




perm PSˆ\i ≥ perm PSˆ1\i > 0. (14)

i ∈ Sˆ \P

i ∈ Sˆ1

This is because of the assumption of complement of Case 2.
That is, for the set of columns indexed by S, the permanent
of the sub-matrix not containing the punctured column is assumed to be zero. This implies that for Sˆ the permanent
of the sub-matrix not containing the punctured column is still zero. Therefore, for Sˆ1 the permanent is zero for the sub-matrix not containing the column from PIR that has its only non-zero element in row σ ∗(1). Thus the proof is complete.
We note that in Example 7 the set S = {1, 2, 3, 4} belongs
to Case 1 of the proof. For the sub-matrix indexed by columns 1, 2, and 3, which has a non-zero permanent, there exists a σ ∗ with a non-zero product such that σ ∗(1) ≤ ncH = 2.

C. Protographs With More Than One Punctured Variable Node

We now consider PBRL protographs that have more than

one punctured variable node. We first provide an example that

shows that the assumptions in Theorem 8 adapted to more

than one punctured column are not sufficient to make the

replacement steps followed so far for a set S to provide a  set Sˆ with the indic
es  of all the columns of PIR such that
i∈S\P perm PS\i ≥ i∈Sˆ\P perm PSˆ\i > 0.
Example 9: Consider the following protomatrix with its

first two columns punctured (i.e. P = {1, 2}):

⎡

⎤

11555500

P

=

⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢101

1 1 0

5 5 0

5 5 0

5 5 0

5 5 1

0 0 1

000⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦

(15)

11000001






Let S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7}; i∈S\P perm PS\i = 900. The

column index from the incremental redundancy part that is

missing in S is 8. According to the replacement steps followed

in proofs so far, in order to replace one of the column indices in S to obtain Sˆ that contains both 7 and 8, either of columns

1 or 2 must be replaced as columns 3, 4, and 5 do not have a

non-zero integer in row 5. Since columns 1 and 2 are identical, assume without lossof generality that Sˆ = {1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8}. Now, i∈Sˆ\P perm PSˆ\i = 1200, which is larger than 900.

The following theorem provides one set of sufficient con-

ditions under which the replacement strategy used to prove

Theorems 6 and 8 is successful when a PBRL protograph has

more than one punctured variable node.

Theorem 10: Let a PBRL protomatrix P of size nc × nv have n p > 1 punctured variable nodes. Without loss of generality assume that P = 1, 2, . . . , n p . Assume that every
entry in the first ncH rows of all the punctured columns is nonzero (this is a stricter requirement than assumed in Theorem 8)

and that there exists at least one non-zero entry in the first

ncH rows of every one of the unpunctured columns in the first nvH columns of P. Also, assume that at most one punctured column has a non-zero integer entry in every row of IRC part.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

Furthermore, assume that the upper bound in (5) for P is a

positive with at


minotesgt er
.ncnTHvhH+e1n
,

the same

·

(nc

+ 


1)

upper bound permanents,

can be obtained each of size at

most ncH + 1 × ncH + 1 .

Proof: The proof is presented in Appendix.

Our replacement strategy throughout the proofs so far has

been of the following manner: If S does not contain the

index of the column in PIR with its only non-zero element in row , we seek columns (either punctured or unpunctured)

indexed in S that have a non-zero element in row  for

replacement. Example 9 has only two such columns, both

being punctured and identical. The example leads to the

conclusion that this replacement strategy is not sufficient to

show (if true) the complexity reduction that is possible if

the PBRL protomatrix has more than one punctured column

without the stricter conditions imposed in Theorem 10 when

compared to Theorem 8. In fact, we can confirm that by

considering only those sets that contain the indices of all the

columns in PIR we obtained the same upper bound for the protomatrix in Example 9 as the one obtained by considering

all possible sets of size nc + 1 = 6.

Based on other computational results we have obtained for

protomatrices with more than one punctured column, it is our

conjecture that the complexity reduction achieved so far in

Theorems 6 and 8 holds true for the case when the protomatrix

has more than one punctured column without having to impose

stricter conditions than Theorem 8.

Note that the first assumption of Theorem 10 that every

entry in the first ncH rows of all the punctured columns is nonzero is problematic for a code obtained from the HRC part.

This is because such a code will never be able to pass useful

information from any check node to any variable node during

any iteration of the decoding process. In other words, the log-

likelihood ratio values from all the check nodes to all the

variable nodes will always be equal to zero. Therefore, PBRL

codes satisfying this assumption are useless at the highest rate,

but can be used as a code that corrects errors at lower rates

provided that there is at least one check node that is connected

to at most one punctured variable node.

D. Further Reduction in Complexity of the Design Procedure
In Sections IV-A, IV-B, and IV-C we showed how the upper bounds of (4) and (5) for a PBRL protomatrix can be computed efficiently by only considering sets S that always contain the indices of all the columns of PIR. These results yield a reduction in complexity of the design procedure while adding a new row to a PBRL protomatrix by reducing the amount and the complexity of computations required to obtain the upper bound for any candidate row under consideration. It turns out that the complexity of the overall design procedure can be further reduced the following way: Computations used in the design of a particular row of the IRC part can be reused while computing the upper bound for candidates considered in the design of the next row.
Consider a PBRL protomatrix P of size nc × nv. Let P ∅ if P has no punctured columns. Let nc nc − 1 and nv nv − 1. If nc > ncH , let P denote the sub-matrix of the

first nc rows and nv columns of P. P is a PBRL protomatrix

by itself. For any set S ⊆ [nv] with |S| = nc + 1 let







sum P , S

perm PS\i .

(16)

i∈S\P

Lemma 11: Let P be a PBRL protomatrix of size nc > ncH

and nv > nvH . Let S ⊆ [nv], |S| = nc + 1, and S contain the

indices of all the columns in PIR of P. Let S = S \ nv. Then,




sumP,S = sumP ,S + perm PS\nv .

(17)

Proof: As PS (i1, nc + 1) = 0 for all i1 = nc and

PS (i1,nc+ 1) = 1 when i1 = nc and PS (i1, i2) = PS (i1, i2), ∀i1 ∈ nc , i2 ∈ [nc], expanding the permanent of PS\i when i = nv, i ∈ S \ P along ncth column of the sub-matrix PS\i

yields






perm PS\i = 1 · perm PS \i .

Furthermore when
 S contains the indices of all the columns of PIR,perm PS\nv depends only on elements P(i, j ) such that i ∈ ncH or i = nc and j ∈ S \ nvH + 1, nvH + 2, . . . , nv .

Lemma 12: Let P be a PBRL protomatrix with nc > ncH

and nv > nvH . Assume that P satisfies the assumptions of

Theorem 6 if n p = 0, satisfies the assumptions of Theorem 8

if n p = 1, and satisfies the assumptions of Theorem 10 if n p >

1. Let sumP,S be as defined in Lemma 11. If we know the

values of sumP ,S for every S ⊆ nv such that |S | = nc and

nvH + can be

1, nvH + 2, . . . computed with

, nv ⊆ exactly

S ,ntvhHen

ncH +1

the upper bound for P additional permanents

b eyond w
hathas alrea
dy been computed for P , each of size

ncH + 1 × ncH + 1 .

Proof: Due to Theorems 6, 8, and 10 and Lemma 11.

Remark 13: The result of Lemma 12 implies the fol-

lowing for the design procedure: We can reuse the values

of sumP ,S for all S such that |S | = nc for which nvH + 1, nvH + 2, . . . , nv ⊆ S and compute only one additional permanent from columns in P for each set S = S ∪{nv}

in order to obtain the upper bound fo
r protomatrix P. The

value of this permanent perm PS\nv depends upon only

the

entries

in

the

first

ncH

rows

and

n

th c

row

of

P

and

the

ncH + 1 columns indexed in S from the first nvH columns

of P. Denote by γ a candidate vector of length nvH to be

considered in the design of any row of the IRC part, PIRC.

Denote by Pt the matrix formed by appending γ as row

nnPect Hefdo+rtos1ucctohomaPpcHuatRnedCi.dnaTcnHtvheH+eγ1
raenpsudelrttmhoeafnreeLsneutsmltsomuoatf

12 means that we of sub-matrices of these computations

can be used during the design of any row of PIRC if γ is a

candidate for that row. Therefore, the number of permanents to

be computed for the design of PIRC depends upon the number of candidates considered in the overall design procedure and

not on the number of rows to be designed. The complexity of

computing each permanent for any such candidate is exactly

the comp
lexity of com
puting the permanent of a matrix of size ncH + 1 × ncH + 1 .
Summary of Algorithm to Implement the Simplified Design

Procedure: We now summarize the overall, simplified design

procedure to obtain a PBRL protomatrix of size nc × nv

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3767

in Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1 presents the overall procedure

for finding a PBRL protomatrix that maximizes (4) or (5)

for each rate. It can be used to design a PBRL protomatrix

whenever the conditions of either Theorem 6, 8, or 10 are

satisfied in the PBRL design. The algorithm is presented in

a way that the input is the HRC part and the output is the

obtained PBRL protomatrix P. It can be modified and re-

written as a recursive program that takes as its input a PBRL

cporomtopmutaetsrixncnaHvnH+d1
repteurrmnsanoennltys

one new row. of size ncH +

T
he 1×

algorithm
 ncH + 1

exactly once for every candidate under consideration. This

tioshfedsaoilzngeeorinintchHlmin×ceosnm1cHp1uttthehrsaotautgamhreo1sc7tanondfcnHivdAH+al1tge
orinintchdHmep+e1n1.d
Fepunertrthmaenardnmeoanrrtees permanents required to compute the upper bound for the initial

HRC matrix PHRC. This is done in lines 19 through 27 of the algorithm that is presented. Lines 29 through 48 obtain the

optimal candidate row at each design rate by using simple

vector additions and by reusing the permanent computations

of lines 11 through 17 and lines 19 through 27.

The following are some of the variable identifiers introduced

in Algorithm 1: Assume that the candidates for each row of

PIRC are sets ofvectors oflength nvH . Let the set of candidates for row i ∈ nc − ncH of PIRC be denoted Ci and let ctChaan=tdsi∪tdoairCteesi (.tthFheeorlreleoqawureiinr,egidnRtneocnmtHavHal+,r1k|
C1p|3ecr,amlneadtniSdeanuttmess,M)r.oaLwtre-itwxPibsueen,caftoPmraeattatercrihxn

be a vector of length nvH that specifies whether a variable node among the first nvH is punctured or transmitted, with 0 indicating that the variable node is punctured. Other variable

identifiers introduced in the algorithm are self-explanatory.

We note that the computational complexity of Algorithm 1 is

extremely low when compared to the threshold-based PBRL

design approach of [25]. This is because it usually requires

more than 500 iterations of message passing and real-valued

function computations in order to compute the threshold of

a given PBRL protomatrix using the RCA approach [25].

Moreover, one cannot reuse computations performed during a

run of the RCA algorithm at a higher rate to find the optimal

row for the next lower rate.

V. UPPER BOUND ON THE OPTIMAL VALUE OF THE EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH FOR A ROW OF IRC PART

In Section IV we showed how the overall design procedure

is simplified because of the presence of the identity matrix

structure in the columns of PIR in a PBRL protomatrix.

In particular, we presented Algorithm 1 that performs the fol-

lowing for a given HRC matrix (assuming that the conditions

of either of Theorems design process): First,


6, 8, or compute



10 an

arnev
ncH

sa
tisfied during

H
+
 1

-length

vector

the of

permanents of size ncH + 1 × ncH + 1 for each candidate.

Then, during the design of any row add the vector of perma-

nents corresponding to the candidate under consideration to

a pre-computed vector of the same length obtained from the

design of the previous row of the protomatrix. The minimum

value across this new resultant vector is the upper bound

Algorithm 1 Permanent-Bound-Based PBRL Design

1: Function perm in the following, which computes the

permanent of a square matrix, can be implemented using

Ryser’s algorithm [34]

2: Inputs, Output: The main function Pbdesign of the algorithm takes as inputs PHRC, nc, and Ci , i ∈ nc − ncH and returns protomatrix P as the output

3: 4:

funRcetitounrnMa AmTaRtrIiXxOoUfTsi=zeEnab
u×mebractoen(taa,inbi)ng

all

b

combi-

nations (without repetition) of [a]

5: end function







6: function P = Pbdesign(PHRC, nc, Ci , i ∈ nc − ncH ,

PunctPattern)

7: C ← ∪i Ci

8: Assign an index 1 ≤ i ≤ |C| to each γ in C


9: 10: 11:

Combinations ← Enumerate nv SumMatrix ← ZeroMatrix |C|,
for i ← 1 : |C| do

H

, ncH
nvH


+

ncH +1

1

12: 13:
14:

Pt ← for j
S

← ←app1reo:nwdnjγcnHivoH+af1sC
nodemowbirnoawtiotonsPH
RC

15:

SumMatrix(i, j ) ← perm PtS

16:

end for

17: 18:
19: 20:

end for



OptimalVector ← ZeroMatrix 1,

for i S

← ←

1

:

 nvH 

ncH +1

do

row i of Combinations

 nvH 

ncH +1

21:

for j ← 1 : ncH + 1 do

22:

if PunctPattern(S( j )) == 0 then

23:

Continue

24:

end if

25:

 OptimalVector(i ) ← OptimalVector(i ) +

perm PHRCS\S( j)

26:

end for

27: end for

28: P ← PHRC

29: for i ← 1 : nc − ncH do

30:

UBOptimal ← 0

31:

for j ← 1 : |C| do

32:

if γ j ∈/ Ci then

33:

Continue

34:

end if

35:

TempVector ← OptimalVector + row j of

SumMatrix

36:

if UBOptimal == 0 then

37:

UBOptimal ← min(TempVector)

38:

OptimalCandidate ← γ j

39:

OptimalCandidateSums ← TempVector

40:

else if UBOptimal < min(TempVector) then

41:

UBOptimal ← min(TempVector)

42:

OptimalCandidate ← γ j

43:

OptimalCandidateSums ← TempVector

44:

end if

45:

end for

46:

OptimalVector ← OptimalCandidateSums

47:

P ← append OptimalCandidate as new row to P

48: end for

49: P ← append 0 and I matrices to P

50: Return P

51: end function

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

on minimum distance for the protomatrix with the candidate under consideration as the new row.
In this section, we show that the problem of selecting an optimal candidate for a row of a PBRL protomatrix can be cast as an integer linear program (ILP) whenever the assumptions of either of Theorems 6, 8, or 10 are satisfied. Apart from being an interesting equivalent view of the design process, the ILPs let us obtain bounds on the optimal value of the minimum distance upper bound that can be obtained by choosing the best possible candidate from a feasible set of candidates for a new row. This equivalent formulation of the exhaustive search to find an optimal row also shows that the search, in general, is a computationally complex problem.

A. Linear Programming (LP) Upper Bound

For a PBRL protomatrix P of size nc × nv, assume the
definitions of nc, nv, sumP,S, and P as previously stated in Section IV-D.

Let x be a vector of length nvH that denotes the new PIRC

rrtpheoosawsutslibtcbseolienontfgaSiSdn. eesLcsitetgihtonenAedInbVfcneoH-vDrH+aa,1m
lPeaBvttaRrbliuxLbeospefrooastfiovzmseeucatmtonrcrinPHxvoH+,PSf1
.,leF×ononglnetlhov HwfoinrwncngHehv Ha+otchs1hee


rows with nvH

comprise the following: For the

Si corresponding + 1, nvH + 2, . . . ,

to bi = nv . That

sum is, S¯i

set
P ,Si

,

Si = let S¯i

Si ∪ =

contains the ncH

{nv} Si \
+1

indices in Si that are chosen, without repetition, from indices

1, 2, . . . , nvH . Now, entry A(i, j ) is defined as





A(i, j )

perm PHRCS¯i \ j , j ∈ S¯i ,

(18)

0,

j ∈/ S¯i ,

where the permanents computed here are of size ncH × ncH . With a candidate vector x as the new row, the minimum
distance upper bound, assuming that either of Theorems 6, 8, or 10 holds for the design process, can thus be computed as

min Ax + b,

(19)

where the minimum is over the elements of the vector Ax + b. The exhaustive search over all feasible vectors x can now be represented as

max min Ax + b,
x

s.t. x a feasible vector.

(20)

Upon choosing an optimal vector x∗ from the feasible set,
the new b vector for the design of the next row is obtained as b ← Ax∗ + b; matrix A remains unchanged.
The search can now be equivalently re-written as

− min β,

s.t. − (Ax + b) ≤ β · 1,

x a feasible vector,

(21)

where β is a real scalar and 1 is a vector of all ones of appropriate size.

The constraints that define the feasible set of x determine whether exhaustive search (21) is a convex optimization problem or not. In order for the search process (21) to be exact, we require that the design process satisfy the conditions of either of Theorems 6, 8, or 10 according to the presence of n p = 0, n p = 1, or n p > 1 punctured variable nodes, respectively. Theorems 6 and 8 impose constraints only on the HRC part of the PBRL protomatrix, whereas Theorem 10 contains assumptions about the candidates that can be chosen for each row of the IRC part. For simplicity, we deal only with the former two cases in the following.
Theorems 6 and 8 do not implicitly assume constraints about x, but we can impose reasonable constraints that suit the design for PBRL families that support short block-lengths. In particular, as we will further see in design examples of Section VI, we can impose constraints such as the following:


 nvH

wmin ≤ xi ≤ wmax,

(22)

i =1

wi,min ≤ xi ≤ wi,max , 1 ≤ i ≤ nvH ,

(23)

xi ∈ Z, 1 ≤ i ≤ nvH ,

(24)

where the constraint that xi take on integer values is necessary for the design process and prevents (21) from being a convex optimization problem by forcing the feasible set to be nonconvex. The above constraints are only a representative of the types of linear inequality constraints that can be imposed. These constraints turn search process (21) into the following integer linear program (ILP):

− min β,

s.t. − (Ax + b) ≤ β · 1,

Cx ≤ d,

xi ∈ Z, 1 ≤ i ≤ nvH ,

(25)

where C is a matrix and d is a vector that we have introduced to represent the linear constraints on x. Relaxing the integer constraint on values of xi now would lead to a (convex) linear program whose optimal value, which can be computed efficiently, provides an upper bound on the optimal value of the optimization problem in (25). In Section VI, we present numerical examples of computation of the optimal values of the LP relaxation alongside numerical results obtained through the design process of Algorithm 1.

VI. NUMERICAL DESIGN EXAMPLES

In this section we design PBRL protomatrices according to

the new design method we have proposed. We assume the

following HRC matrix for designs in this section:





PHRC,1 =

2 1

1 2

2 1

1 2

2 1

1 2

2 1

1 2

(26)

We consider both a punctured and an unpunctured version of PHRC,1 in our examples. The punctured version has the first variable node punctured. Hence the design rate we start with is either 6/8 (unpunctured) or 6/7 (punctured).
The HRC matrix in (26) has a minimum distance upper
bound of 12 when none of its variable nodes are punctured

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3769

and an upper bound of 8 when its first column is punctured. One can verify via Lemma 5, therefore, that any unpunctured or punctured PBRL protomatrix that can be obtained from PHRC,1 will satisfy the conditions of Theorems 6 or 8, respectively. Hence, Lemma 12 applies in this case and we can use Algorithm 1 to design PBRL protomatrices using PHRC,1 when at most one of its columns is punctured.
Remark 14 (Design Constraints): We constrain the last nc − ncH rows of the protomatrix to have a weight of exactly 4 and do not allow any non-zero integer other than 1. These constraints facilitate good performance at short block-lengths because limiting both the density and the number of multiple edges in the protograph helps the resulting LDPC codes have good girth upon lifting and avoid having too many short cycles. Explicit constraints are necessary because increasing the value of any element in any position of a protomatrix with a finite permanent bound of (4) or (5) either results in an increase in the bound or the bound stays the same. In other words, the problem of selecting an optimal row is trivial without such constraints.
Remark 15: Our design method, which maximizes an upper bound on code minimum distance, does not depend upon the channel over which we use the codes. For designing codes for comparison according to the original PBRL design method that involves computing iterative decoding thresholds, we assume the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel (BIAWGNC). The threshold values computed in this work are the result of at least 1000 iterations of the reciprocal channel approximation (RCA) method (See [25]).
1) Unpunctured Design: We design two unpunctured ensembles using the HRC matrix given in (26) with the design constraints in Remark 14. The design rates we consider decrease from 6/8 to 6/15. The first ensemble, P1, is obtained using the new permanent bound design (PBD) method proposed in this paper. For comparison, the second ensemble, P2, is designed by optimizing the iterative decoding thresholds (referred to as “threshold-based” in results) over BI-AWGNC. The IRC parts of P1 and P2 that we obtained are:

⎡

⎤

⎡

⎤

11100000

11100000

P1,IRC = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢01101

0 0 1 0 0

0 0 1 0 1

1 0 1 0 0

1 0 0 1 0

1 0 0 1 0

0 1 0 0 0

00011⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥

P2,IRC = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢00111

0 0 0 0 0

0 0 1 0 1

1 0 0 1 0

1 0 1 1 0

1 0 0 0 1

0 1 1 0 0

00100⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦

(27)

01010010

10100010

ensembles ⎡

are

called

P3

(PBD) ⎤

and

P⎡4

(threshold-based): ⎤

11100000

10101000

P3,IRC = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢111111

0 0 0 1 0 0

0 0 1 0 0 0

1 0 0 1 0 0

0 1 0 0 1 1

0 0 1 0 1 0

1 0 0 0 0 0

010010⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥, P4,IRC = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢111111

0 1 0 0 0 0

1 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 1 0 0 1

0 1 0 1 0 1

0 0 0 1 0 0

1 0 1 0 1 0

000001⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

(28)

11001000

11000010

3) Unconstrained Design via Original PBRL Design

Method: For further comparison, we design an ensemble,

called P5, using the same HRC matrix with its first variable

node punctured according to the original PBRL design method.

The design rates decrease from 6/7 to 6/15. For this ensemble

we only have the following restriction in the IRC part: We do

not permit any integer greater than 1. The design yielded the

following IRC part (note that some rows of PIRC have a weight

larger than 3):

⎡

⎤

10101000

P5,IRC

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢111111

0 1 1 1 0 1

1 1 1 1 1 1

0 0 0 0 1 0

1 1 1 1 1 1

0 0 0 0 0 0

1 1 1 1 0 1

000000⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

(29)

10110000

We now compare the five ensembles Pi , i ∈ [5], according to two design metrics. Fig. 2 shows the upper bound on the minimum distance obtained at each design rate for the five ensembles. P1, the unpunctured, constrained ensemble obtained via the new PBD method, has the best upper bound at almost every design rate. At the other end of the spectrum, P5, the unconstrained, punctured ensemble designed to optimize the threshold at each rate, has the smallest upper bounds.
The iterative decoding thresholds at each design rate (over BI-AWGNC) for all five ensembles are shown in Fig. 3. As expected, ensemble P5 has the best threshold at each design rate. But surprisingly, both the unpunctured and punctured constrained ensembles obtained via the new PBD method, P1 and P3, have almost the same threshold at each design rate as their counterpart ensembles P2 and P4, which were obtained by optimizing the iterative decoding threshold at each design rate. While this appears to be the case for the examples in this section, the examples of Section VII-C show that such a property is not obtained always.

2) Punctured Design: Similarly, we design two punctured ensembles using the HRC matrix in (26) via the design constraints in Remark 14. The first variable node is punctured,1 and the design rates decrease from 6/7 to 6/15. The resulting
1A punctured variable node improves the iterative decoding threshold (See [9], [25]). Also, following the observations of [25] we constrain every row of PIRC to connect to the punctured variable node in all of our punctured designs in this section.

A. Comparison of LP Upper Bound and Optimal Values of Minimum Distance Upper Bound at Each Design Rate
We provide here an example of evaluating the relaxed version of the ILP in (25). This leads to an important conclusion regarding the optimality of the relaxed problem. For the punctured design P3,IRC with HRC part (26) and its first column punctured, the matrix A is of size 56 × 8 and the vector b is of size 56 × 1. The design constraints introduced in Remark 14 and the requirement that the punctured variable node have a connection to every row of the IRC part lead to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

Fig. 4. Comparison of optimal values of the upper bound from the design procedure that yielded P3,IRC and from the LP relaxations of (25).

Fig. 2. Comparison of minimum distance upper bounds of ensembles Pi , i ∈ [5], obtained from HRC matrix PHRC,1 in (26).

That is, we compute the upper bound for the current design rate using the LP relaxation and update b for the next design rate using as x ∗ the optimal vector obtained in P3,IRC at the current design rate.
The results of the two upper bounds on the optimal value of the permanent bound obtained using the LP relaxations and the actual optimal value at each design rate obtained through the design of P3,IRC are shown in Fig. 4. A significant result of our experiment is that we observed that the x∗ that we obtained while solving the LP relaxation contained non-integer values for most design rates and while computing both the upper bounds. This shows that the ILP, in general, does not possess a problem structure that would lead to the conclusion that the LP relaxation is an exact formulation of the ILP. Nonetheless, the complexity reduction identified in this paper allows Algorithm 1 to operate efficiently for most PBRL designs even though the algorithm is an exhaustive search.

Fig. 3. Iterative decoding thresholds over BI-AWGNC for ensembles Pi , i ∈ [5], obtained from HRC matrix PHRC,1.
the following linear inequality constraints for the ILP in (25) to design every row:

8 xi ≤ 3, 0 ≤ xi ≤ 1, 1 ≤ i ≤ 8, x1 = 1 (30)
i =1
We solve the relaxed version of the ILP by removing the integer constraint xi ∈ Z of (25). For every design rate we obtain two upper bounds by solving the LP relaxation, with the two upper bounds differing in how vector b is updated. The first set of upper bounds, called UB1, at rates 6/8 through 6/15 is obtained by continuously updating b as Ax∗ + b, where x∗ is the optimal vector as obtained by solving the LP relaxation at each step. Note that the x∗ that is provided by the relaxation can have non-integer values at some positions. For example, the vector x∗ for the LP relaxation at design rate 6/8 is
[1, 0.2353, 0.3529, 0.2353, 0.3529, 0.2353, 0.3529, 0.2353].
The second set of upper bounds, called UB2, is obtained by updating b with the x∗ provided by the actual design process.

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this section, Section VII-A presents simulation results of

carefully designed RC code families from the five protograph

families Pi , i ∈ [5], obtained from PHRC,1 in Section VI.

Further, we also present similar results in Section VII-C for

three ensembles that we designed using another HRC matrix

that we call PHRC,2:





PHRC,2 =

3 1

1 3

3 1

1 3

2 1

1 2

2 1

1 2

(31)

PHRC,2 is irregular in its degree distribution, whereas PHRC,1 (in (26)) is regular.
Remark 16 (Lifting and Simulation Parameters): Codes simulated in this section are all quasi-cyclic. Lifting was performed for the protomatrix of the lowest rate 6/15 using the circulant-PEG (C-PEG) algorithm combined with the ACE algorithm of Tian et al. [27]. The ACE algorithm guarantees that all cycles of length up to 2dACE have an approximate cycle extrinsic degree (ACE) value of at least ηACE (see [27] for ACE). The lifting algorithm that produced the codes in this paper was constrained to satisfy a target girth of at least 6 and a target (2dACE, ηACE) pair value that is as high as possible for a given protomatrix. The lifting factor used is 33, which resulted in k = 198 information bits for all code families. Simulation results shown were obtained using a maximum of 100 iterations of full-precision, flooding, LLR-domain belief propagation over BI-AWGNC. At least

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3771

Fig. 5. Comparison of FER performance of codes obtained from ensembles Fig. 6. Comparison of FER performance of codes obtained from ensembles

Pi , i ∈ [5], at rates 6/15 and 6/9.

Pi , i ∈ [5], at rates 6/14 and 6/10.

100 errors were collected for each frame error rate (FER) point in any simulated Eb/N0 vs. FER graph.
A. Frame Error Rates of QC Code Families From Pi , i ∈ [5]
First, we note that the (2dACE, ηACE) values that we obtained during lifting of the lowest-rate protographs Pi , i ∈ [5], are as follows: P1 : (16, 10), P2 : (16, 8), P3 : (16, 9), P4 : (16, 8), P5 : (16, 4). The target cycle length 2dACE was set to 16 in all cases, which is sufficiently large that the impact of the ACE values on low-FER performance is dominated by the guaranteed extrinsic message degree ηACE. The best ACE values were achieved by the new PBD designs P1 with ηACE = 10 and P3 with ηACE = 9. The constrained, thresholdbased PBRL designs had the next best ACE values with ηACE = 8, and the smallest ACE value was achieved by the unconstrained, threshold-based design of P5 with ηACE = 4.
The FER performance of the QC PBRL code families obtained from these ensembles are shown in Figs. 5 and 6. Note that the low-FER performance for the lowest rate (rate 6/15) codes is consistent with the ACE ordering described in the previous paragraph. The QC-LDPC code family obtained from constrained, punctured, PBD ensemble P3 outperforms all the other code families at FERs 10−4, 10−5, and 10−6 and at all rates (including at rates 6/11, 6/12, and 6/13, which are omitted from the figures to avoid clutter). This ensemble has the advantages of a good, if not the best, threshold due to the punctured variable node (See Fig. 3.) and a good upper bound on the minimum distance at all rates (See Fig. 2). P1, which has the best ACE value at rate 6/15, performs better than P3 at even lower FERs at rate 6/15.
The QC PBRL code family from the constrained, unpunctured, PBD ensemble P1, which has the best minimum distance upper bound at all but two rates, performs well at lower rates but not at higher rates. For example, at a higher rate of 6/10, the code from P1 has an FER performance curve that is above the codes from P3, P4, and P5. At this rate, the minimum distance upper bound of P1 becomes closer to

that of the other ensembles (See Fig. 2.) and performance is affected by the fact that P1 possesses a threshold that is not competitive enough (See Fig. 3.) to deliver a waterfall curve that is competitive against the punctured ensembles. However, the slope of the FER curve of the rate-6/10 code from P1 at low FERs, as shown in Fig. 6, is suggestive of a performance that is better than that of the threshold-based ensembles P2, P4, and P5 at lower FERs.
The ensembles with the three best thresholds across all rates are P3, P4, and P5, which are all punctured. Of the three, the code family obtained from P3 resulted from the new design method. It can be seen from the results in Figs. 5 and 6 that, even though P5 has the best threshold across all design rates (See Fig. 3.) the codes from the P5 ensemble have a frame error rate slope that is not competitive when compared to P3. Code family P4 is also not competitive with respect to P3 at low FERs despite both ensembles having virtually the same set of thresholds across all design rates. Here we see the benefit of having a better permanent bound when thresholds are similar.
The gap to BI-AWGNC capacity at an FER of 10−6 is shown in Fig. 7. The QC PBRL code family of ensemble P3 achieves the best performance at all design rates. The performance of this code family is about 1.5 dB away at all rates from the refined normal approximation of [35]. The figure shows that this code family is the only one of the five to have a constant gap to BI-AWGNC capacity at all the design rates.
Recall from Fig. 3 that the newly designed PBRL protomatrices P1 and P3 have more or less the same threshold as the threshold-based PBRL protomatrices P2 and P4, respectively. Thus, both designs could have been equally chosen if threshold were the design metric. However, looking at Fig. 2, we see that for lower rates P1 has a better permanent bound than P2, and that P3 has a better permanent bound than P4. Looking at Fig. 7 we see that the PBD method did a better job of identifying rate-compatible ensembles that produce QC code families with improved low-FER performance at short blocklengths.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

Fig. 8. Comparison of frequency of convergence to incorrect codewords of the rate-6/12 code from ensembles P3, P4, and P5 at an Eb/N0 of 3.5dB.

Fig. 7. Comparison of gap to BI-AWGNC capacity at a frame error rate (FER) of 10−6 and information block size of k = 198 for QC codes from the ensembles Pi , i ∈ [5], and the refined normal approximation of [35].

B. Empirical Codeword Weight and Non-Convergence Spectra
In order to better understand the performance gains we obtain through the PBD method, we analyzed the empirical codeword weight spectrum and the non-convergence set spectrum of the codes we constructed. An undetectable error in the iterative decoding process occurs when the decoder converges to an incorrect codeword. A detectable error occurs when the decoder does not converge to any codeword within the given maximum number of iterations. For every simulation instance, iterative decoding terminates with one of three outcomes: the decoder converges to the correct codeword (no error), or the decoder does not converge (detectable error), or the decoder converges to an incorrect codeword (undetectable error).
In case the decoder converges to an undetectable error, we make note of the weight of the incorrect codeword to which the decoder converged. The empirical frequencies with which the decoder incorrectly converges to the possible (codeword) weights is the empirical codeword weight spectrum.
A detectable error usually occurs due to non-codewords in an LDPC code such as stopping sets, trapping sets, etc. It is a difficult problem to enumerate or identify all non-codewords, but we capture the essence of these graphical objects through what we call the empirical non-convergence set spectrum. For each simulation instance, we track the weight of the smallest set of variable nodes that fail to converge to their correct values and report this weight for simulations that culminated in non-convergence. We call the smallest such non-empty set in every simulation instance the non-convergence set. In case a detectable error occurs, it means that the decoder has operated over its maximum number of iterations and at the end of every iteration the decoder encountered some variable nodes that are in error. The empirical frequencies with which the decoder “gets stuck” in non-convergence sets of various weights is the empirical non-convergence set spectrum.
Figs. 8 and 9 depict the empirical codeword weight spectrum and non-convergence set spectrum for the rate-6/12 code obtained from the punctured ensembles P3, P4, and P5 at an

Fig. 9. Comparison of frequency of occurrence of non-convergence sets that lead to non-convergence for the rate-6/12 code from ensembles P3, P4, and P5 at an Eb/N0 of 3.5dB.
TABLE I MINIMUM DISTANCE UPPER BOUNDS (IN PARENTHESIS) AND EMPIRICAL
SMALLEST CODEWORD WEIGHTS OBTAINED FROM SIMULATIONS OF CODE FAMILIES FROM Pi , i ∈ [5], AT FIVE DESIGN RATES
Eb/N0 of 3.5dB. It is seen from these figures that the code from ensemble P3 possesses the most favorable spectra of the three in terms of the graphical structures that dictate low-FER performance. P3 was obtained using the PBD method, which maximizes an upper bound on the minimum distance.
Note that the permanent bound is an upper bound on the distance, and the actual minimum distance of the code will often be below this bound. Table I shows the minimum distance upper bounds (in parenthesis) along with the empirical smallest codeword weights obtained from simulation for the five code families at five design rates.
Any upper bound on the minimum distance is also an upper bound on the size of the smallest stopping set of the code and more generally on the smallest size of other nonconvergence sets. This is a critical relationship at short blocklengths because the more small stopping sets (and other such objects) there are in a code, the more often the decoder gets stuck in configurations that lead to detectable errors. The point of the new code design method for short block-lengths is not that the designed codes will have the permanent bound as their distance. The goal is merely that by seeking to maximize

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3773

this bound we achieve a better codeword weight spectrum and better non-convergence set spectrum than would be obtained by focusing only on threshold as a design metric.
Remark 17: Note that PBRL ensembles P1 and P2 have exactly the same permanent bound for rates 6/8, 6/9, 6/10, and 6/11 in Fig. 2. However, comparing the FER performance for the codes from these two ensembles at rates 6/9 and 6/10 in Figs. 5 and 6, respectively, we see that the codes from P1 perform better than those from P2. To understand this difference, recall that the permanent bound that we compute is based entirely on the protograph and that two codes with the same upper bound, and indeed even the same protograph, can have different actual minimum distances and more generally different codeword weight spectra and non-convergence set spectra.
In the case of P1 and P2 in particular, we note that these two codes do share the same protograph for all rates greater than or equal to 6/11. However, P1 and P2 do not yield identical codes for these rates because they were lifted differently. Our code design approach only lifts the lowest-rate code, which implies the lifting of all higher rates. To investigate this further, we ran a simulation to determine the empirical minimum distance for these rate-6/10 codes and found that both codes had an empirical minimum distance of 11 but that the code from P1 had a superior non-convergence set spectrum. In this case, the difference in performance between P1 and P2 cannot be attributed to the protograph, but rather to a better lifting. It is possible that a better lifting was facilitated by P1’s superior permanent bound at the lowest rate.
While the above remark shows that two codes can have the same permanent bound (and even the same protograph) but different performance after lifting, we emphasize that our experiments have shown that when two codes have different permanent bounds, the code with the superior permanent bound, provided its threshold is competitive, has displayed a better low-FER performance.

C. Simulation Results for Ensembles Obtained Using PHRC,2

We first provide a brief overview of the ensembles obtained

using PHRC,2 (in (31)). For any ensemble that has a property of “constrained”, we follow the same constraint we imposed

while designing ensembles using PHRC,1 in Section VI. That is, we constrain the last nc − ncH rows of the protomatrix to have a weight of exactly 4 and do not allow any non-zero

integer other than 1 in these rows. Similarly, an ensemble

that is “punctured” has its first column punctured and PIRC is connected to the punctured column in every row.

The following are the IRC parts of the punctured and

constrained ensembles obtained using PHRC,2, where P6 is

based on PBD method and P7 is threshold-based:

⎡

⎤

⎡

⎤

10001100

11010000

P6,IRC = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢111111

0 1 0 0 0 0

0 1 0 0 0 0

0 0 1 0 1 0

0 0 0 1 0 0

0 0 0 1 0 1

1 0 0 0 1 1

011000⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥,

P7,IRC = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢111111

1 0 0 0 0 0

1 1 0 0 1 1

0 1 0 0 0 0

0 0 1 1 0 0

0 0 0 0 1 0

0 0 1 1 0 0

001000⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ (32)

10001001

11010000

Fig. 10. Comparison of minimum distance upper bounds of ensembles Pi , 6 ≤ i ≤ 10, obtained from HRC matrix PHRC,2 in (31).

The following is the IRC part of the threshold-based, punc-

tured,

and

unconstrained

ensemble ⎡

P8:

⎤

10100000

P8,IRC

=

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢111111

1 1 1 1 1 1

1 1 1 1 1 1

1 1 1 1 1 1

0 1 1 1 0 1

0 0 0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0 1 0

000000⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

(33)

10100010

The following are the IRC parts of the unpunctured and

constrained ensembles obtained using PHRC,2, where P9 is

based

on PBD ⎡

method

and ⎤

P10

is

threshold-based: ⎡

⎤

10001100

11100000

P9,IRC =⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢10000

1 0 0 1 0

0 1 0 1 0

0 1 0 0 1

0 1 0 0 1

0 0 1 0 1

1 0 1 0 0

01100⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥, P10,IRC

=⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢01011

0 0 1 1 0

0 1 0 1 0

1 1 0 1 1

1 0 0 0 0

0 0 1 0 0

0 1 0 0 0

00001⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

(34)

00010011

01010100

Figs. 10 and 11 depict the minimum distance upper bounds and the iterative decoding thresholds of the corresponding ensembles. Unlike the results in Fig. 3, the constrained ensembles designed using the PBD method (P6 and P9) do not have thresholds similar to their threshold-based counterparts (resp. P7 and P10). In fact, the threshold difference, which is around 0.14dB across the range of design rates, is generally considered to be quite significant when comparing two codes designed for the BI-AWGNC.
We now present simulation results from the punctured ensembles P6, P7, and P8 to demonstrate the effectiveness of the PBD method for low FER requirements. Although the threshold differences in Fig. 11 are not promising, the simulated gap-to-capacity results in Fig. 12 show that PBD ensemble P6 is the best-performing punctured ensemble considering all design rates, albeit with a worse, but negligible,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

Fig. 11. Iterative decoding thresholds over BI-AWGNC for ensembles Pi , 6 ≤ i ≤ 10, obtained from HRC matrix PHRC,2.

Fig. 13. Comparison of FER and undetected error rate performance at rate 6/15 of QC-LDPC codes from ensembles P6, P7, and P8.
permanent bound identifies a better protomatrix when it comes to factors that affect low-FER performance at short blocklengths. Of course, designs that include both threshold and the permanent bound have the potential to be even more effective in those cases where the threshold difference is significant, but our initial results found that looking at the permanent bound alone can be sufficient for short block-lengths.

Fig. 12. Comparison of gap to BI-AWGNC capacity at a frame error rate (FER) of 10−6 and information block size of k = 198 for RC families from ensembles P6, P7, and P8 and the refined normal approximation of [35].
performance at the lowest design rates when compared to ensemble P7. Across results from both Section VII-A and the current section, we observe that QC-LDPC code families designed using the PBD method possess the best slope in FER curves at the lowest FERs. Fig. 13 shows this to be true in the case of ensembles P6, P7, and P8 at rate 6/15. The figure also shows that the rate-6/15 code obtained from ensemble P6 possesses the best empirical smallest codeword weight. This comparison suggests that designing thresholdbased PBRL codes with the heuristic of constraining the row weights of PIRC is a competitive alternative way to design short block-length PBRL codes for low FER requirements. We note that this specific constraint was not considered in the original work on PBRL codes [25], although Chen et al. [25] explored similar constraints involving individual edge weights. Overall, this comparison also validates our premise that the

D. Comparison Against the Short Block-Length PBRL Codes in the 5G Standard

In order to show the effectiveness of our new design method

for short block-length applications, we consider the short

block-length PBRL codes for k = 192 information bits as

specified in the 5G standard [36]. The HRC matrix for this

family of RC-LDPC codes is

⎡

⎤

1111001100

⎢⎣⎢11

0 1

0 0

1 1

1 1

1 0

0 1

1 0

1 1

01⎥⎦⎥ ,

(35)

0110111001

where the first two variable nodes are punctured and the highest design rate is 6/8.
As the first two variable nodes are punctured, we used the full-complexity search procedure for the best set of rows based on the minimum distance upper bound until rate 6/15. Our design constrained each added row to the PBRL protomatrix to have exactly the same weight as the corresponding row of the PBRL protomatrix provided in the standard specification [36]. Further, as for the connections between the punctured variable nodes and PIRC, we retained the same connections as used in the standard. We then used our CPEGACE lifting algorithm to obtain a new set of k = 192 bits, QC PBRL codes with the same block-lengths as in the 5G standard.
Fig. 14 shows the simulation results over BI-AWGNC comparing the codes in the 5G standard and our newly obtained codes with the same parameters. Fig. 14 shows that the permanent-bound-based designs offer a better low-error-rate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3775

work could explore whether designs maximizing the permanent bound also perform well on the binary symmetric and binary erasure channels with low FER requirements. Similarly, our simulations were limited to full-precision belief propagation decoding. Further work could explore how designs maximizing the permanent bound perform with other decoder implementations. This work concentrated on QC PBRL codes designed only according to the newly proposed design method. One could use the method of optimizing the threshold once enough rows have been added according to the newly proposed design method. For future work, we intend to use the two PBRL design approaches to design very-low-rate QC-LDPC block codes with PBRL structure that are better than existing and practical very-low-rate LDPC codes in literature.

Fig. 14. Comparison of FER performance of original 5G PBRL LDPC codes and the new PBD method 5G PBRL LDPC codes at k = 192 information bits.
performance, once again confirming the premise of this paper and the potential for the new design approach to be practically useful. Note that we have only shown the performance at 3 design rates here (for clarity), but the new PBD method 5G PBRL LDPC codes also perform the same or better at low FERs than the original 5G PBRL LDPC codes at other design rates. A key point to note is that our design took only a few hours.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a new method to design PBRL QC-LDPC codes for short block-lengths and low FERs. The metric used in the design is an upper bound on the minimum distance of any QC-LDPC code that can be obtained from a protomatrix. By maximizing this upper bound at each design rate of the rate-compatible family of codes, the paper obtained a significant improvement in the low-FER performance regime over PBRL codes designed according to the original method of optimizing the iterative decoding threshold. The paper observed the combination of the original method of optimizing the iterative decoding threshold with a constraint on the row weights of the incremental check nodes to be an alternative way to design short block-length PBRL QC-LDPC codes. However, it is seen that the new design method produces QCLDPC codes with better slope of FER performance at the lowest FERs when compared to the threshold-based methods.
Furthermore, the paper identified a key reduction that is possible in the complexity of computing the minimum distance upper bounds. This reduction in complexity yielded a very low-complexity PBRL search procedure that has a constant run-time for each row added to lower the design rate. The constant complexity is in contrast to the original, thresholdbased PBRL search procedure where the complexity of the search procedure grows with each new added row. Finally, the paper established the equivalence between the newly proposed design method and an ILP and showed that the relaxation of this ILP is not exact.
A limitation of the current work is that our simulation results focused entirely on the BI-AWGN channel. Future

APPENDIX PROOF OF THEOREM 10

Proof: The cases when S contains the index of no punc-

tured column or contains the index of exactly one punctured

column are handled by the proofs of Theorems 6 and 8,

respectively. Therefore, let us assume that S contains the

indices of n pS ≥ 2 punctured columns (out of n p > 1). Let
PIR, denote the column in PIR that contains its only non
-zero entry, 1, in row . Also, assume that i∈S\P perm PS\i > 0.
Let us consider a sub-matrix Pi∗ PS\i∗ with i ∗ ∈ S \
apPeprsemurmcuhtuatttiahotainot σnp∗eσrs∗mu(cj(h)Pt>ih∗a)nt c>H n0jac=.n1dTPhjii∗s>(mσn∗ep(aSjn,)s,thtjhe)na>ttht0his.erImef efeoaxrnissstuswchae
can replace an index in S of an unpunctured column with an index of a column 
in PIR to obtain a newset Sˆ such that
i∈S\P perm PS\i ≥ i∈Sˆ\P perm PSˆ\i > 0, unless the latter is already present in S. In the same way, we can now iteratively obtain newer sets until we arrive at a set Sˆ1 such that the following is true: For every sub-matrix PSˆ1\i , i ∈ Sˆ1 \ P

with perm

nc
j =1

PSˆ1\i

PSˆ1\i (σ ( j ),

> 0, j ) > 0,

for the

every permutation σ such that conditions PSˆ1\i (σ ( j ), j ) > 0,

j > n pS , and σ ( j ) > ncH are satisfied only if PIR,σ ( j) is

already indexed in set Sˆ1.

Now, if Sˆ1 contains the indices of all the columns
 of PIR, then the proof is complete as i∈S\P perm PS\i ≥
i∈Sˆ1\P perm PSˆ1\i > 0. If that is not the case, then we

proceed to do further replacements, but using the properties of

Sˆ1 and the assumptions in the statement of the theorem. Note

that Sˆ1 contains the indices of all the punctured columns that

were indexed in S.

Consider a column PIR,∗ whose index is not contained in Sˆ1. For any sub-matrix PSˆ1\i , i ∈ Sˆ1 \ P with

ppreordmuctPSˆ1n\jic=1

> 0, every PSˆ1\i (σ ( j ), j

permutation σ with a non-zero ) has σ ( j ) = ∗ only when j ≤

n pS . Pick any such sub-matrix and one such permutation

σ ∗ for that sub-matrix. There is only one j ∗ ≤ n pS with

PSˆ1\i (σ ∗( j ∗), j ∗) > 0 and σ ∗( j ∗) = ∗ as we have assumed

that only one punctured column has a non-zero entry in every

row of PIRC. Note that j ∗ ≤ n pS is the local index (i.e.

within the sub-matrix) of a column in the chosen PSˆ1\i that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 65, NO. 6, JUNE 2019

is originally a punctured column in P. Let the index of this punctured column in P be i1∗.
Now, similar to Case 2 of the proof of Theorem 8,

assume 

that

the

matrix

PSˆ1\i1∗ ,

which

is

not

part

of

i∈Sˆ1\P perm PSˆ1\i , has a positive permanent. As the HRC

part has a positive design rate less than 1, n pS ≤ n p < ncH .

Then, with the assumptions of the theorem that only one

punctured column has a non-zero entry in every row of PIRC,

that all punctured columns have all entries in their first ncH

rows as non-zero integers, and the fact that n pS ≤ n p < ncH ,

we can find a sub-matrix PSˆ1\i ,

zpeerromapnreondtuscut ch tnjhc=a1t

there exists PSˆ1\i (σ ( j ),

i ∈ Sˆ1 \ P with a positive
a permutation σ with a nonj ) and σ ( j ) = ∗ > ncH

for some j > n pS . But, Sˆ1 is a set that cannot have this

property and therefore our assumption that PSˆ1\i1∗ has a nonzero permanent is incorrect.

Now, with the permanent that is

assumption that equal to zero, we

PSˆ1\i1∗ can can replace

only

i

∗ 1

∈

have a S with

the index of PIR,∗ to obtain a new set Sˆ2 that has one fewer

index missing of columns in the incremental redundancy part

of P such that




 




perm PSˆ1\i ≥

perm PSˆ2\i > 0. (36)

i ∈ Sˆ1 \P

i ∈ Sˆ2 \P

Now, Sˆ2 is another set of nc + 1 column indices that has

the relationship with S that





 




perm PS\i ≥

perm PSˆ2\i > 0. (37)

i∈S\P

i ∈ Sˆ2 \P

If Sˆ2 contains the indices of all the columns of PIR, then the

proof is complete. Otherwise we can follow through the same

steps that we have applied to set S so far, and by iteratively repeating these steps we can arrive at a set Sˆ∗ that contains

the

indices 


of

all

the 

columns of 


PIR

such 

that 

perm PS\i ≥

perm PSˆ∗\i > 0. (38)

i∈S\P

i ∈ Sˆ ∗ \P

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work used computational and storage services associated with the Hoffman2 Shared Cluster provided by UCLA Institute for Digital Research and Education’s Research Technology Group. The authors are grateful to Fabian Steiner of TU Munich for his assistance with the simulation results in Section VII-D. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF. Research was carried out in part at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology, under a contract with NASA.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-36, no. 4, pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988.

[2] J. Cain, G. Clark, and J. Geist, “Punctured convolutional codes of rate (n − 1)/n and simplified maximum likelihood decoding (Corresp.),” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-25, no. 1, pp. 97–100, Jan. 1979.
[3] K. R. Narayanan and G. L. Stüber, “A novel ARQ technique using the turbo coding principle,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 49–51, Mar. 1997.
[4] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[5] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[7] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[8] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. IPN-PR 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[9] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. R. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacityapproaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[10] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[11] S. Abu-Surra, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Enumerators for protograph-based ensembles of LDPC and generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 858–886, Feb. 2011.
[12] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[13] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On the girth of quasi-cyclic protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4542–4552, Jul. 2013.
[14] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Influence of proto-and Tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 585–607, Feb. 2012.
[15] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Bounds on the minimum distance of punctured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4584–4597, Jul. 2013.
[16] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[17] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 728–738, Feb. 2006.
[18] J. Kim, A. Ramamoorthy, and S. W. Mclaughlin, “The design of efficiently-encodable rate-compatible LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 365–375, Feb. 2009.
[19] M. El-Khamy, J. Hou, and N. Bhushan, “Design of rate-compatible structured LDPC codes for hybrid ARQ applications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 965–973, Aug. 2009.
[20] B. N. Vellambi and F. Fekri, “Finite-length rate-compatible LDPC codes: A novel puncturing scheme,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 297–301, Feb. 2009.
[21] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of ratecompatible low-density Parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.
[22] S. Dolinar, “A rate-compatible family of protograph-based LDPC codes built by expurgation and lengthening,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Sep. 2005, pp. 1627–1631.
[23] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of ratecompatible protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2841–2850, Oct. 2012. doi: 10.5948/UPO9781614440147.
[24] T. V. Nguyen and A. Nosratinia, “Rate-compatible short-length protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 948–951, May 2013.
[25] T. Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.
[26] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RANGANATHAN et al.: QC PBRL LDPC CODES FOR SHORT BLOCK-LENGTHS

3777

[27] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[28] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., vol. 5, Oct. 2003, pp. 3125–3129.
[29] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Gen03-6: Investigation of error floors of structured low-density paritycheck codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, Nov./Dec. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[30] D. G. M. Mitchell, R. Smarandache, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Quasicyclic LDPC codes based on pre-lifted protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 5856–5874, Oct. 2014.
[31] S. V. S. Ranganathan, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Design of improved quasi-cyclic protograph-based Raptor-like LDPC codes for short blocklengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2017, pp. 1207–1211.
[32] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 2551–2567, Jun. 2006.
[33] P. O. Vontobel, “The Bethe permanent of a nonnegative matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1866–1901, Mar. 2013.
[34] H. J. Ryser, Combinatorial Mathematics (The Carus Mathematical Monographs), 1963. [Online]. Available: https://www.cambridge.org/ core/journals/proceedings-of-the-edinburgh-mathematical-society/ article/h-j-ryser-combinatorial-mathematics-carus-mathematicalmonographs-no-14-published-by-the-mathematical-association-ofamerica-distributed-by-john-wiley-and-sons-1963-xiv-154-pp-30s/ 6876904D16446D078531D6833EBBD67F
[35] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdú, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.
[36] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network, NR, document 3GPP TS 38.212 V2.0.0, 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Multiplexing and Channel Coding (Release 15), Dec. 2017.
Sudarsan V. S. Ranganathan (S’10) is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA. He received his Bachelor’s degree in Electronics and Communication Engineering from Anna University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India, in 2012 and his Master’s degree in Electrical Engineering from UCLA in 2014. Sudarsan’s research interests include coding and information theory, communication systems, and combinatorics. His experiences include two internships at Broadcom Corp., Irvine, CA, USA, during the summers of 2014 and 2015. He was the recipient of the Best Poster Award at the 2015 IEEE Communication Theory Workshop (CTW).

Dariush Divsalar (S’76–M’78–SM’90–F’97–LF’13) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 1978. Since then, he has been with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, CA, USA, where he is a JPL Fellow and Senior Research Scientist. At JPL, he has been involved with developing stateof-the-art technology for advanced deep-space communications systems and future NASA space exploration. He is also an Adjunct Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, UCLA. Since 1986, he has taught graduate courses in communications and coding at UCLA and Caltech. He has published more than 275 papers, coauthored a book entitled An Introduction to Trellis Coded Modulation with Applications, contributed to three other books, and holds 25 U.S. patents in the aforementioned areas. He was a co-recipient of the 1988 Paper Award of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY. He was a co-recipient of the Joint Paper Award of the IEEE Information Theory and IEEE Communication Theory societies in 2008. He was a co-recipient of the 2018 Best Paper Award of the IEEE Aerospace Conference. The IEEE Communication Society has selected one of his papers for inclusion in a book entitled The Best of the Best: Fifty Years of Communications and Networking Research, containing the best 56 key research papers ever published in the society’s 50-year history. He is a recipient of the 2014 IEEE Alexander Graham Bell Medal. He has received over 50 NASA Tech Brief Awards and a NASA Exceptional Engineering Achievement Medal in 1996. He served as an Area Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 1989 to 1996.
Richard D. Wesel (S’91–M’96–SM’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, and the Ph.D. degree from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, all in electrical engineering. In 1996, he joined the University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA, where he is currently a Professor with the Electrical Engineering Department and the Associate Dean for Academic and Student Affairs for the UCLA Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science. His research is in the area of communication theory with particular interest in low-density parity-check coding, short-block-length communication with feedback, and coding for storage. He was a recipient of the National Science Foundation CAREER Award, the Okawa Foundation Award for research in information theory and telecommunications, and the Excellence in Teaching Award from the UCLA Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:20:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

