IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 8, AUGUST 2007

677

Reliability-Based Iterative Decoding of LDPC Codes Using Likelihood Accumulation
Ming Jiang, Chunming Zhao, Member, IEEE, Enyang Xu, and Li Zhang

Abstract— In this work, we present an improvement on low complexity serial concatenation of belief propagation (BP) order statistic decoding (OSD) algorithm for low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes. We introduce a more reliable method to reconstruct ordered information sequence in terms of the accumulated log-likelihood ratio (LLR) transitions of variable nodes. We give a general expression for both the existing BPOSD algorithm and our proposed new method according to a structure similar to an infinite impulse response (IIR) filter. This improved algorithm achieves noticeable performance gains with only modest increase in computation complexity.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check codes, accumulated log-likelihood ratio, reliability decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
C OMPARED with the maximum likelihood decoding (MLD) of high complexity, the belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes leads to inevitable performance losses due to (short) cycles in the Tanner graph. Proposed in [1], the reliabilitybased order statistic decoding (OSD) algorithm, combined with BP, is an efficient method to close the performance gap between BP and MLD for short LDPC codes.
Due to the significant computational cost for the Gaussian elimination and sorting, the OSD reprocessing is very hard, if not impossible, to implement in each BP iteration for practical application. In [1] and [2], Fossorier and Isaka et al. further investigated the dynamic BP-OSD combination, which has effectively reduced the average number of BP iterations and OSD processes. However, even with the modification, the computation complexity and decoding delay is still substantial. It is a good tradeoff between performance and decoding complexity when OSD decoder is serially concatenated after the last iteration of BP decoding.
In the OSD algorithm, new message bits are obtained by ordering the reliabilities of all the variable nodes. In [1], it is shown that if OSD is applied in a serial manner after BP, then not much can be gained if only the soft values delivered by the last iteration of BP are used. Due to the LLR oscillation phenomenon observed by [3] during iterative decoding, the last LLR output is not always a credible reliability measure.

In [3], the number of sign oscillations for each bit during BP decoding is used as the measure for reliability, regardless of the magnitudes of the iterative outputs. However, the sign oscillation numbers are usually the same among different variable nodes, leading to performance degradation.
To improve the performance of serial decoding with BP followed by OSD reprocessing, we propose to utilize the accumulated LLR during iterative decoding as the reliability measure. The computational cost of LLR accumulation is minor in the BP decoding.

II. BP-OSD ALGORITHMS USING LLR ACCUMULATION

Assume an LDPC code defined by a sparse M × N parity check matrix. The coded sequence C = {c1, c2, ..., cN } is transmitted by BPSK modulation, which maps the codeword into a bipolar sequence X = {x1, x2, ..., xN }, according to xn = 1 − 2cn, n ∈ [1, N ]. Denote Y = {y1, y2, ..., yN } with yn = xn + zn, n ∈ [1, N ] representing the demodulator output which is also known as the received signal from the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel where the noise zn is independent, identically distributed Gaussian variable with zero mean and variance σ2. The initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of nth variable node vn is defined by

Ln0

=

ln

P (xn = 1|yn) P (xn = −1|yn)

=

2yn σ2

,

n

∈

[1, N ]

(1)

and Lkn stands for the LLR output of the nth variable node vn at the kth iteration of BP decoding, where 1 ≤ k ≤ K.
In the serial implementation of BP decoding followed by
OSD, the OSD reprocessing is performed in terms of the reliability information rn = LnK , n ∈ [1, N ]}, when the iterative BP decoding does not yield a valid codeword at the Kth iteration. Using the likelihood accumulation, we propose
a new scheme to measure the reliabilities. The reliability value of variable node vn is evaluated based on

K

rn =

αK−kLkn , n ∈ [1, N ] ,

(2)

k=0

Manuscript received March 27, 2007. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. Marc Fossorier. This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) (Grant No. 2006AA01Z263).
M. Jiang, C. Zhao, and E. Xu are with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, P.R. China (e-mail: {jiang ming, cmzhao, eyxu}@seu.edu.cn).
L. Zhang was with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, P.R. China. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis (e-mail: liszhang@ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2007.070450.

where the parameter α is an attenuation scaling factor in the
LLR accumulation.
This LLR accumulation takes a more general form of reliability measurement. The reliability value rn = L0n of the sole OSD algorithm is a special case of (2), where
the maximum number of iterations is set to zero. The new
proposed form of reliability measure can be reduced to the conventional BP-OSD algorithm [1] rn = LKn , when the parameter α = 0 is chosen. The accumulation process can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. D10o8w9n-l7o7ad9e8d/0o7n$2J5u.n0e024c,20220607atI0E4E:5E1:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

678

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 8, AUGUST 2007

converted to

K

rn =

Lnk , n ∈ [1, N ] ,

(3)

k=0

with α is set to 1. The direct sum in (3) can be seen as a discrete integral of the output LLRs from all past iterations.
In order to simplify the implementation of accumulation, the proposed computation associated with reliability can also be represented as a low-pass filtered LLR from past iterations. The accumulation values are set to initial LLRs

Ln = L0n, n ∈ [1, N ]

(4)

and a single multiply-add floating point operation is performed for each variable node

Ln = Lkn + α · Ln, k ∈ [1, K] ,

(5)

in every iteration of BP decoding. After the maximum number

of iterations, the final reliability values of OSD process are

obtained by

rn = |Ln| , n ∈ [1, N ] .

(6)

In essence, we use a first order infinite impulse response (IIR) filter of coefficient α to determine the average LLR values more reliably.
Compared with the standard serial concatenation of BPOSD algorithm, the proposed measurement of reliability requires a minor increase in computation and storage. This new improvement costs N more real data storage units and N more multiply-add operations in each iteration. Thus it can be easily pipelined with BP decoding and does not bring in any delay.

Fig. 1. The impact of α in BP-OSD algorithm on the block error rates for decoding the Code-A, Code-B and Code-C, with fixed 200 iterations.

III. EVALUATION OF THE PARAMETER α
Fig. 2. The impact of α in BP-OSD algorithm on the block error rates for
The evaluation of parameter α is an important issue for decoding the Code-A with different numbers of iterations.

the usage of LLR accumulation in order to optimize the

performance of the proposed BP-OSD algorithm. In the accu-

mulation process, the accumulation factor not only is code oscillations of LLR in variable nodes become more obvious

dependent, but also varies with the maximum number of when the BP decoding fails to converge. The accumulation of

iterations. A simple evaluation of parameter α is obtained LLRs is dominated by the last several iterations and the OSD

through a serial of simulations with various types of LDPC algorithm does not make sufficient improvement on Code-B,

codes and different maximum numbers of iterations.

if the parameter α 1. The oscillation behavior will be

There are three types of LDPC codes selected in this significantly reduced when the LLRs of the precious iterations paper in order to carry out a sound analysis about the are not discarded in the accumulation process with α ≥ 1. In

improvement on LLR accumulation. The first one, Code-A, Fig. 1, we compared the performance of BP-OSD algorithm is a (504,252,3,6) regular LDPC code given in [4]. Another for Code-B with α ranging between 0 and 2, and the optimized

(273,191,17,17) regular code, Code-B, is constructed based on factor is 1.2. Code-C is a high rate irregular code with many

finite geometric (FG) [5]. The last one, Code-C, is a (576, 96) low weight variable nodes, so the oscillations of LLRs in the

irregular code defined in 802.16e protocol [6]. The code rates weight-2 nodes are more dramatic than those in the weight-

of the above three codes are 1/2, 7/10 and 5/6, respectively. 3 nodes of the regular Code-A with the BP decoding. From The Eb/N0 values of simulations are fixed at 2.5dB, 3dB and Fig. 1, we can see that the optimized factor α of Code-C is 4dB for the Code-A, Code-B and Code-C, respectively. At slightly larger than that of Code-A, although the influence of

these Eb/N0 values, the frame error rates of these codes are the accumulation parameter is similar for these two codes.

between the 1e − 3 and 1e − 4 for the BP-OSD algorithm.

The optimized factor α varies with the maximum number

Firstly, we compared the performance of three codes with of iterations for the serial implementation of BP decoding

the parameter α in Fig. 1, where the BP decoding and order- followed by OSD process. For Code-A, the maximum numbers

1 OSD process are serially concatenated and the maximum of iterations are set to 3-7, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, where the

number of iterations is set to 200. The iterative BP algorithm Eb/N0 is also 2.5dB while order-1 OSD process is performed. usually converges fast for the FG-LDPC code, Code-B. But We can show in Fig. 2 that the optimized value of α increases

the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on Junew24it,2h02th6eatn0u4:m51b:5e7rUoTfCiftreomraItEioEnEsXpglroorew. tRhe.stTrichteiondsaasphpelyd. line in Fig.

JIANG et al.: RELIABILITY-BASED ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES USING LIKELIHOOD ACCUMULATION

679

Fig. 3. Block error rate of the Code-A with BP and BP-OSD algorithms.

Fig. 4. Block error rate of the (204,102,3,6) LDPC code and convolutional code decoded by BP, OBP, BP-OSD and Viterbi algorithms.

2 presents the evaluation of the optimized α with different maximum numbers of iterations. The full LLRs accumulation cannot well overcome the oscillations due to the unreliability of the LLR outputs when the maximum number of iterations

short length of the codeword. Also the high-order reprocess provides remarkable performance gain compared with the Viterbi decoding when the block error rate is below 1e-1.

is too small. The LLR values of the last several iterations are

more reliable, so the optimized parameter α is less than 1

V. CONCLUSION

when the maximum number of iterations is no more than 20. As the maximum number of iteration increases, the output of each iteration becomes more stable and the optimized α increases gradually.

In this letter, a modified BP-OSD algorithm is proposed. The new algorithm is based on the accumulated LLR in the iterative decoding and requires only a small computational increase. Simulation results show that our proposed algorithm

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

outperforms the conventional scheme in which the BP decoder is followed by OSD reprocessing. Various measurements of

Fig. 3 illustrates the performance of Code-A decoded with the reliability can be presented by utilizing different values

BP algorithm and serially decoded by BP followed by OSD of accumulated coefficients. This improvement is effective for

reprocessing. The maximum numbers of iterations are set to short regular LDPC codes, and offers a good tradeoff between

100 and 50 for BP and BP-OSD algorithms, respectively. The performance and complexity. Furthermore, the accumulated

conventional BP-OSD algorithm and our proposed scheme are LLR can also be utilized in other reliability-based algorithms

different for parameter α = 0 or 1. At block error rate of 1e-3, in connection with iterative decoding.

the order-0 OSD algorithm based on the accumulated LLRs

achieves 0.2dB coding gain over the same order algorithm with

REFERENCES

α = 0. Below the block error rate of 1e-4, the performance of this regular code decoded with the proposed algorithm is much better than that of the BP-OSD algorithm in [1]. Meanwhile the modified algorithm with order-2 outperforms the BP decoding with 100 iterations by more than 0.5dB.

[1] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[2] M. Isaka, M. Fossorier, and H. Imai, “On the suboptimality of iterative decoding for turbo-like and LDPC codes with cycles in their graph representation,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 845–854, May

For short length codes, convolutional codes decoded by the Viterbi algorithm is a strong counterpart to the LDPC codes with BP decoding. In Fig. 4, a short LDPC code (204,102,3,6)

2004. [3] S. Gounai and T. Ohtsuki, “Decoding algorithms based on oscillation
for low-density parity check codes,” IEICE Trans. Fundam., vol. E88-A, no. 8, pp. 2216–2226, Aug. 2005.

is compared with the same length 256-state convolutional code utilized in 3GPP [7] defined by the generator polynomials g1 = 561OCT , g2 = 753OCT . The simulation results of the oscillation-based LLR-BP algorithm (OBP) [3] are also presented by setting its maximum number of iteration to 100. The block error rate of the OBP algorithm is between

[4] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html.
[5] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf.. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov 2001.
[6] IEEE P802.16e/D12, “IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks - part 16: air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems,” Oct. 2005.

those of the standard BP decoding and the serial decoding [7] 3G Partnership Project, Channel Coding, 3GPP TS 05.03 V8.7.0 (2003-

of BP followed by order-0 OSD reprocessing with the LLR

04), http://www.3gpp.org.

accumulation α = 1. Order-2 BP-OSD algorithm outperforms

the convolutional code with a 256 state trellis. The order-2

serially concatenated BP-OSD algorithm achieves 1dB coding

gain over the BP decoding with 100 iterations. The high order

OSD algoritAhumthoriizsednloictentsoeod ucsoemlimpitleedxto:toYoinmsepi Ulenmiv.eDnotwngloivaedend othneJune 24,2026 at 04:51:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

