674

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 8, AUGUST 2007

Relation Between Parity-Check Matrixes and Cycles of Associated Tanner Graphs
Ruwei Chen, Huawei Huang, and Guozhen Xiao

Abstract— This correspondence presents an approach to the representation of cycles of Tanner graphs on associated paritycheck matrices. Several equivalent conditions for the girth of a Tanner graph to be 2k are proposed. An algorithm to determine girth of associated Tanner graphs of parity-check matrices is proposed, also with an algorithm to count shortest cycles.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, paritycheck matrix, Tanner graph, cycle, girth.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were discovered by Gallager [2] in the early 1960s. The remarkable discovery had been ignored by coding researchers for a long time. In 1981, Tanner provided a new interpretation of Lowdensity parity-check codes from a graphical point of view [3]. Tanner’s work was also ignored by coding theorists. In 1996, Mackay and Neal showed that LDPC codes may perform near Shannon limit [4]. From then on, LDPC codes have attracted interest of many coding researchers, and Tanner graph has become an important tool for studying LDPC codes. Cycles of Tanner graph are of great interest in the research of LDPC codes. It is widely accepted that good LDPC designs have graph models without too many short cycles [5]–[8]. The length of shortest cycles of a Tanner graph is called the girth. To construct LDPC codes, one should try to avoid short cycles (i.e. to ensure the girth is not too low). Yet large girth is not enough to ensure a good graphical model. It was shown in [1] that the performance of two LDPC codes with the same girth but a different number of short cycles can be dramatically different, and the regularity of the cycles structure of a Tanner graph (i.e. how random the cycles appear) also affects graphical code model.
This work is based on the one-to-one correspondence between the “1’s of a parity-check matrix and edges of the associated Tanner graph. In this work, We present an approach to representation of cycles of Tanner graphs on associated parity-check matrices and show how problems on shortest cycles be solved in the associated parity-check matrices.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents some fundamental facts of Tanner graph and parity check matrix, the one-to-one correspondence between subgraphs of a Tanner graph and matrices included in the associated parity-check matrix is the basis of this work. In section III, the concept of “2k-cycle-matrix’ is introduced, it is shown that 2k-cycle-matrices are exactly the representation
Manuscript received April 19, 2007. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. Jing Li (Tiffany).
The authors are with the ISN State Key Laboratory, Xidian University, Xi’an, China, 710071 (email: spring2.718@163.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2007.07613.

of cycles of length 2k, and several equivalent conditions for the girth of a Tanner graph to be 2k are proposed. In section IV, an algorithm to determine girth are proposed, also with an algorithm to count shortest cycles.
II. FUNDAMENTALS
For a linear block code with the parity-check matrix Hmn of m rows and n columns, there is a unique Tanner graph G associated to Hmn. The Tanner graph is a bipartite graph with variable nodes set V and check nodes set P , each node in V represents a column of Hmn and each node in P represents a row of Hmn. So there are n variable nodes in V and m check nodes in P . A check node pi (pi represents the ith row) is connected to a variable node vj (vj represents the jth column) if and only if the element H(i, j) on the position of the ith row and the jth column of Hmn is 1.
Denote the finite field with two elements by GF (2). Suppose H is a m × n matrix over GF (2), and M is a m × n matrix over GF (2) with m ≤ m and n ≤ n. If there is a m × n submatrix M of H such that M (i, j) = 1 implies M (i, j) = 1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ m and 1 ≤ j ≤ n , then we say M is included in H, denoted by M ⊆ H. If M is a matrix included in a parity check matrix Hmn , there is a subgraph of the Tanner graph G composed of the edges corresponding to the “1”s in M . Conversely, for every subgraph G of G, there is a matrix M such the Tanner graph of M is G . If we arrange the rows and columns of M by the order of rows and columns of Hmn, then M ⊆ H. In this way a one-toone correspondence between the matrices included in Hmn and subgraphs of G is established.
III. RELATION BETWEEN PARITY-CHECK MATRIXES AND CYCLES OF ASSOCIATED TANNER GRAPHS
It is well known that length-4 cycles of a Tanner graph G manifest themselves as four “1”s lying on the corners of a submatrix of the parity-check matrix Hmn. But for cycles of length greater than 4, they are not so easy to be found in the parity-check matrix. To discuss the relation between a parity-check matrix and cycles of its tanner graph, the definition of “cycle-matrix” should be introduced firstly, then it will be shown that the definition depicts exactly the representation of cycles on the associated parity-check matrix.
Definition 3.1: A 2k-cycle-matrix M is a k ×k matrix over GF (2) satisfying the following conditions: (1) There are exactly two “1”s on each row of M . (2) There are exactly two “1”s on each column of M . (3) For any square submatrix N of M with N not equal to M , N does not satisfy the previous two conditions simultaneously.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. D10o8w9n-l7o7ad9e8d/0o7n$2J5u.n0e024c,20220607atI0E4E:5E3:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: RELATION BETWEEN PARITY-CHECK MATRIXES AND CYCLES OF ASSOCIATED TANNER GRAPHS

675

Example. Suppose M2 and M3 are square matrices over

GF (2):

M2 =

11 11

(1)

Theorem 3.3: Let G be the associated Tanner graph of a parity-check matrix Hmn. The following statements are equivalent: (a) the girth of G is 2k;

110

M3 = 0 1 1

(2)

101

then M2 is a 4-cycle-matrix and M3 is a 6-cycle-matrix.

(b) k is the least integer such that there is a 2k-cycle-matrix
included in Hmn; (c) k is the least integer such that there are k (k ≥ 2) rows of Hmn add up to a sum1 with at least k components no less than 2;

(d) k is the least integer such that there are k (k ≥ 2) columns

The following theorem shows that 2k-cycle-matrixes are of Hmn add up to a sum with at least k components no less

exactly representation of cycles of length 2k.

than 2.

Theorem 3.2: In the one-to-one correspondence between matrices included in a parity-check matrix Hmn and subgraphs of the associated Tanner graph G, 2k-cycle-matrices is oneto-one corresponding to cycles of length 2k for any integer k≥2
Proof: Suppose M is a 2k-cycle-matrix included in Hmn. Draw a walk δ in G started from a node α such that α is corresponding to an arbitrary chosen row of M , let δ go forward by the edges corresponding to the “1”s in M , never let δ go through an edge for a second time. Since the degree of all the nodes of the subgraph corresponding to M is equal to 2, δ will be ended at the starting node α, so δ is a cycle. The cycle δ must have passed all nodes of the subgraph corresponding to M . Otherwise, suppose δ passes only k (k k) variable nodes, then δ passes only k check nodes too. Denoted the square matrix corresponding to δ by N , then N is a matrix included in M and satisfies the former two
conditions of definition 3.1 simultaneously, this contradicts to that M is a 2k-cycle-matrix. Since M has exactly two “1”s on each row (column), the cycle δ is the subgraph corresponding to M . Obviously, the length of δ is 2k.
Conversely, suppose there is a cycle δ of length 2k in the Tanner graph, then there are k variable nodes and k check nodes on δ. Regard as a subgraph, each node of δ has degree of 2. Denote the set of k variable nodes of δ by Vk, denote the set of k check nodes of δ by Pk. In the subgraph δ, each node of Vk is connected to exactly two nodes of Pk, and each node of Pk is connected to exactly two nodes of Vk. Denote the k × k matrix included in Hmn corresponding to δ by M . Then M ⊆ Hmn, and each row (column) of M has exactly two “1”s. Suppose M is a k × k (k k) submatrix of M , if M satisfies the former two conditions of definition 3.1
simultaneously, then as it is shown in the first part of this proof, there is a cycle δ of length no greater than 2k in the subgraph corresponding to M . So the cycle δ is a subgraph of the cycle δ, and the length of δ is less than the length of δ. This is apparently impossible. It has been proved that M is a 2k-cycle-matrix included in Hmn.

Proof: (a) ⇔ (b). By theorem 3.2 the length of shortest cycles is 2k if and only if k is the least integer such that there is a 2k-cycle-matrix included in Hmn.
(c) ⇒ (b). Firstly we will proof inductively on k that if k is the least integer such that there are k (k ≥ 2) rows of Hmn add up to a sum with at least k components no less than 2, then there is a 2k-cycle-matrix included in Hmn. The statement is obviously true for k = 2. Suppose the statement is true for all the integers less than t (t ≥ 3) and greater than 1. Let us consider the case k = t: t is the least integer such that there are t rows of Hmn add up to a sum with at least t components no less than 2. Choose t columns of Hmn corresponding to t components no less than 2 in the sum of the t rows. Denote the submatrix on position of the chosen t columns and t rows by M . Change some “1”s of M to be “0”s such
the sum of elements on each column of the resulting matrix is equal to 2, and denote the resulting t × t matrix by M , then M ⊆ Hmn. M must be a 2t-cycle-matrix. Otherwise M does not satisfy condition (1) and condition (3) of definition
3.1 simultaneously. If M does not satisfy condition (1), there will be a row of M with no more than one component to be 1, then if we add up the t − 1 rows of Hmn corresponding to the other t − 1 rows of M , the sum must have at least t − 1
components no less than 2. This contradicts the presumption
that t is the least integer such that there are t rows of Hmn add up to a sum with at least t components no less than 2. If M
does not satisfy condition (3) of definition 3.1, then there is a t × t submatrix N of M satisfying the former two conditions of definition 3.1 simultaneously, and t t. It is easy to see that the t rows of Hmn corresponding to the t rows of N add up to a sum with at least t components no less than 2.
This again contradicts the presumption. Now we have proved that if k is the least integer such that there are k (k ≥ 2) rows of Hmn add up to a sum with at least k components no less than 2, then there is a 2k-cycle-matrix included in Hmn. Next it should be shown that there is no 2k -cycle-matrix included in Hmn for k k . Otherwise there is a 2k -cycle-matrix N included in Hmn with k k, then the k rows of Hmn corresponding to the k rows of N add up to a sum with

By theorem 3.2, one can identify cycles of a Tanner graph at least k components no less than 2, this contradicts the

by identifying cycle-matrices included in the associated parity-check matrix. Yet how to identify 2k-cycle-matrix for arbitrary integer k is still an unsolved problem, except the case 2k is equal to the girth of the Tanner graph. Several equivalent conditions for the girth to be 2k are presented In

presumption.
(b) ⇒ (c). If k is the least integer such that there is a 2kcycle-matrix included in Hmn, let M be a 2k-cycle-matrices included in Hmn. It is easy to see that the k rows of Hmn

the following theorem.

1Through this paper, the sum of some vectors does not mean the vector

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on Junes2u4m,2o0v2e6raGt 0F4:(523):,41wUe TjuCstfroamddIEthEeEmXupplorceo.oRrdeinstarticetwioinses aapspilnyt.egers.

676

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 11, NO. 8, AUGUST 2007

corresponding to the k rows of M add up to a sum with at
least k components no less than 2. Suppose there is a integer
k (2 ≤ k k) such that there are k rows of Hmn add up to a sum with at least k components no less than 2. Then
by “(c) ⇒ (b)” , there is a 2u-cycle-matrix included in Hmn with 2 ≤ u ≤ k k, this contradicts with the presumption.
So k is the least integer such that there is a 2k-cycle-matrix
included in Hmn. (b) ⇔ (d). Denote the transpose of Hmn by HmT n. k is the
least integer such that there are k (k ≥ 2) columns of Hmn add up to a sum with at least k components no less than 2, if
and only if k is the least integer such that there are k (k ≥ 2) rows of HmT n add up to a sum with at least k components no less than 2. As it has been proved: k is the least integer such that there are k (k ≥ 2) rows of HmT n add up to a sum with at least k components no less than 2, if and only if k is
the least integer such that there is a 2k-cycle-matrix included in HmT n. At last, k is the least integer such that there is a 2k-cycle-matrix included in HmT n, if and only if k is the least integer such that there is a 2k-cycle-matrix included in Hmn.

B. An Algorithm To Count Shortest Cycles

For a Tanner graph G of girth 2k, there are exactly k check

nodes on each cycle of length 2k. Suppose r1,r2,...,rk are k rows of Hmn, p1,p2,...,pk are k check nodes corresponding to r1,r2,...,rk respectively, S is the sum of r1,r2,...,rk, u is the number of components of S no less than 2. By the proof of

“(b) ⇔ (c)” of theorem 3.3, we can see that if u k, there

is no cycle of length 2k with p1,p2,...,pk to be all the check

nodes; if u ≥ k, there are

u k

=

u(u−1)...(u−k+1) k(k−1)...2.1

cycles

of

length 2k with p1,p2,...,pk to be all the check nodes. Add up

the numbers of shortest cycles of all combinations of k rows,

we can get the total number of shortest cycles of G.

The complexity of the proposed algorithm to count shortest

cycles is dominated by the number of combinations of k rows

of Hmn. If m and the girth are large, the algorithm will be too complicate to implement. It is practical only if m

is not large or the girth is not large. The advantage of this

algorithm is that the shortest cycles can be counted directly in

the parity-check matrix without drawing the associated Tanner

graph explicitly.

IV. APPLICATIONS
In this section we shall apply theorem 3.3 to determine girth and count shortest cycles of associated Tanner graphs of given parity-check matrices. The advantage of these algorithms is that we can do the calculation directly in the parity-check matrix without drawing the associated Tanner graph explicitly.
A. An Algorithm To Determine Girth
Once the parity-check matrix of an LDPC code has been constructed, we need to determine the girth of its associated Tanner graph. In the following we present an algorithm to determine the girth of the associated Tanner graph of a parity check-matrix Hmn. The algorithm is a natural result of theorem 3.3.
Steps of the algorithm to determine girth: 1. Let the value of k be 2. 2. Try all combinations of k rows of Hmn one by one to see wether there is a combinations with the sum of the k rows having at least k components no less than 2. If the answer is ”yes”, then the girth is 2k, stop; otherwise the girth is greater than 2k, go to step 3. 3. Increase the value of k by 1, go to step 2.
For a parity-check matrix with an associated Tanner graph of girth 2k, the complexity of the proposed algorithm is dominated by the number of combinations of k rows of Hmn. If m and the girth are large, the algorithm will be too complicate to implement. Fortunately, in most circumstance the girth will not be so large. In practise, usually we just need to apply the algorithm to ensure the girth is not small. The advantage of this algorithm is that the girth can be calculated directly in the parity-check matrix without drawing the associated Tanner graph explicitly.

V. CONCLUSION
In this correspondence, we depict the representation of cycles of Tanner graphs on associated parity-check matrices with the definition “2k-cycle-matrix”. Several equivalent conditions for the girth of a Tanner graph to be 2k are proposed. Based on the relation between a parity-check matrix and cycles of the corresponding Tanner graph, an algorithm to determine girth of associated Tanner graphs of given paritycheck matrixes is proposed, also with an algorithm to count shortest cycles. The advantage of these algorithms is that we can do the calculation directly in the parity-check matrix without drawing the associated Tanner graph explicitly.
REFERENCES
[1] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “An algorithm for counting short cycles in bipartite graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 287-292, Jan. 2006.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complecity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 1, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645-1646, Aug. 1996.
[5] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good lowdensity parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 1, Helsinki, Finland, June 2001, pp. 41-44.
[6] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi,“Design of parallel concatenated convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 591-600, May 1996.
[7] K. M. Chugg, A. Anastasopoulos, and X. Chen,Iterative Detection: Adaptivity, Complexity Reduction, and Applications. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2001.
[8] S. Crozier, “ New high-spread high-distance interleavers for turbo-codes,” in Proc. 20th Biennial Symp. Communications, Kingston, ON, Canada, May 2000, pp. 3-7.
[9] S. Lin and D. J. Costello,Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:53:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

