Powerful LDPC Codes for Broadband Wireless Networks: High-performance Code Construction and
High-speed Encoder/Decoder Design

Zhiyong He*, Sébastien Roy, and Paul Fortier Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Laval University,
Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, G1K 7P4
(Invited paper)

Abstract- This paper discusses high-performance code construction and high-speed encoder and decoder designs for low density parity check (LDPC) codes. Thanks to their nice structures, LDPC codes constructed from shifted identity matrices have been emphasized. Several techniques in code constructions have been proposed to lower the bit error floor down to 10-10. Characterized by a parity check matrix in a triangular plus dual-diagonal form, these structured LDPC codes can be encoded in linear time using a layered encoding algorithm. To increase the throughput of decoders, a joint row-column decoding algorithm has been proposed and parallel decoding architectures have been used. The implementation results into field programmable gate array (FPGA) devices indicate that the encoder for these high-performance LDPC codes attains a throughput of up to 115 Gbits/sec and the decoder attains a throughput of up to 1 Gbits/sec. The proposed codes are suitable for high-speed and high-performance applications which demand relatively low error floor, including application in broadband wireless networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Because of their capacity-achieving performance and the existence of effective decoding schemes, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes introduced by Gallager [1] have recently been accepted by several industrial standards, such as Digital Video Broadcast (DVB) satellite communications [2], 802.16e wireless metropolitan access networks [3], and 802.11n wireless local area networks. For further practical applications, including future broadband wireless networks, fourthgeneration cellular communication system, Gigabit Ethernet, data storage, and long-haul optical channels, one requires extremely reliable transmission with relatively high transmission speed. To design high-performance and highspeed LDPC codes for these systems, three critical issues must be considered.
The first issue is the decoding speed of LDPC codes. Since LDPC decoders inherently have a large latency and low speed due to the iterative decoding process, highly parallel decoding architectures are required to achieve speed-up of an order of magnitude. To increase the degree of parallelism and reduce the routing congestion of parallel decoders, structured LDPC codes are favored. For example, a class of structured LDPC codes constructed from the identity matrix have been adopted in 802.11n and 802.16e standards, because of their simple structures which dramatically reduce the storage requirements associated with parity check matrix in encoders and decoders.

The second issue which must be considered in code construction is their bit error rate (BER) performance. Though the BER of LDPC codes decreases steeply with increasing signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for low SNR, the BER tends to exhibit a sudden saturation for medium to high SNR, i.e. the so-called error floor. It is accepted now that the error floor of LDPC codes using the belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithm is mainly due to some problematic graphical structures in the code’s Tanner graph, such as trapping sets [4]. To lower the error floor, LDPC codes should be constructed carefully with some constraints in the design of the paritycheck matrix to avoid these problematic graphical structures.
The third issue in code construction is the associated encoding complexity. Though turbo codes can be encoded in linear time, a straightforward encoder implementation for LDPC codes has a complexity which is quadratic with the code length. To reduce this complexity, parity check matrices in an approximate triangular form were suggested in [5], [6]. By dividing the approximate triangular matrix into 6 submatrices, the encoding complexity was reduced to O(n + g 2 ) ,
where n is the code length and g is the gap between the given parity check matrix and a true triangular matrix [6]. For an LDPC code based on the identity matrix, g is the size of two sub-matrices and is about one or two tenths of n.
Another approach to the code construction with low encoding complexity is to design parity check matrices in a dual-diagonal form (e.g. [7]). The LDPC codes represented by a dual-diagonal matrix have been specified in 802.11n and 802.16e standards. A main disadvantage is that these codes may exhibit a high error floor, because too many columns with degrees of 1 or 2 exist in its parity check matrix. For example, 1056 columns have a degree of 2 for the code with a code length of 2304 and a code rate of 0.5 in 802.16e standard, accounting for 46% of the total columns within its parity check matrix.
In this paper, we focus on the design of high-performance and high-speed LDPC codes by jointly considering the error floor, encoding complexity and decoding complexity. Based on a parity check matrix in a triangular plus dual-diagonal form, the proposed LDPC codes can be encoded in linear time
with an encoding complexity of O(n) . Moreover, another
advantage of these codes is their relatively low error floor, thanks to the adaptability of column degrees within the parity

1-4244-1449-0/07/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE

173

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

check matrix. Since their parity check matrices are constructed based on identity matrices, these codes can be effectively decoded by highly-parallel decoders. Prior to the design of high-speed encoders and decoders, we first discuss the code construction with very low error floor in the next section.

II. HIGH-PERFORMANCE CODE CONSTRUCTION

We focus on a class of linearly encodable irregular LDPC codes represented by the following parity-check matrix H=[HS | HP] in which each column and each row have nonconstant degrees, i.e.

⎡ H1,1 ... ⎤ H1,L−J

HS

=

⎢ ⎢

...

⎢ ⎢

H

J

−1,1

... ...

...

⎥ ⎥,

⎥⎥ H J −1,L−J

(1)

⎣ H J ,1 ... ⎦ H J ,L−J

⎡I

... 0 0 0 ⎤

HP

=

⎢ ⎢

...

⎢⎢H J −1,L−J +1

... ...

... H J −1,L−2

... I

... I(q −

⎥ ⎥ 1)⎥

,

⎥

(2)

⎣ H J ,L−J +1 ... H J ,L−2 I

I⎦

where 0 and I are the q×q null matrix and the identity matrix,

respectively, and I(q-1) is a q×q matrix obtained by shifting the rows of I to the right by (q-1) places. For 1 ≤ j ≤ J and

1 ≤ l ≤ L , the sub-matrix H j,l in position (j, l) within H is either a null matrix or a shifted identity matrix obtained by shifting the rows of I to the right by C j,l places, i.e.

H j,l ≡ I(C j,l ) . The shifting coefficient C j,l is chosen
randomly in such a way as to avoid short cycles in the code’s Tanner graph. To distinguish from conventional columns and rows, we refer to a column (row) of sub-matrices within H as a block-column (block-row). Matrix H has J block-rows and L block-columns (BC).

A. Code construction with low error floor

In practical code construction, a straightforward search for problematic trapping sets requires extraordinary computation. We propose a fast and efficient approach to code construction, in which small trapping sets are automatically avoided. The basic idea is to eliminate all small cycle sets by optimizing both the degree distributions and the cycle structures during code construction.

1) Optimization of the degree distributions: Since columns of low degree are more likely to form small cycle sets, the algorithm proceeds by generating columns in increasing order of degree, i.e. matrix H is constructed BC-by-BC from the rightmost BC having the smallest degree to the leftmost BC having the largest degree. To guarantee a large cycle set for columns of low degree, the first step in the code construction is to position each shifted identity matrix in each BC as

follows. Between two arbitrary BCs with a degree of 3, block 4-cycles should be avoided or reduced, while double block 4cycles should be reduced between two arbitrary BCs with a degree of 4. Conceptually similar to that of a 4-cycle, a block 4-cycle implies that two BCs are linked via two block-rows, while a double block 4-cycle implies that two BCs are linked via three block-rows.

2) Constraints on the shifting coefficients: After positioning the shifted identity sub-matrices, the second step in code construction is to randomly choose the shifting coefficient C j,l for each identity sub-matrix in such a way as to avoid
short cycles and cycles of medium length. To optimize the cycle structure, the coefficients for BCs with degree 2 and 3 are chosen to avoid cycles of length 4, 6, 8, or 10. Then, the coefficients for BCs with degree 4 are chosen to avoid cycles of lengths 4 and 6. Finally, the short cycle of length 6 must be composed of high-degree BCs.

3) Estimations of the minimum distance: During the selection of shifting coefficients, the minimum distance of the codes which affects the error floors is estimated by calculating the distances d1, d2, and d3, where di is the minimum weight of the codeword when the weight of the systematic part is i. Some shifting coefficients are then modified to increase minimum distance.

B. Performance analysis

To analyze the performance in the error floor region, we designed two LDPC codes, code 1 with a code rate of 5/6 and a code length of 2304 and code 2 with a code rate of 2/3 and a code length of 1944. The LDPC code with a code rate of 5/6 and a code length of 2304 specified in 802.16e standard, the so-called 802.16e code in the following text, was used as a benchmark to compare with code 1. Table I lists code rate R, code length n, dimension J, dimension L, size q, and minimum distances for the three codes.

TABLE I DESIGN PARAMETERS FOR THREE CODES.

R

n

J

L

q

Minimum distance

802.16e 5/6 2304 4 24 96

≤ 11

Code 1 5/6 2304 6 36 64

≤ 15

Code 2 2/3 1944 24 72 27

≤ 73

The three codes are evaluated by performing simulations with binary phase-shift keying modulation in an AWGN channel. The iterative BP decoder stops when either a valid codeword is found or 50 decoding iterations are reached. The bit error rate (BER) of the 802.16e code, codes 1 and 2 versus
the signal-to-noise ratio per bit Eb / N0 are compared in Fig.
1. It is clearly shown that a BER error floor occurs in the vicinity of 10-7 for the 802.16e code. By optimizing the cycle structures, the error floor for code 1 is lowered below 10-8.
Because of a small value of J = 6 in code 1, some block 4cycles exist between two arbitrary BCs with a degree of 3. To further optimize the cycle structures, code 2 with J = 24 was

174
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

designed by avoiding block 4-cycles between two arbitrary BCs with a degree of 3 and avoiding double block 4-cycles between two arbitrary BCs with a degree of 4. By carefully choosing shifting coefficients, the minimum distance of code 2 is upper-bounded at 73. Fig. 1 shows that code 2 exhibits no error floor down to BER < 10-10. A main advantage of the proposed codes is their suitability for high-performance applications which demand relatively low error floor.

upper two sub-matrices [I I (q-1)] and the lower two submatrices [I I ] into the odd and even rows of H, respectively, and then putting the columns of the left two sub-matrices and the right two sub-matrices into the odd and even columns of H, respectively. Thus, the intermediate vector v (or w) is stored into the odd (or even) address of register 1 in Fig. 2. Then, the output vector y with odd (or even) index is stored into the upper (or lower) part of register 2 for the parity bits p2 (or p3). Since matrix H is a sparse matrix comprising shifted identity matrices or null matrices, the matrix-vector multiplication is simply implemented with several XOR gates.

Fig. 1 Bit error rate (BER) performances of three LDPC codes. Both the 802.16e code and code 1 have a code rate of 5/6 and a code length of 2304, while code 2 have a code rate of 2/3 and a code length of 1944.

III. HIGH-SPEED LAYERED ENCODER

Thanks to the triangular plus dual-diagonal form of the parity check matrix, the proposed codes can be encoded in linear time using a layered encoding algorithm.

A. Layered encoding algorithm

This sub-section discusses the layered encoding algorithm for an LDPC code with J = 3 and L = 4. Extension of the proposed algorithm to arbitrary J and L is straightforward. When J = 3 and L = 4, matrix H is rewritten as follows:

H

=

⎡ ⎢ ⎢

H1,1 H 2,1

I H 2,2

I

⎤ I(q −1)⎥⎥ .

(3)

⎣⎢H3,1 H3,2 I

I ⎥⎦

Since LDPC codes are linear codes, x is a codeword if and

only if

H xT = 0T .

(4)

It is convenient to split x into 4 parts, i.e. x = (u, p1, p2, p3), where u denotes the systematic part, and p1, p2, and p3 denote the parity parts. Then, (4) is naturally expanded to yield layered encoding equations.
The block diagram of the layered encoding process deduced from (4) is displayed in Fig. 2. First, the systematic bits vector u is multiplied by H1, 1 to obtain the parity bits p1. Then, the vector (u, p1) is multiplied by [H2, 1, H2, 2] and [H3, 1, H3, 2] to obtain the intermediate vectors v and w, respectively. The feedback shift register in Fig. 2 is used for the operation of the dual-diagonal sub-matrix. It has been shown in [8] that the four sub-matrices at the lower-right corner of HP in (2) can compose a dual-diagonal matrix by putting the rows of the

Fig. 2 Block diagram of a layered encoder.

B. FPGA implementation

To estimate the encoding speed of the proposed layered encoder, several such encoders for code 1 were implemented into a Xilinx Virtex-4 XC4VLX160 Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) device. The systematic bits u, the parity bits p, and the intermediate bits v and w were stored into the dualport Random Access Memory (RAM) with one port for writing and one port for reading. Each dual-port RAM was configured as a 16 × 1-bit module with 16 addresses so that M modules can store 16M bits. A total of 2304 bits were needed, divided up into 144 modules, for an LDPC code with a code length of 2304.
Since each sub-matrix within H is a shifted identity submatrix obtained by cyclically shifting the rows of a 64×64
identity sub-matrix I to the right by C j,l positions, the
addresses for writing (reading) the bits into (from) the RAM modules were generated easily by several 6-bit accumulators, where 26 = 64.

TABLE II ENCODING SPEED OF THREE LAYERED ENCODERS.

Number of processors

XOR gates

Encoding speed

Code 1

16

326

28 Gbps

(q = 64)

32

651

57 Gbps

64

1302

115 Gbps

The XOR utilization statistics and the encoding speeds of these encoders are listed in Table II as a function of the number of processors which were used for the matrix-vector multiplication. With an encoding clock frequency F = 300 MHz, the encoder for code 1 with a code length of 2304 and a code rate of 5/6 attains a throughput of 115 Gbps using 1302 XOR gates.

175
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. HIGH-SPEED DECODER DESIGN
LDPC codes can be effectively decoded using the sumproduct algorithm, which is also variously designated as the message-passing (MP) algorithm and the belief propagation (BP) algorithm. The traditional decoder based on the sumproduct algorithm uses two processors, i.e. a check node processor for the row processing and a bit node processor for the column processing. We have developed a novel decoding technique for the fast decoding of LDPC codes. The basic idea is to use only one processor, the so-called joint row-column processor, by combining column processing into the processing of each row [9], [10]. The new decoding technique reduces the storage requirement by 50% and increase the decoding speed by 4-fold. In this section, we discuss the design of highly-parallel decoder using the proposed joint row-column processors.
As an example, Fig. 3 shows a 4-parallel decoder which is composed of 4 joint row-column processors for the 802.16e code discussed in Section 2. The parallel decoder consists of a RAM for the input signals, a RAM for the probability messages U, 4 processors, and 4 RAMs for the extrinsic messages v. 4 processors process m rows within the code’s parity-check matrix from the uppermost row to the lowermost row, by reading both the extrinsic messages v and the probability messages U of the ith bit, and then calculating new extrinsic messages and new probability messages.

V. CONCLUSION
This paper has discussed the design of high-performance and high-speed LDPC codes by jointly considering error floor, encoding complexity, and decoding complexity. To delay the onset of error floor, several techniques in code constructions have been proposed to optimize both the degree distributions and the cycle structures. The numerical simulations have indicated that the designed codes exhibit no bit error floor down to 10-10 in an AWGN channel. Based on their parity check matrix in a triangular plus dual-diagonal form, a layered encoding algorithm with linear encoding complexity has been proposed. To increase decoding speed and reduce decoding latency, a joint row-column decoding algorithm in which the column processing is combined in the processing of each row has been proposed to decode LDPC codes. Since the parity check matrices of these codes are constructed based on the identity matrix, parallel architectures have been used in both encoders and decoders to increase their throughputs. The FPGA implementation results indicate that the encoder attains a throughput of up to 115 Gbits/sec and the decoder attains a throughput of up to 1 Gbits/sec.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Le Fonds québécois de la recherche sur la nature et les technologies (FQRNT).

Fig. 3 A 4-parallel decoder using 4 joint row-column processors.

If one clock cycle is required for a processor to process

one row, m×I/M clock cycles are required for M processors to

process I iterations. Thus, the decoding speed in Mbps is given

by

F ×n× M

S=

,

(5)

I ×m

where F is the decoding clock frequency in MHz and n, m, M

are the code length, the number of rows, and the number of

processors, respectively.

A 12-parallel decoder for the 802.16e code has been

implemented into the XC4VLX160 device. The 288 block

RAM in the device, each one being a dual-port RAM with

18432 bits of data memory, are adequate to store the messages

U and v. Since the code’s parity check matrix has 384 rows,

32 clock cycles are required to perform one iteration. When

using a decoding clock frequency of 150 MHz and a

maximum number of iterations of 8, the 12-parallel decoder

attains a decoding speed of 1.3 Gigabits/sec for the 802.16e

code with a code length of 2304 and a code rate of 5/6.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT. Press, 1963.
[2] Digital Video Broadcast (DVB) satellite communications, European Telecommunication Standards Institue, World Wide Web, http: //www.dvb.org/documents/white-papers/ wp06.DVB-S2.final.pdf.
[3] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, “IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems,” Feb. 28th, 2006.
[4] T. J. Richardson, “Error Floors of LDPC Codes”, 41st Annual Allerton Conf. on Communications, Control and Computing, pp. 1426-1435, Monticello, Illinois, USA, Oct. 2003.
[5] D. MacKay, S. Wilson, and M. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 14491454, Oct. 1999.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638-656, Feb. 2001.
[7] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894-2901, Aug. 2005.
[8] Z. He, P. Fortier, and S. Roy, “A class of irregular LDPC codes with low error floor and low encoding complexity”, IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, pp. 372-374, May 2006.
[9] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, "Lowering error floor of LDPC codes using a joint row-column decoding algorithm", IEEE International Conference on Communications, June 2007.
[10] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, "FPGA implementation of LDPC decoders based on joint row-column decoding algorithm", IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, May 2007.

176
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:54:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

