Design and Optimization of LDPC Encoder Based on LU Decomposition with Simulated Annealing

Xiangran Sun
Information Engineering School Communication University of China
Beijing, China sunxr@cuc.edu.cn

Dongxin Shi
Information Engineering School Communication University of China
Beijing, China sdx@cuc.edu.cn

Abstract—We present a low-complexity high-efficiency LDPC encoder, based on LU decomposition with a novel simulated annealing algorithm instead of classic algorithm. The new algorithm could obtain as sparse low-triangular matrix and upper-triangular matrix as possible during LU decomposition, which is applied to design LDPC encoder in CMMB for example. In the proposed design the complexity of encoding is reduced effectively, and the speed of operation is improved distinctly.
Keywords-LDPC; simulated annealing; LU decomposition
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC code was first introduced by R.G. Gallager [1] in 1962. In 1996, D. MacKay and R. M. Neal [2] rediscovered their powerful performance as error correction coding. Presently LDPC codes have been widely used on magnetic record, wireless communication and other zones. For instance, they were used as channel coding in DVB-S2, IEEE 802.11n/16e, DMB-TH, DTTB, and CMMB [6], etc. The advantage of LDPC codes are lower decoding complexity, but its’ disadvantage is higher encoding complexity to get the optimal LDPC codes.
Although the parity-check matrix of LDPC codes is always very sparse, its generation matrix is mostly dense, meaning quadratic complexity to code length with direct generation matrix encoding, which is nearly infeasible for hardware implementation. Few attempts have been made to implement the encoder directly through dense matrix operations, for it will result in complexity quadratic to code lengths.
One of encoding methods with linear complexity was proposed by Neal [3], he used LU decomposition to free the encoding process of dense inverse operation, however, it is not easy to find a good sparse LU decomposition for arbitrary H matrices, and especially some matrices can not be decomposed. And low complexity hardware structure of the encoder based on the method is the notable advantage. Another way is introduced by Richardson and Urbanke (named as RU algorithm) [4]. They show that linear time encoding is achievable through careful linear manipulation of LDPC codes.
In this paper, based on LU decomposition, we present a general optimized algorithm named simulated annealing (SA) algorithm to reduce encoding complexity and improve encoding efficiency. Simulated annealing is a generic

probabilistic metaheuristic for the global optimization problem of applied mathematics, namely locating a good approximation to the global optimum of a given function in a large search space [5] . We also implement a novel LDPC encoder based on our algorithm for CMMB as example. To reduce encoding complexity, we use simulated annealing algorithm to find a sparse LU decomposition from the given matrix.
In the rest of the paper, we describe the optimized algorithm and the implementation of software program and hardware encoder.
II. LDPC ENCODER
A. General LDPC Encoder for CMMB LDPC code in CMMB is a kind of High-Structured (HS)
code, which is characterized by the parity-check matrix H which has the regular quasi-cyclic structure.
The principle of LDPC encoding with the matrix H is to
solve parity equations:

HcT = 0T

(1)

{ } Where c= c0, c1,"c9215 is encoded codeword, which is { } consisted of information bit vector s= s0, s1,"sK-1 and { } parity code vector p= p0, p1," p9215-K .
According to CMMB standard, information bits and parity bits are reordered by codeword bits mapping vector (named IDX table) in as follows:

cCOL_ORDER(i)

=

­ ® ¯

si+

pi
K -9216

0 ≤ i ≤ 9215 − K 9216 − K ≤ i ≤ 9215

(2)

Here c represents outputting encoded codeword, COL_ORDER(i) is codeword bits mapping vector, K is
LDPC code information sequence length. K = 4608 bits for
1/2 code rate, 6912 bits for 3/4 code rate.

978-1-4244-9763-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju1n8e124,2026 at 07:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Because the outputting encoded codeword is not systematic, it is not suitable for encoder implementation.
Suppose that csys is the systematic form of encoded code,
[ ] meaning csys = p s , TIDX is the permutation matrix
corresponding to codeword bits mapping vector, and the weight of rows or the weight of columns are one, thus
c=csysTIDX .
Substituting it into (1) we can get

( ) HTIDXT

cT sys

=

0T

.

(3)

We define HIDX to be the systematic form of parity-check matrix H as HIDX =HTITDX . HIDX is divided into two parts, HP and HS , respectively corresponding to parity bits p and information bits s . Then (3) became

HP pT +HSsT =0T .

(4)

We get the general encoding method as follow:

pT

=-H

H -1
PS

s

T

.

(5)

H and HIDX both are very sparse, so HP separated from

H IDX

is

still

sparse.

But

H

−1 P

is

a

dense

matrix.

It

shall

consume quite a number of storages and logical resources. In

order to improve encoding efficiency, we use LU

decomposition with optimized simulated annealing algorithm

to implement LDPC encoder for CMMB.

B. LDPC Encoder Based on LU Decomposition
The encoding method based on LU decomposition has linear complexity. Neal used LU decomposition to free whole encoding process from dense inverse operation, however, it is not easy to find a good sparse LU decomposition for arbitrary matrices. In the classic LU decomposition method, the preprocessing which is performed on the parity-check matrix
HP is very simple. It can not achieve a good sparse lower-
triangular matrix L and upper-triangular matrix U . However,
in the paper, we design optimized LU decomposition method
for CMMB which processes the matrix HP corresponding to
parity code by Gaussian elimination and brings it into sparse lower-triangular and upper-triangular matrix as possible by performing row and column permutations during the operation of Gaussian elimination. It can improve sparsity of the matrices dramatically. We execute the preprocessing in software since it needs to be performed only once for the given matrix. So it does not cost the encoding time and resource of the actual hardware encoder.

In general the Classic LU decomposition on the matrix H P
is based on Gaussian elimination as followed:

ª 1 x12 x13 " x1N º

« «

x21

x22

x23

"

x2 N

» »

HP

=

« « «

x31 "

x32 "

x33 "

" "

x3N "

» » »

«¬ xN1 xN 2 xN 3 " xNN ¼»

ª 1 x12

⎯L⎯C (⎯1) ×→

« « «

0 0

««"

1
x312 "

¬« 0 x1N 2

x13 " x123 " x313 " ""
x1N 3 "

x1N º

x12 N

» »

x31N "

» » »

x1NN ¼»

""

ª 1 x12 x13 " x1N º

⎯L⎯C(⎯N )×⎯→

« « «

0 0

««"

1 0 "

x123 1 "

" " "

x21

N

» »

x32N "

» » »

«¬ 0 0 0 " 1 ¼» . (6)

Where x is the element of the matrix HP , x ∈ (0,1) .
From the procedure we can get

LC( N )...LC(2)LC(1)HP = UC .

(7)

Where LC(i) denotes partial lower-triangular matrix, and UC
denotes upper-triangular matrix.
Because the matrix is binary, we have

L −1 C(i)

=

LC(i)

.

(8)

So equation (7) is equal to:

HP = LC(1)LC(2)...LC(N )UC = LCUC .

(9)

Where LC = LC(1)LC(2)...LC(N ) is lower-triangular matrix.
But LC and UC are not good sparse matrices generally.
In order to achieve as sparse as possible matrices, we use optimized algorithm to perform row and column permutations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju1n8e224,2026 at 07:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

during the operation of Gaussian elimination. We get optimized LU decomposition as follow:
L(N )R(N )...L(2)R(2)L(1)R(1)HPC(1)C(2)...C( N ) = U (10)

Finally, the outputting encoded codeword c is determined by csys which consisted of p and s .

Where L(i) denotes partial lower-triangular matrix and U
denotes upper-triangular matrix in optimized algorithm instead
of classic algorithm. Where R(i) denotes that the matrix is
multiplied by a permutation matrix on its left which is equal to
realign the row. Similarly, C(i) denotes that the matrix is
multiplied by a permutation matrix on its right which is equal to realign the column.
Similarly, defined C = C(1)C(2)...C(N ) we get

HPC = R(1)L(1)R(2)L(2)...R(N )L(N )U = LU . (11)
Where L = R(1)L(1)R(2)L(2)...R(N )L(N ) is lowertriangular matrix. We can find the appropriate value of R(i) and C(i) to improve the sparsity of L and U using
optimized algorithm which is described in next section. Substitute (11) into (4), we can draw that

LUC−1 pT = −HSsT .

(12)

If define

pCT =C−1 pT

(13)

equation (12) is equal to: LUpCT = −HSsT Ҡ

(14)җ

Let −HSsT = xT , LyT = xT , UpCT = yT , then paritycheck bits pT can be calculated as following steps;

1) Compute HS multiplies information bit vector sT :

xT = −HSsT .

(15)

2) Solve equation LyT = xT with forward substitution; 3) Solve equation UpCT = yT with backward substitution; 4) From (13) pT can be calculated:

pT = CpCT .

(16)

Figure 1. LDPC encoding software and hardware framework.
The basic framework of our encoder is shown in Figure 1. Our approach for LDPC encoding consists of two steps: preprocessing and hardware encoding. First, the original parity-
check matrix H is preprocessed with the optimized LU
decomposition method in software to generate the matrices needed by the hardware encoder. The encoder itself is implemented in hardware to encode the message blocks and output the encoded codeword.
III. LU DECOMPOSITION VIA SIMULATED ANNEALING ALGORITHM
It is important to obtain as sparse low-triangular matrix and upper-triangular matrix as possible during LU decomposition. The classic algorithm of LU decomposition is based on Gaussian elimination with pivoting [7] as equation (6). But in it usually do not operate optimally on all the data with performing row and column permutations as equation (10). So we present novel simulated annealing algorithm to LU decomposition. Furthermore our algorithm is general algorithm for regular and irregular LDPC codes except for LDPC code in CMMB. Simulation results for CMMB show that the sparsity of the matrix can be improved greatly by applying the new algorithm.
Generally in the simulated annealing method, each point s of the search space is analogous to a state of some physical system, and the function E(s) to be minimized is analogous to the internal energy of the system in that state. The goal is to bring the system, from an arbitrary initial state, to a state with the minimum possible energy. So we are now ready to state simulated annealing algorithm to LU decomposition:
1) Find the columns of degree one in HP then select the rows to form the set θ . If θ is empty, perform Gaussian
elimination with the column which has the minimum degree sum of all columns. And repeat step 1 with the modified matrix
HP .
2) Take each “1” in θ as point. For each point compute the
degree sum of all rows. Then we take the points corresponding to maximum sum as remained points. Select one of remained points as start point, then permute it to the pivot. Remove the row and column corresponding to start point, the residual
matrix is HP ' .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju1n8e324,2026 at 07:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3) One by one compute the degree sum of all columns in
HP ' . According to the above simulated annealing principle,
choose the minimum degree sum corresponding to the point in the remained points. So the point “1” is accepted to be permuted to the pivot, other points are discarded. Then bring the matrix into a partial lower-triangular matrix and a partial upper-triangular matrix.
4) Modify HP again by removing the triangular part. The
residual matrix is empty, the algorithm terminates. Otherwise,
perform Gaussian elimination with HP and go to step 2.
For 1/2 and 3/4 code rate, we perform the given matrices according to classic algorithm and our simulated annealing algorithm. The results are listed in Table I. From Table I we can see that the new algorithm obtains more sparse matrics than classic algorithm, so encoding complexity is reduced.

TABLE I.
rate matrix
L 1/2
U
L 3/4
U

THE NUMBER OF NONZERO ELEMENTS

The number of nonzero elements

classic algorithm

simulated annealing algorithm

88435

22468

231201

16753

25649

8935

46535

4277

IV. LDPC ENCODER IMPLEMENTATION
A. LDPC Encoder Architecture
The hardware encoder is to compute the parity-check bits according to equation (16). The main operations performed in the encoder are matrix-vector multiplication (MVM), forwardsubstitution (FS), forward-substitution (BS) and codeword generation (CWG). Codeword generation implements the bit permutations according to the standard. An overview of our hardware encoder architecture is shown in Figure 2. The matrices required by the operations is accomplished in the preprocessing step and stored in the hardware. It is very

considerate that the operations are divided into four stages which run in parallel and double buffering is used between the stages, in order to minimize the overall latency, idle times and memory requirement.
B. Implementation Results
Our LDPC encoder is programmed in Verilog HDL and implemented on Stratix II EP1S180F102014 device of Altera. The design takes 3% the logic resource and 76% the memory resource of the device. Encoder maximum work frequency is 200 MHz, under this frequency, system pure encoding rate can achieve 54 Mbps (1/2 code rate) and 86 Mbps (3/4 code rate), which is sufficient for CMMB standard.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented the software and hardware design of a LDPC encoder based on optimized LU decomposition with simulated annealing algorithm, which has a low-complexity and high-efficiency character. Whole design has been applied to the implementation of the LDPC encoder for CMMB. Ongoing and future work includes the optimization of software algorithm and the reduction of the hardware resource.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, 1962, 8:21-28.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of lowdensity parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett, vol. 32, 1996, pp. 1645.
[3] R. M. Neal, “Sparse matrix methods and probabilistic algorithm,” IMA Program On Codes, Systems, and Graphic Models, 1999.
[4] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke. “Efficient encoding of low-density paritycheck codes. IEEE Trans,” on Inform. Theory, 2001, 47:638-656
[5] Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, Vecchi. "Optimization by Simulated Annealing". Science, 1983, New Series 220 (4598): 671–680.
[6] Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting (P. R. China) Part 1: Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Broadcasting Channel.
[7] Jia-Ning Su, Zhou Jiang, Ke Liu, Xiao-Yang Zeng, Hao Min. “An efficient low complexity LDPC encoder based on LU factorization with pivoting,” ASICON 2005. 6th International Conference On, Vol. 1 (2005), pp. 107-110.

Figure 2. Overview of our hardware encoder architecture. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on 2Ju1n8e424,2026 at 07:47:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

