IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

1099

A Reduced-Complexity Architecture for LDPC Layered Decoding Schemes
Sangmin Kim, Gerald E. Sobelman, and Hanho Lee
Abstract—A reduced-complexity low density parity check (LDPC) layered decoding architecture is proposed using an offset permutation scheme in the switch networks. This method requires only one shuffle network, rather than the two shuffle networks which are used in conventional designs. In addition, we use a block parallel decoding scheme by suitably mapping between required memory banks and processing units in order to increase the decoding throughput. The proposed architecture is realized for a 672-bit, rate-1/2 irregular LDPC code on a Xilinx Virtex-4 FPGA device. The design achieves an information throughput of 822 Mb/s at a clock speed of 335 MHz with a maximum of 8 iterations.
Index Terms—Decoding, field-programmable gate array (FPGA), forward error correction, low density parity check (LDPC).

a bidirectional network or two switch networks for shuffling and reshuffling messages, which increases the hardware complexity.
Designs utilizing one data shifter or a cyclic shifter have been intro-
H duced in [9] and [10], respectively. However, the proposed data shifter
in [9] is targeted for only one parity-check matrix since its inter-
H connection mapping is fixed by the shift values in the first block row
of . In [10], the overall decoder is designed specifically for a (3, 6) array code. In contrast, our objective is to create a design that is suitable for multiple code rates and different codeword sizes. Specifically, we propose a reduced-complexity LDPC decoder architecture for use in layered decoding having an offset generating algorithm to decrease the interconnection complexity with no degradation in the decoding throughput.
II. LAYERED BLOCK PARALLEL DECODER ARCHITECTURE

I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC) codes have been extensively adopted in next-generation forward error correction applications because they achieve very good performance using the iterative decoding approach of the belief-propagation (BP) [1]. The basic decoder design [2] for achieving the highest decoding throughput is to allocate processors corresponding to all check and variable nodes, together with an interconnection network. In this fully-parallel decoder architecture, the hardware complexity due to the routing overhead is very large. Therefore, much of the work on LDPC decoder design has been directed towards achieving optimal tradeoffs between hardware complexity and decoding throughput. In particular, a time-multiplexed or folded approach [3], which is known as a partially parallel decoder architecture, has been proposed.
Recently, several partially parallel decoder designs [4]–[10] for “block structured LDPC codes” or “architecture-aware LDPC codes” have been developed using elements such as check node units (CNUs), variable node units (VNUs), and interconnection networks between CNUs and VNUs. These approaches lead to decoders having a reduced number of clock cycles per iteration, which results in higher decoding throughput. In [5], the sum and sign accumulation unit for the CNU is used in computing a portion of each row while the VNU computes each column. The overlapped decoding scheme exploited in [6] for high-rate LDPC codes is similar to the method in [5] except that a CNU computes a portion of a row by accumulating partial results. To achieve a faster convergence compared to the overlapped, two-phase decoding scheme, turbo-decoding message-passing [7], or a layered decoding [8] schedule and architecture for regular structured codes have been proposed. However, conventional layered decoders use
Manuscript received August 15, 2009; revised November 18, 2009. First published March 29, 2010; current version published May 25, 2011. This work was supported in part by the Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI).
S. Kim and G. E. Sobelman are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: sangmin@ece.umn.edu; sobelman@umn.edu).
H. Lee is with the School of Information and Communication Engineering, Inha University, Incheon 402-751, Korea (e-mail: hhlee@inha.ac.kr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2010.2043965

A. Layered Decoding Scheme

Structured regular or irregular LDPC codes are described by an

M N H M M=z N N=z 2 = b b base matrix b with b

= and b

, where

M N is the number of parity check equations, is the code length,

z H and is the size of a square sub-matrix. The parity check matrix

of a structured LDPC code can be viewed as the concatenation of

constituent codes [7], where the number of constituent codes is equal

MR = [r r 1 1 1 r ]M T to b. The dataflow of a typical layered decoder is shown in Fig. 1.

Let

12

denote the check-to-variable messages,

r H 1  k  M k k k where corresponds to a constituent code of for

b.

Q Q ( ) and ( +1) are the previously decoded soft output value and

the newly decoded soft output value used for updating the next
L k block row, respectively. ( ) denotes the variable-to-check message r which has entered the decoding update block, and + represents the k k updated check-to-variable message at the th block row. The updated rk check-to-variable message + can be expressed as [8]

r+k = 0 sign(L(k)) 1 9 9 L(k)

where

9 (x) = log tanh

x
2

:

(1)

k For notational simplicity, we omit the indices denoting the set of posi-
tions of the columns connected to all check nodes within the th block

row. In Fig. 1, the decoding update block, which was presented as a

check node-based processor (CNBP) in [11], can be implemented for

any decoding algorithm such as approximations of BP.

After the initialization of the layered decoder is achieved using the

(r ) soft values from the channel in the bit update block, the decoder starts
updating messages corresponding to the first constituent code 1 .

The switch network (SN) 1 shuffles the channel soft values based on
r the permutation information obtained from 1. The shifted messages Q r (1) from SN 1 and the check-to-variable messages 1 read from L memory are used to compute the variable-to-check messages (1).

r L r The decoding update block computes the check-to-variable messages

+ 1

based

on

(1) and stores

+ 1

back

into

memory.

The

updated

posterior messages are computed by adding the recently updated

Q check-to-variable messages to the variable-to-check messages, then
reshuffled through SN 2 and finally stored as (2) in the bit update

1063-8210/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

Fig. 1. Dataflow of a typical layered decoder.

Q block. This updated soft output value (2) is used to compute mesr sages corresponding to the next constituent code ( 2). Decoding for a r H constituent code ( k) or for the complete is called one sub-iteration
or one iteration, respectively.

B. Block Parallel Decoder Architecture

Compared to the decoder structures presented in [5]–[8], this de-

coder architecture has the following unique characteristics: 1) we gen-

erate offset shifting values for shuffling and reshuffling messages so

that the proposed decoder needs to use only SN 1 rather than two SNs

H and 2) the number of memory banks for check-to-variable messages is
configured to be a row weight of . The first characteristic is achieved

by observing that the operation of the SNs for shuffling and reshuffling

messages is overlapped during the updating of the constituent codes of
H. In other words, the SN 2 block in Fig. 1 reshuffles updated output r messages corresponding to k until the decoder reaches the end of one H iteration for the complete . At the end of a sub-iteration the recently

Fig. 2. Proposed layered decoder. (a) Modified dataflow with offset permutations. (b) Block parallel layered decoder architecture.

updated outputs are shuffled by SN 1 for the next constituent code.

Therefore, the two consecutive operations, reshuffling and shuffling, are not necessary to compute the decoded output within a sub-iteration and this provides an opportunity for reducing the complexity of the
r interconnections. The second characteristic is used to simultaneously
process all messages corresponding to k in one clock cycle. The dataflow of the layered decoder architecture based on the above

sages loaded into the CNBP blocks are then computed for newly updated check-to-variable messages and rotated soft output messages. The check-to-variable messages are stored in the memory, and the rotated soft output messages replace the previous messages in the bit-update register array.

two characteristics is shown in Fig. 2(a). The decoding steps are al-

most the same as in the conventional decoding with the exception of the ordering patterns in the bit update block and the offset permuta-
P P tions through SN 1. Let (k) and (k+1) be the previous and updated P Q soft outputs, respectively. Note that (k+1) = ( (k+1)) is a perQ mutation of (k+1). The top-level architecture using the layered mode

III. ALGORITHM FOR GENERATING OFFSET VALUES OF SWITCH NETWORK
We present a novel algorithm to generate offset values for switch networks which leads to the elimination of SN 2. A decoder design using this proposed algorithm decreases the hardware cost by removing

with offset permutations for SN 1 is illustrated in Fig. 2(b). During an initialization operation, the incoming soft message is shifted into the bit updating register array. Then, the registered MUX block simultaneously loads the required messages into SN 1. Following that, SN 1 rotates the input messages by the amount of the offset permutations. The check-to-variable messages and the rotated variable mes-

redundant shifting operations.
H In general, indices of the base matrix b = (hm;n) are usually
represented by cyclically shifting the columns of the identity matrix
Iz2z to the right or left by hm;n places, where hm;n 2 f0; 1; . . . ; z 0
1g [ f01g, for m = 1; . . . ; Mb and n = 1; . . . ; Nb, in which “01” represents null (i.e., all-zero) submatrices. We denote two Mb 2 Nb

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

1101

A = ( ) matrices of precomputed cyclic shifts for SN 1 and 2 as

am;n

B and = (bm;n), respectively, where am;n, bm;n 2 f0; 1; . . . ; z01g[

A B f01g, for m = 1; . . . ; Mb and n = 1; . . . ; Nb. The required cyclic
shifting values of and can be set according to either shuffling

0 1 . . . 1 A B or reshuffling operations for SN 1 or SN 2, respectively. All integer
elements i, where i 2 f ; ; ; z 0 g, of and can be stored in a

dedicated lookup table (LUT). The proposed algorithm for generating

offset shifting values can be described as follows.

Algorithm 1

for

n=1 m 01

:

Nb

while am;n == 01

sm;n 0 01

m 0m+1

end
sm;n 0 am;n
m 0m+1
while m  Mb
l 0m01 while bl;n == 01 and l  1
l 0l01

end
sm;n = am;n bl;n m 0m+1

end

2 Fig. 3. Example of generating offset values for the switch networks. (a) 4
H5 . (b) Typical layered decoder. (c) Proposed decoder.

D Given the shifting information and the hard decisions x, we can

y = E x E precompute the output ordering information

1 , where can

be written as

pd O

111 O

E=

O pd
...

...

O 111 O

...
pdO

:

end

where

a8b=

01; (a +

b)mod

z;

a = 01 or b = 01
otherwise.

S = In the above, we indicate that each element sm;n of the matrix
( ) sm;n is an offset shifting value. Therefore, we need only use SN 1
with offset shifting information sm;n, which exploits the characteristic structure of the layered decoding scheme. Based on a given set of sm;n

O I Here, indicates a z 2z zero matrix, and pj is obtained from the z2z y by cyclically shifting the columns to the right by j elements. From the
output ordering information , the decoded data can be easily mapped
H to the output ports of this decoder without extra hardware cost.
1) Example: The base matrix b in Fig. 3(a) is a 4 2 5 array of 3 2 3 cyclicly-shifted identity or all-zero matrices. The control signals
A B represented in matrix form, and , for SN 1 and SN 2 as shown in H Fig. 3(b) can be determined based on the elements of the b. We com-
pute offset control signals and decoded output mapping information, which are illustrated in Fig. 3(c), by using the proposed Algorithms 1 and 2.

shifting values, we can reduce the amount of hardware required by re-
moving any unnecessary 2 2 2 switches from the switching network.

IV. HARDWARE COMPLEXITY COMPARISON

x H x 0 = [ . . . ] = To

compute the x1; x2;

p; axrNityTc,hwechkicehqiusathtieonsasmuseiansgdtehteerhmaridnidnegciof ded1

output ,

the shifting information for performing the parity check equations and

D = ( ) = 1 . . . for sorting correctly the hard decision output is needed after each it-

eration. The shifting information

dn , for n ; ; Nb, is

described in Algorithm 2.

In layered decoding architectures the number of memory bits is reduced by nearly 50% and the number of iterations for achieving the same error rate is also reduced by almost 50% compared with traditional decoder designs [8]. To show the low complexity of the block parallel processor in the layered decoding scheme, we compare it with different decoder architectures.

Algorithm 2

for n = 1: Nb

m 0 Mb

dn 0
while

dbmn ;n==
m 0m

01 01

dn 0 bm;n

end

end

The irregular LDPC code in the IEEE 802.15 standard has a 16 by

H H 32

= 21 b with z

, so that its parity check matrix

has 16 2 21

rows and 32 2 21 columns. Tables I and II present, for three different

designs, characteristics of the key components used and the estimated

total number of hardware resources required, respectively (note that

designs A [4] and B [5] do not use layered decoding). In Table I, design

A is obtained using a folding factor of 4 for both the CNUs and the

VNUs in a time-multiplexed approach and it requires eight clock cycles

to complete one decoding iteration. Design B uses a set of sum and sign

accumulation units (SSAUs) in addition to the CNUs and VNUs. In this

design, the CNUs and SSAUs are fully parallel while the VNUs have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

TABLE I KEY COMPONENT CHARACTERISTICS FOR THREE DIFFERENT DESIGNS

TABLE II ESTIMATED TOTAL HARDWARE RESOURCES FOR THREE DIFFERENT DESIGNS

Fig. 4. Simplified diagram of a block parallel layered decoding unit, the CNBP.

a folding factor of 8, and it requires nine clock cycles to complete one decoding iteration.
To perform a fair comparison with the hardware complexity of designs A and B, we use a standard Log-BP structure in the CNBP as shown in Fig. 4. For simplicity, sign-magnitude (SM), 2’s complement (2’s) and exclusive-or (XOR) units are not shown in the figure. Pipeline registers are inserted to provide the same critical path in all 3 designs, which is equal to the path from a LUT to an eight-input adder tree block.
H For the matrix considered here, there are no data dependencies beH tween adjacent layers while updating posterior messages. For other
matrices having such dependencies, stalls could be used to avoid conflicts in the pipeline.
The decoding throughput can be approximated as

 N 2 f 2 R Throughput

clk

N 2 N + N clk

iter

latency

(2)

f R N where clk is the clock frequency, is the code rate, clk is the number N of clock cycles required for an iteration, iter is the average number of N iterations, and latency is the number of clock cycles due to the pipeline
latency. Note that a layered decoding scheme needs only about half the average number of iterations compared with designs A and B in order to achieve same error rate. Therefore, the proposed design uses about twice as many clock cycles per iteration (i.e., 16 clock cycles versus 8 for design A and 9 for design B) with no throughput degradation. As shown in Table II, the hardware complexity of the decoding processing units and the amount of memory required for the proposed design is significantly smaller than for either design A or B.

N = 672 Fig. 5. Simulated performance for

, rate-1/2 irregular LDPC code.

( = 8) Maximum number of iterations

. (a) Bit error rate for the proposed de-

sign. (b) Average number of iterations using the (6, 2) quantization.

using a block parallel architecture. The min-sum decoding algorithm, which is a modified version of the standard Log-BP algorithm, is exploited in the CNBP, which has four pipeline stages. Based on the sim-
ulated performance results of Fig. 5(a), we use a (q; f) = (6; 2) quanq f tization scheme, where and are the total bit size and the number of
fractional bits, respectively. Furthermore, our decoder typically needs only three iterations to converge at a signal-to-noise ratio of 3 dB, as shown in Fig. 5(b).

V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

N = = 336 We designed an

672 (data length

), rate-1/2 irregular

LDPC decoder based on the proposed offset control scheme for the SN

Our SN uses a Benes network [13] in which the unnecessary switches have been removed, and it uses three pipeline stages in order to reduce the critical path delay. As a result, the critical path of the pipelined SN
2 is three 2 2 switches. This decoder was implemented on the Xilinx

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

1103

TABLE III XILINX VIRTEX4 XC4VLS200 FPGA SYNTHESIS RESULTS
Virtex-4 xc4vls200 FPGA. To provide a fair comparison, we also implemented a conventional layered decoding design for the same code using the same quantization and pipelining techniques. The synthesis results for both designs are given in Table III. The proposed decoder, using only a single SN, results in 9.3% reduction in the number of slices with no degradation in the decoding throughput.
The proposed decoder has a pipeline latency of nine clock cycles, of which seven cycles are due to the SN 1 and CNBP blocks and the other two cycles are due to the registered MUX and DEMUX blocks. The information decoding throughput is estimated to be approximately
2 2 (335 MHz) 336=(8 16 + 9) = 822 Mb/s based on the maximum
clock frequency of 335 MHz (from the synthesis timing report) and using a maximum of eight decoding iterations and the pipeline latency of nine cycles. The estimated gate count (14 adders, 20 muxes, and 11 XOR gates per VNU and CNU) in [9] is based on a different code, i.e., a 3456-bit, rate 1/2, (3, 6)-regular code, i.e., having a column weight of 3 and a row weight of 6. The design in [9] requires 12 clock cycles per iteration, while our decoder design requires only three clock cycles per iteration. However, the estimated gate count of our design (21 adders, 31 muxes, and 11 XOR gates) is higher than that of [9].

[5] S. Kim, K. K. Parhi, and R. Liu, “System and method for designing RS-based LDPC code decoder,” U.S. Patent App. US2007-0033484, Feb. 8, 2007.
[6] L. Liu and C.-J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Nov. 2008.
[7] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[8] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Austin, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[9] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and Y. Liu, “High-throughput layered LDPC decoding architecture,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 582–587, Apr. 2009.
[10] K. K. Gunnam, G. S. Cho, and M. B. Yeary, “A parallel VLSI architecture for layered decoding for array LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. VLSI Des., Bangalore, India, Jan. 2007, pp. 738–743.
[11] S. Kim, G. E. Sobelman, and H. Lee, “Flexible LDPC decoder architecture for high-throughput applications,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst. (APCCAS), Macao, China, Nov. 2008, pp. 45–48.
[12] Draft Standard for Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications for High Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs): Amendment 2: Millimeter-Wave Based Alternative Physical Layer Extension, IEEE P802.15.3c/D04, 2008. [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org
[13] S. Olcer, “Decoder architecture for arrary-code-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. (GLOBECOM) Conf., San Francisco, CA, Dec. 2003, pp. 2046–2050.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have proposed an efficient architecture for layered LDPC decoding by reducing the interconnection complexity without any degradation in the decoding throughput. Our design requires only a single shuffle network, rather than the two shuffle networks used in prior designs. The results show a 9.3% reduction in the number of required FPGA slices compared to a standard layered decoding architecture. Implementation of a 672-bit, rate-1/2 irregular LDPC code on a Xilinx Virtex-4 xc4vls200 FPGA device achieves an information throughput of 822 Mb/s with a maximum of eight iterations.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[3] K. K. Parhi, VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems: Design and Implementation. New York: Wiley, 1999.
[4] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Joint (3,k)-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1065–1079, Apr. 2004.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

