IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

1433

A 100 pJ/bit, (32,8) CMOS Analog Low-Density Parity-Check Decoder Based on Margin Propagation
Ming Gu, Student Member, IEEE, and Shantanu Chakrabartty, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—One of the key factors underlying the popularity of low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is its iterative decoding algorithm which is amenable to efficient analog and digital implementation. However, different applications of LDPC codes (e.g. wireless sensor networks) impose different sets of constraints which include speed, bit error rates (BER) and energy efficiency. Our previous work reported an algorithmic framework for designing margin propagation (MP) based LDPC decoders where the BER performance can be traded off with its energy efficiency. In this paper we present an analog current-mode implementation of an MP-based (32,8) LDPC decoder. The implementation uses only addition, subtraction and threshold operations and hence is independent of transistor biasing. Measured results from prototypes fabricated in a 0.5 m CMOS process verify the functionality of a (32,8) LDPC decoder and demonstrate the trade-off capability which is realized by adapting a system hyper-parameter. When configured as a min-sum LDPC decoder, the proposed implementation demonstrates superior BER performance compared to the state-of-the-art analog min-sum decoder at SNR greater than 3.5 dB. We show that an optimal configuration of the same MP-based decoder can also deliver up to 3 dB improvement in BER compared to the benchmark min-sum LDPC decoder.
Index Terms—Analog decoders, current-mode circuits, error-correcting code, low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder, margin propagation (MP), piecewise-linear (PWL) approximation.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check codes [1] constitute an important class of capacity approaching error-correcting codes which has seen widespread acceptance in emerging communication standards [2]–[4]. One of the key factors behind the success of LDPC codes is its iterative decoding algorithms [5]–[8] which are scalable and hence can be easily mapped onto digital [9]–[12] and analog [13]–[16] hardware. As LDPC codes are applied to a wide range of applications from digital video broadcasting (DVB) [2] to wireless sensor networks (WSNs) [17], each of these applications imposes a different set of constraints on the LDPC encoding and decoding algorithms and hence demands different performance specifications. For instance, a DVB application might require a lower
Manuscript received January 04, 2011; revised March 03, 2011; accepted March 14, 2011. Date of publication May 02, 2011; date of current version May 25, 2011. This paper was approved by Associate Editor Stefan Rusu. This work was supported by a research grant from the U.S. National Science Foundation (CCF:0728996).
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA (e-mail: guming1@egr.msu.edu; shantanu@egr.msu.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2011.2134550

BER than a WSN application, whereas a WSN application might impose a much stricter energy efficiency constraint on the LDPC decoding than its DVB counterpart. This motivates the need for LDPC decoders whose BER performance can potentially be traded off with respect to its energy efficiency. While this trade-off can be achieved in digital LDPC decoders by changing the decoding time and the number of iterations [10], [18], analog LDPC decoders require a system hyper-parameter that can modify the dynamics of the decoding process to achieve this trade-off.
In our previous work, we had reported a margin propagation (MP) based LDPC decoding algorithm [19], [20] and demonstrated that adapting a system hyper-parameter can achieve different levels of message sparsity and hence energy efficiency, however, at the expense of different BERs. In this paper, we present a current-mode implementation of a CMOS analog MP-based LDPC decoder. Like other analog LDPC decoders [14], [15], [21], [22], MP-based decoders can also demonstrate superior power/speed ratio and lower switching noise compared to their digital counterparts [9]–[12]. Also, the use of analog decoding eliminates the need for high speed analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion which is typically required for digital decoder implementations, which could lead to significant savings in power and silicon area. However, there are additional advantages of MP-based decoders when implemented using CMOS analog circuits, which includes: 1) the operation of the MP decoder is invariant to the MOS transistor biasing (weak, moderate and strong inversion) [23]; 2) improved dynamic range due to current-mode implementation.
The functionality of the MP-based LDPC decoder is verified and characterized using a (32,8) decoder prototype fabricated in a 0.5 m standard CMOS process. The measurement results validate our previously hypothesized ability of analog MP-decoders to adapt its BER and energy efficiency by adjustment of a system hyper-parameter. We show that, when configured as a min-sum decoder the BER performance of the proposed implementation outperforms a benchmark state-of-the-art min-sum decoder [14] at SNR levels greater than 3.5 dB. Also, when an optimal value of the system hyper-parameter is chosen, the proposed decoder outperforms the benchmark min-sum decoder by more than 3 dB.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the conventional LDPC decoding algorithm and describes the basic operational principles underlying the proposed MP-based LDPC decoding technique. In Sections III and IV, the architecture and circuit implementation of the basic decoder modules, namely, the check node module and the variable node module, are described. In Section V, we describe the experimental setup

0018-9200/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1434

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

Similarly, each variable node receives messages from its

neighboring check nodes

and re-computes messages

that will be sent to the check node (denoted by

)

according to

(2)
Fig. 1. Tanner graph corresponding to a 32-bit (3,4) LDPC code.

and measurements obtained from fabricated decoder prototypes. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper by discussing new directions and extensions of the proposed architecture to emerging low-voltage technology.
II. LDPC CODES AND DECODING ALGORITHMS
A. LDPC Codes and Tanner Graph

where

denotes the initial value of the message computed

using the noisy signal-levels (corresponding to transmitted bits)

received over the communication channel.

Equation (1) is typically considered the most computation-

ally intensive part of the LDPC decoding algorithm and several

approximation techniques have been proposed in the analog and

digital VLSI literature to reduce the computational complexity.

One such approach is a min-sum based LDPC decoder which

approximates the

in (1) according to

The structure of an LDPC code can be graphically repre-

sented using a Tanner graph [5], an example of which is shown

in Fig. 1. It consists of variable nodes ,

which

are connected to check nodes ,

using edges. where

From Fig. 1, it can be seen that the LDPC code consists of 32

(3) .

variable nodes and 24 check nodes. The number of variable C. MP-Based LDPC decoding

nodes can be interpreted as the length of the codeword trans-

mitted in a communication system. In this paper, the number of

edges associated with each check node and variable node (also

known as the degree of the node) will be denoted by and .

If each check(variable) node has the same

, the LDPC

code is deemed as a regular LDPC code, otherwise, it is an ir-

regular one [24]. A regular LDPC code can be expressed with

the degrees

. Thus, the LDPC code represented by Fig. 1

Margin propagation (MP) provides a lower message sparsity

and yet a more accurate approximation to the (1) [19]. MP ap-

proximation has been described in detail in [29] and in this sec-

tion, we provide a brief outline to support the hardware descrip-

tion provided later in this paper. Given a set of scores

,

, MP approximation computes a normalization

factor according to the constraint:

is a 32-bit (3,4) LDPC code, or a (32,8) LDPC code.

Let denote the set of check nodes connected to the variable

(4)

node and

represent the set of check nodes other than

that are connected to variable node . Similarly, let denote the set of variable nodes connected to the check node and
represent the set of variable nodes other than the node connected to .

where

is a rectification operation and

represents a hyper-parameter of the approximation. For the

sake of consistency, we will express to be the output of a MP

function

whose inputs will be the set of scores

B. Conventional LDPC Decoding Algorithms

,

of size and the hyper-parameter .

In [19], we proved that the MP function is a piecewise-linear

Conventional LDPC decoding algorithms are either based (PWL) approximation to a log-sum-exp function according to

on (a) the sum-product formulation [25] or it’s approximation

commonly referred to as (b) the min-sum formulation [6] or its

(5)

variants like (c) the normalized and offset min-sum algorithms

[26]–[28].

In a sum-product based decoding algorithm, each check

node receives messages (log-likelihood ratios) from its set

of neighbors (denoted by

) and computes

messages to be sent to the variable nodes

(denoted by

) according to

which is illustrated graphically in Fig. 2 for a two-input MP-based function which is compared against an equivalent two-input sum-product and min-sum function. In [19], we showed that the parameter controls a theoretical measure of energy efficiency of an MP-based LDPC decoder. This is shown in Fig. 3 which is obtained using a three-parameter

Monte Carlo simulation of a 1000-bit (3,6) LDPC code. It can

be seen that for a fixed SNR, there exists an optimal value of

(hence energy efficiency) that yields the best BER perfor-

(1) mance. This indicates that a correct choice of could provide

where

an optimal performance in terms of energy efficiency and

and equivalently

.

BER performance. Also, Fig. 3 could be used as a calibration

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GU AND CHAKRABARTTY: A 100 pJ/bit, (32,8) CMOS ANALOG LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK DECODER BASED ON MARGIN PROPAGATION

1435

Fig. 2. Comparison of 3D LDPC check function for (a) sum-product (b) min-sum and (c) margin propagation with

.

If the log-likelihood ratios s are represented by their differ-

ential forms as

, with

, and

, then (3) can be rewritten as

(7)

Fig. 3. Effect of adapting hyper-parameter ferent AWGN channel conditions).

on BER performance (for dif-

Once the check function has been expressed in terms of logsum-exp functions, we can apply the MP-based approximation according to the procedure described in Section II-C. The MP approximate check function (5) is written as
(8)

curve for designing adaptive LDPC decoders with varying where and are given by specifications of energy efficiency.

III. IMPLEMENTATION OF MP DECODER CHECK NODES

As shown in (4), MP approximation requires addition, subtraction and rectification. Each of these operations can be im-

(9)

plemented in a CMOS process using basic conservation laws

(e.g. Kirchhoff’s current summation) which scale across tran-

sistor operating regimes (weak, moderate and strong inversion).

Therefore, the same decoder architecture can be operated at dif-

ferent decoding speeds by scaling the bias current and hence

by scaling its power dissipation. In this section, we describe the

current-mode circuits which has been used for implementing the

check node module of the proposed MP-based LDPC decoder.

A differential topology has been adopted to represent the posi-

tive and negative log-likelihood ratios and for canceling out any

common-mode interference.

We used the check node in Fig. 1 as an example to explain

the implementation details. is connected to the variable nodes

, , , and . To avoid long mathematical notations we

will denote the message from to

as

and the messages

as ,

as and

as . The check function, according to (1) can

then be written as:

These equations are also applicable for computing messages

,

, and

.

Fig. 4 shows the architecture of the check node imple-

menting (9). The differential messages generated by the vari-

able nodes are selected and the permutations and summations

are carried out according to the (9). The summation results are

then processed by individual MP units as described in (9). The

output produced by the respective MP units ( and in (9))

are then propagated to the neighboring variable nodes.

Fig. 5(a) shows the current-mode implementation of the (9).

The currents

in Fig. 5(a) represent the differential vari-

ables

in (9),

, 2, 3. The hyper-parameter in (9)

is represented by the current . The circuit has two operational

modes: (a) when the reset signal

is set to logic low, tran-

sistor pulls the gate voltage of transistors

low and

the output current is set to zero (implying no message is

conveyed); (b) when the reset signal

is set to logic high,

the gate voltage of set to which determines the current

(6)

. At equilibrium, the output current MP condition (4).

is determined by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1436

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

speed of the circuit. However, the matching between the transis-

tors

is important because it ensures that the constraint

in (4) is accurately satisfied.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE VARIABLE NODE

We will use the variable node to illustrate the basic oper-

ation as described by (2). The architecture of the variable node

is shown in Fig. 6 and the circuit implementation for computing

the message propagated from variable node to check node

is shown in Fig. 7. The currents represent the posi-

tive part of differential message

. Similarly,

and

represent the

and

. These currents are summed at node

and mirrored through transistors and . Similarly, the cur-

rent through equals the sum of all the negative portion of the

differential message. For brevity, we denote the two summed

currents as and as shown in Fig. 7, where

(10)

The two currents and are compared at node and when is greater than , the current through equals to the pos-
itive part of the differential message propagated from the variable node to the check node. A similar circuit computes the negative part of the differential message. Thus, we realize the differential form of (2) as

if otherwise.

if otherwise.

(11)

Note, the transistors and in Fig. 7 act as current limiters where the common-mode current and hence the total power dissipation of the decoder can be limited using the voltage .

Fig. 4. Architecture of the check node in Fig. 1.

V. MEASUREMENT RESULTS

Fig. 8 shows a system level schematic of the (32,8) LDPC

The PMOS diodes through ensures a unidirectional decoder corresponding to the Tanner-graph shown in Fig. 1.

flow of current thus implementing the rectification operation Besides the variable node and the check node modules, the

in the (4). The subtraction operations in (4) are implemented decoder also integrates the following modules to facilitate

by transistors

and the summation constraint is im- output buffering and testing through an external digital inter-

plemented using the Kirchhoff’s current summation at the node face (FPGA in this paper):

. However, the diodes introduce a threshold voltage drop re- (a) A 6-bit current-mode digital-to-analog converter

quiring a larger supply voltage (

). An alterna-

(DAC), used to digitally programming initial messages

tive low-voltage implementation is shown in Fig. 5(b) which

(currents) in (10). Its MSB of the DAC is denoted by

consists of a cascode PMOS through . The implementa-

whereas the LSB is denoted by . The architecture of

tion eliminates the threshold voltage drop but potentially suf-

the current DAC (shown in Fig. 8 is based on the popular

fers from current leakage between neighboring stages as shown

resistive divider [30] where the current through each

in Fig. 5(b). This situation could occur when one of the branch

branch is twice as large as its neighbor. The output as

currents is much larger than the other. In the proposed imple-

determined

mentation, we have chosen the circuit shown in Fig. 5(a). Since (b) by the bits

is a binary weighted sum of currents

the operation of the circuit is based on the Kirchhoff’s current

which are mirrored into each of the variable node mod-

law, it is functional irrespective of the biasing condition of the

ules.

transistors. Consequently, the magnitude of current can vary in (c) Output comparators, which are used to compute the de-

a wide range from pA to , which only effects the operational

coded bits by comparing the differential variable node

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GU AND CHAKRABARTTY: A 100 pJ/bit, (32,8) CMOS ANALOG LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK DECODER BASED ON MARGIN PROPAGATION

1437

Fig. 5. (a) Circuits for implementing the check node module using the MP algorithm: (a) design used in this paper; and (b) an alternate low-voltage circuit.

Fig. 7. Circuit to implement variable node.

(d) Digital sample-and-hold input buffer is a shift reg-

ister chain which converts the serial input

to the

decoder IC into parallel bit slices that are processed by

the DAC module. As shown in Fig. 8, there are two sets

of non-overlapping control signals for the shift register

chain:

and

. and . In one period,

when (

and

), the previous stage data

is sampled; and when (

and

), the sampled

data is held during while the DAC module processes the

latched bits.

(e) Digital sample-and-hold output buffer is also a shift

register chain which sample the parallel decoded bits

Fig. 6. Architecture of variable node in Fig. 1.

(from the comparator modules) and convert them into a

bit-serial format .

The microphotograph of a prototype MP-based LDPC de-

currents when the decoder has reached equilibrium. For coder fabricated in a 0.5 m standard CMOS process is shown

example, if is greater than , the output of the com- in Fig. 9. Table I summarizes the main specifications of the chip.

parator is logic “high” and indicative of the bit “0” The measurement setup used to evaluate the fabricated chip

being decoded. Note that the comparator needs to be reset is shown in Fig. 10. The decoder chip is hosted on a daughter

before each comparison is made.

board which is then mounted on a test station mother board. A

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1438

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

Fig. 8. System level schematic of the (32,8) LDPC decoder.
TABLE I SPECIFICATIONS OF THE MP-BASED ANALOG LDPC DECODER
second mountable daughter board hosts a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) which is responsible for clock generation and data synchronization. A sample timing diagram for all the digital signals used by the LDPC chip (shown in Fig. 8) and generated by the FPGA are shown in Fig. 11. The FPGA selectively programs the on-chip DACs to emulate data received over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel after which the FPGA enables the analog decoding core. The output of the decoder is latched on the comparator after a pre-deter- Fig. 9. Die microphotograph of the chip. mined decoding time and the latched bit-stream is serially retrieved by the FPGA. As shown in Fig. 10, the experimental PC. The C script emulates the AWGN channel and generates setup is also controlled through a Visual Studio interface on a 6-bit signal values at different SNR levels. These bit patterns are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GU AND CHAKRABARTTY: A 100 pJ/bit, (32,8) CMOS ANALOG LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK DECODER BASED ON MARGIN PROPAGATION

1439

Fig. 10. Experimental setup of the chip.

Fig. 12. Comparison of BER of the MP-based LDPC decoder using software simulation and measurements from the fabricated prototypes.

Fig. 13. Comparison of BERs of the measured MP-based LDPC decoder and a benchmark min-sum LDPC decoder.

Fig. 11. Timing diagram of digital signals used to control the operation of the LDPC decoder chip.
throughput is set to 320 Kbps; and (b) when the MP-based

decoder is configured with an optimal setting of the hyper-pa-

then stored on the SDRAM of the FPGA which uses the values rameter

. For comparison we have included BER results

to perform real-time decoding. After each noisy transmission, reported for a state-of-the-art analog min-sum decoder [14].

decoded bits are retrieved from the LDPC chip and stored on The results in Fig. 13 show that for

, the performance of

the FPGA’s SDRAM. At the end of each Monte Carlo run, the MP-based min-sum LDPC decoder is inferior to the benchmark

Visual Studio interface transfers the data logged on the SDRAM min-sum decoder [14] at low SNR, however, at high SNR

and computes the overall BER. The MATLAB interface is also ( 3.5 dB) the performance of MP min-sum decoder outper-

used to adapt the bias voltages of the decoder through a National forms the benchmark. When

, the results show that the

Instruments data acquisition card.

MP-based LDPC decoder outperforms the benchmark min-sum

Fig. 12 compares the BER performance of a software imple- decoder by more than 3 dB.

mentation of the MP-based decoder and the measured results Fig. 14 shows the measured BER curves for different values

obtained from the fabricated prototype. For this experiment the of the hyper-parameter . Again, for this experiment the de-

decoding throughput was set to 320 Kbps and the hyper-param- coding throughput is set to 320 Kbps. As increases ( in-

eter was optimally chosen based on iterative experiments as creases), it can be seen that the BER of the MP-based LDPC

described later. At low SNR, the hardware implementation out- decoder first improves and then degrades, which is consistent

performs its software counterpart which could be attributed to with the BER-SNR- trade-off previously demonstrated only

the continuous-time dynamics of the analog decoder. However, using simulation results (shown in Fig. 3).

at high SNR the software implementation outperforms its hard- Fig. 15 shows the measured BER performance (under dif-

ware counterpart which could be attributed to the limited dy- ferent SNRs) when the decoding time (inverse of decoding

namic range of the programming DACs and due to the offset speed) is varied. For this experiment, is held constant at

and gain errors introduced by the current mirrors.

0.74 V (correspondent to one of the four curves shown in

Fig. 13 shows the measured BER curves which are obtained Fig. 14). It is seen that as the decoding time is increased, the

under the conditions: (a) when the system is configured to BER performance improves, which is consistent with the re-

operate as a min-sum decoder

[19] and the decoding sponse of previously reported analog decoders [14]. When the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1440

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011
TABLE II CMOS DIGITAL (TOP 4) AND ANALOG (BOTTOM 6) DECODERS

Fig. 14. Comparison of measured BER performances for different values of Fig. 15. Measured BER performances of the MP-based LDPC decoder

the hyper-parameter .

for different decoding times (throughput).

decoding time is reduced to less than 2.5 s (data throughput an energy efficiency much lower than the MP-based design.

12.8 Mb/s), the BER performance starts to decreases rapidly. Moreover, the turbo decoder has a longer codeword length than

When decoding time is as low as 833 ns (data throughput ours. The benchmark min-sum LDPC decoder [14] has the same

38.4 Mb/s), the BER (measured at SNR 7 dB) could be codelength as the proposed MP-based LDPC decoder. However,

13 times higher than the BER measured at data throughput of the former measured the energy efficiency based on the power

12.8 Mb/s.

consumption for the whole chip, while the latter based on the

Table II compares the measured specification of the fabri- core, which makes the comparison difficult. However, it can be

cated MP-based LDPC decoder to the specifications of different seen that the throughput of the MP-based LDPC decoder is more

digital and analog decoders reported in literature. The compar- than twice that of the benchmark min-sum LDPC decoder. In

ison shows that the MP-based LDPC decoder has the second terms of energy efficiency, the MP-based LDPC decoder has the

highest throughput amongst the reported analog decoders. How- second highest energy efficiency. Whereas the (8,4) Hamming

ever, the turbo decoder with the highest throughput [31] has Trellis graph decoder, which has the highest energy efficiency,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GU AND CHAKRABARTTY: A 100 pJ/bit, (32,8) CMOS ANALOG LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK DECODER BASED ON MARGIN PROPAGATION

1441

has a much lower throughput than this implementation. In terms the operational region the transistors are biased in. Thus, using

of the silicon area, the proposed implementation achieves inte- the MP-based technique it is possible to implement analog

gration density comparable to that of [14], considering the dif- decoders operating with currents ranging from femtoamperes

ferences in the respective technology feature size.

to microamperes.

The table of comparison also shows that state-of-the-art

digital decoders can also enjoy high energy-efficiencies as

REFERENCES

the analog decoders. This is because these implementations exploit highly parallel architecture [9], [10], early termination techniques [18], post-processing methods [32] and aggressive feature and voltage scaling. However, it should be noted that unlike analog decoders, digital decoders require an analog-to-digital converter to digitize the analog channel information. For instance, the digital decoder reported in [32] requires 4 to 6-bit digital inputs and the energy efficiency metric (pJ/bit) reported in Table II does not incorporate the power dissipation of the ADC.

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[2] ETSI EN 302 307, Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications ver. 1.1.2, Jun. 2006.
[3] B. Bangerter, E. Jacobsen, M. Ho, A. Stephens, A. Maltsev, A. Rubtsov, and A. Sadri, “Wireless technologies: High-throughput wireless LAN air interface,” Intel Technical J., ser. 3, vol. 7, Aug. 2003.
[4] Y. Rashi, E. Sharon, and S. Litsyn, “LDPC: Efficient Alternative FEC for the TFI-OFDM PHY Proposal,” IEEE 802.15 Working Group for WPAN [Online]. Available: http://www.grouper.ieee.org/groups/

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS

802/15/pub [5] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981. [6] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary

In this paper, we have proposed an implementation of an analog LDPC decoder based on MP algorithm. The use of MP-based decoding allows trading off the BER performance with respect to the energy efficiency of the decoder and hence can be adapted to a wide range of applications. A proof-of-concept prototype has been fabricated in a 0.5 m CMOS technology and measured results validate the trade-off capability of the decoder using a system hyper-parameter. The measured results show that the BER performance of the MP-based decoder outperforms a benchmark state-of-the-art min-sum decoder at SNR levels greater than 3.5 dB and can achieve energy efficiencies greater than 100 pJ/bit at a throughput of 12.8 Mbps. Even though we chose the 0.5 m CMOS technology for implementing the MP-decoder, we envision the proposed decoder being attractive for sub-100-nm

block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-42, no. 3, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996. [7] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999. [8] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001. [9] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640 Mbps 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006. [10] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002. [11] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps bitserial block-interlaced min-sum LDPC decoder in 0.13- m CMOS.,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conf., 2007, pp. 459–462. [12] T. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. C. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, S. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, P. Goud, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture

CMOS processes. The architecture of the decoder is modular and hence can be scaled up to implement longer codes like the ones used in DVB-S2. However, for large analog decoders,

with bit-serial message exchange,” Elsevier Integration–The VLSI J., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 385–398, May. 2008. [13] J. Hagenauer and M. Winklhofer, “The analog decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT ’98), Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998,

the effect of mismatch and environmental variations could be significant and has to be considered during the design phase and ultimately incorporated into the automation and verification

p. 145. [14] S. Hemati, A. Banihashemi, and C. Plett, “A 0.18- m CMOS analog
min-sum iterative decoder for a (32,8) low-density parity-check (LDPC) code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 11, pp.

tools. Also, implementing a large scale decoder would imply longer interconnects which will require larger driving currents. Hence, maintaining a strict control over the distribution of currents (or messages) would be the key towards ensuring energy efficiency. MP-based LDPC decoder allows such a control through the use of the hyper-parameter . Also, due to aggressive scaling (feature size and power dissipation) of digital CMOS technology, low-voltage analog circuits that can be integrated with low-voltage digital designs are becoming one of the major requirements [33]. Even though the supply-voltage has been aggressively scaled, the threshold voltage of the transistor can not be significantly reduced due to exponential increase in the sub-threshold leakage power [34]. Therefore, there is a need for analog computing circuits that can operate across multiple biasing conditions ranging from weak-inver-

2531–2540, Nov. 2006. [15] C. Winstead, N. Nguyen, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Low-voltage
CMOS circuits for analog iterative decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 53, pp. 829–841, Apr. 2006. [16] V. Gaudet, “Energy efficient circuits for LDPC decoding,” CMOS Emerging Technologies, 2007. [17] S. B. Qaisar, S. Karande, K. Misra, and H. Radha, “Optimally mapping an iterative channel decoding algorithm to a wireless sensor network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2007, pp. 3283–3288. [18] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008. [19] M. Gu, K. Misra, H. Radha, and S. Chakrabartty, “Sparse decoding of low density parity check codes using margin propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, Nov. 2009, pp. 1–6. [20] M. Gu and S. Chakrabartty, “An adaptive analog low-density paritycheck decoder based on margin propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, May 2011, accepted. [21] C. Winstead, J. Dai, S. Yu, C. Myers, R. Harrison, and C. Schlegel, “CMOS analog MAP decoder for (8,4) Hamming code,” IEEE J. Solid-

sion, moderate-inversion to strong-inversion regime. Since the underlying principle of MP decoder is based on current conservation, the proposed circuits function no matter what

State Circuits, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 122–131, Jan. 2004. [22] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarköy, “Prob-
ability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 837–843, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1442

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

[23] S. Chakrabartty, “CMOS analog iterative decoders using margin propagation circuits,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, Greece, 2006, pp. 5003–5006.
[24] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[25] F. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[26] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[27] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[28] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Min-sum decoder architectures with reduced word length for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 105–114, Jan. 2010.
[29] C. Kong and S. Chakrabartty, “Analog iterative LDPC decoder based on margin propagation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 1140–1144, Dec. 2007.
[30] C.-H. Lin and K. Bult, “A 10-b, 500-MSample/s CMOS DAC in 0.6 mm ,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 1948–1958, Dec. 1998.
[31] V. Gaudet and G. Gulak, “A 13.3-Mb/s 0.35 m CMOS analog turbo decoder IC with a configurable interleaver,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 2010–2015, Nov. 2003.
[32] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolić, “An efficient 10GBASE-T ethernet LDPC design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[33] International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, ITRS, 2010 [Online]. Available: http://www.itrs.net
[34] A. Balankutty, S.-A. Yu, Y. Feng, and P. R. Kinget, “A 0.6-V zero-IF/ low-IF receiver with integrated fractional-N synthesizer for 2.4-GHz ISM-band applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 538–553, Mar. 2010.
[35] D. Vogrig, A. Gerosa, A. Neviani, A. Amat, G. Montorsi, and S. Benedetto, “A 0.35- m CMOS analog turbo decoder for the 40-bit rate 1/3 UMTS channel code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 40, pp. 753–762, Mar. 2005.

Ming Gu received the B.E. and M.E. degree in automation science and electrical engineering from the Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Beijing, China, in 2000 and 2003, respectively, and the M.E. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, in 2008.
From 2003 to 2006, she worked as a Research Engineer in the Center for Space Science and Applied Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. She is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree at Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI. Her research interests include mixed signal VLSI circuits design, error-control coding, and analog signal processing.
Shantanu Chakrabartty (SM’99–M’04–S’09) received the B.Tech. degree from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India, in 1996, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, in 2002 and 2005, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Michigan State University. From 1996 to 1999 he was with Qualcomm Incorporated, San Diego, CA, and during 2002 he was a visiting researcher at the University of Tokyo, Japan. His work covers different aspects of analog computing, in particular non-volatile circuits, and his current research interests include energy harvesting sensors and neuromorphic and hybrid circuits and systems. Dr. Chakrabartty was a Catalyst foundation fellow from 1999 to 2004 and is a recipient of the National Science Foundation’s CAREER award and Michigan State University’s Teacher-Scholar Award. He is currently serving as an associate editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS OF BIOMEDICAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, associate editor for the Advances in Artificial Neural Systems journal, and a review editor for the Frontiers of Neuromorphic Engineering journal.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:46:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

