1416

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

An 847–955 Mb/s 342–397 mW Dual-Path Fully-Overlapped QC-LDPC Decoder for WiMAX
System in 0.13 m CMOS
Bo Xiang, Dan Bao, Shuangqu Huang, and Xiaoyang Zeng, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a partially-parallel dual-path fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for the WiMAX system. By adopting five techniques including symmetrical six-stage pipelining, block column and row interleaving, nonzero sub-matrix reordering, sum memory quad-partition and read-write bypass, the decoder continuously scans nonzero sub-matrices two by two in the block row-wise order without any memory access conflict. Two phases are fully overlapped with each other, and the check node updating phase always takes the latest sums from the previous variable node updating phase. The sum memory stores not only the posterior sums but also the prior messages, which saves 11,520 memory bits. It only takes 48–54 clock cycles for the decoder to finish one iteration. The read-write accesses to sum memories are reduced by 24.3%–48.8%. Fabricated in the SMIC 0.13 m CMOS process, the decoder occupies 4.84 mm with core area of 3.03 mm , attains 847–955 Mb/s at 214 MHz and 10 iterations, and consumes 342–397 mW at 1.2 V with power efficiency of 39–46 pJ per bit per iteration.
Index Terms—Block column and row interleaving, decoder architecture, dual-path, fully-overlapped, nonzero sub-matrix reordering, QC-LDPC codes, read-write bypass, symmetrical six-stage pipelining.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, which were invented by Gallager [1], are one kind of linear

block codes with generator matrix and parity-check ma-

trix

, and can be efficiently represented by the

bipartite Tanner graph [2]. They have been widely applied

into broadcast, communication, and magnetic storage systems

since it was proved by MacKay and Neal [3] that they had

outstanding error-correcting performance close to Shannon

limit.

Generally, there are two kinds of parity-check matrices:

1) the pseudo-random [1] and 2) the quasi-cyclic [4]. Due to the

linear encoding complexity and favorable partially-parallel de-

coding architecture, the quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes

are adopted in many systems such as DVB-S2, WLAN (IEEE

802.11n), WiMAX (IEEE 802.16e), DTMB, CMMB, and

maybe the next generation wireless communication systems.

QC-LDPC codes are defined by a sparse parity-check ma-

trix , which is composed of

square sub-matrices.

Each

sub-matrix is either all-zero or cyclically shifted

Manuscript received January 06, 2010; revised January 11, 2011; accepted January 15, 2011. Date of current version May 25, 2011. This paper was approved by Associate Editor Bevan Baas.
The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of ASIC and System, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2011.2125030

from identity matrix by an offset . The parameter is the

expansion factor. Due to irregularity and sparsity of , there

are only nonzero sub-matrices

. Therefore,

QC-LDPC codes can be compactly identified by a base matrix

with positions and offsets of all nonzero sub-matrices.

Fig. 1 shows the base matrix and Tanner graph of QC-LDPC

code

in the WiMAX system, where denotes the

check node weight (row weight) and denotes the variable

node weight (column weight). Table I lists the parameter sets

of all codes.

The original two-phase message-passing (TPMP) algo-

rithm [1] has optimal error-correcting performance, but it is

hard to be implemented for large numbers of exponential,

multiplicative, and lookup-table operations. Based on the

TPMP algorithm, many simplified algorithms come forth. The

log-domain sum-product (SP) algorithm [5], using logarithmic

likelihood ratio (LLR), can avoid exponential calculations and

numerical unstabilities. The min-sum algorithm [6], having low

complexity, suffers a heavy performance loss. Making tradeoff

between performance and complexity, there are three kinds of

variations: 1) the min-sum-plus-correction-factor [7], 2) the

normalized min-sum [8], [9], and 3) the offset-based min-sum

[9]. The first can slightly reduce complexity, and the latter two

are more realizable because they can significantly reduce com-

plexity and memory resource. In addition, the turbo-decoding

message-passing (TDMP) algorithm [10], treating each block

row as a constituent code, has faster convergence speed.

Based on the iterative decoding algorithms, many LDPC de-

coders are implemented. In general, there are two categories:

1) one with much high parallel degrees [11]–[15] and 2) the

other with low parallel degrees [16]–[36]. Due to high level of

parallel computation, decoders of the first category have short

decoding latency and attain high throughput, but they suffer

from large silicon area due to many processing units, registers,

and routing wires. The bit-serial [12], multi-split-row [13], and

1d32x time-multiplexed [15] techniques can reduce routing and

computing complexity to some extent, which make these de-

coders favorable for multi-gigabit applications. Oppositely, de-

coders of the second category have much higher folding fac-

tors, less processing units, and more high-density memories in-

stead of scattered registers, so they feature smaller area but

lower throughput. Due to large and structured matrices of the

QC-LDPC codes, partially-parallel decoders with folding fac-

tors of

, or are widely adopted.

The next generation wireless communication systems

(B3G/4G) with MIMO would be capable of providing from

0018-9200/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AN 847–955 MB/S 342–397 MW DUAL-PATH FULLY-OVERLAPPED QC-LDPC DECODER FOR WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 M CMOS

1417

Fig. 1. QC-LDPC code (2304, 1/2) in the WiMAX system: (a) base parity-check matrix and (b) bipartite Tanner graph.

TABLE I

II. RELATED WORKS

PARAMETER SETS

OF ALL QC-LDPC CODES

IN THE WIMAX SYSTEM

Generally, there are two primary types of partially-parallel

decoder architectures for QC-LDPC codes

. The

difference between them lies in parallel strategy. For the ar-

chitectures [16]–[23] of the first type, CNU processors and

VNU processors work concurrently. Each CNU processor

updates one row per clock cycle, and rows of one block row

are updated serially in clock cycles. Similarly, each VNU

processor updates one column per clock cycle, and columns

of one block column are updated serially in clock cycles.

Totally, it takes about

clock cycles per iteration for the

non-overlapped decoders. Taking different applications into

account, there are some variations such as [24] with

CNUs and

VNUs, [25] ` '

with CNUs and one

hundreds of megabits to one gigabit per second with high reliability. To meet these throughput requirements, a partially-parallel dual-path fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder is proposed in this paper. The decoder adopts the improved TDMP algorithm based on the normalized min-sum [8] algorithm and the TDMP [10] algorithm. Only the first and the second minimum magnitudes, the position of the first magnitude, and the sign bits pertaining to each check node are stored in memories. For each block row, the variable node updating (VNU) phase

VNU, [26] with one CNU and VNUs, and [36] with

CNUs and

VNUs. For the architectures [28]–[33] of the

second type, CNU processors and VNU processors work

concurrently. Each CNU processor updates one row serially

in clock cycles, and rows of one block row are updated

simultaneously. Similarly, each VNU processor updates one

column serially in clock cycles, and columns of one block

column are updated simultaneously. Totally, it takes about

clock cycles per iteration for the non-overlapped decoders.

closely follows the check node updating (CNU) phase. For two In addition, there are also some variations such as [34] with

adjacent block rows, CNUs of the current block row always

CNUs and VNUs, [14], [15] with CNUs and

takes the latest sums from VNUs of the previous block row. VNUs, and [35] with

CNUs and VNUs. The architec-

With symmetrical six-stage pipelining, block column and row tures [16]–[22] of the first type need no permutation networks,

interleaving, nonzero sub-matrix reordering, sum memory update each row or column in one clock cycle, and are much

quad-partition, and read-write bypass, each phase continuously suitable for the original TPMP and min-sum-plus-correc-

scans nonzero sub-matrices two by two in the block row-wise tion-factor algorithms. However, the architectures [28]–[31],

order without memory access conflicts. The decoder architec- [33] of the second type need permutation networks, scan each

ture can be adapted into any system with QC-LDPC codes. row or column serially in multiple clock cycles, and are much

The paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly reviews suitable for the normalized min-sum, offset-based min-sum,

the related works about the partially-parallel QC-LDPC de- and TDMP algorithms.

coders. Section III introduces the improved TDMP algorithm. To improve the throughput further, two-phase overlapping

The proposed decoder architecture is presented in Section IV. can be applied into partially-parallel decoder architectures. For

Section V shows the implementation results. Finally, Section VI the traditional TPMP decoding process, two phases work alter-

concludes the paper.

nately [18]–[22], [28], [29] as shown in Fig. 2(a). If the column

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1418

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

Fig. 2. Two-phase overlapping in partially-parallel decoder architectures: (a) non-overlapped TPMP algorithm, (b) partially-overlapped TPMP algorithm, (c) non-overlapped TDMP algorithm, and (d) partially-overlapped TDMP algorithm.

Fig. 3. Solutions of access conflicts to sum memories: (a) partial base parity-check matrix, (b) using additional FIFO, (c) memory partition with single-path fully overlapping, and (d) proposed memory quad-partition with dual-path fully overlapping.

processing cycle 1 of VNU phase needs no data from the row with more than 16 transistors are not area-efficient. Overall, the

processing cycle of CNU phase (no data dependency), two decoding latency can be cut down further, but the decrements

phases can be overlapped partially [16], [17], [23], [24], [36] depend heavily on the structure of

. The decoders [16],

as shown in Fig. 2(b). For the TDMP decoding process, two [17] can fully overlap two phases in some optimal cases. How-

phases are interleaved together [30]–[33] as shown in Fig. 2(c). ever, the decoder [36] can only overlap 1/3 decoding latency at

For each block row , the column processing cycle closely fol- most due to data dependency.

lows the row processing cycle. The row processing cycles al- Besides the data dependency, the memory access conflict is

ways use the latest sums from the previous column processing another factor that prevents further overlapping and unfolding

cycles, which speeds up the convergence twice at most. In the in hardware implementation. That is to say, the number of con-

same way, two phases can be overlapped partially if they have current read-write accesses to some memories is beyond their

no data dependency [34] as shown in Fig. 2(d). For other ar- supplies. There are two ways of settling the problem: 1) ad-

chitectures [14], [15], [25] ` ' , [27], each row is updated ditional memory and 2) memory partition. Fig. 3 shows these

concurrently in one clock cycle, but each column is updated se- two solutions for the second type of partially-parallel TDMP de-

rially in multiple clock cycles, and vice versa. Two phases are coder architectures. For the parity-check matrix

as shown

fully interleaved with each other, but they need large numbers in Fig. 3(a), there is an additional FIFO in decoders [31], [33],

of scattered registers instead of high-density memories. Com- [34], [35] which stores the temporary prior messages from CNU

pared with the static memories which are typically composed of to VNU as shown in Fig. 3(b). The size of the FIFO is lin-

six-transistor bit cells, the scattered registers (D-type Flip Flops) early proportional to the check node weight . If the sum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AN 847–955 MB/S 342–397 MW DUAL-PATH FULLY-OVERLAPPED QC-LDPC DECODER FOR WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 M CMOS

1419

memory can be divided into two independent banks by some

rules as shown in Fig. 3(c), the FIFO would be unnecessary.

Two two-port memory banks can supply two independent read

or write ports for fully-overlapped decoders. However, memory

partitions are very difficult for the irregular QC-LDPC codes be-

cause the distribution of nonzero sub-matrices in

is spo-

radic, random, and unordered. Memory partition for one block

row may be unbefitting for another block row. Unfolding CNUs

and VNUs by a factor of

(dual paths), there would be

more memory access conflicts. With memory quad-partition,

a dual-path fully-overlapped decoder architecture proposed in

this paper can greatly improve the throughput and completely

solve the data dependency and memory access conflict without

the additional FIFO as shown in Fig. 3(d). Each phase scans

nonzero sub-matrices two by two without stalls.

III. DECODING ALGORITHM
The original TPMP decoding algorithm [1] propagates belief messages between check nodes and variable nodes in multiple iterations. Due to high computing complexity, it is scarcely considered in the LDPC decoders. However, the normalized min-sum decoding algorithm [8], [9], which is simplified from the original TPMP algorithm, can significantly reduce the complexity and memory bits for intermediate messages. Therefore, it is widely adopted in many applications. The key function of the CNU processor is as follows:

(1)

where

denotes the LLR from check node to vari-

able node in the second half of th iteration,

de-

notes the LLR from variable node to check node in the

first half of th iteration,

denotes the set of variable

nodes connected with check node excluding variable node

, and denotes the normalization factor. Equation (1) reveals

that the CNU processor can be implemented by some simple

compare-and-select and shift-and-add operations, and only the

message component set (the first and the second minimum mag-

nitudes, the position of the first magnitude, and the sign bits)

needs to be stored. All LLR messages from one check node to

its neighboring variable nodes can be condensed into the com-

ponent set and then be recovered from it again.

The TDMP decoding algorithm [10], [31], treating each block

row of

as a constituent code, propagates belief messages

not only between check nodes and variable nodes but also be-

tween one constituent code and the other constituent code. That

is to say, the updated messages from one constituent code are fed into the next constituent code immediately, which will speed up the convergence twice at most. Decoding of one constituent code corresponds to a sub-iteration, and decoding of all constituent codes corresponds to a whole iteration. Each row of the constituent code is updated as a single parity check (SPC) code. The soft-in soft-out (SISO) engine of the constituent code is as follows:
(2)

where

denotes the extrinsic LLR from check node

to variable node in the th sub-iteration of th iteration,

denotes the posterior LLR (sum) of variable node

in the

th sub-iteration of th iteration,

denotes

the prior LLR from check node to variable node in the th

sub-iteration of th iteration, and the acronym BCJR denotes

the trellis decoding algorithm [37] for SPC codes.

Taking advantages of the normalized min-sum algorithm and

the TDMP algorithms, an improved TDMP algorithm is pre-

sented by substituting the SISO engine (2) of the TDMP algo-

rithm with the CNU function (1) of the normalized min-sum

algorithm.

The proposed decoder scans nonzero sub-matrices two by

two in the block row-wise order. Let

denote the block row index, and

denote the block column indexes,

denote the posterior messages (sums) pertaining to one block

column,

denote the component sets

pertaining to one block row,

denote

the extrinsic messages pertaining to one nonzero sub-matrix,

and

denote the prior messages per-

taining to one nonzero sub-matrix. For every two nonzero sub-

matrices, the messages of the CNU phase are updated as shown

in (3)–(6), and the messages of the VNU phase are updated as

follows:

(7)

(8)

As in [29], the permutation block cyclically shifts the sums of

each block column by an offset ; the recover block recovers the

extrinsic messages from the component sets; and the searcher

block updates the component sets of each block row. The pos-

terior messages

and

in (3) are initialized by

(3) (4) (5) (6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1420

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

Fig. 4. Proposed iterative decoding process.

stores the dual-path updating order of nonzero sub-matrices

for the VNU phase. The OFFSET ADJUAST stores the offset

adjustments for different code lengths. The PRE OFFSET store

the offsets of the last updated nonzero sub-matrices in each

block column. The SUM bank stores not only the posterior

sums but also the prior messages. The MAG, POS, FLAG, and

SIGN banks store the component sets of the extrinsic messages.

Most of the memories are single-port register files.

Each phase concurrently scans two nonzero sub-matrices

(paths A and B) per clock cycle in the block row-wise order.

The previous sums

and

of variable nodes

and read from sum memories get through two inde-

pendent permutation networks. Meanwhile, two recovers

and recover the previous extrinsic messages

and

from component sets

. All permutated

sums and recovered extrinsic messages are fed into 96 CNU

processors to update the component sets. The prior messages

generated in the CNU phase are written back to sum memories

immediately. When the CNU phase of one block row is done,

the updated component sets

are written back to mem-

ories. Meanwhile, they are fed into another two recovers

and to recover the updated extrinsic messages

and

for the following VNU phase. All recovered extrinsic messages and prior messages from sum memories are fed into

192 VNU processors to update the posterior sums

and

the intrinsic messages (received channel values), and the com-

ponent set

in (4) is initialized by a zero vector.

The decoding process terminates when the hard-decision se-

quence satisfies the parity-check matrix

or it

attains the predefined maximum iteration number .

For the partially-parallel decoder architectures, (3)–(8) indi-

cate that only the sum of each variable node and the component

set of each check node need to be stored, and that all other in-

termediate messages can be calculated from them. Especially,

the prior messages

and

, which are generated

in the CNU phase and utilized to update the sums of variable

nodes in the following VNU phase, should be temporarily stored

, which are written back to sum memories finally.

The proposed decoder architecture is configurable for any

QC-LDPC code

. All codes

can share

the proposed decoder architecture without any hardware

overhead. Changing the base matrix

, only the mem-

ories CNU COL OFFSET and VNU COL are reconfigured.

Therefore, the base matrix has no effect on the decoder area.

However, the size of sub-matrix has effect on the offset cal-

culation and memory width. To reduce the power dissipation of

the code with small size by clock gating, large data widths are

split into small pieces ( 128 bits) which are stored in different

register files.

in a memory as a result of the serial scanning. In our proposed decoder architecture, sums and prior messages share the same B. Symmetrical Six-Stage Pipelining

memory without read-write access conflicts. Fig. 4 shows the proposed decoding process with dual-path fully-overlapped decoder architecture. The data stream should be interleaved based on block columns before decoding, and deinterleaved after decoding.

Due to the following three features: 1) dual-path processing, 2) fully overlapping, and 3) memory sharing by sums and prior messages, read-write access congestions of sum memories are key issues for both phases. To solve the access conflicts and to improve the throughput, a symmetrical six-stage pipelining is

introduced, which is shown in Fig. 6.

IV. PROPOSED DECODER ARCHITECTURE

As shown in Fig. 6(a), the CNU phase is pipelined in four stages: 1) reading sums and component sets (Rd), 2) per-

A. Proposed Decoder Architecture

mutating sums and recovering extrinsic messages (Per/Rec), 3) calculating prior messages (Add), and 4) writing prior mes-

Fig. 5 shows the block diagram of the proposed dual-path sages and searching the component sets (Wr/Sea). As shown

fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder. It is made up of a cen- in Fig. 6(b), the VNU phase is also pipelined in four stages:

tral controller, ROMs, register files, permutation networks, re- 1) reading prior messages (Rd), 2) recovering extrinsic mes-

covers, CNU processors, and VNU processors.

sages (Rec), 3) calculating sums (Add), and 4) writing sums

The COL MAP stores the orders (block column indexes) (Wr). For the VNU phase, the first stage Rd and the second

of the block column interleaving. The CNU COL OFFSET stage Rec can be processed in parallel since there is no data

stores the dual-path updating orders and corresponding offsets dependency between them. However, to get the symmetrical

of nonzero sub-matrices for the CNU phase. The VNU COL pipelining, the stage Rd is arranged one clock cycle in advance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AN 847–955 MB/S 342–397 MW DUAL-PATH FULLY-OVERLAPPED QC-LDPC DECODER FOR WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 M CMOS

1421

Fig. 5. Block diagram of the proposed dual-path fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder.

Fig. 6. Symmetrical pipelining: (a) four-stage pipelining of the CNU phase, (b) four-stage pipelining of the VNU phase, and (c) six-stage pipelining of the whole decoding process.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1422

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

Fig. 7. Overlapping of block rows: (a) between reading schedule of CNU and reading schedule of VNU and (b) between reading schedule of CNU and writing schedule of VNU.

The pipelining features two symmetries: 1) each phase has

. The first quadrant contains those block columns

four-stage pipelining; and 2) read-write accesses to memories that

. The second quadrant contains those

occur at the first and the last stages of each pipelining. In block columns that

. The third quadrant con-

other words, writing operation regularly occurs three clock tains those block columns that

. The fourth quad-

cycles later than reading operation for every memory entry rant contains those block columns that

. If

. Using two-port register files for sums, the all the nonzero sub-matrices in each block row distribute into

first stage of the CNU pipelining is overlapped with the last these four quadrants evenly, the sum memory can be easily di-

stage of the VNU pipelining, and vice versa. Therefore, the vided into four banks (quadrants) to supply four independent

whole decoding process is pipelined in six stages as shown in read-write ports without memory access conflicts for the pro-

Fig. 6(c). Due to dual-path computation, four reading accesses posed dual-path fully-overlapped decoder architecture.

and four writing accesses to sum memories per clock cycle are Let correlation

denote the number of block

required.

columns in which both block rows and

have nonzero

With symmetrical pipelining, the schedule of writing oper- sub-matrices, and

denote the clock cycles be-

ations is the same as reading operations. There would be no tween the reading stage and the writing stage of the same

writing access conflicts if reading access conflicts are nonex- nonzero sub-matrix as shown in Fig. 6(c). For the proposed

istent. As a result, the following sections would concentrate on decoder with six-stage pipelining

, reading

how to solve reading conflicts.

schedules of block rows and

have

clock

C. Matrix Interleaving and Reordering

cycles overlapped, and reading schedules of block rows

and

have

clock cycles over-

For all irregular QC-LDPC codes, nonzero sub-matrices lapped as shown in Fig. 7(a). Similarly, reading schedule of

locate randomly and unevenly in

. For the proposed block rows and writing schedule of block row

have

dual-path fully-overlapped decoder architecture, each nonzero

clock cycles overlapped, and reading schedule

sub-matrix needs two read accesses and two write accesses to of block rows and writing schedule of block row

sum memories per iteration. Therefore, if the decoder follows have

clock cycles overlapped as

the original row-wise order of nonzero sub-matrices, the access shown in Fig. 7(b). To avoid pipelining bubbles from data

conflict would arise frequently and the power dissipation for dependency, the allowable maximum correlation

memory accesses would be very large.

is

, and the allowable maximum correlation

According to the block column index

is

. To reduce power

, the base matrix is partitioned into four quadrants

dissipation, the read-write bypass technique can be adopted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AN 847–955 MB/S 342–397 MW DUAL-PATH FULLY-OVERLAPPED QC-LDPC DECODER FOR WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 M CMOS
TABLE II ALLOWABLE MAXIMUM CORRELATIONS AT DIFFERENT CODE RATES

1423

for

and

nonzero sub-matrices. Much block row is serially scanned in four clock cycles. No waiting

more sums of correlations indicate that much more read-write cycle exists between two consecutive iterations.

accesses to sum memories can be bypassed. Table II lists the As shown in Fig. 8(c), each phase continuously scans nonzero

allowable maximum correlations at different code rates.

sub-matrices two by two in the block row-wise order. The upper

Therefore, to solve memory access conflict and to reduce row of each phase scans the even-column nonzero sub-matrices,

power dissipation, the base matrix

should be sequentially and the lower row scans the odd-column nonzero sub-matrices.

pre-processed with 1) block column interleaving, 2) block row The integers out of brackets are block column indexes , and

interleaving, and 3) nonzero sub-matrix reordering. After steps the integers in brackets are remainders of block column indexes

1) and 2),

should feature the following three points:

divided by four

. Four remainders at each clock

1) Nonzero sub-matrices in each block row distribute into cycle are different with one another (0, 1, 2, and 3) mostly. How-

four quadrants

as evenly as possible; ever, there are two exceptions at the 28th clock cycle (0, 1, 0, and

2) The sum of all correlations

is as much as pos- 3) and at the 38th clock cycle (0, 1, 2, and 1). Both exceptions

sible within the allowable scope,

can be solved easily by read-write bypass technique. Writing op-

erations occur three clock cycles later than reading operations

, so the updated sums of the zeroth and 21st block

columns from the VNU phase are ready to be written to sum

(9) memories at the 29th clock cycle. When the CNU phase reads sums of the zeroth and 21st block columns at the 28th clock

3) The sum of all correlations sible within the allowable scope,

is as much as pos- cycle (one cycle earlier), the updated sums are directly carried from the VNU phase to the CNU phase without read-write accesses to sum memories. Totally, there are 37 nonzero sub-ma-

trices can be handled similarly.

All regular and irregular QC-LDPC codes

can

(10)

be pre-processed in the same way. If nonzero sub-matrices in some block rows don’t distribute into the four quadrants evenly,

Based on the three guidelines, the matrix interleaving and the

nonzero sub-matrix reordering of code (2304, 1/2) are presented

in Fig. 8. For the original base matrix in Fig. 8(a), the base ma-

trix after some block column and row interleaving is shown in

Fig. 8(b) where the numbers in brackets are the original posi-

tions. For code (2304, 1/2) in the WiMAX system (

and

), the allowable maximum correlation

is 8, and the allowable maximum correlation

is 0.

After block column and row interleaving, the sum of

rises from 12 to 37, but the sum of

reduces from 23

to 0. For the proposed decoder without bypass technique, each

the memory access conflict can be solved by adopting read-

write bypass or inserting pipelining bubble (stall). If correla-

tions

and

go beyond the allowable

maximum scopes, the data dependency can be decoupled by

inserting pipelining bubble (stall). The number of pipelining

bubbles would be much smaller than the number of nonzero

sub-matrices in

. Therefore, the base matrix has slight ef-

fect on the decoder throughput. Overall, the matrix interleaving

and nonzero sub-matrix reordering are not unique, and they only

change the updating orders without any error-correcting perfor-

mance loss.

nonzero sub-matrix needs four

accesses to sum memories.

However, for the proposed decoder with bypass technique, each D. Sum Memory Quad-Partition, Cross, and Bypass

nonzero sub-matrix defined by

or

only

needs two

accesses to sum memories. That is to say, the

read-write accesses to sum memories can be reduced by

As shown in Fig. 8(c), two groups of sums are read from memories and two groups of prior messages are written to memories in the CNU phase. Meanwhile, two groups of prior mes-

sages are read from memories and two groups of the updated

sums are written to memories in the VNU phase. Equations

(3)–(8) indicate that the lifecycles of the prior messages happen

(11) to lie between reading sums in the CNU phase and writing the updated sums in the VNU phase, which are also shown in Fig. 6

Fig. 8(c) presents the rearranged updating order of nonzero sub- (c). Therefore, the prior messages pertaining to one nonzero

matrices for each phase. Due to data dependency and six-stage sub-matrix can be stored temporarily in the same cells of sum

pipelining, the VNU phase is delayed for six clock cycles. Each memories, where the corresponding sums are stored. In this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1424

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

Fig. 8. Matrix interleaving and nonzero sub-matrix reordering of code (2304, 1/2): (a) original matrix, (b) matrix after interleaving, and (c) rearranged updating order.

case, it saves additional two-port memories of

Sum memories with depth are partitioned into four inde-

bits.

pendent banks (quadrants) that store sums and prior messages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AN 847–955 MB/S 342–397 MW DUAL-PATH FULLY-OVERLAPPED QC-LDPC DECODER FOR WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 M CMOS

1425

Fig. 9. Cross and bypass controlling of partitioned sum memories.
TABLE III CLOCK CYCLES PER ITERATION AND DECREMENTS OF MEMORY ACCESSES WITH BYPASS

for block column indexes

, and block to get into the corresponding data paths. The cross blocks

respectively. In the WiMAX system,

and are controlled by bank tags

. The two-way messages

. The bank tag

and bank address

from sum memory banks also go through the bypass block with

are derived from block column index

: the two-way messages from the VNU phase. If the delayed

writing memory tags and addresses in the VNU phase are the (12) same with the reading memory tags and addresses in the CNU

(13) phase, the read-write accesses to sum memories are bypassed, and the messages are carried from the VNU phase to the CNU

After sum memory quad-partition, the proposed decoder hap- phase directly.

pens to read/write messages from/to four different banks each With symmetrical six-stage pipelining, block column and

time. The cross and bypass blocks, which are shown in Fig. 9, row interleaving, nonzero sub-matrix reordering, sum memory

are the necessary data exchange networks. The four-way input quad-partition, and read-write bypass, the proposed dual-path

messages from two phases pass through the input cross block fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder can be implemented.

to get into the corresponding banks. Contrarily, the four-way Table III lists the required clock cycles per iteration and decre-

output messages to two phases pass through the output cross ments of sum memory accesses with bypass technique. It only

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1426

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

only controlling logic is for the multiplexers

.

By inserting the pipelining registers after the first logarithmic

shifter as shown in Fig. 10, the critical path is reduced by half.

At SMIC 0.13 m CMOS and 400 MHz, synthesis result in-

dicates that the proposed permutation network only occupies

0.097 mm with 19.4K logic gates.

Conventionally, the updated sums from the VNU phase should

be permutated in reverse before they are written back to sum

memories. To reduce the silicon area and power dissipation

further, the proposed decoder directly delivers the updated

sums into memories without permutation. For each two nonzero

sub-matrices in the CNU phase, sums read from sum memories

are shifted cyclically with two relative offsets, which are shown

in Fig. 11(a) and (b). The current offsets are read from memory

CNU COL OFFSET, and the previous offsets are read from

memory PRE OFFSET. Due to dual-path decoding process,

there are two register files storing the previous offsets for odd and

even block columns, respectively. After two nonzero sub-ma-

trices are processed, two previous offsets in register files are

overwritten by the delayed current offsets. The relative offsets

are the modulo- differences between the current offsets and the

previous offsets, which are calculated as shown in Fig. 11(c).

Following the proposed configurable permutation networks

Fig. 10. Configurable permutation network ( 96 ways).

with relative offsets, the output hard-decision sequence should be permutated in reverse to recover the original order after the

decoder terminates the decoding process.

takes 48–54 clock cycles for the decoder to finish one iteration. The read-write accesses to sum memories are reduced by F. Extrinsic Message Recover

24.3%–48.8%. It also enumerates the number of clock cycles of VNU delay and the number of null operations. Memory read-write accesses dominate the power dissipation of the partially-parallel QC-LDPC decoders. Therefore, large memory access decrements can greatly reduce the power dissipation of the proposed decoder.

To reduce memory resource, all updated extrinsic messages pertaining to a check node are condensed into the component set. Two extrinsic messages for the CNU processor are recovered by recovers and , and two extrinsic messages for the VNU processor are recovered by recovers and . Fig. 12 shows the recover architecture. The key function is a four-to-one

E. Configurable Permutation Network

There are two independent permutation networks for data

paths A and B, respectively. Each one is composed of two cas-

cade 96-way logarithmic shifters as shown in Fig. 10. Different

from Benes and Banyan networks, it only supports cyclic-shift

widths equal to or less than 96.

Parameters and split the input sequence of length 96 into

three pieces A, B, and C as shown in Fig. 10. Pieces A and B

denote the valid data, and piece C denotes the dummy data. The

input sequence gets through the first logarithmic shifter by a

shift width of length

, then gets through the second log-

arithmic shifter by a shift width of length

, and

finally passes through a group of multiplexers. The final output

sequence is assembled with part B of the first shifted sequence

and part A of the second shifted sequence. The parameter

is a random integer between 0 and

, so the first loga-

rithmic shifter needs seven

stages. The parameter

is an integer between 24 and 96 with constant step four in the

WiMAX system, so the second logarithmic shifter only needs

five

stages, and directly bypasses the last two

multiplexer with two-bit selector address. One bit is the com-

paring result of the current block column index and the position

of the first minimum magnitude

. The other

bit, which is the sign bit of the updated extrinsic message, is

calculated from the sign bit of the prior message and the final

flag bit

.

Equations (4) and (5) reveal that the extrinsic messages are

subtracted from the posterior sums in the CNU phase. Equations

(7) and (8) reveal that the updated extrinsic messages are added to

the prior messages in the VNU phase. The decoder adopts twos

complement representation of signed digit numbers. To realize

a subtractor, it needs two additional operations of ones comple-

ment and addition by one, which are not area-efficient for large

numbers of CNU processors. By reversing the truth table of the

multiplexers of the recovers and as shown in Table IV,

adders instead of subtractors are adopted in the CNU phase. In

other words, the operations of ones complement and addition by

one are transferred from the CNU processors to the recovers

and without hardware overhead. The synthesis results indi-

cate that the area of all CNU processors is reduced by about 3%.

stages. The proposed configurable permutation network totally

saves about %

hardware resource.

G. Dual-Path CNU Processor

Compared with the permutation network [35], the proposed A dual-path CNU processor as shown in Fig. 13 is made up of

has much simpler controlling logic but longer critical path. The two adders, a searcher, a parity check, and four holding circuits.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AN 847–955 MB/S 342–397 MW DUAL-PATH FULLY-OVERLAPPED QC-LDPC DECODER FOR WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 M CMOS

1427

Fig. 11. Permutation strategy for posterior sums: (a) relative offset for odd columns, (b) relative offset for even columns, and (c) relative offset calculation.
TABLE IV TRUTH TABLE FOR THE MULTIPLEXERS OF THE RECOVERS

The two adders calculate the prior messages, which are directly

fed into the searcher and temporarily written back to sum mem-

ories meanwhile. The searcher serially updates the component

set: 1) the first minimum magnitude, 2) the second minimum

magnitude, 3) the position of the first magnitude, 4) sign

bits, and 5) a flag bit. The four holding circuits keep the com-

ponent set stable in the following VNU phase. Each processor

updates component set with two input data paths A and B, and

is synchronized at the beginning of each block row.

Two most significant bits (MSBs) of sum are sign bits. The

first is the hard-decision bit from the posterior sum, and up-

dated after the last nonzero sub-matrix of each block column

is scanned in the VNU phase. The second is the sign bit of the

posterior sum, and updated in the VNU phase of each sub-it-

eration. Due to different updating cycles, the hard-decision bit

and the sign bit of the posterior sum are stored separately in

sum memories. Two hard-decision bits from paths A and B are

carried into the three-input exclusive-or gate to do parity check

Fig. 12. Extrinsic message recover.

with the feedback bit.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1428

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

Fig. 13. Dual-path CNU processor.

Two prior messages are decomposed into their magnitudes

and sign bits. Two magnitudes are normalized with factor by

some shift-and-add operations, and then carried into searcher

to update the first and the second minimum magnitudes. Mean-

while, two sign bits are carried into the three-input exclusive-or

gate to update the flag bit with the feedback bit.

The CNU phase scans nonzero sub-matrices two by two se-

rially, so it takes about

clock cycles to update all mes-

sages of each block row. All valid sign bits of the updated ex-

trinsic messages are exactly known after

clock cycles.

If the decoder stores all valid sign bits, it needs many regis-

ters to latch the sign bits of the prior messages. The register

number is linearly proportional to the row weight . There-

fore, an efficient storing strategy with a single-port memory of

bits is proposed in this paper. Instead of storing

all valid sign bits, the decoder stores the sign bits of the prior

messages and the final flag bit of each row as shown in Fig. 13.

Every valid sign bit is calculated from the sign bit of the prior

message and the final flag bit by the recover as shown in Fig. 12.

V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

Fig. 14. Chip die photo of the proposed QC-LDPC decoder, occupying 2.2 2.2 mm .

The proposed QC-LDPC decoder is fabricated in the SMIC

0.13 m 1P8M CMOS process. Fig. 14 shows its die photo. improved TDMP algorithm at 10 iterations nearly has the same

There are total 80 input/output (I/O) pins with 56 signal pins error-correcting performances as the TPMP algorithm at 20 iter-

and 24 power/ground (P/G) pins, and 59 memory macros in the ations. Simulation results indicate that matrix interleaving and

implementation. Due to large numbers of successive accesses nonzero sub-matrix reordering have no effect on the error-cor-

to memories, all of them are placed around the chip to equalize recting performance. Compared with the seven-bit quantiza-

the power density. All memories of the same type are placed tion, the six-bit quantization only brings

dB performance

in the array format. The initial chip utilization ratio after floor- loss. Compared with the six-bit TDMP algorithm at 15 itera-

plan is about 75%. To optimize the clock skew, clock network tions, the six-bit TDMP algorithm at 10 iterations brings about

delay, setup time, and hold time, large numbers of special cells 0.3 dB performance loss. There are no error floors when the

are inserted into the design. Therefore, the final chip utilization BER is above . The proposed decoder can get much better

ratio after detail routing is about 85%. The maximum IR-drop error-correcting performance at more decoding iterations for

is about 56 mV. The chip area is

mm , and the different applications.

core area is

mm .

The decoder is tested with some peripheral driving circuits.

The error-correcting performance of code

is pre- The measured peak frequency is 214 MHz. The source volt-

sented in Fig. 15. The proposed decoder adopts the improved ages for I/O and core are 3.3 V and 1.2 V, respectively. The

TDMP algorithm at 10 iterations and six-bit quantization. The working voltages are measured between the power pin and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AN 847–955 MB/S 342–397 MW DUAL-PATH FULLY-OVERLAPPED QC-LDPC DECODER FOR WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 M CMOS

1429

Fig. 15. Error-correcting performance of code (2304, 1/2).

Fig. 16. Measured power dissipation versus iteration number.

ground pin of the chip. For all QC-LDPC codes in the WiMAX number. The standby power dissipation is about 100 mW. At

system, the power consumed by I/O is less than 15 mW. Fig. 16 214 MHz and 10 iterations, the decoder consumes the largest

shows the measured power dissipation including I/O and core power of 397 mW for code (2304, 1/2).

versus iteration number for different codes

, where Let denote the code length, denote the peak frequency,

. Each power curve denote the number of block columns,

denote the prede-

tests three points at one, five, and 10 iterations, respectively. fined maximum iteration number, and denote the code rate.

The power dissipation is directly proportional to the iteration With input and output buffers, the proposed decoder takes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1430

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011 TABLE V THROUGHPUT AND POWER EFFICIENCY AT DIFFERENT CODE RATES
TABLE VI SUMMARY OF DIFFERENT QC-LDPC DECODERS

clock cycles for data initialization, and

clock cycles for The net throughput is derived from (15):

hard-decision bit output. The number of clock cycles per itera-

tion

for each code rate is listed in Table III. So, the gross

(15)

throughput

is calculated by (14):

(14)

As a result, the proposed decoder attains a peak gross throughput of 955 Mb/s at code rate 1/2, and a valley gross throughput

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIANG et al.: AN 847–955 MB/S 342–397 MW DUAL-PATH FULLY-OVERLAPPED QC-LDPC DECODER FOR WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 M CMOS

1431

of 847 Mb/s at code rate 3/4 B. Contrarily, the proposed de- access conflicts. Two phases are fully overlapped with each

coder attains a peak net throughput of 728 Mb/s at code rate other. There is no additional FIFO between two phases. The

5/6, and a valley net throughput of 477 Mb/s at code rate 1/2. sum memories store not only the posterior sums but also the

For the WiMAX applications (

Mb/s), the decoder can prior messages. With bypass technique, the accesses to sum

work at

MHz to meet the throughput requirements, and memories are reduced by 24.3%–48.8%. The proposed decoder

work at iterations to get much better error-correcting per- attains 847–955 Mb/s and only consumes 342–397 mW at

formance. Therefore, the proposed QC-LDPC decoder can be 214 MHz, 10 iterations, and 1.2 V. Therefore, the decoder

flexibly tuned up to different applications.

features great flexibility, small area, high throughput, and

The power efficiency is another effective parameter to eval- low power consumption, and can be easily adapted into other

uate different LDPC decoders. Let denote the total power applications.

dissipation. The gross power efficiency by (16):

is calculated

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.

(16)

Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962. [2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.

The net power efficiency

is derived from (17):

[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp.

(17)

1645–1646, Aug. 1996. [4] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and

Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.

As a result, the proposed decoder has a peak gross power efficiency of 46 pJ per bit per iteration at code rate 3/4 B, and a valley gross power efficiency of 39 pJ per bit per iteration at code rate 5/6. Contrarily, the proposed decoder has a peak net power efficiency of 84 pJ per bit per iteration at code rate 1/2, and a valley net power efficiency of 47 pJ per bit per iteration

[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[6] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electrical Eng., Univ. Linkoping, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftherious, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC

at code rate 5/6. Table V lists the gross and net throughput and power efficiency of the proposed decoder at different code rates.
Table VI summarizes the proposed and the other three QC-LDPC decoders. Symmetrical six-stage pipelining, block column and row interleaving, nonzero sub-matrix reordering, memory quad-partition, and read-write bypass result in large throughput increment and high

codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1036–1036E. [8] J. Chen and M. C. Fossorier, “Decoding low-density parity-check
codes with normalized APP-based algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1026–1030. [9] J. Chen, “Reduced complexity decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check codes and turbo codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electrical Eng., Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, 2003. [10] M. M. Mansour, “A turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix codes,” IEEE Tans. Signal Process., vol.

hardware utilization. Based on the synthesis results, the count of logic equivalent gates is about 470 000
. The gate count can also be calculated from core area

54, no. 11, pp. 4376–4392, Nov. 2006. [11] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2
low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002. [12] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps bit-

. With the six-bit quantization, the proposed decoder needs 72 552-bit memories including 59 304-bit register files and 13 248-bit ROMs. Most of the memories are single-port register files. The proposed dual-path fully-overlapped decoder only takes 48–54 clock cycles for each iteration, attains 847–955 Mb/s at 214 MHz and 10 iterations, and consumes 342–397 mW at

serial block-interlaced min-sum LDPC decoder in 0.13- m CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE CICC, 2007, pp. 459–462. [13] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “Multi-split-row threshold decoding implementations for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, 2009, pp. 2449–2452. [14] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and Y. Liu, “High-throughput layered LDPC decoding architecture,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 582–587, Apr. 2009. [15] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikoli, “A 47 Gb/s

1.2 V with power efficiency of 39–46 pJ per bit per iteration. Compared with the other three decoders [31], [35], and [36], the decoding latency of the proposed decoder is shortened by more than 60%, and the power efficiency is enhanced by more than 60%. Therefore, the proposed QC-LDPC decoder is much more power-efficient than the other three decoders.

LDPC decoder with improved low error rate performance,” in IEEE VLSI Circuits Symp. Dig., 2009, pp. 286–287. [16] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004. [17] N. Chen, Y. Dai, and Z. Yan, “Partly parallel overlapped sum-product decoder architectures for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE SIPS, 2006, pp. 220–225.

[18] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSI decoder

VI. CONCLUSION

architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISLPED, 2002, pp. 284–289.

This paper presents a partially-parallel dual-path fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder. With the techniques of symmetrical six-stage pipelining, block column and row interleaving, nonzero sub-matrix reordering, memory quad-partition, and read-write bypass, each phase scans nonzero sub-matrices two by two in the block row-wise order without memory

[19] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “A 54 Mbps (3, 6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE SIPS, 2002, pp. 127–132.
[20] M. Karkooti and J. R. Cavallaro, “Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE ITCC, 2004, vol. 1, pp. 579–585.
[21] N. Jiang, K. Peng, J. Song, C. Pan, and Z. Yang, “High-throughput QC-LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 251–259, Jun. 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1432

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 46, NO. 6, JUNE 2011

[22] L. Zhang, L. Gui, Y. Xu, and W. Zhang, “Configurable multi-rate decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes based broadband broadcasting system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 226–235, Jun. 2008.
[23] K. Shimizu, N. Togawa, T. Ikenaga, and S. Goto, “Power-efficient LDPC code decoder architecture,” in Proc. IEEE ISLPED, 2007, pp. 359–362.
[24] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.
[25] H. Zhong, W. Xu, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Area-efficient min-sum decoder design for high-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117–4122, Dec. 2007.
[26] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Signals, Systems, and Computers, 2005, pp. 729–733.
[27] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[28] P. Urard, E. Yeo, L. Paumier, P. Georgelin, T. Michel, V. Lebars, E. Lantreibecq, and B. Gupta, “A 135 Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH codes,” in IEEE ISSCC Dig., Feb. 2005, vol. 1, pp. 446–609.
[29] B. Xiang, R. Shen, A. Pan, D. Bao, and X. Zeng, “An area-efficient and low-power multirate decoder for quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1447–1460, Oct. 2010.
[30] D. Bao, B. Xiang, R. Shen, A. Pan, Y. Chen, and X. Zeng, “Programmable architecture for flexi-mode QC-LDPC decoder supporting wireless LAN/MAN applications and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 125–138, Jan. 2010.
[31] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 634–698, Mar. 2006.
[32] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE SIPS, 2004, pp. 107–112.
[33] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, M. Yeary, and M. Atiquzzaman, “VLSI architectures for layered decoding for irregular LDPC codes of WiMax,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, 2007, pp. 4542–4547.
[34] T.-C. Kuo and A. N. Willson, “A flexible decoder IC for WiMAX QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE CICC, 2008, pp. 527–530.
[35] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC decoder chip based on self-routing network for IEEE 802.16e applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 684–694, Mar. 2008.
[36] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, C.-H. Lin, and A.-Y. Andy Wu, “An 8.29 mm 52 mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile WiMAX system in 0.13 CMOS process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 672–683, Mar. 2008.
[37] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[38] B. Xiang and X. Zeng, “A 4.84 mm 847–955 Mb/s 397 mW dualpath fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for the WiMAX system in 0.13 m CMOS,” in IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits Dig., 2010, pp. 211–212.

Bo Xiang received the B.S. degree in microelectronics from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in 2005. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics in the State Key Laboratory of ASIC & System, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include wireless communication systems and their VLSI architecture design, in particular, the channel coding and decoding algorithms, and their VLSI implementations.
Dan Bao (S’10) received the B.S. degree in electronics from Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics (BUAA), Beijing, China, in 2005. From Aug. 2005 to July 2006, he worked as an assistant engineer with Marine Radar Institute, Nanjing, China. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in microelectronics at the State Key Laboratory of ASIC & System, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include ASIC designs, channel decoding techniques and VLSI architectures for broadband wireless transmission systems.
Shuangqu Huang received the B.S. degree in microelectronics from Nankai University, Tianjin, China, 2004. From July 2004 to September 2007, he worked as an assistant engineer with Grand Digital Information Limited Company, Beijing, China. He is currently working toward the M. S. degree in microelectronics at the State Key Laboratory of ASIC & System, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
His research interests include ASIC designs, channel decoding techniques and VLSI architectures for broadband wireless transmission systems.
Xiaoyang Zeng (M’05) received the B.S. degree from Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, China, in 1992, and the Ph.D. degree from Changchun Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2001.
Since 2007, he has been a Full Professor and the Director of the State Key Laboratory of ASIC and System, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, where he was a Postdoctoral Researcher from 2001 to 2003, and later an Associate Professor in the Department of Microelectronics. His research interests include information security chip design, VLSI signal processing, and communication systems. Prof. Zeng is the Steering Committee Member of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, and the TPC member of the IEEE Asian SolidState Circuits Conference and the International Conference on ASIC (ASICON).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

