f`tjjkOMNV m

AN EFFICIENT DECODING IMPLEMENTATION OF PCGC
WITH LOWER ERROR FLOOR
Hui Xue1
,Lijun Zhang1
1School of Electronics and Information Engineering,Beijing Jiaotong University,Beijing, China 
17120194@bjtu.edu.cn

Keywords: PARALLEL CONCATENATTED, ERROR FLOOR, LDPC CODES, PEG

Abstract

Parallel Concatenated Gallager codes usually has error floor phenomenon due to insufficient use of extrinsic information. We propose an effective serial decoding scheme to lower error floor of component LDPC codes through mutual coordination of component decoders. Simulation results show that it outperforms PEG-LDPC codes.
1 Introduction
Parallel Concatenated Gallager codes (PCGC) was first proposed by H. Behairy and Chang [1] [2]. The structure of PCGC is similar to that of Turbo codes except that the inter-leaver is absent in PCGC. Many previous studies [3] on PCGC just aimed at reducing complexity or optimizing the BER performance. For example, the PCGC with single encoder [4] and the PCGC with two set of source bits [5] only obtain BER gains by making small changes to the PCGC structure, but do not make any effective improvements to the decoding scheme. As we all know, a serious weakness in the iterative decoding algorithm of LDPC codes is the error floor phenomenon [6]. This phenomenon severely limits the application in many fields which have strict BER requirement. Numerous studies have been done so far to optimize the error floor phenomenon. The previous studies can be roughly summarized into two categories, code construction [7] [8] and optimization for decoding algorithm [9] [10]. The main motivation of code construction [11] is to avoid generating harmful trapping sets [12] in the Tanner graph because trapping sets have been known as the major factor causing error floor phenomenon. The optimization can also be considered on decoding schemes, but most of them need to get a priori information of the harmful trapping sets,

which is extremely difficult to get. Like the backtracking method [13] or the two-stage decoding algorithm [14], which can efficiently improve the error floor problem but increase the system delay and complexity at the mean time. Consider on the error floor phenomenon, we come up with a novel and efficient decoding scheme base on PCGC structure. It can effectively avoid the influence of trapping sets through the coordination of component decoders, and then significantly reduce the error floor. We also find it has relatively low complexity and better performance when compared with LDPC codes constructed by Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) with equal coding rate and length.
2 Conventional decoder of PCGC
In this section, we first present a detailed description of the conventional encoder and decoder of PCGC and analyse the weakness of the decoding scheme. We show the PCGC encoder in Fig.1. The encoding structure is mainly composed of two different LDPC encoders. The bits x indicates the information bits and  and  indicates the parity check bits corresponding to the first and the second encoder respectively.
(a)

SR
^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQPWNT rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)(b) Fig.1 (a) Encoder of PCGC (b) The structure of PCGC

Before the analyzing of conventional PCGC decoding scheme, we do a review of SPA. The iterative steps under AWGN channel are shown as follow. The i, j represent rows and columns of the parity check matrix H,  represent the element of H. VNs and CNs represent variable nodes and check nodes respectively, and  represent the initial prior information, which is obtained by function (1).

Lj 2yj /d 2



Where  is the received channel value and  is Gaussian noise. Initialization: For all VNs,  is initialized according to function (1), and then for all i, j satisfying    , let   . Step1: Update of CNs For each CN, calculate its outgoing information , according to function (2).

Li j

 2

tanh

-1 

j 
 N

( i ) -{

j}

tanh 

1 2

L

j
i

 

 

(2)

And then transmit to VNs. Where  is the set of the VNs

connected to the #.. except .

Step2: Update of VNs

For each VN, calculate its outgoing information 

according to equation (3).

        

(3)

Where  is the set of the CNs connected to the  except

.

Step3Calculate the sum of  and make a hard decision.

The component decoders of PCGC are all under SPA and

the extrinsic information is denoted by function (3). The

conventional decoding scheme has already dedicated in [1].

As shown in Fig.2,  represents the received bits which corresponding to the information bits x,  and  indicate
the bits which corresponding to the parity check bits of the

component codes. A whole iterate decoding process is

named a super iteration. At the first super iteration, the

decoder 1 computes the extrinsic information  by utilizing the received sequence  and  . The decoder 2 will calculate the extrinsic information  by the 

obtaining from decoder 1. In the next iterations, the decoder 1 will use  which is product from the decoder 2 to calculate the extrinsic information. This process of super iteration will continue until the component decoders all get a valid word or reach the maximum number of super iterations. If all decoders do not success decoded until the max number of iterations is reach, the final output is the decoding result of the decoder 2.
Fig.2 Conventional decoder of PCGC
The conventional PCGC decoding scheme aims to make full use of channel information through the interaction of extrinsic information between component decoders. However, the extrinsic information is transferred between component decoders after each iteration. It can be seen from the extrinsic information defined by function (3) in SPA that its main component is channel information. Since the two component decoders are defined by different matrices H, frequent external information interaction may lead under-utilization of itself information. In other words, it may enhance the influence of channel noise, especially in the low to medium SNR region, where the interference of the noise is much larger than the contribution of the extrinsic information. This phenomenon may lead to more bit errors, increase the possibility of getting caught in trapping sets, and ultimately lead to a higher error floor.
3 Proposed decoder of PCGC
Based on the consideration described above, we do an improvement on the conventional decoding scheme of PCGC. This novel scheme removes the step of information exchange and replaces it with the control signal t. The two component decoders independently work in a serial manner as shown in Fig.3. The details are described below.

SS

^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQPWNT rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)Fig.3 Proposed decoder of PCGC
Initialization: De-multiplex the received sequence r {   }  , into r1 { }  , and r2 { .}  , Initialize the (Log Likelihood Ratio) LLRs of r1 and r2. Set the maximum number of iterations for two component decoders (k1 is much larger than k2). Set control signal t 0 (if t 0, decoder 1 works and   . Else, decoder 2 works and  ). Step1: sent r1 to decoder 1 with SPA. The iterate process continues until decoder 1 converges or k1 is reached. While in the latter case, t 1 and turn to step 2. Step2: sent r2 to decoder 2 with SPA. The iterate process continues until decoder 2 converges or k2 is reached. Step3: if t 0,  , else   .  is considered as the final output. Considered the decoding scheme we described above, it works in a serial mode, so we call it serial decoding scheme (SDS) of PCGC. The SDS firstly does an enough number of iterations at the decoder 1. The decoder 2 is performed only if the decoder 1 fails to converge. This kind of decoding scheme ensures that the decoders can make full use of its own information and maximize its potential power. It should be noted that the two component decoders are defined by different check matrices, and thus they correspond to two different Tanner graph structures. The probability that two component codes have a trapping set at the same bit node is extremely small, and the sequence that cannot successfully converge in one component decoder is very likely to successfully converge in another component decoder, so that the trapping sets are effectively avoided, error floor can be reduced. In addition, the SDS does not require the transmission of extrinsic information between component decoders, which can efficiently avoid the influence of channel noise between component decoders, especially in low SNR region. Thereby, the BER performance can be effectively improved. In the whole decoding process of SDS, the maximum number of iterations of the first component decoder is much larger than that of the second one. Since most of the received

sequences can be successfully decoded in the first component decoder, the second decoder is only set for a small number of sequences that cannot converge even more iterations are performed in the first decoder. This approach avoids the decoder making a lot of useless iterations and reduces the latency of the communication system.
4 Simulation results
This section presents the results of simulation experiments of the SDS for PCGC. We assume all the simulation experiments is under BPSK modulation and AWGN channel. Results show that the SDS has a much better BER performance than the conventional decoding scheme and the LDPC codes constructed by PEG with equal coding rate and code length. Among them, PEG is a very effective and widely used code construction method, which can construct a Tanner graph with a large loop length through greedy algorithm. The LDPC code constructed by PEG is recognized as having an excellent performance and can be considered as the reference standard for judging the performance of other LDPC codes. Example 1: Two coding rate-1/2, (96, 48) regular Gallager codes are used as component codes to form a (144, 48) PCGC.
Fig.4 The performance of the PCGC(144, 48) and the PEG (144, 48) code The BER performance of the conventional decoding scheme and the SDS for PCGC is shown in Fig.4, we found the SDS

ST

^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQPWNT rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)has an obvious lower error floor than conventional scheme. At the BER of  , the performance of the SDS is about 0.8 dB gain when compared with that of conventional scheme. The error floor phenomenon of SDS with k1 80 and k2 20 do not appear when the BER down to  . Simultaneously, the SDS still has about 0.6 dB gains at the BER of  when compared with PEG (144, 48) code. So it can prove that the PCGC is able to achieve excellent performance under SDS. To further verify the advantages of SDS on lowering the error floor of component codes, we puncture the PCGC under SDS. The length and coding rate after puncture are the same as the component codes. Example 2: We apply the SDS and conventional decoding scheme to (144, 48) PCGC after random puncture. The coding rate of PCGC after puncture is 1/2, which is equal to that of the (96,48) Gallager codes. We can see from Fig.5 that the punctured PCGC under conventional scheme converges slowly, and error floor will still appear at the BER of  like the component codes. However, the punctured PCGC under SDS has 0.6 dB gain at BER of  when compared with conventional decoding scheme, the obvious error floor phenomenon does not appear even after the BER down to . This result further proves that the SDS really has great advantages in reducing error floor of component codes.
Fig.5 The performance of Gallager (96, 48) code and the punctured PCGC (144,48)

Complexity Analysis: Conventional BP decoding has about  floating-point multiplications per iteration, where  is the column weight of the parity-check matrix and  is the number of variable nodes. Hence, the total multiplication operations is    , where  is the average number of iteration. We compare the complexity between
the conventional scheme with k 100 and the SDS with
k1 80, k2 20 in example 1. These two schemes all have    and    . In the high SNR such as 4.086 dB, the average numbers of iterations of the conventional decoder is  5814.3 and the average numbers of iterations of the conventional decoder is  .2622.2 Hence, we find the percentage reduction of multiplication operations is

approximate





 



  .

Therefore,

with

about

0.8 dB coding gain and the improvement of error floor phenomenon, the SDS can also reduce complexity by 34.9%.

5 Conclusion

In our research, we came up with a novel and efficient decoding scheme over parallel concatenated structure aiming to reduce the error floor phenomenon. This work shows apart from code construction and improvement of decoding scheme, the parallel concatenated structure also has great potential in reducing error floor of LDPC codes when the structure is under suitable decoding scheme. In our further research, we plan to further ameliorate the performance of SDS and verify its effectiveness for more codes.

6 Acknowledgments
This work is supported by National Science Foundation of China under grant No.61872031 and U1534201.

7 References
[1] H. Behairy and S. Chang, "Parallel concatenated Gallager codes," Electronics Letters, vol. 36, no. 24, pp. 2025-2026, 2000 [2] H. Behairy and S. C. Chang, Analysis and design of parallel concatenated Gallager codes, Electronics Letters, vol. 38, no. 18, pp. 1039- 1040, Aug 2002 [3] R. Pravin Kumar, Rakhesh Singh Kshetrimayum, "An Efficient Methodology for Parallel Concatenation of LDPC codes with reduced complexity and decoding delay", IEEE Proceedings of the National Conference on Communications (NCC), pp. 1-5, February 2013 [4] G. P Aswathy, Niyas K. Haneefa, "Efficient Implementation of Parallel Concatenated Gallager Codes with Single Encoder", Proceedings of IEEE International

SU

^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQPWNT rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)Conference on Communication Systems and Networks, pp. 39-43, July 2016

[5] P. C. Catherine, K. M. S. Soyjaudah, "Parallel Concatenation of LDPC codes with Two Sets of Source Bits", IEEE Proceedings of International Conference on Emerging Trends in Engineering Technology, pp. 112-115, 2011

[6] T. Richardson, Error oors of LDPC codes, in Proc. of the 41st Annual Allerton Conference, Oct. 2003

[7] X. Xiao, M. Nasseri, B. Vasi, and S. Lin, Serial concatenation of ReedMller and LDPC codes with low error floor, in Proc. 55th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Oct. 2017, pp. 688693

[8] M. Nasseri, T. Wang, S. Lin, "Concatenated finite geometry and finite field ldpc codes", International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ICSPCS), 2017

[9] S. Kang, J. Moon, J. Ha, J. Shin, "Breaking the trapping sets in LDPC codes: check node removal and collaborative decoding", IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 15-26, Jan. 2016

[10] Le Dong, Ziyu Zhao, Jing Lei, Er-bao Li, " Lower error floor of LDPC codes based on trapping sets elimination", in Proc. International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP) 2014

[11] Dong Yuan, Lu Li,and Yuanan Liu, Lowering the Error Floors of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes with Additional Check Nodes, in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), 6-10 Nov. 2017

[12] S. Kang, J. Moon, J. Ha, and J. Shin, Breaking the trapping sets in LDPC codes: check node removal and collaborative decoding, IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 1526, Jan. 2016

[13] J. Kang, L. Zhang, Z. Ding, and S. Lin, An Iterative Decoding Algorithm with Backtracking to Lower the Error-Floors of LDPC Codes," in Proc. IEEE Globecom. Conf., New Orleans, LA, Nov. 2008

[14] J. Kang, L. Zhang, Z. Ding, and S. Lin, A two-stage

iterative decoding of LDPC codes for lowering error oors,"

in

Proc.

IEEE

TRANSACTIONS

ON

COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011

SV
^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQPWNT rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)