IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2019

6700605

A Study on Block-Based Neural Network Equalization in TDMR System With LDPC Coding
Ke Luo 1, Shaobing Wang 1, Kheong Sann Chan 2, Wei Chen1, Jincai Chen1,3, Ping Lu1,3, and Weiming Cheng1,4
1Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China 2Nanjing Institute of Technology, Nanjing 211167, China
3Key Laboratory of Information Storage System, School of Computer Science and Technology, Ministry of Education of China, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China 4School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China

To achieve a high track density, two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) is combined with shingled magnetic recording (SMR). SMR makes it possible to record 1 bit on a few grains. However, the performance will be remarkably deteriorated by the increased media noise, the inter-track and inter-symbol interference (ITI and ISI). Therefore, the application of effective equalization and error control coding are required. In this paper, we investigate a simple block-based neural network equalizer (NNE) that mitigates the influence of ITI and ISI. We compare the equalization effects of the NNE and a conventional 2-D equalizer with low-density parity-check (LDPC) coding based on a random Voronoi grain media model. Simulation results show the proposed block-based NNE achieves better bit error rate performance than the conventional 2-D linear equalizer followed by the a posteriori probability (APP) detector and a sum-product (SP) decoder. In addition, we find the block-based NNE is sensitive to write errors.
Index Terms— Error control coding, neural network, two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR), Voronoi grain media model.

I. INTRODUCTION
I N two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR), each encoded channel bit can be recorded on a few grains because of the shingled writing technique. However, the readback performance will be remarkably deteriorated by the inter-track and inter-symbol interference (ITI and ISI), and more importantly, the increased media noise leads to the reduced SNR. Therefore, recovering data correctly requires effective equalization and error control coding. The feasibility of TDMR with a high areal density relies on aggressive 2-D signal processing algorithms, including equalization, detection, and coding. Various equalizers and detectors using neural network have been studied to suppress ITI and ISI. 2-D neural network equalizers (2-D-NNEs) [1], [2] have been proposed to reduce the medium noise and ITI. However, ISI is partly mitigated by combining a 2-D NNE and the traditional partial response (PR) class-I maximum likelihood (PR1ML) channel. In order to alleviate the nonlinear effects due to the track mis-registration (TMR) and media noise, a detection scheme that consists of two multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) has been designed in bit patterned media recording systems [3]. Recently, a proposed log-likelihood ratio (LLR) modulator has shown that a neural network also plays an important role in the decoding process [4]. In previous work [5], we designed a neural network block predictor by exploiting the characteristics of 2-D interference to detect the recorded bits. In this paper, we transform it into an equalizer and integrate it into the LDPC
Manuscript received June 19, 2019; revised July 14, 2019; accepted July 25, 2019. Date of publication August 15, 2019; date of current version October 17, 2019. Corresponding author: J. Chen (e-mail: jcchen@hust.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2019.2931760

coding and decoding system. Under the same experimental conditions, we evaluate the performances of the proposed NNE and conventional 2-D equalizers. In addition, we evaluate the impact of write errors based on Voronoi grain media models.
II. WRITE/READ CHANNEL
We approximate real magnetic grains by a random Voronoi grain model. The grains are represented by randomly distributed Voronoi cells with a certain areal variance. Generally, there are two kinds of methods to generate the grain cells. First, these cells can be obtained by shifting the center of the ideal square cells with controlled random offsets. One can assume the shift of grain centers follows a known probability distribution. This distribution affects the variation in grain sizes, positions, and shapes. There are two typical choices of the probability distribution [6]. The choice of a uniform distribution is simple and the shifted grain centers can be easily controlled within corresponding cells. But it introduces a long-range correlation in grain shapes and positions which is derived from the prior knowledge before shifting the center of the ideal square cells in a large grid. The other choice is a Gaussian distribution which allows the grain centers to cross their corresponding cell boundaries as the blue box in Fig. 1(a). Although it weakens the correlation, an underlying long-range order is still present as shown in the red dashed box in Fig. 1(a).
The other method is to start with the randomly distributed grain nuclei without any predesignated grid of ideal square cells. To avoid the long-range correlation between grain centers and cells, we start with the grain nuclei randomly distributed on a 2-D surface then compute the Voronoi diagrams and measure the area of the diagrams. We split the largest

0018-9464 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:44:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6700605

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2019

Fig. 1. Distribution of Voronoi grains. (a) Example of Gaussian distributed grains by shifting centers. (b) Example of randomly distributed grain centers.

Fig. 2. Block diagram of the write/read system in TDMR.

1/10th of the grains through their centroids into two grains and remove the smallest 1/10th. We repeat until the standard deviation and the mean of the grain areas are within the desired limit as shown in Fig. 1(b). In this model, we keep the ratio of the grain area standard deviation σg to mean μg at 25%, which is close to that for HDD media grains as reported in [7].
We simulate the recording bits by flipping the magnetic polarity of grains whose centroids lie within the corresponding (i, j )-bit cell according to the value ai, j ∈ {±1}. Write errors occur when no grain centroids lie within the bit cells, and the polarities of such cells are thus determined by the surrounding bits. Therefore, the write error rate (WER) differs for diverse grain sizes and bit sizes. It is expected that the smaller is the grain size relative to the bit cell the lower WER can we achieve.
For the readback process, we consider a 2-D interference by exploiting a 2-D circularly symmetric Gaussian read-head impulse response function [7], [8]. The read-head response is a function of cross- and down-track positions xc and xd given by

h(xd , xc) = exp

−

1.348982 xd2 2T520

+

xc2

(1)

where T50 is set equal to the bit period. Then, we get the real-time readback signal by the convolu-
tion of input magnetization and the 2-D read-head response over a region. We consider the valid response region as a local bit area of size 5 × 5 with 5 bits along the down-track

direction and 5 bits in the cross-track direction respectively. Next, we sample in the position around each bit center to get the discrete-time read samples. The ratio of the reader misregistration jitter standard deviation to bit length or width is set to 1%. The system electronic noise represented by the additive white Gaussian noise is added to the readback samples. We define the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the readback signal to the system noise as SNRelec = 10log10(V 2/σ 2), where V is the root-mean-square of the sampled readback signal and σ 2 is the variance of the noise.
Fig. 2 shows the write/read system using an irregular LDPC encoder under the 512 Bytes/sector format in TDMR. The code rate is 0.75. The parity check matrix with a codeword length of 4096 and a column weight of 3 is adopted. We create such a parity check matrix following the construction method used in [9] and we eliminate cycles of length 4 in the factor graph. We assume the recording channel areal density (CAD) is 4 Tbits/in2. The grain size, bit length, and bit width (track pitch) are set to 7.3, 7.3, and 21.9 nm, respectively. The bit size is close to that in [4]. In this case, each channel bit cell contains about three grains. Each recording block consists of 100 encoded channel sequences in 100 adjacent tracks. A total of 50 information blocks are used in our simulation.
III. BLOCK-BASED NEURAL NETWORK EQUALIZER
The block-based NNE is a two-layered neural network, where x (xi , i = 1, 2, . . . , N) denotes the block of readback signals corresponding to each bit located in a neighborhood

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:44:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUO et al.: STUDY ON BLOCK-BASED NEURAL NETWORK EQUALIZATION IN TDMR SYSTEM

6700605

of a target central bit. N is the number of bits within each local neighborhood block. We choose the block of size 3 × 3, 3 × 7, and 5 × 5. The structure of the NNE is similar to that proposed in [5]. Each input sample signal is connected to a neuron in the hidden layer. There are N neurons in the hidden layer. The output layer is a linear element. According to the design, the output of each layer is given by

y (1) = tansig(W (1)x + b(1))

(2)

y(2) = w(2)y (1) + b(2)

(3)

where tansig(n) = 2/(1 + exp(−2n)) − 1 is the tan-sigmoid transfer function. The superscript (l) indicates a parameter in the lth layer. W , w, b, and b stand for the synaptic weight of size N×N, N×1 and bias of size N×1, 1×1, respectively. We use standard notation (matrix in upper case, vector and scalar in lower case, vector in bold, and scalar in normal font). The output of the last layer is a scalar representing an estimation of equalization output.
The proposed NNE is trained offline. The channel readback output x and ideal recorded data a = {±1} are required during training. The optimal parameters θˆ = {W , w, b, b} of the neural network

θˆ = arg max p(aˆ = a|x , θ )

(4)

θ

can be obtained by using the Levenberg–Marquardt backpropagation [10]. The loss function for the NNE is the mean square error (MSE) between the network outputs and the encoded channel bits, given by

L(aˆ , a ) = 1 K

K
|aˆi − ai |2

(5)

i

where aˆ denotes the estimated equalization output of the NNE,

a is the actual recorded data, and K is the number of training

samples. Each sample consists of N readback signals and

a recorded bit corresponding to the center bit of the local

block. Once the neural network has been trained, only channel

readback signal x is fed into the NNE.

Fig. 3 shows the structure of our proposed NNE based on a bit block (red dashed box) of size 3×3. The readback samples

on each block are fully connected to the neurons of the hidden

layer. The gray scale in the input sample block represents the

readback value.

We generate the random input user data and pass them

through the write/read channel to obtain readback signals

with noise from SNR 8 to 28 dB for the network training,

validating, and testing. The NNE model is trained and tested

at each specific SNR value. 12 288 000 samples per SNR

are used for training (70%), validating (15%), and testing

(15%). Learning rate is set to 0.001, then it is decreased by

a factor of 0.1 as the loss is reduced and is increased by a

factor of 10 only when a tentative step would increase the

loss function. The initialized network parameters follow the

standard normal distribution.

IV. SIMULATION AND RESULTS
In our model, the coded bits are recorded row-by-row on a 2-D surface which covers a block of bits with 104 rows and

Fig. 3. Structure of NNE based on a bit block of size 3 × 3.
4102 columns. During the read process, we assume that the magnetic grains outside of the center block with 100 rows and 4096 columns are recorded with the magnetization of “−1."
The reproducing waveforms from multiple adjacent tracks are equalized by a conventional 2-D PR equalizer or the proposed NNE. In our work, the conventional 2-D PR equalizer with a 1-D target [0, 1, 0] which forces both ITI and ISI to be zero is designed with a coefficient matrix of size 3 × 3, 3 × 7, and 5 × 5 [11]. In addition, a 2-D generalized PR (2-D GPR) equalizer is also implemented with a 1-D target [g−1, 1, g1] where g−1 and g1 could be any real value, and the optimum targets are obtained by minimizing the mean-squared error [12]. Correspondingly, we set the training bit block size to 3×3, 3×7, and 5×5 for the NNE. The equalized waveforms are converted to the LLR of the recorded information by an APP detector based on the Log-MAP algorithm [13]. For the NNE, we use an APP detector based on a trellis with the target of [0, 1, 0]. This is because the output of the NNE can be regarded as the convolution of the target and the output itself though we did not use any filter. An SP decoder recovers user data from the output of the detector. We use a logdomain version of the sum-product (SP) algorithm (SPA) [14]. The maximum number of local iterations in the SP decoder for LDPC code is isp. According to several experiments on iterations, isp is set to 15 in our simulation. For comparison, we present the results of a 2-D PR equalizer and a 2-D GPR equalizer with the coefficient matrix of size 3 × 3, 3 × 7, and 5 × 5.
Based on random Voronoi grain model, we study the impact of write errors. To obtain signals without write errors, we assume that there is one grain being properly flipped located at the bit center during the read process. If no grain centroid lies within a bit (i, j) which is one of the 5 × 5 bits in the valid response region and supposed to be “+1” or “−1,” a write error occurs. The readback signal in the center bit of the bit block is thus determined by other bits. When we assume there is one grain being properly flipped located at the center of bit (i, j), the response component of bit (i, j) will be added to the original readback signal. We compare the BER performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:44:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6700605

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2019 Fig. 6. Diagram with the NNE cascaded to an SP decoder.

Fig. 4. BER performance of NNE and conventional 2-D equalizers when write errors occur.

Fig. 7. BER performance of NNE with and without an APP detector.

Fig. 5. BER performance of NNE and conventional 2-D equalizers without write errors.
of the NNE and the conventional 2-D equalizers when write errors are considered as shown in Fig. 4. In most instances, the block-based NNE outperforms the 2-D equalizers, but they can achieve nearly the same performance when SNR of the additive electronic noise is as high as 24 dB. When the SNR is higher than this threshold, the BER performance is limited by the media noise and the system noise is no longer the dominant impact factor. Typically, recovering with nearly no errors for conventional 2-D equalizer relies on iterative turbo equalization between the APP detector and the SP decoder. However, when we eliminate the impact of write errors, Fig. 5 shows that recovering with better BER performance can be achieved without redundant turbo equalization for the NNE and the 2-D PR equalizer. Meanwhile, the NNE outperforms the 2-D PR equalizer. On the other hand, it indicates that the block-based NNE and the 2-D PR equalizer are sensitive to write errors while the 2-D GPR equalizer is not susceptible.

We also explore the detecting capability of the NNE by removing the APP detector. Fig. 6 shows the connection between the NNE and an SP decoder, and Fig. 7 shows the comparison of the BER performance when an APP detector is cascaded or not. We perform the simulation based on the Voronoi grain model according to the two methods introduced in Section II: the model with Gaussian distributed shifts (i.e., the Gaussian model) and the model by starting with randomly generated grain nuclei (i.e., the random model). The main difference between these two models is that the write error rate of the Gaussian model is lower than that of the random model. For the Voronoi model with randomly generated grain nuclei, two schemes with and without an APP detector achieve nearly the same performance. It is likely that the nonlinear computation results in information loss in equalization. Therefore, an APP detector does not gain from nonlinear equalization. For the Voronoi model with Gaussian distributed shifts, however, when the output of NNE is directly fed into the SP decoder, the results show detecting with NNE improves the BER performance significantly under high SNRs. Because there is a guaranteed long-range order among the media grains in this model that does not exist in the Voronoi model by starting with randomly generated grain nuclei like real media. An equalizer or a detector might conceivably take advantage of this long-range order and thereby report better performance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the BER performance of conventional 2-D equalizers and our proposed block-based NNE with LDPC coding and decoding system based on a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:44:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LUO et al.: STUDY ON BLOCK-BASED NEURAL NETWORK EQUALIZATION IN TDMR SYSTEM

6700605

random Voronoi grain media model. Under different SNRs of the readback signal to the system noise, NNE shows better BER performance than the conventional 2-D equalizers in most instances. We also found that the BER performance of NNE is sensitive to the write errors, the sensitivity could be mitigated by optimizing the bit size. NNE could be more useful when applied in bit-patterned magnetic recording because of the existing long-range order of the islands. In addition, it is possible to integrate NNE into the decoding process as a part of turbo equalization.
There are many classical neural network methods such as CNN, DNN, GAN, RNN, LSTM, and so on. For example, CNN, DNN, and GAN are often used in the computer vision community with large and complex structure which may involve hundreds of thousands of neurons and connections, resulting in a mass of computation. RNN and LSTM are suitable for applications in machine translation and sequence generation. Therefore, they can be used in the design of encoders and decoders. Considering the application of NNs in HDD system, it is required to be simple, with low complexity and computation cost. In addition to our neural network method, it is important to note that other simple algorithms such as the logistic regression, the supported vector machine (SVM), and k-nearest neighbors (kNN) would demonstrate similar characteristics. However, the flexibility and the ability to combat nonlinear interference are weaker than the neural network method we used. Meanwhile, our method is quite close to the conventional 2-D equalizers though a small amount of computing overhead is added. The overhead can be further decreased by replacing the nonlinear neurons with a lookup table (LUT) and introducing parallel processing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61672246, Grant 61272068, and Grant 61432007 and in part by the

Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities,
HUST, under Grant 2016YXMS018.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Yamashita et al., “Modeling of writing process for two-dimensional magnetic recording and performance evaluation of two-dimensional neural network equalizer,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 4586–4589, Nov. 2012.
[2] M. Yamashita, Y. Okamoto, Y. Nakamura, H. Osawa, and H. Muraoka, “Performance evaluation of neuro ITI canceller for two-dimensional magnetic recording by shingled magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 3810–3813, Jul. 2013.
[3] S. Han, G. Kong, and S. Choi, “A detection scheme with TMR estimation based on multi-layer perceptrons for bit patterned media recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 55, no. 7, Jul. 2019, Art. no. 3100704.
[4] M. Nishikawa, Y. Nakamura, H. Osawa, Y. Okamoto, and Y. Kanai, “A study on iterative decoding with LLR modulator using neural network in SMR system,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 55, no. 7, Jul. 2019, Art. no. 3100604.
[5] K. Luo, S. Wang, G. Xie, J. Chen, P. Lu, and W. Cheng, “Read channel modeling and neural network block predictor for TDMR,” in Proc. IEEE Asia–Pacific Magn. Recording Conf. (APMRC), Nov. 2018, pp. 1–2.
[6] A. R. Krishnan, R. Radhakrishnan, B. Vasic´, A. Kavcic, W. Ryan, and F. Erden, “2-D magnetic recording: Read channel modeling and detection,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3830–3836, Oct. 2009.
[7] X. Sun et al., “ISI/ITI turbo equalizer for TDMR using trained local area influence probabilistic model,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 55, no. 4, Apr. 2019, Art. no. 3100515.
[8] K. S. Chan et al., “TDMR platform simulations and experiments,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3837–3843, Oct. 2009.
[9] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645, Aug. 1996.
[10] M. T. Hagan, H. B. Demuth, and M. H. Beale. (2002). Neural Network Design. [Online]. Available: http://hagan.okstate.edu/nnd.html
[11] Y. Wang, S. Frohman, and R. H. Victora, “Ideas for detection in twodimensional magnetic recording systems,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 4582–4585, Nov. 2012.
[12] S. Nabavi and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Two-dimensional generalized partial response equalizer for bit-patterned media,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2007, pp. 6249–6254.
[13] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), vol. 2, Jun. 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[14] B. Vasi and E. M. Kurtas, Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:44:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

