2019 IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS)

Sampling Graphs without Forbidden Subgraphs and Unbalanced Expanders with Negligible Error
(Extended Abstract)

Benny Applebaum, Eliran Kachlon School of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University Tel-Aviv, Israel
{benny.applebaum, elirn.chalon}@gmail.com

Abstract—Suppose that you wish to sample a random graph G over n vertices and m edges conditioned on the event that G does not contain a “small” t-size graph H (e.g., clique) as a subgraph. Assuming that most such graphs are H-free, the problem can be solved by a simple rejected-sampling algorithm (that tests for t-cliques) with an expected running time of nO(t). Is it possible to solve the problem in running time that does not grow polynomially with nt?
In this paper, we introduce the general problem of sampling a “random looking” graph G with a given edge density that avoids some arbitrary predefined t-size subgraph H. As our main result, we show that the problem is solvable with respect to some specially crafted k-wise independent distribution over graphs. That is, we design a sampling algorithm for kwise independent graphs that supports efficient testing for subgraph-freeness in time f (t) · nc where f is a function of t and the constant c in the exponent is independent of t. Our solution extends to the case where both G and H are d-uniform hypergraphs.
We use these algorithms to obtain the first probabilistic construction of constant-degree polynomially-unbalanced expander graphs whose failure probability is negligible in n (i.e., n−ω(1)). In particular, given constants d > c, we output a bipartite graph that has n left nodes, nc right nodes with right-degree of d so that any right set of size at most nΩ(1) expands by factor of Ω(d). This result is extended to the setting of unique expansion as well.
We observe that such a negligible-error construction can be employed in many useful settings, and present applications in coding theory (batch codes and LDPC codes), pseudorandomness (low-bias generators and randomness extractors) and cryptography. Notably, we show that our constructions yield a collection of polynomial-stretch locally-computable cryptographic pseudorandom generators based on Goldreich’s one-wayness assumption resolving a central open problem in parallel-cryptography (cf., Applebaum-Ishai-Kushilevitz, FOCS 2004; and Ishai-Kushilevitz-Ostrovsky-Sahai, STOC 2008).
Keywords-Expander Graph, LDPC Codes, Local Cryptography
I. INTRODUCTION
Many combinatorial properties of graphs and hypergraphs can be formulated as avoiding some family H of
small subgraphs. Notable examples consist of graphs that
avoid short cycles or small cliques, expander graphs (that

avoid small non-expanding subgraphs) and even graphical representations of good error-correcting codes (that avoid small “stopping sets” [17]). Motivated by the wide range of applications, the computational problem of efficiently constructing H-free graphs has attracted a huge amount of research (e.g. [1], [15], [16], [23], [33]). In this paper, we consider several natural probabilistic variants of the construction problem.
Setup: Let Gn,m,d be the set of all (n, m, d)hypergraphs, i.e., d-uniform hypergraphs over n vertices with m hyperedges. We typically think of d as a constant that does not grow with n and take m = poly(n). Let H be a family of “small” d-uniform hypergraphs of size at most t for some slowly growing function t(n). While our setup is defined with respect to hypergraphs (to match our applications), the following problems make sense even for simple undirected graphs (i.e., d = 2) and so, for now, the reader may safely focus on this special case. (Indeed, we are not aware of prior solutions that handle the case of simple graphs.)
Problem 1.1 (Zero-error/negligible-error constructions): Generate an H-free hypergraph G ∈ Gn,m,d in probabilistic poly(n)-time. The algorithm is allowed to fail with a negligible error probability that vanishes faster from any inverse polynomial, i.e., n−ω(1). Such a construction is referred to as a negligible-error construction. We say that this is a zero-error (or ZPP) construction if the algorithm outputs a special failure symbol whenever it fails to find an H-free graph.
Unlike the classical de-randomization literature which typically emphasizes the distinction between deterministic and probabilistic construction, in Problem 1.1 we focus on the error level. We advocate the use of negligibleerror constructions as a second-best alternative when explicit constructions are unknown. Indeed, for many applications a randomized construction that almost never fails is almost as good as a fully explicit construction. In particular, if one is planning to plug-in G into some randomized algorithm or system then a negligible error in the construction of G will be swallowed by the overall error probability of the

2575-8454/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

171

DOI 10.1109/FOCS.2019.00020

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithm.1 Following the standard cryptographic tradition, we insist
on an error that is negligible (i.e., tends to zero faster than any polynomial), in order to guarantee a tiny failure probability even after polynomially-many repetitions.2 Throughout the paper, we typically assume that an α-fraction of all (n, m, d)-hypergraphs are H-free, where the density α is large but not overwhelming, i.e., α(n) = 1 − n−c for some constant c > 0. In this case, the problem is non-trivial when testing H-freeness cannot be done in polynomial-time.
While Problem 1.1 is a relaxation of the explicitconstruction problem, our next problem addresses the harder task of generating a random, or pseudorandom, H-free graph.
Problem 1.2 (Quasi-random H-free graphs): Sample in expected probabilistic poly(n) time a random graph G from some “pseudorandom” distribution over Gn,m,d conditioned on being H-free.
The general task of generating a pseudorandom object that always satisfies some given property was first studied by Goldreich, Goldwasser and Nussboim [21].3 In this setting the property (i.e., H-freeness) is viewed as a necessary worst-case requirement that should be satisfied by any sampled hypergraph G. Using the terminology of [21], the implementation G must be truthful to the H-freeness specification. Conditioned on this, G should be distributed uniformly or close to uniformly under some metric.
This combination of requirements arises when one tries to understand the behavior of an H-free random system (e.g., in simulation) or when the hypergraph G is being used as part of a system whose analysis relies on a random choice of G and, in addition, its validity depends on H-freeness. In such a case we cannot use a single explicit construction of H-free hypergraphs since it may fail to achieve some other property of pseudorandom hypergraphs. On the other hand, we cannot use a random sample from Gn,m,d since it fails to be H-free with positive (in our case, inverse polynomial) probability.
We further mention that in some cases even a tiny positive failure probability can be problematic. This is the case, for example, when the sampling procedure is invoked by an untrusted party who can benefit from the existence of Hsubgraphs. If our sampling algorithm has a positive failure
1This view is implicitly used in other contexts. For example, although the problem of deterministically generating n-bit primes is wide open, there are randomized algorithms that generate such primes with negligible (or even zero) error probability. Consequently, applications which employ prime numbers (or prime-order finite fields) rely on negligible-error constructions.
2Observe that in our context it is not clear how to reduce the error probability from constant or even inverse polynomial 1/nΩ(1) to negligible.
3The work of [21] focuses on huge exponential-size random objects. However, the problem remains non-trivial even for polynomial-size objects as long as the required property cannot be tested in polynomial-time. See Section II-B for further discussion regarding the applicability of our results to the GGN setting.

probability, then a cheating party can cheat by selecting “bad coins” that lead to hypergraphs with H-subgraphs. Since general subgraph-testing seems to be computationally-hard such a cheating may be left undetected.4
The testing barrier: A natural way to sample Hfree random hypergraphs is via rejected sampling. That is, repeatedly sample G until an H-free hypergraph is chosen. Since we work in a regime where most hypergraphs are Hfree, the expected number of iterations will be polynomial. This approach reduces the sampling problem to the subgraph testing problem. If the largest hypergraph in H is of constant size t, then the problem can be trivially solved in time f (t)nO(t). However, we think of t as a large constant, or as a slowly increasing function of n, and so we would like to have a running time of f (t)nc where the exponent c is independent of t. Unfortunately, such a running time cannot be achieved for general subgraph-testing (even for simple cases such as cliques) unless the exponential-time hypothesis (ETH) fails (cf. [18]). We refer to this hardness-of-testing as the testing barrier. Jumping ahead, we will show that some variant of this barrier arises if one tries to sample a hypergraph that is uniformly distributed over all H-free hypergraph in Gn,m,d.
Summary: The problem of constructing H-free hypergraphs can be roughly ranked from easy to hard as follows: negligible-error constructions, zero-error constructions, explicit constructions, pseudorandom constructions.
II. OUR RESULTS
We partially resolve Problems 1.1 and 1.2. Our main results consist of two main parts. We begin by studying pseudorandom constructions of H-free hypergraphs (Sections II-A and II-B). Then we focus on the concrete case of unbalanced expanders, describe negligible-error constructions of such graphs (Section II-C), and use them to derive various applications (Section II-D).
A. Sampling k-Wise Independent Graphs Conditioned on H -Freeness
We show that Problem 1.2 can be solved with respect to some k-wise independent distribution over Gn,m,d. Here kwise independence means that every k-subset of the hyperedges are distributed uniformly over all possible d-uniform hyperedges. The use of k-wise independent distributions as a good model for pseudorandom graphs was advocated by Naor, Nussboim and Tromer [36] and by Alon and Nussboim [2]. These works further show that a large family of natural graph-theoretic properties that hold whp over random graphs (with a given edge density) also hold whp over polylog(n)-wise independent distributions with the same density.
4The work of [14] provides a good example for such a case in the context of financial derivatives.

172 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

We bypass the “testing barrier” by designing a concrete k-

wise independent probability distribution Gn,m,d,k in a way that allows us to efficiently test whether a given sample G

is H-free. That is, our distribution is amenable to subgraph

testing by design. To formalize this strategy, we introduce a

new notion of sampler/tester pair of algorithms. Roughly

speaking, the sampler S samples an object according to

some given distribution D, and the tester T examines the

coins of the tester and checks whether the corresponding

object avoids some bad event E. The combination of the

two allows us to sample the conditional distribution [D|¬E].

(See full version of this paper [12] for more details on the

sampler/tester framework.)

We prove the following key theorem. Below we define

the log-density of an (n, m, d) hypergraph as c = logn m, and define the size of a hypergraph as the sum of its vertices

and hyperedges.

Theorem 2.1 (key theorem): For every log-density pa-

rameter c > 1, edge-uniformity parameter d ≥ 2, subgraph-

size

function

t(n)

≤

O(

log log log n log log log log

n

)

and

independence

parameter k(n) that satisfies k(n) ≤ O(n1/tc t ) where c is

a constant that depends on c, there exists a poly(n)-time

sampler/tester pair (S, T ) with the following properties:

• Given 1n, the randomized sampler S uses its internal random coins r to sample an (n, m = nc, d) hypergraph Gr whose hyperedges are k(n)-wise independent.
• The deterministic tester takes as input a d-uniform hypergraph H of size at most t(n) and a fixed sequence
of coin tosses r and accepts the input if and only if H is a subgraph of the hypergraph Gr = S(1n, r) that is generated by S using coin tosses r.

Although the size t of the tested subgraph is relatively small, it is still super-constant. This property will be crucial for our applications. We further note that the independence parameter k(n) is super-logarithmic (or even “almost” polynomial) in n and so the pseudorandomness properties established by [2], [36] hold. (See the full version [12] for a more detailed version of Theorem 2.1 as well as all other theorems that are stated here.)
Sampling H-free graphs: It is important to note that our sampler S is independent of the subgraph H, and that the tester T gets H as an input. These properties allow us to partially solve the sampling problem (Problem 1.2) with respect to a family of small hypergraphs H. Indeed, we can use the sampler S to sample a k-wise independent (n, m, d)hypergraph G and use the basic tester to test that G is Hfree for all subgraphs H ∈ H. If one of the tests fails, we repeat the process from the beginning. Since H contains at most exp(td) < poly(n) hypergraphs, the expected running time will be polynomial, assuming that a random k-wise independent (n, m, d)-hypergraph is H-free with noticeable probability.
Corollary 2.2 (pseudorandom H-free hypergraphs): Let

c, d, t(n), k(n) and m = nc be as in Theorem 2.1. Let H be an efficiently constructible family of hypergraphs each of size at most t(n) such that a k(n)-wise independent (n, m, d)-hypergraph is H-free with noticeable probability of 1/poly(n). Then, there exists a probabilistic algorithm that runs in expected poly(n)-time and samples an H-free hypergraph from some k-wise independent distribution over (n, m, d)-hypergraphs.
Remark 2.3: It is natural to try and sample a uniform H-free (n, m, d)-hypergraph, i.e., to replace the k-wise independent distribution in Corollary 2.2 with the uniform distribution over Gn,m,d. We conjecture that sampling uniform H-free hypergraphs is computationally infeasible and present some evidence towards this conjecture. In particular, suppose that:
( ) For some families of hypergraphs, it is infeasible to certify H-freeness over the uniform distribution. That is, there is no 1-sided error tester that accepts most (n, m, d)-hypergraphs and never accepts a hypergraph that is not H-free.
We show that, under the ( ) assumption, sampling uniform H-free hypergraphs implies the existence of one-way functions. Put differently, a sampler would allow us to convert average-case hardness (of testing) to one-wayness, or, in the language of Impagliazzo [25], to move from Pessiland to Minicrypt.
The ( ) assumption (hardness of certifying H-freeness) is closely related to previous intractability assumptions (cf. [7], [9], [14]). We further relate this assumption to the problem of certifying that a random low-density parity-check code has a high distance. (See the full version of this paper [12] for details.)
Remark 2.4 (On k-wise independence): It is instructive to note that Theorem 2.1 employs k-wise independence in an unconventional way. Typically, the notion of k-wise independence is useful due to the combination of pseudorandomness with computationally-cheap and randomness-efficient implementations. In contrast, the proof of Theorem 2.1 exploits the simple algebraic structure of k-wise independence constructions to force a structure on the sampled object (the hypergraph G) in a way that makes it amenable to efficient analysis (i.e., subgraph testing). The fact that such implementation is computationally-cheap or randomnessefficient is not really needed. (Nevertheless, these properties will be used in the next subsection.)
ZPP and explicit constructions.: Corollary 2.2 immediately leads to a ZPP-construction of H-free hypergraphs. We further observe that, under standard worst-case derandomization assumptions, any ZPP-construction implies an explicit construction.
Corollary 2.5 (explicit H-free hypergraphs): Let c, d, t(n), k(n) and m = nc and H be as in Corollary 2.2. Assuming that the class of functions computable in 2O(n) uniform-time requires 2Ω(n)-size circuits, there exists a

173 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

deterministic poly(n)-time algorithm that always outputs an H-free (n, m, d)-hypergraph. The above assumption is known to imply, for any constant a, a pseudorandom generator prg that fools na-time algorithms with logarithmic size seed [26]. Such a generator can be used to fully de-randomize the ZPP construction A and derive a fully explicit construction A . (The algorithm A just outputs the first seed s for which A(prg(s)) does not output “failure”.) This makes a crucial use of the ability to recognize bad outputs (which trivially holds for ZPP samplers). We are not aware of a similar transformation that applies to “Monte-Carlo” constructions that have a positive failure probability.5
B. The Succinct Setting
So far we assumed that the computational complexity of the sampler is allowed to grow polynomially in the size of the hypergraph G. In some scenarios, it is more natural to think of the hypergraph as a huge object and require a running time that is polynomial in log n. In particular, we say that an (n, m, d) hypergraph G has a succinct representation if it can be represented by an identifier z of length polylog(n) such that given z, a hyperedge e ∈ [m], and an index i ∈ [d], it is possible to compute the i-th member of the hyperedge e in time polylog(n).6 (Here we assume that the hyperedges are ordered and can be represented by d-tuples.) We prove a succinct version of Theorem 2.1 that applies to constant-size subgraphs H and polylog(n)-wise independence.
Theorem 2.6: For every log-density parameter c > 1, edge-uniformity parameter d ≥ 2, constant subgraph size t and independence parameter k(n) ≤ polylog(n), there exists a polylog(n)-time sampler/tester pair (S, T ) with the following properties:
• Given n (in binary representation), the randomized sampler uses its internal random coins r to sample a succinct (n, m = nc, d) hypergraph Gr whose hyperedges are k(n)-wise independent.
• The deterministic tester takes as input a d-uniform hypergraph H of size at most t and a fixed sequence
5There are cases in which derandomization assumptions can be easily used to turn a negligible-error construction into an explicit construction [29]. This typically happens when one of the following holds: (1) It is “easy” to recognize a “bad” object (i.e., to detect a violation of the desired property) in polynomial-time; or (2) There is an efficient way to combine a “bad” instance with several “good” instances into a single “good” instance. As far as we know, in general, both conditions fail for H-freeness.
6This is in contrast to the (more common) notion of succinctness (in the context of standard graphs), where, given a vertex v and an index i, we can compute the i-th neighbor of v in time poly log n. Our notion of succinctness is better suited for our applications, in which a hypergraph represents the dependencies graph of some function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}m (e.g., low-biased generator) where inputs correspond to vertices, outputs correspond to hyperedges, and the i-th hyperedge contains the vertices on which the i-th output depends. Our notion of succinctness guarantees that each output of f can be computed in polylog(n)-time (e.g., in the RAM model).

of coin tosses r and accepts the input if and only if H is a subgraph of the hypergraph Gr = S(n, r) that is generated by S using coin tosses r.
Theorem 2.6 leads to the following succinct version of Corollary 2.2.
Corollary 2.7: Let c, d, t, k(n) and m = nc be as in Theorem 2.6. Let H be a family of hypergraphs each of size at most t, such that a k(n)-wise independent (n, m, d)hypergraph is H-free with probability of 1/polylog(n). Then, there exists a probabilistic algorithm that runs in expected polylog(n)-time and samples a succinct H-free hypergraph from some k-wise independent distribution over (n, m, d)-hypergraphs.
As already mentioned the problem of constructing huge k-wise independent graphs that satisfy some given property (specification) was studied in [2], [21], [35], [36]. Corollary 2.7 provides a zero-error (aka “truthful”) solution for this problem with respect to H-free hypergraphs of given density. To the best of our knowledge, prior to our work no solution was known even for the case of undirected graphs and concrete fixed-size forbidden subgraphs.
C. Negligible-Error Construction of Constant-Degree Unbalanced Expanders
We move back to the non-succinct setting, and consider the problem of explicitly constructing a single, not necessarily random, expander graph. We say that an (n, m, d)hypergraph is an (α, t)-expander if every set S of hyperedges of size at most t “touches” at least α|S| vertices.7 Equivalently, an (α, t)-expander is an (n, m, d)-hypergraph that avoids small “dense” subgraphs, i.e., (n , m , d)-hypergraphs with n ≤ αm for m ≤ t.
We focus on the setting of constant-degree highly unbalanced expanders. That is, we let d be a constant, and assume that the number of hyperedges m is polynomially larger than n, i.e., m = nc for some constant log-density 1 < c < d. A standard probabilistic calculation shows that in this regime most (n, m, d)-hypergraphs achieve a good expansion factor of α = Ω(d) (or even α = d−O(1)) for polynomially-small subsets of size at most t = n1−δ where δ is a constant that depends on α, c and d. Unfortunately, the problem of efficiently constructing highly-unbalanced constant-degree expanders is wide open. Existing constructions either have only linearly many hyperedges m = O(n) [16] or suffer from a super-constant (actually polylogarithmic) degree [23]. Motivated by the numerous applications of constant-degree highly-unbalanced expanders (to be discussed later), we present a negligible-error construction of such graphs.
We begin by giving a ZPP-construction of constantdegree highly-unbalanced hypergraphs that expand well for
7This formulation is equivalent to the more standard notion of bipartite expanders over n left vertices and m right vertices where the degree of each right vertex is d, and every set S of right vertices of size at most t is connected to at least α|S| left vertices.

174 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

small sets of super-constant size. The following theorem

follows from Corollary 2.2 by instantiating the class H of

forbidden subgraphs with the class of small non-expanding

hypergraphs.

Theorem 2.8 (ZPP-construction of small-set expanders):

For every log-density parameter c > 1, edge-uniformity

parameter d > c, and α < d − c there exists a ZPP-

construction of (n, m = nc, d)-hypergraph with (α, t)-

expansion

where

t

=

O(

log log log n log log log log

n

).

Next, we show that Theorem 2.8 gives rise to a negligible-

error construction of hypergraphs that expand well for

polynomial-size subsets. That is, we downgrade the level

of explicitness (from zero-error construction to negligible-

error construction) and upgrade the expansion threshold t to

polynomial.

Theorem 2.9: For every log-density parameter c > 1,

edge-uniformity parameter d > c, and α < d − c, there exists a negligible-error construction of (n, m = nc, 2d)hypergraph with (α, t)-expansion where t = Ω(n1−δ) and

δ = (c − 1)/(d − α − 1).

Recall that a negligible-error construction guarantees the

existence of a poly(n)-time randomized algorithm that outputs, except with negligible probability of n−ω(1), an (α, t)-

expanding (n, m, 2d)-hypergraph.

Theorem 2.9 provides an (n, m, D = 2d)-hypergraph

whose expansion parameters (α, t) match the parameters of

a random (n, m, d)-hypergraph. While this factor-2 gap in

the degree has a relatively minor effect on the expansion

threshold t (which is still polynomial in n), it limits the

expansion factor α to be at most D/2 − O(1). Such an

expansion factor suffices for many applications, but in some

cases it is useful to expand by a factor larger than D/2.

Notably, expansion beyond half the degree guarantees the

useful unique expansion property. Formally, a hypergraph

is a (β, t)-unique expander if for every set S of at most t

hyperedges there exists a set U of at least β|S| vertices such

that each vertex in U appears in a unique hyperedge e in S.

Perhaps surprisingly, although we cannot expand by a

factor better than D/2, we can still get a negligible-error

construction of unique expanders.

Theorem 2.10: For every log-density parameter c > 1,

edge-uniformity parameter d > 2c, and β < d − 2c,

there exists a negligible-error construction of (n, m = Ω(nc), 2d)-hypergraph with (β, t) unique-expansion where t = Ω(n1−δ) and δ = 2(c − 1)/(d − β − 2).

Theorems 2.8, 2.9 and 2.10 (whose proofs appear in the

full version of this paper [12]) provide the first negligible-

error constructions of highly-unbalanced constant-degree

expanders.

D. Applications
We use our negligible-error construction of unbalanced expanders to obtain the first negligible-error constructions

of several useful objects including batch codes, and locallycomputable k-wise independent generators, low-bias generators and randomness extractors. These applications follow immediately from our expanders via standard techniques. (See full version of this paper [12] for more details.) Below we briefly describe two non-trivial applications: highrate low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, and locallycomputable cryptographic pseudorandom generators (PRGs) with polynomial stretch.
1) High-Rate LDPC Codes: LDPC codes [19] (see also [32], [37], [38]) are [m, k] linear error-correcting codes whose (m − k) × m parity check matrix is sparse in the sense that it contains only dm non-zero entries for some sparsity constant d = O(1).8 Any (n, m, d)-hypergraph G defines an [m, m − n]-binary LDPC by letting the paritycheck matrix be the n × m incidence matrix of G. The parity-check matrix has md ones, and is therefore sparse when d = O(1). Moreover, it is well known that if, for some β > 0, the hypergraph G achieves unique-neighbor expansion of (β, γ) then the resulting code has a distance of γ.
Theorem 2.10 leads to the first negligible-error construction of high-rate LDPC code that tolerates polynomially small number of errors.9 In particular, for every constants 1 < c < d/2 we get an LDPC with sparsity 2d that maps k bits of information into k + O(k1/c)-bit codeword with a distance of n1−O(c/d).
Sipser and Spielman showed that an LDPC code whose underlying graph has a very good expansion factor (well beyond half the degree) can be efficiently decoded by a linear time decoding algorithm with O(log n) parallel steps [37]. Unfortunately, the hypergraph given by Theorem 2.10 does not satisfy such a strong expansion property. Nevertheless, we show that our construction can be tweaked in a way that still allows for highly efficient decoding via a variant of the Sipser-Spielman decoder. In particular, we prove the following theorem.
Theorem 2.11: For every constant c > 1, integer d > 10c and constant 0.9d < α < d − c, there exists a negligibleerror construction of an [m, m − 2m1/c]-LDPC code with sparsity of 2d that admits a decoder that runs in quasi-linear time O(m log2 m) and O(log2 m) parallel steps and corrects up to Ω(n1−δ) errors where δ = (c − 1)/(d − α − 1).
8Recall that an [m, k]-code is a linear code with codewords of length m and information words of length k, and an [m, k, Δ]-code has, in addition, an absolute distance of Δ.
9The status of existing explicit/negligible-error constructions is the same as the status of unbalanced expanders. In fact, any [m, m−n, t] LDPC with sparsity md implies an (n, m)-hypergraph with average rank of d such that any set of t hyperedges has some “odd-expansion” property. We do not have better ways to construct such expanders compared to standard expanders. The situation is similar for all the applications discussed in this paper. That is, unbalanced constant-degree hypergraphs with some expansion property for polynomial-size subsets of hyperedges are also necessary for all these applications, and accordingly so far we had no explicit or negligible-error constructions.

175 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2) Polynomial-Stretch Locally-Computable PRGs: A cryptographic pseudorandom generator stretches a short random n-bit seed into a longer m-bit pseudorandom string that is computationally indistinguishable from a truly random string. We say that a PRG is locally-computable if each of its output bits depends on at most d = O(1) input bits. Locally-computable PRGs were extensively studied in the past two decades. In particular, locally-computable PRGs that polynomially stretch their input (i.e., m = nc for c > 1) have shown to have remarkable applications. This includes secure-computation with constant computational overhead [8], [27] and general-purpose obfuscation based on constant-degree multilinear maps (cf. [30], [31]).
Unfortunately, constructing locally-computable PRGs with polynomial-stretch turns out to be a challenging task. Indeed, while there are good constructions of local PRGs with sub-linear stretch m = n + o(n) [10], and even linear stretch m = n + Ω(n) [4], [6], [11] under standard assumptions, we currently have only partial solutions to the polynomial-stretch regime. In particular, in [4] the first author constructed a locally-computable polynomial-stretch weak-PRG. Here weak means that the distinguishing advantage ε of any polynomial-time adversary is upper-bounded by some fixed inverse polynomial 1/poly(n), whereas the standard cryptographic definition requires a negligible distinguishing advantage of n−ω(1). The construction of [4] is based on the one-wayness of random local functions with polynomially-long output length – a variant of Goldreich’s one-wayness assumption [20].
We show that our negligible-error construction of expanders can be used to upgrade any weak-PRG into standard PRG while preserving constant locality and polynomial stretch.
Theorem 2.12: For every constants d ∈ N, a > 0 and c, c > 1 there exists a constant d for which the following holds. Any ensemble of d-local PRGs that stretches n bits to nc bits and achieves indistinguishability parameter of ε = 1/na can be converted into an ensemble of d -local (standard) PRGs that stretches n bits to nc bits. The term ensemble here means that, given 1n, we can sample in polynomial-time a circuit that implements a locally computable function f from n-bits to m bits so that except with negligible probability f is a PRG. This use of ensembles is standard in the context of parallel cryptography and typically has at most a minor effect on the applications.
Combined with the weak-PRG of [4], Theorem 2.12 yields the first construction of local PRG with polynomial stretch based on a one-wayness assumption, resolving an important open question in the theory of parallel cryptography [4], [10], [27], [34]. We mention that there is a second heuristic approach for constructing such pseudorandom generators, due to [27] (see also [13], [34] and the survey [5]). This approach also requires the existence of explicit (or negligible-error) construction of highly-unbalanced constant

degree expanders, and one can instantiate it using our constructions as well. In fact, it is known that such expanders are necessary for any construction of locally-computable PRG with large-stretch [11].10 Theorem 2.12 shows that, up to some extent, such expanders are also sufficient for this task.

III. TECHNICAL OVERVIEW We briefly sketch some of the main techniques.

A. Sampler/Tester for H-free hypergraphs

We present a k-wise independent distribution over

(n, m, d) hypergraphs that admits efficient subgraph-testing

for

hypergraphs

of

size

t

=

O(

log log log n log log log log

n

)

(as

in

Theo-

rem 2.1). For simplicity let us focus on the case of directed

graphs (d = 2). Let us further assume that the number of

vertices n is prime, and that the number of edges m is an

integer power of n, i.e., m = nc for some integer c ≥ 1.

We identify every vertex with an element of the field F =

GF(n), and index the edges with c-tuples of elements of F.

We sample the graph by uniformly sampling a pair (A, B)

of c-variate polynomials over F of total degree k. For every

tuple h = (h1, . . . , hc) ∈ Fc, we define the h-th edge to be (A(h), B(h)). That is, h leaves the source vertex A(h) and

enters the target vertex B(h).

It is not hard to show that every set of k edges are

uniformly distributed. (This follows by a simple extension of

the well-known fact that random degree-k univariate poly-

nomials are k-wise independent.) We reduce the problem of

subgraph testing to the following polynomial satisfiability

problem: Check whether a system of O(t) polynomial

equations of degree D = O(k + t) and O(t) variables

over the field F has a solution. The latter problem can be

solved by an algorithm of Kayal [28, Theorem 6.1.1] in time poly(DtO(t) t log |F|) which is polynomial in n for our

choice of parameters.11

We describe a simplified version of the reduction for

the special case of detecting a directed rectangle (4-cycle).

First observe that any sequence of edges indexed by

x1, x2, x3, x4 ∈ Fc that form a rectangle must satisfy the system L1 of equations

B(X1) = A(X2), B(X2) = A(X3), B(X3) = A(X4), B(X4) = A(X1),

10Indeed, prior works on expander-based cryptography (cf. [3], [4], [8],
[13], [20], [27], [30], [31]) assumed, either explicitly or implicitly, the
existence of explicit constant-degree unbalanced vertex-expander, or at least
that such expanders can be sampled efficiently with negligible error, even
though it was unknown how to do so, cf. [27, Remark 5.7]). 11On a high-level, Kayal’s algorithm decomposes the algebraic closed
set X, defined by the input polynomials, into closed sets Xi, such that each Xi is birational to a hypersurface Yi. If some Yi has an absolutely irreducible Fq-factor, then by Weil’s theorem there exist rational points in Yi, and by the birational correspondence also in Xi, so the algorithm outputs “yes”. Otherwise, if Xi contains a rational point it has to lie on a closed proper subset of Xi. The subset is computed and the algorithm is applied on it recursively. See [28] for full details.

176 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where the formal variables X1, X2, X3 and X4 correspond to indices of edges and so they take values from Fc. However, a moment of inspection suggests that the system L1 can be also solved by a 2-cycle: Assign the first edge to X1 and X3 and the second edge to X2 and X4. We therefore need a mechanism for excluding solutions that assign the
same value to different variables. Fortunately, this can be
achieved by introducing few more auxiliary variables and
few more low-degree equations.
In particular, we add four new variables Y = (Y0, Y1, Y2, Y3) which take values from Fc and define a new system L2 of four equations

3
Yj X1j = 1,
j=0
3
Yj X3j = 3,
j=0

3
Yj X2j = 2,
j=0
3
Yj X4j = 4,
j=0

where arithmetic is over the extension field GF(nc) and 1,2,3,4 represent four distinct constants from this field. Observe that the variables Y define a degree-3 univariate polynomial PY (·), and the system is satisfiable if this polynomial evaluates to i over the input Xi. Clearly, any solution to L1 that assigns non-distinct values to the X variables violates L2. On the other hand, any solution to L1 that assigns distinct values to the X variables can be extended by an assignment to Y in a way that satisfies L2. (Such an assignment can be found via polynomial interpolation). Hence, by combining L2 with L1 we get a new system that excludes solutions in which the same edge is being used twice.
To complete the reduction one has to deal with few additional minor technicalities. Firstly, the system L1 is over the field F = GF(n) whereas the second system is over the extension field GF(nc). This is solved by projecting down the second system to the base field, and checking the satisfiability of the combined system over F. Secondly, an additional distinctness gadget should be used to further force distinct vertices. (Otherwise, a system for detecting a 4-path will be fooled by a 4-cycle.)
The construction extends to d-uniform hypergraphs in a straightforward way (use d polynomials instead of 2), and to the case of non-integral log-density c = logn m by working over appropriate extension fields. (See full version of this paper [12] for full details.) Finally, observe that the sampled graph has a succinct representation: An edge query can be implemented by evaluating a low-degree polynomial. Moreover, for polylogarithmic k and constant t, the polynomial-satisfiability algorithm can be implemented in polylogarithmic time, and so we get a succinct version of the theorem.

B. Expanding the Expansion: From Small-Sets to Large Sets

Theorem 2.8 converts a zero-error construction of

(n, m, d)-hypergraphs G1 with (α, t)-expansion for small

threshold

t

=

O(

log log log n log log log log

n

)

into

a

negligible-error

con-

struction of (α, T )-expander with polynomial threshold of

T = n1−δ. The proof is based on two observations.

First, suppose that, in addition to G1, we are given an (n, m, d)-hypergraph G2 with the property that any “medium-size” set S of hyperedges t ≤ |S| ≤ T expands

by a factor of α. Then, we can combine G1 and G2 into a single (n, m, 2d)-hypergraph G by letting the i-th hyperedge

of G be the union of the i-th hyperedge of G1 and G2. (Both hyperedges should be viewed as d-size multisets over

[n].) Every hyperedge set S of size at most T now expands

by a factor of α, either due to the expansion of G1 (when |S| ≤ t) or due to the expansion of G2 (when t < |S| ≤ T ). As a result, the expansion factor remains unchanged, but the

overall degree doubles.

The second observation is that a random (n, m, d)-

hypergraph forms a negligible-error construction of medium-

size expanders. Indeed, in our regime of parameters, the

probability that a random (n, m, d)-hypergraph contains an

s-tuple of hyperedges that violate expansion (touch less than αs vertices) is n−Ω(s) which is negligible when s ≥

t > ω(1). (The constants in the big-Omega depend on

d, c = logn m and the exponent of the expansion threshold logn T .) Indeed, the only reason for which a random (n, m, d)-hypergraph does not qualify as a negligible-error

expander is the existence of small non-expanding sets which

appear with noticeable probability.

Unique-expansion: Unique-expansion is achieved via

a similar approach except that the merging procedure is

slightly different. As before we merge a pair of (n, m, d)-

hypergraphs G1 and G2 into a single hypergraph G by defining the i-hyperedge of G to be the union of the i-

th hyperedge of G1 and G2. However, now we treat the vertices of G1 and the vertices of G2 as distinct sets. (E.g., the vertices of G1 are indexed from 1 to n and the vertices of G2 are indexed by n + 1 to 2n.) As a result, G is a (2n, m, 2d)-hypergraph. It is not hard to verify that if G1 is a (β, t) unique-expander and G2 expands by β for sets of size t < s ≤ T , then G is a (β, T ) unique-expander.

Coding perspective: Recall that unbalanced hyper-

graphs can be viewed as parity-check matrices of error-

correcting codes where t-weight codewords correspond to

“bad” t-size subgraphs (that violate unique expansion).

Using this terminology the above transformation defines a

code by taking the intersection of the code G1 (that has no nontrivial codewords of weight smaller than t) with the

code G2 (that has no codewords of weight s ∈ [t, T ]). The efficient decoding algorithm, presented in the full version of

this paper [12], further exploits this view, and shows that,

in our setting, a noisy codeword of the intersection code

177 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

G can be decoded by combining the decoders of G1 and G2. In particular, the G2 decoder “reduces” the number of noisy coordinates from T to (roughly) t, and the G1 decoder further reduces the noise from t to zero.
C. Local Hardness Amplification: From weak-PRGs to strong-PRGs
Theorem 2.12 converts a weak-PRG g : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}m into a standard PRG while preserving polynomial stretch and constant locality. Such hardness amplification theorems are typically based on a direct sum construction: Apply g on independent copies of the seed and XOR the results. By Yao’s XOR-lemma (cf. [22]), if we start with an inverse polynomial indistinguishability, it suffices to take a super-constant number of copies = ω(1). Unfortunately, this leads to a super-constant growth in the locality. We therefore take a different approach based on randomness extractors.
We generate polynomially-many pseudorandom strings (using independent seeds) and place them as rows of a k × m matrix. Since the rows are independent and the indistinguishability parameter is a small inverse polynomial, one can guarantee that each column has an almost full pseudo-entropy of k − 1/poly(k). Finally, we extract the randomness from each column using randomness extractor. This approach was used by [4] (following a more general transformation from [24]) to obtain a linear-stretch localPRG.
The success of this approach depends, however, on the existence of a suitable locally-computable randomness extractor. The extractor should take a k-bit source with an almost-full entropy of k − 1/poly(k) and a polynomiallyshort random seed of length k1−ε and output an almostuniform k-bit string with negligible statistical error. The main new observation is that such extractors exist, and a negligible-error construction can be achieved based on negligible-error construction of highly-unbalanced constantdegree expanders. (Similar connections between expanders and locally-computable extractors were established, for a different regime of parameters, in related contexts [4], [11]). See full version of this paper [12] for more details.
REFERENCES
[1] Noga Alon. Explicit ramsey graphs and orthonormal labelings. the electronic journal of combinatorics, 1(1):12, 1994.
[2] Noga Alon and Asaf Nussboim. k-wise independent random graphs. In 49th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2008, October 25-28, 2008, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pages 813–822. IEEE Computer Society, 2008.
[3] Prabhanjan Ananth and Amit Sahai. Projective arithmetic functional encryption and indistinguishability obfuscation from degree-5 multilinear maps. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, pages 152–181. Springer, 2017.

[4] Benny Applebaum. Pseudorandom generators with long stretch and low locality from random local one-way functions. SIAM Journal on Computing, 42(5):2008–2037, 2013.
[5] Benny Applebaum. Cryptographic hardness of random local functions - survey. Computational Complexity, 25(3):667– 722, 2016.
[6] Benny Applebaum. Exponentially-hard gap-csp and local PRG via local hardcore functions. In Chris Umans, editor, 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, October 15-17, 2017, pages 836–847. IEEE Computer Society, 2017.
[7] Benny Applebaum, Boaz Barak, and Avi Wigderson. Publickey cryptography from different assumptions. In Leonard J. Schulman, editor, Proceedings of the 42nd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2010, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 5-8 June 2010, pages 171–180. ACM, 2010.
[8] Benny Applebaum, Ivan Damga˚rd, Yuval Ishai, Michael Nielsen, and Lior Zichron. Secure arithmetic computation with constant computational overhead. In Annual International Cryptology Conference (CRYPTO), pages 223–254. Springer, 2017.
[9] Benny Applebaum, Naama Haramaty, Yuval Ishai, Eyal Kushilevitz, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Low-complexity cryptographic hash functions. In Christos H. Papadimitriou, editor, 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, ITCS 2017, January 9-11, 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, volume 67 of LIPIcs, pages 7:1–7:31. Schloss Dagstuhl Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2017.
[10] Benny Applebaum, Yuval Ishai, and Eyal Kushilevitz. Cryptography in NC0. SIAM J. Comput., 36(4):845–888, 2006.
[11] Benny Applebaum, Yuval Ishai, and Eyal Kushilevitz. On pseudorandom generators with linear stretch in NC0. Computational Complexity, 17(1):38–69, 2008.
[12] Benny Applebaum and Eliran Kachlon. Sampling graphs without forbidden subgraphs and almost-explicit unbalanced expanders. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 26:11, 2019. Full version of this paper.
[13] Benny Applebaum and Shachar Lovett. Algebraic attacks against random local functions and their countermeasures. SIAM Journal on Computing, 47(1):52–79, 2018.
[14] Sanjeev Arora, Boaz Barak, Markus Brunnermeier, and Rong Ge. Computational complexity and information asymmetry in financial products. Commun. ACM, 54(5):101–107, 2011.
[15] Boaz Barak, Anup Rao, Ronen Shaltiel, and Avi Wigderson. 2-source dispersers for sub-polynomial entropy and ramsey graphs beating the frankl-wilson construction. In Proceedings of the thirty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 671–680. ACM, 2006.
[16] Michael Capalbo, Omer Reingold, Salil Vadhan, and Avi Wigderson. Randomness conductors and constant-degree lossless expanders. In Proceedings of the thiry-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 659–668. ACM, 2002.

178 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[17] Changyan Di, David Proietti, I. Emre Telatar, Thomas J. Richardson, and Ru¨diger L. Urbanke. Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel. IEEE Trans. Information Theory, 48(6):1570–1579, 2002.
[18] Rodney G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows. Parameterized Complexity. Monographs in Computer Science. Springer, 1999.
[19] Robert G. Gallager. Low-density parity-check codes. IRE Trans. Information Theory, 8(1):21–28, 1962.
[20] Oded Goldreich. Candidate one-way functions based on expander graphs. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2000:63, 2000.
[21] Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, and Asaf Nussboim. On the implementation of huge random objects. SIAM J. Comput., 39(7):2761–2822, 2010.
[22] Oded Goldreich, Noam Nisan, and Avi Wigderson. On yao’s xor-lemma. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 2(50), 1995.
[23] Venkatesan Guruswami, Christopher Umans, and Salil P. Vadhan. Unbalanced expanders and randomness extractors from parvaresh-vardy codes. J. ACM, 56(4):20:1–20:34, 2009.
[24] Iftach Haitner, Omer Reingold, and Salil Vadhan. Efficiency improvements in constructing pseudorandom generators from one-way functions. SIAM Journal on Computing, 42(3):1405– 1430, 2013.
[25] Russell Impagliazzo. A personal view of average-case complexity. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Structure in Complexity Theory Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, June 19-22, 1995, pages 134–147. IEEE Computer Society, 1995.
[26] Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. P = BPP if E requires exponential circuits: Derandomizing the XOR lemma. In Frank Thomson Leighton and Peter W. Shor, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, El Paso, Texas, USA, May 4-6, 1997, pages 220–229. ACM, 1997.
[27] Yuval Ishai, Eyal Kushilevitz, Rafail Ostrovsky, and Amit Sahai. Cryptography with constant computational overhead. In Proceedings of the fortieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 433–442. ACM, 2008.
[28] Neeraj Kayal. Derandomizing some number-theoretic and algebraic algorithms. Phd, Indian Institute of Technology, 2007. Available in https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/resources/pdf/ kayal.pdf.
[29] Adam R. Klivans and Dieter van Melkebeek. Graph nonisomorphism has subexponential size proofs unless the polynomial-time hierarchy collapses. SIAM J. Comput., 31(5):1501–1526, 2002.
[30] Huijia Lin. Indistinguishability obfuscation from constantdegree graded encoding schemes. In Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques (EUROCRYPT), pages 28–57. Springer, 2016.

[31] Huijia Lin and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Indistinguishability obfuscation from ddh-like assumptions on constant-degree graded encodings. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2016 IEEE 57th Annual Symposium on, pages 11– 20. IEEE, 2016.
[32] Michael G Luby, Michael Mitzenmacher, Mohammad Amin Shokrollahi, Daniel A Spielman, et al. Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs. IEEE Transactions on information Theory, 47(2):585–598, 2001.
[33] Grigorii A Margulis. Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes. Combinatorica, 2(1):71– 78, 1982.
[34] Elchanan Mossel, Amir Shpilka, and Luca Trevisan. On εbiased generators in NC0. Random Structures & Algorithms, 29(1):56–81, 2006.
[35] Moni Naor and Asaf Nussboim. Implementing huge sparse random graphs. In Moses Charikar, Klaus Jansen, Omer Reingold, and Jose´ D. P. Rolim, editors, Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, 10th International Workshop, APPROX 2007, and 11th International Workshop, RANDOM 2007, Princeton, NJ, USA, August 20-22, 2007, Proceedings, volume 4627 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 596–608. Springer, 2007.
[36] Moni Naor, Asaf Nussboim, and Eran Tromer. Efficiently constructible huge graphs that preserve first order properties of random graphs. In Joe Kilian, editor, Theory of Cryptography, Second Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC 2005, Cambridge, MA, USA, February 10-12, 2005, Proceedings, volume 3378 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 66–85. Springer, 2005.
[37] Michael Sipser and Daniel A Spielman. Expander codes. In Foundations of Computer Science, 1994 Proceedings., 35th Annual Symposium on, pages 566–576. IEEE, 1994.
[38] Daniel A Spielman. Linear-time encodable and decodable error-correcting codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 42(6):1723–1731, 1996.

179 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

