f`tjjkOMNV m

LOWERING THE ERROR FLOOR OF LDPC CODES BASED
ON BIT-RECTIFICATION STRATEGY
Hui Xue1
, Lijun Zhang1
1School of Electronics and Information Engineering,Beijing Jiaotong University,Beijing, China 
17120194@bjtu.edu.cn

Keywords: ERROR FLOOR, BIT-SEARCHING, PARALLEL CONCATENATED

Abstract

This paper proposes a bit-rectification strategy to lower error floor of Low-density parity-check codes. Most erroneous bits are located by bit-searching algorithm and obtain more reliable message over parallel concatenated decoder. The negative effect of erroneous bits along with corresponding trapping sets will be avoided.
1 Introduction
With the rapid development of wireless communication system, the Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] with the ability of approaching the Shannon limit has become the focus of the channel coding research. Due to the excellent bit error rate (BER) performance of the LDPC codes under the iterative decoding algorithm, it has been incorporated into the coding scheme of the fifth generation communication system. However, the most LDPC codes have a serious error floor [2] phenomenon under the iterative decoder. That is, as the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) increases, the BER reaches a saturated state and does not continue to decrease. This problem seriously limits its application of the field with higher BER requirement. There has been many research aiming to optimize the error floor phenomenon, most of them aim at breaking the trapping set [3], which is the main cause of error floor. The existing research can be roughly divided into three categories: code construction [4][5], optimization of decoding scheme [6][7] and concatenated strategy [8][9]. The main motivation of code construction is to avoid generating harmful trapping sets in the Tanner graph. However, the construction strategy usually has limitations because it only applies to specific code. The optimization can also be considered on decoding schemes, like the

backtracking scheme and the two-stage algorithm, but both of them need to get a priori information of the harmful trapping sets, which is extremely difficult to get. Concatenated strategy has also be implemented on the cooperation of component decoders, but the weakness is the increased redundancy and complexity. In general, it is necessary to obtain a efficient strategy with low complexity and wide application. In this paper, we proposed a bit-rectification strategy over Monte Carlo simulation and optimized parallel concatenated Gallager codes (PCGC) decoder [10]. The reliable level and the number of erroneous bits are determined by Monte Carlo simulation. And then the erroneous bits will be re-encoded to obtain a targeted parallel concatenated Gallager codes (PCGC), so it can obtain more reliable channel information from another component decoder under the optimized PCGC decoder. Finally, the negative effects of these erroneous bits can be eliminated with high possibility. Simulation results show that it can effectively reduce the error floor while keeping the coding rate basically unchanged.

2 Preliminaries

1.1 Monte Carlo simulation

In our research, the bit-searching method is based on Monte

Carlo simulation. For the LDPC codes, this simulation can

locate the most erroneous bits rather than locate the trapping

sets directly. The Monte Carlo simulation formula can be

mathematically expressed as:

 PMC

1 N

N
Ej (i)
i1

(1)

Where the PM C denoted the Monte Carlo simulation value

of bit j, E j (i) 1 if bit j do not correctly converge during

SM
^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQOWRU rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)the i th iteration. E j (i) 0 if the bit j correctly converge. N is the number of Monte Carlo simulation runs.
1.2 Decoding scheme of PCGC The code construction after bit-searching and the process of re-encoding is a special kind of parallel-concatenate structure, so some improvements can be considered on the conventional PCGC decoder. The conventional decoder has already dedicated in [10]. As shown in Fig.1, yc0 represents the received bits which corresponding to the information bits x, yc1 and yc2 indicate the bits corresponding to the parity check bits of two component codes. A whole iterate decoding process is called a super iteration. At the first super iteration, the decoder 1 computes the extrinsic information p1e (c) by utilizing the received sequence yc0 and yc1 . The decoder 2 will calculate the extrinsic information p2e (c) by p1e (c) obtaining from decoder1. In the next super iterations, the decoder 1 will calculate the extrinsic information p1e (c) by p2e (c) , which is product from the decoder 2. This process of super iteration will continue until all the component decoders get a valid word or reach the maximum number of super iterations. If all decoders do not successfully converge until the max number of iterations is reach, the final output is the output of the decoder 2.

Now consider the reliable level vector E. as the value of E j get bigger, the reliable level of the bit will become smaller, so the most erroneous bits can be selected from the top of the vector E. Finally, the bit-rectification step can be seen from Fig.2.
(a)

Fig.1 Conventional decoder of PCGC
3 Bit-rectification strategy
For the error floor phenomenon of LDPC codes, we proposed an effective bit-rectification strategy based on bit-searching method and optimized PCGC decoder. Firstly, we can obtain the reliable level of bits by bit-searching method, which is based on the Monte Carlo simulation. The detail is shown in algorithm 1.

(b) Fig.2 (a) Original Tanner graph (b) Modified Tanner graph before bit-searching As shown in Fig.2 (a), the variable nodes (VNs) with different gray-scales represent different reliable levels, the darker the color, the less reliable the bits. We assume that the number of the most erroneous bits we selected by Monte Carlo simulation is a. As shown in Fig.2 (b), the a bits will be consider as the message sequence to be re-encoded by the (a+b, a) LDPC code. In addition, for the original code with length n and coding rate (n-m/n), the quantity of the erroneous bits should be carefully considered, the purpose of this idea is to avoid serious rate loss while ensuring better performance. If we choose the (a+b, a) code for (n, m) original code in the process of re-encoding, and then the

SN
^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQOWRU rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)modified coding rate rm m / (n + b) . Since only the a little percentage of bits are involved in trapping sets, so b 0 n and it will not lead much rate loss. As we know, the trapping sets usually lead the bits cannot correctly converge all the time. Therefore, the erroneous bits located by Monte Carlo simulation will have a high probability of being in the trapping sets. After re-encoding, these bits will exist in two different Tanner graphs, the probability that the different structures have a trapping set on the same bit is very small. For the erroneous bits, more reliable information can be obtained from another structure, so the most erroneous bits can be rectified. The final result is that the original code may jump out of the trapping sets with a high probability. For the complexity and latency, the bit-searching algorithm can rectify the bits involving in the trapping sets rather than determine the exact location of the harmful trapping sets by complex analysis of Tanner graph, so that it can eliminate the negative effect of trapping set while keeping the complexity and latency basically unchanged. In order to make better use of this structural feature and ensure the full interaction of extrinsic information, we do an improvement on the conventional PCGC decoder. Two independent maximum number k of iteration is set for the component decoders respectively to ensure sufficient local iterations. The global iteration number is set as W.
Fig.3 The Optimized PCGC decoder
As shown in Fig.3, a whole iterative process is called a super iteration. In the first super iteration, decoder 1 computes the output p1(c) with the received sequence under SPA, this process continue until the decoder correctly converge or the maximum number of iterations is reach. In the first case, the p1(c) is the final output, in the later case, the decoder 2 is
activated, its only output is the extrinsic information p1e(c) ,
which will be transmitted to decoder 1 as a priori information for next super iteration. This process of decoding will continue until the decoder 1 correctly converges or the maximum number of the maximum number

of super iteration is reach. Finally, the output of the decoder 1 is taken as the final output. It is noted that the (Log-likelihood Ratio) LLR held by the erroneous bits is wrong with high probability, so we set the decoder 1 do not transmit the extrinsic information to the decoder 2. Since these erroneous bits are in different Tanner graph structures, which is denoted by different parity check matrix. The decoder 2 is set for the purpose of ensuring the erroneous bits can get correct LLR information from another structure. In the case where the decoder 1 cannot converge correctly, the correct LLR information can be obtained from the decoder 2 with high probability. These erroneous bits transmit the correct LLR information to the decoder 1, and then it can effectively avoid the trapping sets.
4 Simulation result
4.1 Simulation of (1057, 813) MacKay code In this section, we will give an example to show the effectiveness of the bit-rectification strategy. We assume that all the simulation experiments are under BPSK modulation and AWGN channel. The LDPC codes we choose for the simulation is the (1057, 813) MacKay codes. Because the bit-searching algorithm based on Monte Carlo simulation is performed at a certain SNR, we choose a medium SNR 4.15dB to obtain a reliable level sequence. E. Set the running number of Monte Carlo as 5000 and 10000 respectively. Considering the rate loss, we need to carefully select the number of erroneous bits. We sort the sequences E to observe its characteristic. As shown in Fig. 4, the two curves represent the sorted E with running number of 5000 and 10000, we found that there is always a waterfall area in E. This waterfall area divides all the bits into two levels of reliability.
Fig.4 The sorted E

SO

^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQOWRU rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)We randomly select the critical point (765, 48) at the waterfall area, the number of bits with lower reliable level is 48. So we selected the number of erroneous bits 36, 48, and 60 respectively for the test of performance. The code words used for re-encoding all have a coding rate of 1/2, such as (96,48) MacKay codes, and the number of iterations is large enough to ensure reliability. It can be found from Fig. 5 that the bit-rectification strategy based on the bit-searching and re-encoding scheme can effectively improve the error floor phenomenon. Without considering the adding redundancy, the more erroneous bits are selected, the better the performance will be. The random-selected scheme do not have efficient improvement of error floor. Consider the trade-off may be made between the BER performance and rate loss to get the optimal solution. Taking the 48-selected as an example, after re-encoding, the coding rate is reduced from 0.769 to 0.735. the rate loss is negligible for LDPC codes with medium length. The effect caused by the different number of selected-bits are also shown in Fig.5. When the selected number of erroneous bits is 60, there is just fewer improvement of performance when compared to that of the 48-selected, the advantage of more redundancy is almost negligible. Therefore, to obtain the number of the erroneous bits from the waterfall area can be the optimal solution.

It can be seen from Fig. 5 that near the error floor area of the original (1057, 813) MacKay code, the bit-rectification strategy with 48-selected bits reduce the error floor from 10-7 to10-9 . There is no error floor phenomenon appear until the BER of 10-9 . It strongly confirms that the BER performance is improved better in the high Eb / N 0 area with the bit-searching algorithm and optimized PCGC decoder, despite a negligible loss of coding rate. In order to further optimize the performance of the bit-rectification strategy, we replaced the (96, 48) MacKay code with the (96, 48) PEG code, which has a better structure. Through many experiments, the performance has been further improved. As shown in Figure 6, the error floor is further reduced when compared with that of (60, 30) LDPC code. At the BER of 10-8 , the bit-rectification with PEG code has 0.2dB coding gain.

Fig.5 The performance of the bit-rectification strategy with different bit-selected

Fig.6 The performance of bit-rectification strategy with (96, 48) PEG code
4.2 Complexity Analysis As we know, Conventional iterative decoder has about 6nv d ave floating-point multiplications per iteration, where d ave is the average column-weight of the parity-check matrix and nv is the number of variable nodes. Hence, the total multiplication operations c 6nvdave N s , where N s is the average number of iteration. The complexity comparison between original code and the code under bit-rectification strategy can be seen from this aspect. For the original (1057,

SP
^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQOWRU rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)813) MacKay code, nv 1057 and dave 3 , the modified code with 48-selected erroneous bits has nv 1105 and d ave dv + (dv 
 nadd ) / nv 3.13 , where the nadd is the number of erroneous bits being selected. In the high SNR 4.15 dB, the average numbers of original code is
Ns 2.869 and the average numbers of modified code is Ns 2.876. Hence, the percentage of multiplication operations is approximate 1 - coriginal / cmod ified 8.54%
reduction. Therefore, with the significantly improvement on error floor phenomenon, the bit-rectification strategy only has a increased complexity of 8.54%.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a bit-rectification strategy based on Monte Carlo simulation and optimized PCGC decoder. The bit-searching simulation can locate the most erroneous bits without analyzing specific structure of the trapping sets. Furthermore, the simulation result shows that it can efficiently lower the error floor. In the further research, we are committed to find more precise bit-selection criteria and achieve better performance.

[6] J. Kang, L. Zhang, Z. Ding, and S. Lin, An Iterative Decoding Algorithm with Backtracking to Lower the Error-Floors of LDPC Codes," in Proc. IEEE Globecom. Conf., New Orleans, LA, Nov. 2008 [7] J. Kang, L. Zhang, Z. Ding, and S. Lin, A two-stage iterative decoding of LDPC codes for lowering error floors," in Proc.IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 59, NO. 1, JANUARY 2011 [8] X. Xiao, M. Nasseri, B. Vasi, and S. Lin,  Serial concatenation of ReedMller and LDPC codes with low error floor, in Proc. 55th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun.,
Control, Comput. (Allerton), Oct. 2017, pp. 688693 [9] M. Nasseri, T. Wang, S. Lin, "Concatenated finite geometry and finite field ldpc codes", International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ICSPCS), 2017 [10] H. Behairy and S. Chang, "Parallel concatenated Gallager codes," Electronics Letters, vol. 36, no. 24, pp. 2025-2026, 2000

6 Acknowledgments

This work is supported by National Science Foundation of China under grant No.61872031 and U1534201.

7 Reference

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes, IRE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 2128, 1962
[2] T. Richardson,  Error floors of LDPC codes,  in Proceedings of the annual Allerton conference on communication control and computing, vol. 41. The University; 1998, 2003, pp. 14261435
[3] S. Kang, J. Moon, J. Ha, and J. Shin,  Breaking the trapping sets in LDPC codes: check node removal and collaborative decoding, IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no.
1, pp. 1526, Jan. 2016 [4] Le Dong, Ziyu Zhao, Jing Lei, Er-bao Li, " Lower error floor of LDPC codes based on trapping sets elimination", in Proc. International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP) 2014 [5] J. Li, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, W. E. Ryan, and D. J. Costello, Jr, "Globally Coupled LDPC Codes." in Proc. Inf. Theory Applic. Workshop, San Diego, CA., Jan. 31 - Feb. 5, 2016

SQ
^    W v rK a~  g OQIOMOS ~ NMWQOWRU rq`  fbbb uK o ~K

)