High throughput multi-code LDPC encoder for CCSDS standard

Jinfou Xie, Shixian Li, Yun Chen, Qichen Zhang, Xiaoyang Zeng
State Key Lab of ASIC & System, Fudan University Shanghai, China
chenyun@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract—A high throughput encoder based on Recursive Convolutional Encoder (RCE) circuits is designed for multi-code Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check (QC-LDPC) codes of CCSDS standard. The use of system registers is reduced by employing a parallel RCE circuit structure; by configuring these parallel RCE circuit structures, the encoder can support multiple patterns and code rates. The FPGA implementation results show that the design method can be implemented based on the Xilinx VC690T chip, and its normalized registers and LUTs are reduced by 39.4% and 24.4%, respectively, compared with the existing solutions.
Keywords—Encoder; Recursive Convolutional Encoder
(RCE); CCSDS; FPGA
I. INTRODUCTION
The NB-IoT supports the ground-based Internet of Things, while the remote areas of the Internet of Things only rely on satellites. Almost all satellite mobile communication systems[1], including Maritime Satellite, Space, OneWeb, etc., have already pointed their development direction to the M2M "satellite Internet of Things". Both satellite and satellite communications and satellite-to-ground communications require efficient and reliable means of information transmission. Compared with the communication link between the ordinary nearEarth satellite and the ground station, the communication link between the deep space communication and the ground has the characteristics of long transmission distance, serious interference and attenuation. In the case of limited available power on the satellite, how to support high-speed data transmission above Gbps is the core problem that needs to be solved in China's new generation satellite high-speed data transmission system.
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes[2] were invented by R. Gallager in 1962 [1].this is a channel coding technique whose error correction performance approximates Shannon's theoretical limit. It has the advantages of fast decoding speed and low error level. Research hotspots in the field of satellite communications
The QC LDPC code is a special LDPC code that can be cyclically shifted by a base matrix whose coefficients are consistent with the position of each non-zero element in the base matrix. This feature is utilized in the encoding of

QC LDPC codes. II. QC-LDPC CODES FOR CCSDS STANDARD CCSDS standard[3] was announced officially in
August 2006, of which the forward error correction coding FEC is performed by an outer code (BCH code[4]) and an inner code (QC-LDPC code). The performances of QC-LDPC codes are almost the same as computergenerated random LDPC codes. Moreover, the complexity of the implementation of QC-LDPC codes is closed to cyclic LDPC codes. The generator matrix of a QCLDPC code is composed of several circulants. In a circulant, each row is the right cyclic shift of the row above it. This architecture makes the encoder easy to implement on hardware. The generator matrix qc G of QC-LDPC codes for CCSDS standard has the following form：
III. DESIGN OF MULTI-CODE-TYPE QC-LDPC ENCODER
A. Efficient Encoding Unit of QC-LDPC Encoder

978-1-7281-0735-6/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The encoding process can be regarded as a process in which data to be encoded (column vector) m is sequentially multiplied by each row of the generating matrix.
The LDPC generation matrix of the CCSDS standard can be obtained by matrix transposition and multiplication of the check matrix; the check matrix is quasi-cyclic, so the generator matrix derived from the check matrix is also quasi-cyclic. Therefore, we can use the SRAA encoding circuit proposed in the paper [7] to achieve this function.
The SRAA[5-6] (shift-register-add-accumulator) circuit actually uses the quasi-cyclic characteristic of the generator matrix G to compress the generator matrix G in the multiplication into a series of row vectors according to the size of the quasi-cyclic block (1024, 4/5). For example: if the quasi-cyclic block size is 32, the generator matrix G is compressed into 1024/32=32 row vectors. When calculating, the first row of data is first read, then each clock cycle is shifted once, and then The coded input sequence m performs a multiplication operation on the GF(2)[7] domain.

structure of a Recursive Convolutional Encoder (RCE). We have adopted the RCE coding unit and improved
this unit so that it can support parallel coding calculations. As shown in Figure 2, the top shift register is first removed from the RCE structure, directly connected to the ROM of the first row of the storage generation matrix, while the bottom register simultaneously takes the shift and updates each time on the GF(2) domain. The temporary storage function of multiplication and accumulation results. In order to increase the processing rate of the encoder, we consider a parallel implementation of the coding unit in the kernel. We move the encoder by 4 bits instead of 1 bit each time, and the GF(2) domain. The multiplication and accumulation units are increased by a factor of four, so that four data to be encoded can be encoded simultaneously. At the same time, since the multiplication and addition operations in the GF(2) domain do not particularly consume resources, this does not make the critical path too long, and the added logic gate does not occupy much resources. This can reduce the consumption of resources while increasing throughput.

Figure 1. SRAA circuit Taking (1024, 4/5) as an example, the quasi-cyclic block size is 32, then the SRAA circuit needs to consume two 32-bit registers. In the SRAA circuit, the 32-bit shift_reg is read in the ROM in each cycle. The first row of the matrix data is generated, or it is rotated right by one bit per clock cycle. Temp_reg temporarily stores and updates the results of the multiplication and accumulation calculations on each GF(2) domain.
B. Parallel RCE Structure
The SRAA circuit is widely used as a general-purpose computing structure for an encoder, but the SRAA structure also has some drawbacks. First, there are two sets of b-bit registers in the SRAA circuit, which not only wastes a lot of resources, but also increases a lot of power consumption. Second, the SRAA circuit can only handle single-bit inputs at the same time.
to deal with these problems,A more efficient approach is given in [8], henceforth mentioned as RCE encoder. The encoder's architecture makes use of the ideas applied to the design of convolutional codes, namely the encoder

Figure 2. RCE circuit
The RCE coding unit is actually similar to the FIR filter of a GF(2) domain, and the only difference between the two is that the RCE coding unit uses the multiplication and accumulation operations of the GF(2) domain. Similar to the FIR filter, the RCE unit obtains part of the coding result by inputting a series of bit streams to be encoded and multiplying the GF(2) field with a certain row of the generation matrix, and sequentially multiplies each line of the generation matrix. Complete the coding calculation.
C. RCE Reconfiguration
The RCE arithmetic unit itself can be cascaded, and each RCE unit after the cascade receives the same input. The last bits of the N sets of RCE units form a set of buses, and the first bit of each RCE unit is assigned by selecting one bit from the bus by using a multiplexer[9], and can be configured into a plurality of sets of shift registers of different cycle lengths. The specific configuration of the RCE unit is determined by the code length k and the code rate r. The RCE arithmetic unit itself can be cascaded, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

each RCE unit after the cascade receives the same input. The last bits of the N sets of RCE units form a set of buses, and the first bit of each RCE unit is assigned by selecting one bit from the bus by using a multiplexer, and can be configured into a plurality of sets of shift registers of different cycle lengths. The specific configuration of the RCE unit is determined by the code length k and the code rate r.
Figure 3. RCE config For the AR4JA[10] code group, there are 7 expansion factors, and the corresponding l values are 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, and 2048, respectively. Obviously, these values are in a 2x relationship. For the AR4JA code group, the single operation core designed in this paper contains 64 RCE coding units, which can be applied to 7 different code type respectively through configuration. D. Architecture of CCSDS-LDPC Encoder A high throughput multi-code-type encoder based on parallel-RCE circuits is designed in this paper, as shown in Fig.4. The design simplifies the encoder structure through RCE reconfigurable architecture, As a result, plenty of register resources are saved and the cost is reduced.
Figure 4. The block diagram of QC-LDPC encoder The basic arithmetic unit RCE has been described in detail in the second section. The other important modules of the encoder function as follows: Address generation control module: According to a certain timing, the read address of the matrix storage ROM is generated, and the generation matrix row

information required by the RCE operation module is read from the ROM. At the same time, according to different code rates, the ROM enable signal is generated, and the generation matrix storage block corresponding to the LDPC code of different patterns is selected.
ASM module: The purpose of the attached sync marker is to generate a frame synchronization identifier. The communication system needs to use the frame synchronization identifier to judge when synchronizing lock and loss of lock.
Output control module: The output timing of the splicing encoder. First, the frame synchronization flag is output, and then the system bits of the encoded data are output, and finally the parity of the encoded data is output. At the same time, the state machine determines whether the encoder is in operation or idle according to the empty flag of the input FIFO.

E. Resource Comparison
Based on the Xilinx VC690T FPGA chip, the encoder supporting the deep space communication standard in the CCSDS standard is designed by using the parallel RCE coding scheme described in the second section of this paper. At the same time, compared with the encoder configuration scheme proposed in paper[9], the use of hardware resources for the same group of codewords is shown in Table 1.

TABLE 1 RESOURCE UTILIZATION

Register

LUT

Paper[9]

14978

19183

This work

9078

14502

Resource/%

39.4%

24.4%

Table 1 shows that the LDPC encoder designed by the parallel RCE scheme in this paper reduces the resources such as normalized triggers and lookup tables by 39.4% and 24.4%, respectively, which is effectively reduced. The code is used to fuse the encoder's resources.
IV. CONCLUSION
Aiming at the high-throughput, multi-code, actual communication requirements required by the satellite deep space communication system, a high-throughput, high-speed encoder design using the recommended AR4JA code group of the CCSDS standard is presented. Program. Using the new RCE [reference] encoding computing unit structure, reducing the register consumption by 40%; while doing some parallel processing on the coding unit, although a small amount of combinatorial logic is added, it has increased the throughput by about 3 times. At the same time, by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

efficiently multiplexing the hardware resources with different code rate and non-code length and the coding hardware resources of the spreading factor under the parallel coding structure, the throughput of the encoder is greatly improved. The FPGA implementation results show that the method design of this paper the multiformat deep space communication encoder can achieve a throughput of up to about 20G. Its normalized triggers, lookup tables and other resources are reduced by 39.4% and 24.4% respectively compared with the existing designs, and have high application value in the field of satellite deep space communication.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61774049), the Shanghai Pujiang Talent Science funding (Grant No.16PJD008),Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality(Grant 2019-jmrh1-kj24) , the Program of Shanghai Academic/Technology Research Leader under Grant 16XD1400300.

REFERENCES

[1] ZHAN Yafeng， YIN Liuguo， LU Jianhua. LDPC
coding technique and its application on dep-space communications [C]// Dep Space Exploration Research Center, Harbin Institute of Technology.1st Workshop of the CAS Dep Space Exploration Society. Harbin: Harbin Institute of Technology，
2005:303-307.

[2] Gallager R G, “Low-density Parity-check Codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, 1962, 8(1), pp. 21–28.

[3] CCSDS. Low Density Parity Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Dep Space Applications: CCSDS 131.0- B-2 [S].Washington，DC:CCSDS，2011.

[4] Subbiah Arul,Ogunfunmi Tokunbo. A Flexible

Hybrid BCH Decoder for Modern NAND Flash

Memories Using General Purpose Graphical

Processing

Units

(GPGPUs).[J].

Micromachines,2019,10(6).

[5] Shuwen Yang, Kewu Peng, Changyong Pan, “Design and Optimization of LDPC Encoder in DTMB Transmitter,” Video Engineering, vol.32, 2008.

[6] Huxing Zhang, Hongyang Yu, “Multi-Rate QCLDPC Encoder,” Testing and Diagnosis, 2009. ICTD 2009. IEEE Circuits and Systems International Conference on. IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–4.

[7] Godkhindi Shrutkirthi S.,Goutham Simha G.D.,U. Shripathi Acharya. Spatially Modulated Non Orthogonal Space Time Block Code: Construction

and design from cyclic codes over Galois Field[J]. Physical Communication,2019,35.
[8] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Encoders for Block-Circulant LDPC Codes,” in Proceedings IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Adelaide, SA, pp. 2300–2304, Sept. 2005.
[9] GE Guangjun, YIN Liuguo. Multi-rate LDPC encoder for high-speed satellite data transmissions. Journal of Tsinghua University(Science and Technology), 2016, 56(6): 656-660.
[10] Anonymous. Encoders and Decoders for the AR4JA LDPC Codes[J]. NASA Tech Briefs,2015,39(10).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:46:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

