Node Processing Unit for Flexible LDPC Decoders with Subnode for Min-Sum Algorithm

Aswathy Ambass Dept. of Electronics and Communication Engineering
College of Engineering, Trivandrum aswathyambass@gmail.com

Lalu V. Dept. of Electronics and Communication Engineering
College of Engineering, Trivandrum laluv@cet.ac.in

Abstract—Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) decoding has received significant attention due to its superior error correction performance, and has been adopted by recent communication standards. Architecture of a Node Processing Unit(NPU) has significant impact on an LDPC decoder hardware resource requirement and processing throughput. A generalised algorithm for NPU is created using flexible dual-tree structure and these NPUs are designed to act as both Control node as well as Variable node. Simulation of a generalised algorithmic method for constructing NPUs which can support flexible LDPC decoders is done and the subnode function is designed to support min-sum algorithm. Proposed system helps to improve hardware efficiency and power requirement based on processed inputs.
Index Terms—Low-Density Parity Check(LDPC) codes, Node Processing Units(NPU), iterative decoding
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first discovered by Gallager in 1961 [1], but gained popularity recently due to the phenomenal success of turbo codes. Since 1990s, they have become one of the most widely adopted coding schemes, along with Turbo codes, for operation in forward error correcting(FEC) systems in multiple communication standards: IEEE 802.3an, 802.11n, 802.15, 802.16, ETSI 2nd Gen. DVB, 3GPP LTE (4G) and ITU-T G.9960 and G.709 to name a few [2]. LDPC codes support a high degree of parallelism and give error correction performance very close to the Shannon limit.
A Parity-Check matrix(PCM) H or a Bipartite factor graph is used to define LDPC code. Control Node(CN) and Variable Nodes(VN) are connected by edges and number of edges connected to each VN and CN is the Node’s degree. There are different decoding algorithms available to decode LDPC codes and operation of each node varies according to the algorithm used. Node Processing Units are logical structures with one or more 2-input 1-output subnodes and these NPUs perform the functions of nodes. An NPU architecture independent of subnode function is proposed in this paper.
Each NPU will consist of I number of inputs and outputs which accept and provide the messages to be exchanged through connected edges of the bi-partite graph. Due to separate hardware requirement for each node, fully parallel decoder architectures [3] are less practical and have complex routing. Partially parallel decoders provide a better routing but
978-1-7281-5523-4/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

needs the CNPUs and VNPUs to be used for varying functions of different nodes.
A flexible LDPC decoder is required to process varying number of inputs and outputs. Hence the NPU architecture is to be designed to handle flexible number of inputs and different functions. Due to this additional requirement, complexity in design of NPU architecture and routing will increase drastically, hardware requirement will increase and as a solution a hardware-efficient flexible NPU architecture [4] was implemented using a generalised algorithm. This algorithm is independent of the subnode. In this paper we present a hardware efficient and flexible structure for LDPC decoder NPUs using modified subnode. This compares two numbers as required for the min sum decoding algorithm.
II. NPU ARCHITECTURE A flexible NPU having I number of inputs and I number of outputs is proposed, which can act as a CNPU and VNPU. Degree of the CN, dc will be same as that of the number of inputs and outputs whereas the degree of VN, dv will be one less than the number of inputs and outputs. Extra input and output in VN are intrinsic channel information and posteriori information respectively and this will help in making decision about corresonding LDPC bit. Each output depends on all inputs except the corresponding input, but posteriori output depends on all inputs including corresonding input [5]. Dual tree architecture which is a combination of both binary tree and muti tree architecture is used here.
A. Subnode stucture
Fig. 1. Proposed subnode schematic.

70

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In LDPC decoders Min-sum algorithm(MSA) can significantly reduce the harware complexity as compared to the Sum Product(SP) algorithm [6]. Modified MS algorithms such as offset min-sum algorithm (O-MSA) offer better decoding performance compared to that of SP. Block parallel-architecture of LDPC decoder needs to find the two-minimum values for O-MSA from multiple inputs [7]. Node function in O-MSA includes calculation of minimum from incoming messages.
A comparator which can find the minimum value from the two 4-bit inputs(input x and input y) is used for this. A conventional coparator includes comparison of input bits starting fom the most significant bit. This will result in a delay of order n, for a n-bit comparison. In the proposed comparator we are using a carry look-ahead adder(CLA) based architecture. This improves the path delay to O(log(n)).
Fig. 1 shows the structure of proposed subnode. Input x is applied directly to the CLA while input y is converted to its one’s compliment form. Carry input provided will convert input y to its two’s compliment, hence the CLA will act as a substractor. Output carry from the CLA will indicate whether the result was positive or negative thus pointing the lowest number among x and y. This carry is provided to a multiplexer to obtain minimun of the 2 inputs. As the subnode of our structure we used this comparator.

Each square block in the figure represents a subnode with 2-inputs and 1-output. Inputs in[0] to in[15] are shown on the left of summing section while outputs out[0] to out[15] are shown in the combining section. Both the sections consists of s=log(I-1) sections. T[s][t] represents the t-th signal in s-th stage.
First stage of s=0 represents the set of inputs. Functioning of the summing section is similar to that of a binary tree where each signal T[s][t] is a combination of two signals from previous sections T[s-1][2t] and T[s-1][2t+1]. The pattern is repeated until only 2 signals remain. These inputs are then fed to the combining section.

B. Flexible Dual Tree NPU
Proposed architecture is a modified version of hardware efficient flexible NPU architecture [4]. This structure is divided into two sub sections: a summing section and a combining section. Fig. 2 shows summing section of the system and Fig. 3 shows the combining section. A structre with maximum 16 number of inputs is considered here.

Fig. 2. Summing section of proposed architecture.

Fig. 3. Combining section of proposed architecture.
In combining stage each signal is fed to two subnodes in the coming stage and combined with a signal from summing stage. Thus a signal T[s][t] is a combination of a signal from (s-1)th stage and (2S-1)-th stage. Number of intermediate signals in each stage doubles for combining section while it becomes half for summing section.
III. RESULTS
Operation of proposed NPU structure was verified by simulation using Vivado Design Suite 2018.2. The dual tree architecture was simulated for different number of inputs. With varying input the architectural structure gets modified, thus making it possible to implement power gating or clock gating.
Table I shows the area utilization in implementing the subnode using proposed method and conventional method. From

2019 9th International Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication (ICACC)

71

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I LUT USAGE FOR COMPARATOR

Algorithm Conventional Proposed

Area(LUT)

15

7

the results obtained, area required by the new method using CLA is almost 50% lesser than the conventional methods. Thus the proposed comparator provides improved hardware efficiency. This subnode was implemented in Digilent Genesys 2 Kintex 7 FPGA Development board using Vivado.
Comparing proposed dual tree architecture with multi-tree and forward-backward algorithms only dual tree provides flexibility over the number of inputs. In other structures we have to provide a null value of +7 so that it will not affect the output. The same structure was evaluated both as a CNPU and a VNPU by changing the select line input to the Mux shown in Fig. 3.
With the varying number of inputs, hardware architecture changes. Thus the area and power required changes with input. In our simulation for input I=16 power was identified to be 16.23W. Power for a special input case of I=13 was found to be 15.002W. Thus power reduction was observed with reduced number of inputs.
IV. CONCLUSION
An improved NPU architecture was simulated and implemented to support flexible LDPC decoding. With the proposed subnode a 53% reduction in area of each subnode was obtained. Also for the dual tree architecture power efficiency was observed for decreasing number of inputs due to the flexible architecture. The power requirement for a 13-input NPU was observed to be 7% lesser than the power requirement of a 16-input NPU.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.Theory, vol. IT-8, no. Jan., pp. 2128, 1962.
[2] IEEE 802.11n-2009, “Standard for Information technology-Local and metropolitan area networksSpecific requirements-Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications,” 2009.
[3] P. Schlafer, C. Weis, N. Wehn, and M. Alles, “Design space of flexible multigigabit LDPC decoders,” VLSI Design, pp. 110, 2012.
[4] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi and L. Hanzo, “Hardware-Efficient Node Processing Unit Architectures for Flexible LDPC Decoder Implementations,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 1919-1923, Dec. 2018.
[5] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi, and L. Hanzo, “A Survey of FPGA-Based LDPC Decoders,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 10981122, jan 2016.
[6] Mohammad Rakibul Islam, Dewan Siam Shafiullah et al, “Optimized Min-Sum Decoding Algorithm for Low Density Parity Check Codes” International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications Vol. 2, No. 12, 2011.
[7] S. Kumawat, R. Shrestha, N. Daga, and R. Paily, “High-throughput LDPC-decoder architecture using efficient comparison techniques & dynamic multi-frame processing schedule,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 14211430, 2015.

2019 9th International Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication (ICACC)

72

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

