2019 IEEE 37th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD)

VaLLR: Threshold Voltage Distribution Aware LLR Optimization to Improve LDPC Decoding Performance for 3D TLC NAND Flash

Lanlan Cui†, Fei Wu∗†‡, Xiaojian Liu§, Meng Zhang† and Changsheng Xie†‡ †Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Key Laboratory of Information Storage System,
Engineering Research Center of data storage systems and Technology, Ministry of Education of China
School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, China ‡Shenzhen Research Institute of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China §DERA Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China ∗Corresponding author: Fei Wu, wufei@hust.edu.cn
{cuilanlan, wufei, zgmeng, cs xie}@hust.edu.cn, liuxiaojian@derastorage.com

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been widely adopted in NAND flash in recent years to improve data reliability. However, their error-correction capability degrades due to inaccurate log-likelihood ratio (LLR). To improve LLR accuracy of LDPC decoding, this paper proposes a threshold voltage distribution aware LLR optimization scheme, called VaLLR. Firstly, we build a threshold voltage distribution model for 3D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash. Then, by exploiting the model, we introduce the VaLLR scheme to quantize LLR during soft-decision decoding. And by amplifying a portion of small LLRs, which is essential in the layer minsum decoder, more precise LLR can be obtained. Finally, we study the influence of the reference voltage arrangement on LLR calculation and apply the VaLLR scheme during decoding. The simulation shows that the proposed approach can improve the FER performance for several orders of magnitude.
Index Terms—LLR, LDPC, TLC NAND flash, threshold voltage distribution, reference voltage
I. INTRODUCTION
NAND flash memory is widely used in a variety of computer storage systems as non-volatile storage devices, with advantages of low bit cost and large capacity [1]. As the industry continues pushing the technology scaling envelope, 3D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash has been commercialized as increased bit-density. However, data reliability reduces due to high raw bit error rates (RBER) from the continual program/erase (P/E) operations and data retention errors. For ensuring data reliability, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2] with strong error correction capability have attracted a great deal of attention, becoming a more popular error correction code (ECC) for 3D TLC NAND flash. However, inaccurate LLRs result in poor error-correction capability, thus influencing data reliability.
To improve the error-correction capability, some previous works proposed solutions. Chen et al. [3] developed a nonuniform level placement strategy based on the MLC NAND flash error model to optimize the read reference voltages and improve decoding performance. Li et al. [4] proposed a smart sensing level placement scheme to reduce the LDPC decoding latency for MLC NAND flash. Ho et al. [5]

dynamically applied soft-decision voltages to reduce the bit error rate and soft-decision decoding delay according to the shift of threshold voltage. Zhang et al. [6] exploited numerical correction characteristics of retention errors to propose a retention error aware LDPC decoding scheme to improve NAND flash read performance. All of these works are focused on researching various interference. However, the interference of 3D TLC NAND flash we test shows different characteristics, and threshold voltage is still symmetrical.
In this paper, we first establish a threshold voltage distribution model with Gaussian distribution of 3D TLC NAND flash. Through testing recently released 64-layer 3D TLC NAND flash chips, we find that the threshold voltage distributions are fitted to the Gaussian distributions quite well. Besides, the standard deviations of threshold voltage distribution among TLC adjacent states (excluding erase state) are quite different. Another feature of the 3D TLC NAND flash is that no serious asymmetric distributions of threshold voltages are noticed. Based on these observations, we choose Gaussian distribution to describe the states of 3D TLC NAND flash.
The LDPC decoder is a maximum a posteriori decoder, which is sensitive to the precision of input LLR. To fully develop the potential of LDPC decoder, we introduce the VaLLR scheme to get accurate LLRs and build a lookup table for different reference voltage regions and bit positions.
For soft-decision decoding, several sensing levels are applied around each hard-decision reference voltages (HDRV), so more accurate LLR can be gained from multiple reads. In this work, we first decide the boundaries of SDRV, which are the outermost voltages around each HDRV. Since the distortion of threshold voltage distributions in 3D TLC NAND flash is relatively small, symmetrically locating boundaries does not harm the decoding performance. Secondly, we find that two to four SDRVs around each HDRV are enough to ensure good decoding performance. Finally, some concerns about the quantization of LLR are discussed and the VaLLR scheme is applied to improve decoding performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the establishment of the threshold voltage model

978-1-5386-6648-7/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

668

DOI 10.1109/ICCD46524.2019.00096

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and the VaLLR scheme. Topics about soft-decision decoding are discussed in Section III. Section IV shows the simulation results. Section V concludes this paper.
II. THRESHOLD VOLTAGE MODEL AND VALLR SCHEME
Each 3D TLC NAND flash cell stores 3 bits information with eight states, represented by P0, P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6 and P7, which are assigned to voltage windows by the read reference voltages (Vrief , (i = 0, 1, · · · , 6)) [7]. Three bits are mapped into a symbol, with the first bit representing the least significant bit (LSB), the second bit representing the center significant bit (CSB), while the last one representing the most significant bit (MSB).
We test threshold voltage distribution in the recently released 64-layer 3D TLC NAND flash, in the case of medium retention, and P/E cycles are around 5000. Totally, 16 chips are tested. For each chip, 1 die is selected, which contains 10 blocks, and each block contains 744 pages. According to the measured data, the cell threshold voltage can be appropriately fitted to Gaussian distribution, as shown in Fig. 1. Usually, the sum of squares due to error (SSE), coefficient of determination (R-square), and root mean squared error (RMSE) are used to judge the quality of fitting. In our case, all the three parameters indicate a good fitting, with SSE around 0.03, Rsquare > 0.995 and RMSE < 0.02. Moreover, we find that interference only causes a uniform drop of voltage and keeps the distribution still in a symmetry form. Therefore, we choose Gaussian distribution to fit the threshold voltage distribution.
In our test, most area of erase state is undetectable. We assume its average voltage is -1V. The fitted threshold voltage distribution is shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 2. Threshold voltage description of 3D TLC NAND flash based on measured data.

Once the threshold voltage distribution model is determined, we can calculate the floating-point LLRs combing with reference voltages arrangement. Afterward, the floating-point LLRs are quantized by two steps, which are quantization and saturation. Assuming q is the quantized bit width, the maximum modulus of quantized LLRs is max = 2(q−1) − 1. Let x denote the floating-point LLR. Set the quantized LLR as q(x), and let Q(x) denote the saturation result. The quantization is carried out using formula (1).

q (x) =

β

×

x min (x)

+

γ

(1)

Here, β and γ are two constants. Traditionally, β is set to 1. And γ is set to ensure that LLR = 0 during the

decoding process, because a correction coefficient less than

1 is multiplied.

Formula (2) is used to the get final fixed-point LLR.

⎧

⎨ − max,

q (x) ≤ − max

Q (x) = ⎩

q (x) , max,

− max < q (x) ≤ max q (x) > max

(2)

In practice, the online calculation of accurate LLRs is difficult. Instead, using the lookup table is a much reasonable solution. To get the table, we first select the level of RBER. If the RBER is too low, we cannot collect enough error to optimize the model. Otherwise, if the RBER is too high, it is beyond the work zone for our decoder. After choosing the RBER, corresponding threshold voltage distribution can be characterized.

III. SOFT-DECISION DECODING
A. Reference Voltage Boundaries
The soft-decision sensing is to place more reference voltages on both sides of each HDRV. Through multiple reads, the more precise threshold voltage decision region for the cell is gained, and a more accurate LLR sequence is obtained.
An LLR lookup table under a suitable level of RBER is established. The RBER we select is 1.2 × 10−2, which is corresponding to the work zone with low FER. After that, the relevant threshold voltage distribution can be characterized.
The calculation of floating-point LLRs needs to know threshold voltage distribution and read reference voltages. The former is recognized. Afterward, we need to select suitable SDRV configuration, including two steps:
1) The setting of SDRV boundaries, consists of the leftmost voltage and the rightmost voltage around each HDRV.
2) After determining the SDRV boundaries, select an appropriate number.
First, we choose SDRV boundaries. Since the standard deviation of erase state is large, the reference voltage between P0 state and P1 state is considered separately. We analyze the seven states except erase state through simulations, according to the above threshold voltage distribution model.
As shown in Fig. 3, we set V−i 1 and V+i 1, (i = 1, 2, · · · , 6) as the leftmost and rightmost SDRV of each HDRV, respectively. The reference voltage differences between SDRV and HDRV respectively are Δlieft = Vrief −V−i 1 and Δiright = V+i 1 −Vrief . Through simulation search, we observe:
1. Although there is a relatively big difference in standard deviations among the various overlap regions, about 3dB, the performance can reach optimum when V−i 1 and V+i 1 are symmetric about Vrief ;
2. In the case of Δileft = Δri ight, we choose an overall optimal Δi = Δlieft = Δri ight. The performance that the optimal Δi is used for six overlap regions is fine, and it is almost identical to the performance that each region using their respective optimal Δi.
According to observation 1, we can draw a conclusion that it is feasible to place SDRVs symmetrically on both sides of

669 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a) P1 state

(b) P2 state

(c) P3 state

(d) P4 state

(e) P5 state

(f) P6 state

(g) P7 state

Fig. 1. The Gaussian distribution fits the threshold voltage distribution of each state (except erase state) according to the measured data.

HDRV. According to observation 2, we see: the decoder is not sensitive to voltage difference Δi. So we set voltage difference Δi as the same for the six regions during implementation. Furthermore, between P0 state and P1 state, the voltage V−11 and V+11 we select are asymmetrical.
After the reference voltages are selected, we first calculate the LLRs offline, and then quantize the floating-point LLRs according to the VaLLR scheme.
V-1 V-2 V-3 V-4 Vref V+4 V+3 V+2 V+1
Fig. 3. The strategy of reference voltage placement.
B. Reference Voltage Number We know that increasing the number of reference voltages
for soft-decision decoding improves the decoding performance but increases the read latency. To explore this issue, after the boundaries are selected, using dichotomy, we place more reference voltages, V−i 2, V+i 2, · · · , V−i 4, V+i 4, (i = 0, 1, 2, · · · , 6) between V−i 1, V+i 1 and HDRV, as shown in Fig. 3. And we compare three strategies:
Strategy A): Three reference voltages are applied between adjacent states: Vref , V−1, V+1.
Strategy B): Five reference voltages are applied between adjacent states: Vref , V−1, V+1, V−3, V+3.
Strategy C): Nine reference voltages are applied between adjacent states: Vref , V−1, V+1, V−3, V+3, V−2, V+2, V−4, V+4.

Simulation results show that compared with strategy A), strategy B) has a large performance gain, while strategy C)’s performance gain is small compared with strategy B). When increasing the number of reference voltages, a more accurate voltage region can be obtained. As a result, a more accurate LLR can be gained, improving the decoding performance. Although increasing the number of reference voltages can improve decoding performance, the improvement becomes insignificant after reaching a certain level.
Considering the LDPC decoder is only sensitive to small LLRs, it is reasonable to preserve their precisions by amplifying them with factors β and γ. Inevitably, some large LLRs are saturated. Through choosing proper β and γ, we can mitigate negative effect caused by saturation and keep the precision as well.
In this work, we optimize β and γ using simulations based on numerical approximation. For strategy A), after adjusting the two parameters, FER performance is improved by two orders of magnitude. For strategy B), the performance is also improved, which is close to the performance of strategy C).
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we first introduce the simulation setup, and then give the results and analysis.
A. Simulation Setup
In this paper, the LDPC code we use for simulations is a 2KB QC-LDPC we construct with a code rate of 0.9. The 6-bit sign quantization is used for initial LLRs, that is, LLRs belong to [-31,31] after quantified. The layer minsum algorithm is employed, which is accelerated through the SIMD instruction set. Moreover, the correction coefficient is 0.75 and the maximum number of iterations is 10.

670 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Soft-decision Decoding Results
In the simulation of soft-decision decoding, the SDRVs are placed uniformly on both sides of the HDRV (except erase state). And the process is based on the threshold voltage model proposed above. Through simulations, the optimal Δi (i = 1, 2, · · · , 6) of the six overlap regions is selected, which can be seen in Table I.
In the next simulation, we set the Δi are all same for six regions, which is 0.135. As presented in Fig. 4 (a), we can see, this method does not harm the FER performance. In addition, between P0 state and P1 state, the voltage differences Δl1eft and Δr1ight are 0.135V and 0.235V, respectively. During the above process, the selected quantization parameters are β = 1, γ = 1.5, and they are traditional.
TABLE I THE OPTICAL VOLTAGE DIFFERENCE Δ OF SIX OVERLAP REGIONS

Δ

Δ1

Δ2

Δ3 Δ4 Δ5

Δ6

Value 0.13 0.135 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.135

After that, we compare the performance with strategy A), strategy B), and strategy C). The results are shown in Fig. 4 (b). When the number of sensing levels is increased from three to five, the performance gain is relatively large, which is several orders of magnitude. When it comes to nine, the gain is relatively small.
In a word, we suggest using three or five reference voltages is a good solution for soft-decision decoding.

1.0E+00

1.0E+00

1.0E-01

1.0E-01

1.0E-02

1.0E-02

1.0E-03

1.0E-03

1.0E-04

1.0E-04

1.0E-05 1.0E-06 1.0E-07 1.0E-08 1.0E-09
1.00E-02

1.15E-02

strategy A) optimal strategy A) optimal strategy B) strategy B) strategy C) optimal strategy C)
1.30E-0R2BE1R.45E-02 1.60E-02 1.75E-02

1.0E-05 1.0E-06 1.0E-07 1.0E-08 1.0E-09
1.00E-02

(a)

strategy A) strategy B) strategy C) improved strategy A) improved strategy B)
1.20E-02 1.R4B0EE-R02 1.60E-02 1.80E-02
(b)

Fig. 4. (a) The performance comparison between the mode that optimal voltage difference Δ is adopted and the mode that the selected voltage difference Δ is adopted. (b) The performance comparisons of ordinary LLR and improved LLR for strategy A) and strategy B).

There is a relatively big gap between the performance of strategy A) and strategy B). Thus we adjust parameters to improve the performance of strategy A). Finally, the selected quantization parameters are β = 2, γ = 0. As shown in Fig. 4 (b), FER performance of strategy A) is improved by two orders of magnitude and the acceptable RBER is also increased obviously, which is approximately the middle of strategy A) and B). More importantly, there is no implementation complexity.
The fixed-point LLRs of strategy B) are also improved. Since the performance gap between strategy B) and strategy C) is quite small, the improvement of the performance of strategy B) can not be obvious. After adjusting the fixed-point LLRs,

where β = 2, γ = 0, its performance is almost the same as that of strategy C). The simulation results are shown in Fig. 4 (b). Overall, according to the VaLLR scheme, after the fixedpoint LLRs are optimized, the superior performance can be obtained by using only five reference voltages.
V. CONCLUSION
In order to improve the decoding performance of LDPC for 3D TLC NAND flash, this paper first establishes the threshold voltage distribution model based on the measured data, and finds that the fitting of Gaussian distribution is good. Then, according to the model, we propose the VaLLR scheme to calculate the fixed-point LLRs of three bits in different regions offline. In the experiment, we find that although the standard deviations of various states are different, the performance that the SDRVs are placed symmetrically around the HDRV can be optimal, and the same voltage difference can be used among different overlap regions. Based on the above conditions, we also study the effect of the reference voltages number on the performance, and find that when the number of reference voltages achieves five, the performance improvement becomes less obvious. In addition, we use the VaLLR scheme to compensate for the performance loss caused by insufficient quantification. Simulation results show that the decoding performance is increased by two orders of magnitude when using three reference voltages.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the NSFC under Grant No. 61872413, No. U1709220, No. 61902137, No. 61821003, in part by Shenzhen basic research project No. JCYJ20170307160135308, No. JCYJ20170818162129916, in part by National Key Research and Development Program of China No.2018YFB10033005, in part by the 111 Project (No. B07038), in part by the Project funded by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Deguchi, S. Suzuki, and K. Takeuchi, “Write and read frequency-based word-line batch vth modulation for 2-d and 3-d-tlc nand flash memories,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, no. 99, pp. 1–10, 2018.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[3] S.-L. Chen, B.-R. Ke, J.-N. Chen, and C.-T. Huang, “Reliability analysis and improvement for multi-level non-volatile memories with soft information,” in 2011 48th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC). IEEE, 2011, pp. 753–758.
[4] Q. Li, L. Shi, C. J. Xue, Q. Zhuge, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Improving ldpc performance via asymmetric sensing level placement on flash memory,” in 2017 22nd Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASPDAC). IEEE, 2017, pp. 560–565.
[5] K.-C. Ho, P.-C. Fang, H.-P. Li, C.-Y. M. Wang, and H.-C. Chang, “A 45nm 6b/cell charge-trapping flash memory using ldpc-based ecc and drift-immune soft-sensing engine,” in 2013 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers. IEEE, 2013, pp. 222– 223.
[6] M. Zhang, F. Wu, X. He, P. Huang, S. Wang, and C. Xie, “Real: A retention error aware ldpc decoding scheme to improve nand flash read performance,” in 2016 32nd Symposium on Mass Storage Systems and Technologies (MSST). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–13.
[7] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solid-state drives,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, 2017.

FER FER

671 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:45:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

