IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2019

1967

Neighbor-A-Posteriori Information Assisted Cell-State Adaptive Detector for NAND Flash Memory
Zishuai Peng, Ruiquan He, Guojun Han , Senior Member, IEEE, Guofa Cai , and Yi Fang , Member, IEEE

Abstract— Cell-to-Cell interferences (CCIs), which arise from adjacent cells through parasitic coupling-capacitance, severely degrade the performance of threshold voltage detection. Pre-processing and post-processing methods have been proposed to mitigate the effect of CCIs on threshold voltage variation. The performance of the aforementioned methods heavily depends on the accuracy of the threshold voltages adjacent to the victim cells. However, to obtain high accuracy, these methods requires multi-sensing operations, thus significantly resulting in high detection latency. In this letter, a novel non-uniform detection scheme based on the threshold voltage of cell states, which is referred to as the cell-state adaptive detection (CSAD), is proposed to adapt the shifts of the threshold voltages. Then, the neighbor-a-posteriori information is exploited to mitigate the overcompensation phenomenon and further improve the performance of the CSAD under the block read mode scenario. Simulation results show that the proposed CSAD scheme and its improved version not only achieve better bit-error-rate performance but also keep lower detection latency compared with the existing detection schemes.
Index Terms— Cell-to-cell interference, NAND flash memory, non-uniform detection, posteriori information.
I. INTRODUCTION
N AND flash memory has been widely used in various fields, e.g., mobile electronic devices and high-performance servers, due to its non-volatile, extremely high read/write speed. With the development of manufacturing technology, multi-level cell (MLC) technology can increase the data storage density of flash memory, where single memory cell can store more than one bit. However, it results in a narrower gap between adjacent voltage windows, thus increasing the strength of cell-to-cell interference (CCI) effect and decreasing the reliability of NAND flash memory. The CCI is well recognized as one of the major noise source
Manuscript received July 27, 2019; accepted August 12, 2019. Date of publication August 19, 2019; date of current version November 11, 2019. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant (Nos. 61871136, 61701121, 61771149), the Special Innovation Project of the Education Department of Guangdong Province under Grant 2017KZDXM028, 2018KTSCX057, and 2017KTSCX060, the Project of Department of Education of Guangdong Province under Grant 2018SFJD01, the Open Research Fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, under Grant 2018D02, and the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (No. 201904010124). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Morales Cespedes. (Corresponding author: Guojun Han.)
Z. Peng, R. He, G. Han, and G. Cai are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: peng_gdut@foxmail.com; ray_hrq@outlook.com; gjhan@gdut.edu.cn; caiguofa2006@126.com).
Y. Fang is with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China, and also with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China (e-mail: fangyi@gdut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2019.2936342

in flash memory channel [1], there also have data retention noise, random telegraph noise and read disturb [2]–[5], which distorts the threshold voltage, leads to data reliability problems and complicates the design of the channel detector.
To overcome the above issues, soft-decision error-correcting codes (ECCs), such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [6], are investigated to achieve anti-noise capability by utilizing the accuracy of log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) information. Thus, designing effective channel detectors for MLC flash memory is inevitably required. In the existing literature, there have been several schemes to mitigate CCI effect [7]–[12]. Specifically, a temporarily programming approach has been exploited into the lower page (LSB) to minimize the CCI effect [7]. In [8], a state mapping scheme has been proposed by mapping the states of high-order bits to minimize the CCI effect. In [9], [10], the expression of threshold voltage is used to calculate the LLR information and optimize the read reference voltage for improving the error-correcting capability of the soft-decision decoding algorithms. Furthermore, a novel non-uniform quantization method has been exploited to improve the accuracy of the initial LLR information [11], thus further improving the BER performance. Considering the channel noise and to obtain more accurate read-back voltage, an effective post-processing scheme has been conceived in [12] to estimate the CCI strength and remove the CCI component from the read-back voltage. However, to obtain high-reliability soft-input information, these schemes require much computational overhead and frequently sense the voltage of the neighbor cells. Moreover, since the read-back voltage is influenced by CCI, most of the existing postcompensation schemes have overcompensation phenomenon.
With an aim to tradeoff the bit-error-rate (BER) performance and computational overhead, this letter proposes two new detecting schemes to mitigate the CCI effect and overcompensation phenomenon, namely cell-state adaptive detection (CSAD) and neighbor-a-posteriori information assisted CASD (NIA-CSAD), respectively. The basic idea of the proposed CSAD is that the threshold voltage distribution is firstly divided into several sub-windows and then adaptively adjust the position of sensing reference voltage according to the shifts of the threshold voltage and sub-windows. To further mitigate CCI effect and overcompensation phenomenon, the neighbora-posterior information is computed and exploited in the NIA-CSAD scheme. Finally, simulated results indicate that the proposed new schemes can significantly enhance BER performance with respect to other existing detection schemes.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. Section II briefly introduces the channel model and major channel noises. Section III presents the proposed CSAD and NIA-CSAD

1558-2558 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1968

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2019

schemes. The performances of the proposed schemes are demonstrated and discussed in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the letter.

II. BACKGROUND
NAND flash memory is composed of an array, which is divided into several blocks. Each block consists of multiple memory pages, where low bit data represents lower page data and high bit data represents upper page data. In a MLC NAND flash memory, it can store two bits per cell and can be represented by four states. One can exploit different number of charges for the floating gate to distinguish the four states in a flash memory cell.

A. Threshold Voltage Distribution of Erased State and Programed State

In MLC NAND flash memory channel, there are four states, which include one erase state and three program states. The threshold voltage of the erase state follows Gaussian distribution [13], given by

Pe(x)

=

√1

e , −

(x−μe 2σe2

)2

2πρe

(1)

where μe and ρe denote the mean and standard deviation,

respectively. According to [14], the distribution function of

the program state can be modeled as

Pp(x)

=

√1

e , −

(x−μp
2σp2

)2

2πρp

(2)

where Pp(x) represents the distribution function of the programmed state p and belongs to {P10(x), P00(x), P01(x)}, and μp and ρp are the mean and standard deviation of the
programming noise, respectively.

B. Cell-to-Cell Interference
When the memory cells of the next word-line are programming, the threshold voltage of victim cell is influenced by the parasitic capacitance coupling effect from the neighbor cells, thus the threshold voltage shift of the victim cell can be estimated as

I = ΔVnγn,

(3)

where I is the CCI strength, ΔVn denotes the threshold voltage change of the n-th interfering cell from the erase state to the program state, and γn denotes the coupling-capacitive ratio between the interfering and victim cells. For the all-
bit-line structure flash memory, each cell is affected by three
neighboring cells, as show in Fig. 1. Therefore, the threshold
voltage shift of a victim cell can be specifically expressed as

I(i,j) = γxy V(i+1,j−1) − V(i+1,j−1)

+ γy V(i+1,j) − V(i+1,j)

+ γxy V(i+1,j+1) − V(i+1,j+1) ,

(4)

where i and j represent the i-th word-line and j-th bit-line of the cell’s position, V and V represent the threshold voltage

Fig. 1. Illustration of CCI effect in all-bit-line structure, where each cell is affected by three neighboring cells.

Fig. 2. The distribution of threshold voltage before and after CCI and Gaussian random channel noise.

after and before the cell programming, respectively, and γy and γxy are the coupling-capacitive ratios along the victim
cell’s vertical and diagonal directions, respectively.

In the channel noise, in addition to the CCI, there exists data

retention noise, random telegraph noise (RTN) and read disturb

to distort the threshold voltage of flash memory cells. One can

approximate the combination of these noises into a Gaussian
distributed random variable z, with zero mean and standard
deviation ρz, where the channel signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as1

1

SN R = ρz2 .

(5)

III. PROPOSED CSAD AND NIA-CSAD SCHEMES
A. Characteristics of Threshold Voltage Distribution
The channel noises, such as RTN, CCI and P/E cycles can significantly distort the distribution of threshold voltage, which is illustrated in Fig. 2. It can be seen that the threshold voltage distribution experienced channel noises is quite difficult to distinguish the adjacent states. Therefore, how to efficiently optimize the reference voltage and sensing quantization level is very critical for improving the performance of channel detection.
1It should be noted that the SNR is used in dB form throughout the letter.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PENG et al.: NIA-CSAD FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY
TABLE I THE CHANGES OF STANDARD DEVIATION OF CHANNEL NOISE FOR THE
MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

1969

To further investigate the characteristics of threshold volt-
age, the Gaussian Kernel density function and maximum
likelihood estimation are adopted in this letter. According to [15], the Gaussian Kernel density function with mean μp and standard deviation ρp can be written as

fp(V )

=

1 N

N j=1

√1

2

e ( ) , −

V(i,j) −μp 2σp2

ρp 2π

(6)

where N is the number of the memory cells in a block and p is the storage state. For MLC NAND flash memory, p ∈ {11, 10, 00, 01}. Table. I shows the changes of the standard deviation of channel noise for the MLC NAND flash memory, where s is the CCI strength factor that can be used to study a wide range of cell-to-cell coupling strength. Simulation results indicate that the standard deviation for each state varies with the CCI and SNR. Furthermore, the standard deviation for the states with higher threshold voltage is significantly enlarged when the channel noises are applies.

Fig. 3. Illustration of threshold voltage sensing quantization. The conventional uniform sensing quantization sheme is shown in (a), and the proposed cell-state based non-uniform sensing quantization is shown in (b).
Algorithm 1 CSAD Scheme 1: for every state |S| do 2: Calculate the state intersection area of the read reference
voltage Vr|eSf|, according to [10]; 3: Calculate the read reference voltage interval ΔVp using
(8); 4: end for 5: for every cell in a block do 6: Calculate the sensing voltage using (9); 7: end for

B. CSAD Scheme

When the Gaussian Kernel density function is used to
describe the distribution of threshold voltages in NAND flash memory channels, the parameters, i.e., ρp and μp, can be obtained by scanning a large number of cells at the initial
stage of NAND flash memories, and be further dynamically
optimized at the service stage. For the Gaussian Kernel density function and the accurate read-back threshold voltage V of a cell, the LLR information for the bit bi in the cell can be calculated as

L(bi) = log

p

fp(V

p∈Si
)−

fp(V )
p∈Si

fp(V

)

,

(7)

where Si denotes the set of states whose i-th bit is 1. e.g, in MLC storage model, each cell storages two bits b1b2 and S ∈ {11, 10, 00, 01}, then, S1 ∈ {11, 10} and S2 ∈ {11, 01}.
Since one needs infinite sensing quantization level so as

to obtain the accuracy threshold voltage for a cell, the uni-

form sensing quantization method over the entire threshold

voltage range is generally used [12], as shown in Fig. 3 (a).

However, the conventional sensing method does not exploit

the characteristics of the threshold voltage distribution, e.g.,

programmed state, variance of threshold voltage for each state.

Considering MLC NAND flash memory and it’s threshold

voltage distribution as shown in Fig. 2, the programmed states

at higher threshold voltages are more affected by channel

noises than those at lower threshold voltages.

Assume that the read reference voltages at the intersection area between adjacent states can be calculated according to [10]. The read reference voltages at the intersection area have the lowest raw BER. The CSAD scheme sets the sensing quantization levels based on the threshold voltages of each state rather than the whole states. The basic idea of the CSAD is shown in Fig. 3 (b), where the reference voltages located at the redlines (e.g. Vr3ef , Vr6ef , Vr9ef ) are obtained by calculating the lowest raw BER of the threshold voltage distribution, and the reference voltages located at the bluelines is set according to the adjacent redlines, and the read reference voltage interval ΔVp can be calculated as

ΔVp

=

Vr|eSf|

− Vr|eSf|−1 wp

.

(8)

where |S| is the number of storage states, Vr|eSf| denotes the state intersection area of the read reference voltage, and wp is the sensing quantization level of state p. If the threshold voltage of a cell (i, j) locates in [Vrkef , Vrke+f 1], where the Vrkef denotes the k-th read reference voltage, the sensing threshold
voltage can be approximately given by

V(i,j)

=

Vrkef

+ 2

Vrke+f 1

.

(9)

The detailed steps of the proposed CSAD scheme are outlined in Algorithm 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1970

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 23, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2019

Fig. 4. Illustration of sequential read/write scenario in NAND flash memory.

C. NIA-CSAD Scheme

To further improve the performance of the CSAD scheme, the successful decoding cells are used to provide a-posteriori information so as to assist the decoding of the cells on other word-line. First, we consider the sequential read/write scenario as illustrated in Fig. 4. At the write stage, it can be seen that the cells at the i-th word-line are firstly programmed and the cells at the (i + 1)-th word-line are subsequentially programmed. Thus, the threshold voltages of cells at the (i + 1)-th word-line are only affected by the programming operation at i-th wordline. At the read stage, the cells are sensed in opposite direction with respect to the write stage. Second, it can be found that the majority of postcompensation schemes suffer from the overcompensation phenomenon. For example, when the CCI strength is calculated by using Eq. (4), the read-back voltage (i.e., sensed voltage) V is distorted by CCI, thus the read-back voltage is larger than the real voltage (i.e., voltage that is not interfered by CCI after the cell programming). If the cells at the (i + 1)-th word-line are successfully decoded, their a-posteriori information instead of the sensed voltage can be used to calculate the CCI strength for the cells at the i-th word-line. Hence, the above method can greatly mitigate the overcompensation and improve the performance of channel detection.
Assuming that the cells at the (i + 1)-th word-line are successfully detected, according to Eq. (4), the CCI from the previous word-line to the cell at the i-th word-line and j-th bit-line can be calculated as

I¯(i,j) = γxy V˜(i+1,j−1) − Ve + γy V˜(i+1,j) − Ve

+ γxy V˜(i+1,j+1) − Ve , (10)

where Ve and V˜ are the mean value of voltage for the

erase state and the programmed states, respectively. Then,

the threshold voltage of (i, j)-cell with post-processing [12]

can be computed as

−→ V (i,j)

=

V(i,j)

−

I¯(i,j ) .

(11)

If the cells at the previous word-line fail to detect, the sensed threshold voltages for the cells at the current word-line are
directly used in Eq. (7). We assume that one memory block has M word-lines
and i ∈ {1, . . . , M }. The detailed steps of the proposed NIA-CSAD scheme are outlined in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 NIA-CSAD Scheme

for every cell on i-th word-line do

2: Perform CSAD scheme;

if i = M then

4:

Calculate LLR using (7);

Perform BP decoding algorithm;

6: else

if (i + 1)-th word-line is successfully decoded then

8:

Replace the sensing voltage V(i+1,j) by the mean

voltage of state, according to the (i + 1)-th

word-line cell’s decoded codeword;

Perform CCI cancellation using (10) and (11);

10:

else

Perform CCI cancellation using (4) and (11);

12:

end if

Calculate LLR using (7);

14:

Perform BP decoding algorithm;

end if

16: end for

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, a rate-0.90 (4544, 4096) quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code and the Belief-Propagation (BP) decoding algorithm are adopted to investigate BER performance of the proposed detection schemes, where the maximum number of iterations is set to 25. In our simulations, the all-bit-line structure is adopted.2 Moreover, the parameters of a NAND flash memory channel are set to: V11 = 1.4, V10 = 2.7, V00 = 3.3, V01 = 4.0, ρe = 0.35, ρp = 0.1. Furthermore, the CCI parameters are set as follows: γy = 0.08s, γxy = 0.0064s. In addition, 32-level sensing quantization are used, and each of the four state allocates 8-level uniform sensing. To validate the performance superiority of the proposed CSAD and NIA-CSAD schemes, the NIA-UD and NIA-CSAD-Sensed schemes are used as the benchmark, where the NIA-UD scheme is designed by using neighbor-a-posterior information and uniform detection, while the NIA-CSAD-Sensed scheme is conceived by adopting the CSAD scheme and without using neighbor-a-posterior information.
Fig. 5 shows the BER performance for the proposed CSAD and NIA-CSAD schemes, NIA-UD scheme, NIACSAD-Sensed scheme, and Post-Comp detection scheme over varying channel SNR and a fixed CCI strength factor at 1.5. Referring to this figure, it can be observed that the proposed CSAD and NIA-CSAD schemes outperform the Post-Comp scheme. For example, at a BER of 10−5, the proposed CSAD and NIA-CSAD schemes can obtain a 0.8-dB gain and a 2.0-dB gain compared with the Post-Comp detection scheme. The reason of obtaining better performance is that with the increase of SNR, the CCI effect becomes the dominant noise among the channel noises, thus the neighbor-a-posterior information can exert a more obvious advantage to mitigate the channel noise. In addition, it should be noted that the NIA-CSAD-Sensed scheme performs postcompensation by
2It should be noted that the proposed approaches can be easily applied to the even/odd bit-line structure.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PENG et al.: NIA-CSAD FOR NAND FLASH MEMORY

1971

Fig. 5. BER performance of the proposed CSAD, NIA-UD, NIA-CSADSensed and NIA-CSAD schemes as well as the conventional Post-Comp detection scheme over MLC NAND flash memory channel. The CCI strength factor is set to 1.5.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, the CSAD and NIA-CSAD schemes have been proposed for improving the reliability of NAND flash memory. The proposed CSAD scheme enhances the accuracy of the read-back voltage and reduce the number of threshold voltage sensing by exploiting the characteristics of the threshold voltage distribution, and the proposed NIA-CSAD scheme further mitigates the CCI effect and overcompensation by utilizing the a-posteriori information of neighbor cells. Considering the sequential read scenario in solid state driver (SSD), the NIA-CSAD can conveniently uses the information of previously decoded page in the neighbor word-line to assist the decoding of the current page, thus obtaining the improvement of channel detection. Simulation results illustrate that the proposed CSAD and NIA-CSAD schemes can offer better detection performance while keep lower detection latency compared with the existing schemes.

Fig. 6. The impact of the CCI strength factor s on the BER performance of the proposed CSAD, NIA-UD, NIA-CSAD and the Post-Comp detection schemes at the SN R = 10 dB.
using the sensed voltage rather than neighbor-a-posteriori information, thus this scheme has overcompensation phenomenon. It can be observed from the curves of the NIA-CSAD and NIA-CSAD-Sensed shcemes that, utilizing the neighbor-a-posteriori information can effectively mitigate the overcompensation, thus significantly improving the BER performance.
Fig. 6 gives the impact of the CCI strength factor s on the BER performance of the proposed NIA-CSAD, CSAD, NIA-UD and the Post-Comp detection schemes at a SNR of 10dB. From this figure, it can be seen that the proposed NIA-CSAD and CSAD schemes achieve better BER performance than that of the Post-Comp detection one.
Moreover, the computational complexity of the NIA-CSAD scheme mainly comes from the non-uniform detection of the CSAD scheme. The NIA-CSAD detection scheme requires 9N addition operations, 4N multiplication operations and 3N memory read operations. In addition, the Post-comp detection scheme [12] requires 6N addition operations, 3N multiplication operations and 2N memory read operations, where N is the number of memory cells per block. Although the proposed NIA-CSAD scheme slightly increases the computational complexity compared with the Post-comp detection scheme, the proposed NIA-CSAD scheme can significantly improve BER performance.

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory: Measurement, characterization, and analysis,” in Proc. Conf. Design, Automat. Test Eur. (DATE), 2012, pp. 521–526.
[2] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solidstate drives,” Proc.IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
[3] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, S. Ghose, and O. Mutlu, “Read disturb errors in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, mitigation, and recovery,” in Proc. 45th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Jun. 2015, pp. 438–449.
[4] S. Aritome, T. Takahashi, K. Mizoguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “RTN impact on data-retention failure/recovery in scaled (~1Ynm) TLC NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IRPS, Apr. 2017, pp. PM-13.1-PM-13.4.
[5] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Decision-directed retentionfailure recovery with channel update for MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 353–365, Jun. 2018.
[6] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Aug. 1963.
[7] K.-T. Park et al., “A zeroing cell-to-cell interference page architecture with temporary LSB storing and parallel MSB program scheme for MLC NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 919–928, Apr. 2008.
[8] Y. Di et al., “Minimizing cell-to-cell interference by exploiting differential bit impact characteristics of scaled MLC NAND flash memories,” in Proc. NVMSA, Aug. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[9] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[10] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, E. F. Haratsch, K. Mai, and O. Mutlu, “Data retention in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, optimization, and recovery,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit., San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2015, pp. 551–563.
[11] S. Ouyang, G. Han, Y. Fang, and W. Liu, “LLR-distribution-based nonuniform quantization for RBI-MSD algorithm in MLC flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 45–48, Jan. 2018.
[12] G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010.
[13] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and H. Nakamura, “A double-level-Vth select gate array architecture for multilevel NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 602–609, Apr. 1996.
[14] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.
[15] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur., 2013, pp. 1285–1290.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 10:47:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

