4014

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012

On the Smallest Absorbing Sets of LDPC Codes From Finite Planes
Haiyang Liu, Yan Li, Lianrong Ma, and Jie Chen, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Absorbing sets, a class of combinatorial structures of the Tanner graph representation of a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, are known to influence the performance of the code under message passing iterative decoding. In this paper, we study the smallest absorbing sets of LDPC codes constructed from projective planes and Euclidean planes. The lower bounds on the parameters of smallest absorbing sets given by Dolecek are proven to be tight for these two families of LDPC codes. We also analyze the combinatorial properties of the smallest absorbing sets and give conditions necessary and sufficient for a set of bit nodes in the Tanner graph to be a smallest absorbing set. For LDPC codes from projective planes, we further give a condition necessary and sufficient for a smallest absorbing set to be a fully absorbing set. In addition, we show that these smallest absorbing sets are asymptotically not stable, which may explain to some extent the good performance as well as the low error floor expectation of these two families of LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Absorbing sets, Euclidean planes, fully absorbing sets, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, projective planes, smallest absorbing sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N RECENT years, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have received a lot of interest due to their excellent error-control capacities under message passing iterative (MPI) decoding algorithms. For moderate length codes, however, these algorithms always exhibit the error floor phenomena [2] in the low bit error rate (BER) region (typically at about
to ), which is troublesome in the applications with high-throughput requirements. This phenomenon is affected by certain structural weaknesses in the graphical representation of the code: the iterative decoding algorithms may get trapped in a stable near-codeword state and then fail. It has been demonstrated that these weaknesses depend on the code, the channel, and the decoding algorithm used.
Manuscript received October 20, 2010; revised October 24, 2011; accepted January 19, 2012. Date of publication March 09, 2012; date of current version May 15, 2012. The work of H. Liu and J. Chen was supported by the Major State Basic Research Development Program of China under Grant 2009CB320304. The work of Y. Li and L. Ma was supported by the National Science Foundation of China under Grant 11071277.
H. Liu and J. Chen are with the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China (e-mail: liuhaiyang@ime.ac.cn; jchen@ime.ac.cn).
Y. Li is with the Department of Applied Mathematics, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100083, China (email: liyan_00@cau.edu.cn).
L. Ma is with the Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: lrma@math.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Communicated by U. Erez, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2188272

Several prior works have studied such error-prone structures and the design of LDPC codes to avoid these harmful structures [2]–[7]. For the binary erasure channel, the error-prone configurations are completely determined and termed as stopping sets [3]. Recently, a class of combinatorial structures, called absorbing sets, has been introduced by Dolecek and colleagues [6], [7] for the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel as counterparts of stopping sets. An absorbing set is a special kind of near-codeword state, from which the bit flipping decoding algorithm [1] cannot escape. For certain classes of quasicyclic LDPC codes (e.g., array LDPC codes), some small absorbing sets were experimentally verified on a hardware emulation platform to dominate the error floor behaviors of the codes [8], [9]. Another stream of works [6], [10] analyzed topological properties of absorbing sets of several representative structured LDPC codes. In [11], the authors further proposed improved decoding algorithm to lower the error floor by reducing the effects of absorbing sets. A recent stream of works [12]–[14] studied the design of LDPC codes by the approach of eliminating dominant absorbing sets of the codes.
Apart from quasi-cyclic codes, there are other algebraic and combinatorial constructions of LDPC codes, which can reduce implementation complexity in practice compared to random constructions. Based on projective or Euclidean planes over finite fields, certain families of regular LDPC codes can be established [15], where the points in the plane correspond to code bits, and the lines in the plane correspond to parity checks. Several groups of authors have observed that these codes can perform very well under MPI decoding algorithms over the AWGN channel (see e.g., [15]–[17]). For example, the codes constructed from the projective and Euclidean planes over the field perform only about 1.5 dB away from the Shannon limit at the BER of , while no error floor is observed [15]. In some recent works [18]–[22], the structures of codewords, stopping sets, trapping sets, and pseudocodewords of these finite-plane-based LDPC codes have been discussed.
In this paper, we will study the smallest absorbing sets (the definition is given in Section II) of LDPC codes constructed from finite planes. We will prove that the lower bounds on the parameters of smallest absorbing sets given by Dolecek [7] are tight for the codes under investigation. We will also establish the relations between smallest absorbing sets and arcs, a special geometrical structure in the projective or Euclidean plane. Moreover, we will discuss whether the smallest absorbing sets of these finite-plane-based LDPC codes are fully. In particular, for the codes from the projective planes, we will give a condition necessary and sufficient for a smallest absorbing set to be a fully absorbing set. Finally, we will show that these smallest absorbing sets are asymptotically not stable, which may explain

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ON THE SMALLEST ABSORBING SETS OF LDPC CODES FROM FINITE PLANES

4015

to some extent the good performance and the low error floor expectation of LDPC codes from finite planes.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief review of absorbing sets and the families of LDPC codes from finite planes. In Section III, we present the main results of this paper. Finally, Section IV concludes this paper.

Suppose is a

-regular LDPC code whose Tanner graph

has girth

. We have the following lemma.

Lemma 2 ([7]): Let sorbing set, we have

. For the smallest

ab-

II. PRELIMINARIES

In this section, we introduce the definition and properties of where

. In addition, we have

.

absorbing sets and describe the classes of LDPC codes constructed from projective and Euclidean planes.

B. LDPC Codes From Finite Planes

Now we briefly review the two families of LDPC codes under

A. LDPC Codes and Absorbing Sets

An LDPC code of length over the binary Galois field

can be specified as the null space of an

parity-check

matrix . It is convenient to represent the code in terms of its

Tanner graph, which is defined as follows.

Let

and

be the indices

for the columns and rows of . The Tanner graph

is a

bipartite graph consisting two sets of nodes: the set of bit

nodes corresponding to the bits of the code (indices in )

and the set of check nodes corresponding to the parity-

check equations of the code (indices in ). The th bit node is

connected to the th check node if and only if the th entry of

is 1. The bit nodes (respectively, check nodes) connected to a

check node (respectively, bit node) are referred as its neighbors.

In particular, if each bit node having neighbors and each check

node having neighbors, the code is said to be

-regular.

The length of the shortest cycle in

is called the girth of

, denoted by

.

Next, we introduce the concept of absorbing set. Suppose

is a subset of . Let

(respectively,

) be the set of

neighbors of elements of in with odd (respectively, even)

degree with respect to . Note that for the bits in the set ,

and

are the sets of unsatisfied and satisfied checks,

respectively.

investigation in our paper.

The LDPC codes from projective planes are defined as fol-

lows [15]. Let

for some positive integer and

be a projective plane over the field with

points

and

lines. Each point lies on

lines and each line

contains points. A

square matrix

can be formed according to the incidence structure of

lines and points in

. The null space of

is a

-regular LDPC code

with the following

parameters: length

; dimension

;

minimum Hamming distance

; girth of the corre-

sponding Tanner graph

.

The LDPC codes from Euclidean planes are defined as fol-

lows [15]. Let

for some positive integer and

be a Euclidean plane over the field with points and

lines. Each point lies on

lines and each line contains

points. By removing a point as well as the

lines through

it, we obtain a modified Euclidean plane

1. A

square matrix

can be formed according

to the incidence structure of lines and points in

. The

null space of

is a

-regular LDPC code

with the following parameters: length

; dimension

; minimum Hamming distance

; girth

of the corresponding Tanner graph

.

It turns out that both

and

are circulant

Definition 1 ([6], [7]): For a pair of integers , an

absorbing set is a subset

of size , with

of size ,

and with the property that each element of has strictly fewer

neighbors in

than in

. Moreover, if all bit nodes

matrices with appropriate permutation of rows and columns, meaning that both families of codes are cyclic [15]. This nice property allows very efficient encoding using shift registers with linear complexity in practice.

in have strictly more neighbors in

than in

,

is said to be an

fully absorbing set.

III. SMALLEST ABSORBING SETS OF LDPC CODES FROM

Note that absorbing sets depend on the specific Tanner graph

FINITE PLANES

(parity-check matrix) chosen to describe the code. Different Tanner graphs of the same code might have different absorbing sets distributions.
A property of the absorbing sets is that they are stable under Gallager-type bit flipping decoding algorithm, since each bit receives a majority of messages that will retain the current value of

In this section, we analyze the smallest absorbing sets of finite-plane-based LDPC codes. For convenience, we will not make notational differences between a point of the finite plane and the corresponding bit node of the Tanner graph of finiteplane-based code in the following discussions.

the bit. Besides, for some classes of LDPC codes [8], [9], some

small absorbing sets were experimentally verified to dominate

the error floor behaviors of MPI decoding algorithms. Hence,

of very great interest is the smallest

such that an

absorbing set exists for a code described by a given Tanner

A. Smallest Absorbing Sets of Finite-Plane-Based LDPC Codes
Definition 3: Let be a projective or Euclidean plane. A -arc in is a set of points of , no three of which are

graph/parity-check matrix. (The smallest smallest , and the smallest given that .)

means that the

1In the following discussions,

plane over .

is referred as the modified Euclidean

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4016

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012

collinear. In addition, a -arc is said to be complete if it is not

contained in a

-arc.

We know from the above definition that a line incident to a

-arc intersects the arc in either one point or two points. The

former is called a unisecant of the arc, and the latter is called a

bisecant of the arc.

It was shown in [18] and [22] that the support of a minimum-

weight codeword of

corresponds to a

-arc in

, and the support of a minimum-weight codeword of

corresponds to a

-arc in

.

For the smallest absorbing sets of finite-plane-based LDPC

codes, we have the following results.

Theorem 4: The smallest absorbing sets of the code

described by

have parameters

.

Proof: Since

has uniform column weight

and its corresponding Tanner graph

has girth

6, it follows from Lemma 2 that

and

.

We only need to show an absorbing set whose parameters meet

the lower bound.

We choose a

-arc in

and denote as the

set of bit nodes of

that correspond to the points

in . Suppose is a point of . There are

lines passing

through , each of which is either a bisecant or a unisecant of

. Moreover, we know from the basic axiom of projective ge-

ometry that any two points in

lie on a line. Conse-

quently, there are exactly

bisecants of passing through

, and unisecants of passing through . In other words,

the bit node have neighbors in

, and

neighbors

in

. Therefore, is an absorbing set of size

. In

addition, there are a total of

unisecants of , which

means

.

Theorem 5: The smallest absorbing sets of the code

described by

have parameters

.

Proof: Since

has uniform column weight

and its corresponding Tanner graph

has girth 6, it

follows from Lemma 2 that

and

.

As in Theorem 4, we only need to show an absorbing set whose

parameters meet the lower bound.

We choose a minimum-weight codeword of

and

denote as the set of points corresponding to the support of .

It is known [18] that is a

-arc, and any two points in

lie on a line. Because

, we have

. We then

form a set by choosing

points in . It must hold that

is a

-arc, and any two points in lie on a line. Suppose

is the set of bit nodes of

that correspond to the

points in . For any point in , using similar methods as in

Theorem 4, we can show that there are

bisecants of

passing through , and

unisecants of

passing through . As a result, the bit node have

neighbors in

, and

neighbors in

, which

means is an absorbing set of size

. Moreover, there

are a total of

unisecants of , which means

.

It is interesting to note that the smallest absorbing sets of both

codes

and

have size

, which is strictly

less than the minimum Hamming distances of the codes except

for

. Next we will discuss the condition for a set of

bit nodes to be a smallest absorbing set.

Theorem 6: Suppose is a set of bit nodes of the Tanner

graph associated with

(respectively,

). Let

be the set of points corresponding to the nodes in . The set

is a smallest absorbing set if and only if the following two

conditions hold;

1) is a

-arc in

(respectively,

);

2) any two points in lie on a line.

Obviously, the second condition is redundant for

.

Proof: The “if” part of the theorem follows immediately

from Theorems 4 and 5. Next we prove the “only if” part, i.e.,

if is a smallest absorbing set (

), then the afore-

mentioned two conditions must hold.

For

, we only need to show the first condition holds.

Suppose to the contrary that is not an arc. Then there exist

points in that lie in a line. First, we assume

and

denote the set formed by these three points as . Suppose

and

. Denote as the number of neighbors of in

. We claim that

. In order to prove the claim,

we only need to consider the situation that is maximized. In

this situation, the line

cannot contain any other points in

except , since any pair of points in

lies in a

unique line. Because

contains

points,

we have

. Finally, since has strictly less than

neighbors in

, it must have strictly more than

neighbors in

. (Because has a total of

neighbors.)

This, however, contradicts the fact that is an absorbing set.

For the case

, contradictions can also be obtained using

similar methods.

For

, we can prove the first condition using similar

approaches as above. Next we prove the second condition. Sup-

pose

and

, but and don’t lie on a line.

Then, there are at most bisecants of passing through . In

other words, the bit node has at most neighbors in

.

Since has a total of neighbors, it can’t have strictly fewer

neighbors in

than in

, a contradiction.

This completes the proof.

Since the second condition in Theorem 6 always holds for PG codes, we have the following corollary.

Corollary 7: The number of smallest absorbing sets of the

code

described by

is equal to the number of

-arcs in

.

Generally, however, it is hopeless to enumerate the smallest

absorbing sets of

, which is due to the fact that the

number of -arcs in

for a given is still an open

problem (except for some small ). To the best of our knowl-

edge, even any approximate formula or bound on this number

is presently unknown. We only give some examples on the

smallest absorbing sets of

obtained from the known

results.

Example 8: Let has parameters by a square matrix the vector

. The

-based code

and can be represented

of size 7 7, which is formed by

and its six cyclic shifts. The smallest

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ON THE SMALLEST ABSORBING SETS OF LDPC CODES FROM FINITE PLANES

4017

absorbing set of

has parameters (3, 3). It is known

[23, Lemma 7.1] that the number of 3-arc in

is

Therefore,

has a total of 28 smallest absorbing sets.

Example 9: Let

. The

-based code

has parameters [21,11,6] and can be described by a parity-check

matrix

of size 21 21. The smallest absorbing set of

has parameters (4, 8). It is known [23, Lemma 7.1]

that the number of 4-arc in

is

Hence,

has a total of 2520 smallest absorbing sets.

Example 10: Let

. The

-based code

has parameters [73,45,10] and can be described by a parity-

check matrix

of size 73 73. The smallest absorbing

set of

has parameters (6, 24). It is known [23, Lemma

7.1] that the number of 6-arc in

is

Combined with the fact that

has

weight codewords, the theorem is proved.

minimum-

Remark 12: It has been shown that any set of

points

in

satisfying the two conditions3 of Theorem 6 cor-

responds to a smallest absorbing set of

. On the other

hand, it is known that any subset of size

of the support of a

minimum-weight codeword of

satisfies these two con-

ditions. However, the above theorem only gives a lower bound

on the number of smallest absorbing sets of

. This is

because

may also have the sets of points that satisfy

the two conditions of Theorem 6 but are not contained in the

support of any minimum-weight codeword. This will be dis-

cussed again in the following examples.

For

, the number

is unknown except for

some small , which is partially due to the difficulties in the

classification of the

-arcs in

. We list several

examples on the smallest absorbing sets of

obtained

from the known results in the following.

Example 13: Let

. The parity-check matrix

of the

-based code

is a 15 15 square matrix,

which can be formed by the vector

As a result,

has a total of 8,928,192 smallest ab-

sorbing sets.

Now we consider the number of absorbing sets of

described by

. For

, the smallest absorbing set

of

has parameters (3, 0) and there is only 1 such set

because the length of

is 3. For

, it is even more

difficult to give this number, since there exist pairs of points in

that don’t lie in any line. (The difficulty in the enumer-

ation of arcs in

is apparent.) By analyzing the prop-

erties of the minimum-weight codewords of

, a lower

and its cyclic shifts. For convenience, we associate the vector

with a polynomial

, where is the th component of . It is known [15], [18]

that

is the [15,7,5] double-error-correcting BCH code.

The smallest absorbing set of

has parameters (4, 4).

It has been shown [18, Th. 3] that the code

has 18

minimum-weight codewords. From Theorem 11, we know that

has at least

smallest absorbing sets. By

an exhaustive computer search, we can verify that

has

exact 90 smallest absorbing sets.

bound on this number can be derived.

Example 14: Let

. The parity-check matrix

Theorem 11: The code

described by

has at

least

smallest absorbing sets, where

is the number of minimum-weight codewords of

and

is the binomial coefficient.

Proof: Suppose is a minimum-weight codeword of

and is the

-arc corresponding to the support

of . We have the following.

1) Any set of

points is an arc.

2) Any two points in lie on a line.

It now follows from Theorem 6 that any such choice is a

smallest absorbing set. Since contains

points, there are

a total of

possible choices. We say these

smallest

absorbing sets are generated by the codeword .

Furthermore, the supports of any two minimum-weight code-

words of

cannot have

elements in common2,

which means any two different minimum-weight codewords

of

cannot generate a common smallest absorbing set.

of the

-based code

is of size 63 63, which

can be formed by the vector (polynomial form)

and its cyclic

shifts, and yields a [63,37,9] cyclic code. The smallest absorbing

set of

has parameters (6, 18). It has been shown [18,

Th. 3] that the code

has 1960 minimum-weight code-

words. From Theorem 11, we know that

has at least

smallest absorbing sets. An exhaustive

computer search shows that

has 182,280 smallest ab-

sorbing sets. This in turn illustrates that

has 6-arcs that

cannot be extended to construct a minimum-weight codeword.

To make this more explicit, take the set

as an example. We can verify by computer searches that is a

smallest absorbing set of

, but it is not contained in the

support of any weight-9 codeword of

.

Before the end of this section, we mention that it is not dif-

ficult to obtain the following fact from the proofs of Theorems

4–6: every absorbing set of size

of

or

2Indeed, the supports of any two minimum-weight codewords in a binary is a smallest absorbing set.

linear code with minimum Hamming distance cannot have more than elements in common. Otherwise, the sum of these two codewords is a codeword

3Note that

contains

-arcs, in which some pairs of points do

in whose weight is less than , a contradiction.

not lie on a line.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4018

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012

B. Smallest Fully Absorbing Sets of Finite-Plane-Based LDPC Codes

In this section, we will discuss whether a smallest absorbing

set of

or

is a fully absorbing set or not. For

, we will show there is a one-to-one correspondence

between the fully absorbing sets of size

and the complete

-arcs in

. It is interesting to mention that [23,

Th. 9.31] a complete

-arc always exists in

if

is even and

. The following lemma is necessary for

establishing our results.

Lemma 15 (see [23, Lemma 8.4]): Let be a -arc in the

projective plane

and be a point of not on .

Let

and

be the number of unisecants and bisecants

through , respectively. Then, we have

Example 19: For

and 4, it is known that every

-arc in

is incomplete. (In fact, the complete arcs in

can only be of size if

or 4 [23, Table 9.3].)

As a result, all the smallest absorbing sets of

are not

fully when

or 4.

Example 20: For

, the number of complete 6-arcs in

is [23, Corollary 9.24]

Therefore,

has a total of 2 060 352 smallest fully ab-

sorbing sets.

Next, we consider

-based codes. For this class of

codes, it is difficult to give theoretical results about whether a

smallest absorbing set of

is fully, which is again due

to the fact that some pairs of points in

don’t lie in any

line. We give two examples obtained from computer searches.

Suppose is the set of bit nodes that correspond to the points

of . Note that for each

,

is indeed the number

of neighbors of in

.

Example 21: Let

. We know from Example 13 that

the smallest absorbing set of

has parameters (4, 4).

There are 90 such sets, each of which is contained in the support

of a minimum-weight codeword of

. With the help of

Theorem 16: Suppose is a set of

bit nodes of the

Tanner graph associated with

. Let be the set of

computer, we can verify that all these 90 smallest absorbing sets are not fully.

points corresponding to the bit nodes in . The set is a fully

absorbing set if and only if is a complete arc in

.

Proof: First, we show the “if” part of the theorem. Suppose

is a complete

-arc. For each

, there must

exist some bisecants through . (Otherwise, no three points of

lie in a line, which means that is a

-arc.

This together with

give a contradiction to the fact that

is complete.) In other words, we have

. From

Lemma 15, we know that

. Therefore,

we have

, i.e., the bit node has

neighbors

Example 22: Let

. We know from Example 14 that

the smallest absorbing set of

has parameters (6, 18),

and there are 182 280 such sets. With the help of computer, we

can verify that all these 182 280 smallest absorbing sets are not

fully.

We conjecture that the results of these two examples can be

generalized to larger .

Conjecture 23: All the smallest absorbing sets of

are not fully if is even and

.

in

. Since has a total of

neighbors, it must have

neighbors in

, which means has strictly

C. Simulation Results and Discussion

more neighbors in

than in

. Hence, is a fully In this section, we analyze the stability of the smallest ab-

absorbing set.

sorbing sets of finite-plane-based LDPC codes. The more stable

Now we show the “only if” part of the theorem. Suppose is an absorbing set, the more difficult for MPI decoding algorithms

a

-arc, but incomplete. Then, there exists a point such to escape from this absorbing set. The stability of an absorbing

that

is a

-arc. Since no three points of set depends on the structure of the set and eventually determines

lie in a line, it must follow that

. Thus, we have the performance (especially the error floor performance) of a

, i.e., the bit node has neighbors in

. well-designed MPI decoder [9].

Since has a total of

neighbors, it has

neighbors We performed simulations for

- and

in

, which is strictly less than those in

. Hence,

-based codes, using the standard sum–product

is not a fully absorbing set.

decoding algorithm with the maximum number of iterations

This completes the proof.

being set to 100. The decoding process continues until a

Corollary 17: The number of smallest absorbing sets that are

fully absorbing sets of the code

described by

is equal to the number of complete

-arcs in

.

codeword is obtained or the maximum number of iterations is reached. Without loss of generality, we assume that the all-zeros codeword is transmitted.
For both codes, no error floor phenomena is observed when

Remark 18: For

, a complete

-arc always exists the frame error rate (FER) values down to . By carefully

in

. In this case, the fully absorbing sets of size are analyzing the patterns of error frames recorded in the iterative

the smallest fully absorbing sets. Besides, the number of com- process, we found that the error frames at this FER level can

plete

-arcs in

is indeed the number of smallest be divided into two categories: nonzero codewords and random

fully absorbing sets of

.

error frames, i.e., the error bits exhibit random-like oscillations.

The following two examples are obtained from the known For example, at a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 4.5 dB, we sim-

results.

ulated 50 million frames for each code. For

-based

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: ON THE SMALLEST ABSORBING SETS OF LDPC CODES FROM FINITE PLANES

PARAMETERS

OF ABSORBING SETS OF

AND

TABLE I

OF SIZE UP TO THE MINIMUM HAMMING DISTANCES OF

FOR

AND

4019 AND

code, a total of 95 error frames were collected. (The FER can be sorbing set. We also gave a necessary and sufficient condition

estimated as 1.9

at this SNR value.) Of these 95 frames, for a smallest absorbing set to be a fully absorbing set for projec-

three frames are nonzero codewords (of weights 18, 20, and tive-plane-based LDPC codes. Finally, the smallest absorbing

22, respectively), and the other 92 are random error frames. For sets of finite-plane-based LDPC codes were shown to be asymp-

-based code, we collected 88 error frames, where nine totically not stable, which may explain to some extent the good

frames are nonzero codewords (two of weight 17, five of weight performance as well as the low error floor expectation of these

18, one of weight 19, and one of weight 22), and the other 79 are two families of codes.

random error frames. It is expected that decoding errors of these For a better understanding of the decoding performance of

classes of codes at this FER level are not due to the smallest ab- these families of LDPC codes, it is deserved to investigate the

sorbing sets.

whole absorbing set spectrum and decide the stability of each

In order to completely evaluate the effect of smallest ab- absorbing set, and, in particular, find the smallest stable ab-

sorbing sets, it is desirable to characterize the error floor region sorbing sets, of the matrices

and

. This is

of the FER curve of code. However, the finite-plane-based codes the topic for our future work. Here we only present some com-

always have extremely low error floor expectation, which makes puter search results and propose a conjecture. Table I lists the

it impractical to give experimental results (even by using hard- parameters

of absorbing sets of

and

ware simulation methods). In fact, it is claimed that these fam- of size up to the minimum Hamming distances of

and

ilies of codes should not exhibit an error floor above a BER of

for

and

, respectively. The bold numbers

[17], [20]. Next we use an effective way presented in [9] mean that an

fully absorbing set exists for a given . We

to decide the stability of smallest absorbing sets of these codes. divide the fully absorbing sets into two cases:

, and

.

For an

absorbing set, the ratio may reflect the sta- Note that an absorbing set with

in Table I is the support of

bility of this set: the higher the ratio, the more stable this set [9]. a minimum-weight codeword. For the case

, we find that

For finite-plane-based codes, we know from Theorems 4 and 5 all the absorbing sets are fully. Moreover, we can numerically

that

for the smallest absorbing sets of

, and show that the support of each minimum-weight codeword is a

for the smallest absorbing sets of

. fully absorbing set. For the case

, we find that only a part

Obviously, for both classes of LDPC codes the ratio decreases of absorbing sets are fully. We can also observe that the ratio

quickly as increases and we have

. In other is always less than 1 and this ratio seems to be decreasing as

words, the smallest absorbing sets of

and

increases for this case. Based on these observations, we conjec-

are asymptotically not stable, although their sizes are strictly ture that the smallest stable absorbing sets of finite-plane-based

smaller than the minimum Hamming distances of the codes LDPC codes are the supports of minimum-weight codewords.

and

. This may explain to some extent the ex-

cellent performance and the low error floor expectation of these

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

two families of LDPC codes under MPI decoding.

The authors would like to thank Dr. Ju Lu for his comments

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We have studied the smallest absorbing sets of LDPC codes

from projective planes and Euclidean planes in this paper. The

parameters

of smallest absorbing sets were determined

for these finite-plane-based LDPC codes described by square

that helped improve the paper. The authors would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions that improve the paper substantially, and thank the associate editor Dr. Uri Erez for carefully handling the manuscript.

parity-check matrices

and

. Moreover, we

presented conditions necessary and sufficient for a set of bit

nodes of the corresponding Tanner graphs to be a smallest ab-

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4020

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012

[2] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Contr. Comput., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[3] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[4] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weakness of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[5] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” CoRR, 2007 [Online]. Available: http://www.arxiv.org/ abs/cs.IT/0512078
[6] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. J. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[7] L. Dolecek, “On absorbing sets of structured sparse graph codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. (ITA) Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[8] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), San Francisco, CA, Oct./Nov. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[9] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Design of LDPC decoders for improved low error rate performance: Quantization and algorithm choices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3258–3268, Nov. 2009.
[10] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jul. 2010.
[11] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Comm. Conf., New Orleans, LA, Nov. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[12] L. Dolecek, J. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “Towards improved LDPC code designs using absorbing set spectrum properties,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iter. Inf. Proc., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 477–481.
[13] J. Wang, L. Dolecek, and R. Wesel, “Controlling LDPC absorbing sets via the null space of the cycle consistency matrix,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Kyoto, Japan, Jun. 2011.
[14] J. Wang, L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, and R. Wesel, “Absorbing set spectrum approach for practical code design,” CoRR, 2011 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1106.0057
[15] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[16] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931–937, Jun. 2000.
[17] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.

[18] J. Justesen, T. Høholdt, and J. Hjaltason, “Iterative list decoding of some LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4276–4284, Nov. 2007.
[19] N. Kashyap and A. Vardy, “Stopping sets in codes from designs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 122.
[20] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Netw., Commun., Mobile Comput., pp. 630–635, Jun. 13–16, 2005.
[21] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009.
[22] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007.
[23] J. W. P. Hirschfeld, Projective Geometries over Finite Fields, 2nd ed. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1998.
Haiyang Liu received the B.S. degree in Electrical Engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree in Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics from the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2009. Currently, he is a Research Assistant of the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include communication algorithms and VLSI implementations, with an emphasis on channel coding and decoding.
Yan Li received his B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2004 and 2010, respectively. At present, he is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Applied Mathematical Sciences, China Agriculture University, Beijing, China. His research interests include number theory, combinatorics and their applications in information theory.
Lianrong Ma received her B.Sc., M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1985, 1988 and 2007, respectively. Since 2010 she has been an Associate Professor at the Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University. Her current research interests are in the areas of algebraic number theory and algebraic coding theory.
Jie Chen received the B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Harbin Engineering University, China, the University of Electro-Communications (UEC), Tokyo, Japan in 1986, 1991 and 1994, respectively. He was a Research Associate in UEC, a Research Project Leader of Advanced IC Development Center in Yozan Inc., Japan, and an Associate Professor in UEC from 1994 to 2001, respectively. Currently, he is a Director Professor of the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include wireless communications, data compression, and mixed-signal VLSI designs. Dr. Chen is a valued member of IEEE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

