IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012

4021

Rate-Compatible LDPC Convolutional Codes Achieving the Capacity of the BEC
Zhongwei Si, Student Member, IEEE, Ragnar Thobaben, Member, IEEE, and Mikael Skoglund, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a new family of rate-compatible regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) convolutional codes. The construction is based on graph extension, i.e., the codes of lower rates are generated by successively extending the graph of the base code with the highest rate. Theoretically, the proposed rate-compatible family can cover all the rational rates from 0 to 1. In addition, the regularity of degree distributions simplifies the code optimization. We prove analytically that all the LDPC convolutional codes of different rates in the family are capable of achieving the capacity of the binary erasure channel (BEC). The analysis is extended to the general binary memoryless symmetric channel, for which a capacity-approaching performance can be achieved. Analytical thresholds and simulation results for finite check and variable node degrees are provided for both BECs and binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channels. The results confirm that the decoding thresholds of the rate-compatible codes approach the corresponding Shannon limits over both channels.
Index Terms—Graph extension, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, LDPC convolutional codes, rate-compatible codes, Shannon limit.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ATE-COMPATIBLE error-correcting codes are useful in communication systems. A rate-compatible code family is a set of codes with different rates, where higher rate codes are embedded into lower rate codes [2]. The compatibility enables the coding system to conveniently adapt to varying channel conditions. For example, rate-compatible codes are often used to combat fading in wireless communications when combined with automatic repeat request (ARQ). The challenge in designing rate-compatible codes is to guarantee a good performance for all codes in the family.
One method of constructing rate-compatible codes is to employ puncturers [3]–[6]. That is, first a low-rate mother code is generated, and then codes of higher rates are obtained by puncturing different numbers of bits from the mother code. The optimization of the mother code and the optimization of the puncturing are usually carried out separately, which leads to a suboptimal performance. As a consequence, the punctured
Manuscript received May 05, 2011; revised November 21, 2011; accepted February 10, 2012. Date of current version May 15, 2012. This work was supported in part by the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme under Grant 257626 (ACROPOLIS) and in part by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2011 IEEE Information Theory Workshop.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering and the ACCESS Linnaeus Center, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm 11427, Sweden (e-mail: zhongwei.si@ee.kth.se; ragnar.thobaben@ee.kth.se; skoglund@ee.kth.se).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2188990

higher rate codes exhibit wider gaps to the capacity limits than the mother code [3].
Graph extension is another approach to construct rate-compatible codes [6], [7]. For example, the authors of [7] consider the design of rate-compatible irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) block codes based on extension, where a high-rate base code is progressively extended to codes of lower rates. Codes produced by this method outperform the punctured codes by exhibiting an approximately uniform gap to the capacity over a wide range of rates. However, the degree distribution of each member code needs to be optimized for its corresponding rate, which complicates both the design and the implementation.
In this paper, we propose to construct rate-compatible families of regular LDPC convolutional codes using graph extension, which overcomes the shortcomings caused by puncturing and simplifies the optimization. LDPC convolutional codes were first proposed in [8] as a time-varying periodic LDPC code variation. Then, the idea was further developed in, e.g., [9] and [10]. Recently, it has been proved analytically in [11] that for the binary erasure channel (BEC) the belief-propagation (BP) decoding threshold of an LDPC convolutional code achieves the optimal maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) threshold of the corresponding LDPC block code with the same variable and check degrees. This code in turn approaches the capacity as the node degrees are increased. Moreover, regular LDPC convolutional codes allow us to avoid complicated degree optimizations for different coding rates. Motivated by these useful properties, we consider in this paper the design of rate-compatible LDPC convolutional codes. Rate-compatible protograph-based LDPC codes were considered in [12] and [13]. In [12], they were built by expurgation and lengthening. However, the codes are only available for rates higher than . The authors of [13] constructed rate-compatible protograph-based LDPC codes also through graph extension, but a complete analysis is missing.
In the following, we will present the construction of ratecompatible families of LDPC convolutional codes. The concept of graph extension will be introduced using a three-edge-type LDPC block code. The idea is then applied to each position of the LDPC convolutional code. By successively extending the graphs, LDPC convolutional codes of lower rates are generated. Theoretically, the range of rates is able to cover all the rational values in . We will prove analytically that all the LDPC convolutional codes of different rates in the family are capable of achieving the capacity of the BEC.
In [14], the authors provide empirical evidence that the threshold saturation phenomenon also occurs for transmissions over the general binary memoryless symmetric (BMS) channel and conjecture that LDPC convolutional codes are able to

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4022

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012

achieve the capacity of the general BMS channel. In this paper, we also extend our analysis to the general BMS channel, and we show numerically that the codes in a rate-compatible family are able to provide a capacity-approaching performance. Similar extension can be applied to multiple access channels [15], channels with memory [16], and finite-state intersymbol-interference channels [17] where the threshold saturation effect is observed empirically.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give a brief introduction to standard LDPC convolutional codes. In Section III, we propose the construction of rate-compatible LDPC convolutional codes and provide a theoretical analysis for the BEC. A discussion based on density evolution for the BMS channel is included as well. Numerical results for both BECs and binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN) channels are presented in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.

II. LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

A regular

time-varying binary LDPC convolutional

code can be defined by an infinite parity-check matrix [10]

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of a three-edge-type LDPC code. Circles represent variable nodes, and squares indicate check nodes. The white symbols stand for the base nodes (check and variable) while the gray symbols are for the extended nodes. The solid, dashed, and dotted lines correspond to the three types of edges.

connected to one check node at positions

, i.e.,

for all

.

It has been stated in [11] that the type

en-

semble is capacity achieving and easier to analyze compared

with the

type. However, experimentally it shows

a worse tradeoff between rate, threshold, and block length. On

the other hand, it was observed through experiments that the

type

ensemble provides good numerical perfor-

mance with moderate and when

. Therefore, in

the following we use the type

ensembles for

theoretical analysis while employing the

type of

ensembles for finite-length simulations.

III. RATE-COMPATIBLE LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

...

In this section, we will first introduce the concept of graph extension through a three-edge-type LDPC code. Then, we show

where is the variable node degree and is the check node

degree. We assume that at each position (

) the

number of variable nodes is . Then, each submatrix is an

binary matrix. In practice, for a finite number

how we construct rate-compatible LDPC convolutional codes using a similar method. We will prove analytically that the ratecompatible LDPC convolutional codes are capacity achieving for BECs.

of positions , we have

and the code needs to be

initialized in the beginning and terminated in the end. All the

submatrices are sparse and accordingly the overall parity-

check matrix is sparse.

There are many variations of LDPC convolutional code en-

sembles in the literature. In this paper, we consider two dif-

ferent types of LDPC convolutional code ensembles. We de-

note the first ensemble by the five parameters

[11]. We assume that each of the edges of a variable node

at position uniformly and independently connects to the check

nodes in the range

, where the parameter is a

positive integer. More precisely, for each variable node at po-

sition , one can define a constellation , which is a -tuple,

, with elements in

. We

assume that the edges coming out from the variable node are

indexed in an arbitrary but fixed order. Then, the th edge is

connected to a check node at position

. For each vari-

able node, is uniformly and independently chosen from the

set of all possible constellations. The second ensemble, the type

ensemble [10], can be considered as a special

case of the more general code ensemble mentioned earlier. For

A. Three-Edge-Type LDPC Codes

An example of the three-edge-type LDPC code is illustrated

by the Tanner graph in Fig. 1. We split the variable nodes into

two parts: the base variable nodes of length and the ex-

tended variable nodes of length . The corresponding

symbol vectors associated with these two parts are denoted by

and

. Similarly, the check nodes are

also divided into two parts: the base check nodes of length

and the extended check nodes of length . We name

the edges connecting nodes and the type-1 edges, the

edges connecting and the type-2 edges, and those which

connect and the type-3 edges. The submatrices which

correspond to the three types of edges are denoted by

,

, and

, respectively.

Note that the submatrix

is square and has to have full rank

[6]. We let

and

; then the

aforementioned parity-check submatrices and an

zero submatrix constitute the overall parity-check matrix of

size

. The three-edge-type LDPC code satisfies the

following parity-check equation:

this ensemble, the parameter always equals . Exactly one

of the outgoing edges of each variable node at position is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SI et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES ACHIEVING THE CAPACITY OF THE BEC

4023

We denote the LDPC code associated with by and the overall LDPC code structure associated with by .

Definition 1: (The Three-Edge-Type LDPC Code Ensemble).

A regular

three-edge-type LDPC

ensemble of codeword length

includes all

the bipartite graphs where each of the base variable nodes

is connected to base check nodes and extended check

nodes, and each of the extended variable nodes is connected

to extended check nodes. Each base check node has

edges connecting to the base variable nodes, and each extended

check node has edges connecting to the base variable nodes

and edges to the extended variable nodes.

According to Definition 1, the following relations between

the parameters should be satisfied based on the edge connec-

tions:

M = Fig. 2. Tanner graph of a three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code for

2 M = 1 and

. The representations for the symbols/edges are the same as for

those in Fig. 1.

We will discuss how to decide the parameters in the following

sections.

The graph extension from a conventional LDPC code to

a three-edge-type LDPC code can be realized in three steps.

First, we construct the Tanner graph of a regular LDPC code

with degree for each variable node and degree for each check node . The edge connections are associated with the parity-check matrix . This structure is considered as the base graph. In the second step, we connect new check

Fig. 3. Structure of the parity-check matrix of a three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code. The gray boxes of different color depths indicate the nonzero submatrices corresponding to the three types of edges, while the white boxes represent the zero submatrices. The rest of the matrix is filled with zeros.

nodes to the base graph. Additional outgoing edges are added to each variable node in the base graph, which results show that for the code , if in incoming edges for each extended check node . These the design rate is

and

,

connections are described by the parity-check matrix . Fi-

nally, new variable nodes are included with degree and

the resulting check degree for each is . The edge connec-

tions are related to the parity-check matrix . Since

The three-edge-type LDPC code produces a lower rate while

is a square matrix which indicates that and are of the adopting the structure of the higher rate code . Therefore,

same length, we always have

. The overall structure and are rate compatible.

obtained previously is the Tanner graph of the three-edge-type

LDPC code .

B. Three-Edge-Type LDPC Convolutional Codes

When the three-edge-type graph is constructed, the encoding

can be carried out as follows. We assume that is a codeword

of , which satisfies

. To extend to a codeword

of , we first calculate the syndrome on the extended check

nodes using

. Then, we choose a vector

associated with the extended variable node by satisfying

. The codeword of is generated as

. The generation of does not affect the previously

generated codeword . That is, is a codeword of and

meanwhile is a codeword of .

The design rate of the regular code is

Now we extend the three-edge-type construction to LDPC

convolutional codes. The graph extension is applied at every

position from

to . At each position, the number of base

variable nodes is , and the number of extended variable

nodes is . The total number of variable nodes at each

position is then

. Similarly, at each posi-

tion the number of base check nodes is , and the number

of extended check nodes is

. The connections

carried out by the type-1 and type-2 edges are determined by

,

, and the type-3 edges are asso-

ciated with

. We set

,

and then we denote a three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code

ensemble by

which can

be defined similarly as in Definition 1. Fig. 2 shows the Tanner

According to the construction described previously, each vari- graph of a three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code when

able node has in total

outgoing edges. For each

and

. The structure of the corresponding

check node , the total check degree is

. It is easy to parity-check matrix is shown in Fig. 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4024

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012

In the following, we analyze the performance of the three-

edge-type LDPC convolutional code ensemble in the BEC. An

extension to the general binary memoryless symmetric channel

is given as well. Note that the condition

is not neces-

sary for the proofs, although we need this constraint when ex-

tending the graph.

Lemma 1: For

and

, the

design rate of a three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code en-

semble

is given as

the th iteration by ,

. Similarly, we define the

erasure probability of the message from a check node as . The erasure probability of the channel is .

For

, we set

; otherwise, for

, we

have the following density evolution equations. On the edges of

type 1,

and

Proof: We denote the total number of base and extended

variable nodes on all the positions by and , respec-

tively. Obviously,

and

. Due to

the randomness of edge connections and the termination of the

code, only a fraction of the assigned check nodes are actually

connected at the boundary positions. We use to denote the

total number of base check nodes that are connected to at least

one of the variable nodes. Similarly, we have as the number

of all the extended check nodes which are connected.

Following [11], we have

For the type-2 edges, and For the type-3 edges

Similarly, we get and

The design rate of the three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code is given as

In the first iteration, i.e., when ,

for

. If

, we get

.

Now if we set

, then

.

Recursively, we obtain for all and all :

if

. The density evolution, on

all types of edges, is then reduced to

and

We can write it in a 1-D recursion

Lemma 2: In the BEC, the three-edge-type LDPC convo-

lutional code ensemble

has the same BP threshold as the standard one-edge-type en-

semble

if

and

.

which indicates the same BP threshold as the one-edge-type en-

semble

.

Proof: We denote the erasure probability of the message The density evolution of the three-edge-type LDPC convolu-

emitted from a variable node at position along a type- edge in tional code can be extended to the general BMS channel. In the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SI et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES ACHIEVING THE CAPACITY OF THE BEC

4025

following lemma, we will show that the result for the BEC in Lemma 2 is also valid for the general BMS channel.

Lemma 3: In the general BMS channel, the

three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code ensemble

has the same

BP threshold as the standard one-edge-type ensemble

if

and

.

Proof: We now use ,

, to denote the

probability density function (pdf) of the message coming out

from a variable node at position along a type- edge in the th

iteration. Similarly, the pdf of the message from a check node

is defined as . Let denote the pdf of the BMS channel

over which the transmission takes place. Note that all the pdfs

are -densities [18]. The operators and correspond to the

convolution of densities at variable nodes and check nodes [18],

respectively. All-zero codeword is assumed.

For

, we set

, where

is the delta

function at ; otherwise, for

, we have the following

density evolution equations. On the edges of type 1,

and

This is the same as the density evolution recursion of the stan-

dard LDPC convolutional code

[14].

From this, it follows that the three-edge-type LDPC convolu-

tional code ensemble

has the same BP threshold as the standard ensemble

on the BMS channel.

It has been shown in [11] that the

LDPC

convolutional code ensemble has the following properties in the

BEC: for the design rate of the code :

(1)

and for the BP decoding threshold (2)

where

is the MAP threshold of its block LDPC code coun-

terpart.

For a given rate , the Shannon limit is defined as the ulti-

mate threshold of channel parameter under which reliable com-

munication can be achieved by using optimal codes and optimal

decoding. For the BEC, the Shannon limit

. If we

increase the degrees of the nodes and while keeping the

ratio

fixed, i.e., keeping the rate of the code fixed,

the MAP threshold in (2) approaches the Shannon limit:

(3)

On the type-2 edges and On the type-3 edges

In the following theorem, we will show that the three-edgetype LDPC convolutional code is capacity achieving for the BEC.

Theorem 1: The three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code

with the constraints

and

achieves the capacity of

the BEC.

Proof: From Lemma 1, we see that the rate of the three-

edge-type LDPC convolutional code is equal to the rate of the

standard LDPC convolutional code

[11]. According to (1), we have for the three-edge-type code

and

We have proved in Lemma 2 that the three-edge-type en-

semble has the same BP threshold as the one-edge-type en-

semble

. According to (2), the BP

threshold of the three-edge-type code satisfies

Similarly as in the proof of Lemma 2, we obtain the following

1-D density evolution recursion if

and

:

and according to (3) for a fixed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012

Fig. 4. Parity-check matrix extension for the construction of a rate-compatible LDPC convolutional code family (see [6], [7], and [13]).

which equals the Shannon limit. Hence, we have proved the

theorem.

In [14], the authors provide empirical evidence which sug-

gests that the same threshold saturation effect occurs for the gen-

eral BMS channel as it was shown analytically for the BEC in

[11]. Therefore, it is conjectured that in the limit of large , ,

, and (keeping

constant), the LDPC convolutional

code

achieves universally the capacity of the

BMS channels under BP decoding. In Lemma 3, we have proved

that the three-edge-type LDPC convolutional code ensemble has

the same BP threshold as the standard one-edge-type ensemble

over the BMS channel. Together with Lemma 1, we conclude

that the three-edge-type ensemble has the same properties as the

one-edge-type ensemble over the BMS channel. If the one-edge-

type ensemble is able to provide the capacity-achieving per-

formance for a given BMS channel, the three-edge-type LDPC

convolutional code ensemble is able to achieve the capacity of

that channel as well.

base matrix and carry out another round of extension to obtain

the parity-check matrix for . Recursively, for the code

we can obtain its parity-check matrix

from the previously

generated parity-check matrix for ,

.

Assume that the incremental variable degree is used when

extending from the parity-check matrix to

,

,

. We denote the remaining node

degrees by , , and . The generation of the parity-check

matrices for the rate-compatible family is described in detail in

the following algorithm.

Algorithm 1: Generation of parity-check matrices for a rate-

compatible LDPC convolutional code family

Initialize with node degrees and .

For

to

1) Use as the base matrix.

2) Choose

and then let

.

3) Generate a matrix

which has the same number of

columns as the base matrix . The numbers of 1s in each

row and in each column of

are and , respec-

tively.

4) Generate a full rank matrix

which has the same

number of rows as . The numbers of 1s in each row

and in each column of

are both

.

5) Compose the parity-check matrix

of the form

6) Increase :

.

end

Now we look at the range of rates we can achieve by the

successive extension. The rate of the

th member code

can be written as

C. Construction of a Rate-Compatible Family

In the following discussion, we assume that the code is

asymptotically regular [19] so that the boundary effects can be

ignored and the rate

.

The construction of a rate-compatible family of LDPC con-

volutional codes can be realized by successively extending the

graphs of higher rate codes. The idea is illustrated in Fig. 4 For the highest rate

, when is finite but

through the successive extension of the parity-check matrices.

,

. For the lowest rate , we have

Assume that we plan to construct a rate-compatible family in-

cluding member codes

, and

the target rates

are given. For

the base code , we choose the variable degree and the

check degree so that the rate is

, and we When

and

,

.

have the parity-check matrix as the base matrix. Following In general for rate

, if

,

for all and

the constraints shown in previous sections, (i)

, (ii)

,

is able to achieve any rational value in .

, and (iii)

, we write the rate of

as

. Since the rate is given,

the degree

. For the rest of the parameters,

we can easily get and from (i) and (ii), and then obtain

from (iii). To obtain the parity-check matrix , at each po-

sition new columns and new rows are added to the base

matrix , where

. Now we use as the

Theorem 2: All the LDPC convolutional codes in the ratecompatible family are capacity achieving over the BEC.
Proof: Assume that we have a capacity-achieving LDPC convolutional code of rate as the base code. We generate
as we described in Algorithm 1. According to Lemma 1, Lemma 2, and Theorem 1, it is easy to prove that achieves the capacity as well.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SI et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES ACHIEVING THE CAPACITY OF THE BEC

4027

TABLE I

w = 3 BP THRESHOLDS OF LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES OVER BECS (

L = 100 AND

)

TABLE II BP THRESHOLDS OF LDPC BLOCK CODES OVER BECS

Recursively, we can prove that for all ,

,

code achieves the capacity

if code achieves the

TABLE III

w = 4 BP THRESHOLDS OF LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES OVER BECS (

L = 200 AND

)

capacity . By induction, we conclude that all the codes in

the rate-compatible family

are

capacity achieving.

The construction of a rate-compatible family can be general-

ized to the BMS case in a straightforward way. A capacity-ap-

proaching performance can be achieved for all members of the

family. We omit the detailed analysis here.

In the aforementioned construction of a rate-compat-

ible code family, we first give the desired rates

gap is 0.4423. We observe that for the given parameter setup, the

and then calculate the num- LDPC convolutional codes also present larger gaps for low-rate

bers of bits added in the incremental blocks. Alternatively, ensembles. However, the gaps are in general very small, and the

we can also make the size of incremental blocks always difference between the largest gap and the smallest gap is only

be the same by adjusting the incremental variable degrees 0.0740.

and the related parameters. This We further investigate this issue by modifying the parame-

feature is usually demanded by, e.g., hybrid-ARQ applications. ters for the LDPC convolutional codes. On the one hand, the

For the practical construction, i.e., when the code length is gaps can be narrowed for a given if we increase which

finite, the possible choices of of the base code depend consequently increases the design rate. On the other hand, we

on the sequence of the desired rates and the node degrees. That can narrow the gaps by increasing , which leads to a higher

is, we choose so that all incremental sizes are integers. BP threshold, while keeping the design rate fixed by choosing

Alternatively, for any given the rate-compatible family can a proper . As an example, if we set

and

, we

be obtained by tolerating a slight irregularity in the construction, obtain the results shown in Table III. We can see that the gaps

which in our observations still retains the properties of the rate- become even smaller, and the difference between the largest gap

compatible LDPC convolutional codes.

and the smallest gap is reduced to 0.0179. When both and

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

are sufficiently large, the gaps for all degree distributions tend to disappear. We conclude that the rate-compatible code family ex-

In this section, we present numerical results for rate-compatible LDPC convolutional codes over BECs and BI-AWGN channels. The results are based on both density evolution and simulations for finite code lengths.

hibits an approximately uniform capacity-approaching performance for all the member codes with finite node degrees.
Similarly, we give the BP thresholds of LDPC convolutional codes and regular LDPC block codes for BI-AWGN channels. In the BI-AWGN channel, we use the standard deviation of the

A. BP Threshold

Gaussian distribution to indicate the Shannon limit and the BP

The type

ensembles are used for calcu-

lating the analytical BP thresholds in the following. We first

give the BP thresholds of a rate-compatible family for the trans-

missions over the BEC. We choose the number of positions

and the smoothing parameter

. The node degrees

are summarized in Table I. For the purpose of comparison, we

also calculated the BP thresholds of regular LDPC block codes

with the same node degrees. The results are listed in Table II.

threshold. For all the LDPC convolutional codes, we set

and

. The results are summarized in Tables IV and

V. As for the BECs, the LDPC convolutional codes in general

outperform the regular LDPC block codes and present a smaller

performance degradation for the low rates. In addition, the gaps

can generally be narrowed by increasing and as for the BEC

case, and a capacity-approaching performance can be achieved

for the entire code family.

In both cases, we calculated the gap between the Shannon limit

and the BP threshold for each given degree pair.

B. Simulation Results

For the same degree distribution, the LDPC convolutional In the following, we provide the simulation results for

code always outperforms its block code counterpart. Especially, LDPC convolutional code families with finite code lengths

regular LDPC block codes suffer a lot from larger gaps for lower over BECs and BI-AWGN channels. For the reasons mentioned

rates. The difference between the largest gap and the smallest in Section II, we use the type

ensemble for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4028

TABLE IV

w = 3 L = 50 BP THRESHOLDS OF LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES OVER BI-AWGN

CHANNELS (

AND

)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 6, JUNE 2012
TABLE VI PARAMETERS FOR THE SIMULATIONS OVER BECS

TABLE V BP THRESHOLDS OF LDPC BLOCK CODES OVER BI-AWGN CHANNELS

Fig. 6. Bit error rates of a rate-compatible LDPC convolutional code family in BI-AWGN channels. The solid curves show the simulation results, the dotted curves indicate the BP thresholds from density evolution, and the dashed curves indicate the Shannon limits for the achieved rates.
TABLE VII PARAMETERS FOR THE SIMULATIONS OVER BI-AWGNS

Fig. 5. Bit erasure rates of a rate-compatible LDPC convolutional code family in BECs. The solid curves show the simulation results, the dotted curves indicate the BP thresholds from density evolution, and the dashed curves indicate the Shannon limits for the achieved rates.

For the BI-AWGN channel, we use a

ensemble as the base code. The rest of

the family is constructed as in the BEC case by fixing

.

We plotted the bit error rates for different code rates in Fig. 6

the simulations. As a consequence, the design rates in the and summarized the corresponding Shannon limits and BP

simulations are different from those we have in Tables I and IV. thresholds in Table VII. As for the theoretical BP thresholds,

In the BEC, the base code is realized by a

larger gaps to the Shannon limits can be observed for lower

ensemble. We fix

in the rates. However, these gaps can be narrowed if we modify the

successive extension, and generate a code family as described parameters as for the BEC case.

in Algorithm 1. The bit erasure rates are plotted in Fig. 5 together with the Shannon limits for the achieved rates and the

V. CONCLUSION

BP thresholds for the corresponding ensembles. The parame- In this paper, we proposed to construct rate-compatible LDPC

ters and the analytical results are summarized in Table VI. We convolutional codes. The code construction is realized by suc-

compare the simulated thresholds of all codes in the family to cessively extending the graph of the base code which has the

their corresponding BP thresholds and Shannon limits. It can be highest coding rate. Theoretically, the code family is able to

seen that the gaps in between are in general very small.

cover all the rational rates between 0 and 1. We have proved

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SI et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES ACHIEVING THE CAPACITY OF THE BEC

4029

that all the LDPC convolutional codes in the family are capable of achieving the capacity of the BEC. Meanwhile, the codes are able to provide a capacity-approaching performance in the general binary memoryless symmetric channel. From the numerical results, we see that even for finite node degrees the decoding thresholds of all codes in the rate-compatible family closely approach the Shannon limits for different rates.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the associate editor and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions.

[15] S. Kudekar and K. Kasai, “Spatially coupled codes over the multiple access channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2011, pp. 2816–2820.
[16] S. Kudekar and K. Kasai, “Threshold saturation on channels with memory via spatial coupling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2011, pp. 2562–2566.
[17] P. S. Nguyen, A. Yedla, H. D. Pfister, and K. R. Narayanan, “Spatially-coupled codes and threshold saturation on intersymbol-interference channels,” 2011, ArXiv:1107.3253v2.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Model Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[19] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, Feb. 2009, pp. 1–8.

REFERENCES
[1] Z. Si, M. Andersson, R. Thobaben, and M. Skoglund, “Rate-compatible LDPC convolutional codes for capacity-approaching hybrid ARQ,” in Proc. IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop, Oct. 2011, pp. 513–517.
[2] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988.
[3] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[4] C. Hsu and A. Anastasopoulos, “Capacity achieving LDPC codes through puncturing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 4698–4706, Oct. 2008.
[5] M. El-Khamy, J. Hou, and N. Bhushan, “Design of rate-compatible structured LDPC codes for hybrid ARQ applications,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 965–973, Aug. 2009.
[6] G. Yue, X. Wang, and M. Madihian, “Design of rate-compatible irregular repeat accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1153–1163, Jun. 2007.
[7] N. Jacobsen and R. Soni, “Design of rate-compatible irregular LDPC codes based on edge growth and parity splitting,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf., Sep. 2007, pp. 1627–1631.
[8] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[9] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Felström, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[10] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[11] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[12] S. Dolinar, “A rate-compatible family of protograph-based LDPC codes built by expurgation and lengthening,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Sep. 2005, pp. 1627–1631.
[13] T. Van Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of ratecompatible protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Comm., Control, Comput., Oct. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[14] S. Kudekar, C. Measson, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation on BMS channels via spatial coupling,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Top., Sep. 2010, pp. 309–313.

Zhongwei Si (S’08) received the B.Eng. degree in 2004 and the M.Eng. degree in 2007, both from the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China. In September 2007, she joined the Communication Theory Lab at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, where she is currently working towards her Ph.D. degree.
Her research interests include adaptive channel coding, distributed code design for cooperative communications, etc.
Ragnar Thobaben (M’07) received the Dipl.-Ing. degree (M.Sc.) in electrical engineering in 2001 and the Dr.-Ing. degree (Ph.D.) in electrical engineering in 2007 from the University of Kiel, Germany. In December 2006, he joined the Communication Theory Lab at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, as a post-doctoral researcher, where he serves now as an Assistant Professor.
His current research activities are dedicated to the design and analysis of coding and transmission schemes for communication networks with a special focus on cognitive radio, cooperative communication, coordination, as well as physical-layer and network security.
Dr. Thobaben serves currently on the technical program committees for the 2012 IEEE PIMRC and the 2012 ISWCS and as publicity chair for the 2012 International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing. He served as well as publicity chair for the 2011 IEEE Swedish Communication Technologies Workshop.
Mikael Skoglund (S’93–M’97–SM’04) received the Ph.D. degree in 1997 from the Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden. In 1997, he joined the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, where he was appointed to the Chair in Communication Theory in 2003. At KTH, he heads the Communication Theory Lab and he is the Assistant Dean for Electrical Engineering.
His research interests are in the theoretical aspects of wireless communications. He has worked on problems in source-channel coding, coding and transmission for wireless communications, Shannon theory, and statistical signal processing. He has authored or coauthored close to 300 scientific papers, including papers that have received awards, invited conference presentations, and papers ranking as highly cited according to the ISI Essential Science Indicators. He has also consulted for industry, and he holds six patents.
Dr. Skoglund has served on numerous technical program committees for IEEE conferences. During 2003–2008, he was an associate editor with the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS and he is presently on the editorial board for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

