Emerging Data Storage Technologies

1
Reducing Data Transfer Latency of NAND Flash Memory with Soft-Decision Sensing
Guiqiang Dong, Yuelin Zou and Tong Zhang

Abstract— With the aggressive technology scaling and use of multi-bit per cell storage, NAND flash memory is subject to continuous degradation of raw storage reliability and demands more and more powerful error correction codes (ECC). This inevitable trend makes conventional BCH code increasingly inadequate, and iterative coding solutions such as LDPC codes become very natural alternative options. However, these powerful coding solutions demand soft-decision memory sensing, which results in longer on-chip memory sensing latency and memory-tocontroller data transfer latency. This paper presents two simple design techniques that can reduce the memory-to-controller data transfer latency. The key is to appropriately apply entropy coding to compress the memory sensing results. Simulation results show that the proposed design solutions can reduce the data transfer latency by up to 64% for soft-decision memory sensing.
I. INTRODUCTION
The continuous bit cost reduction of NAND flash memory mainly relies on aggressive technology scaling, e.g., NAND flash memory chips at sub-25nm technology nodes have been recently announced by major NAND flash manufacturers such as Samsung, Toshiba, and Micron. Besides technology scaling, multi-level per cell (MLC) technique, i.e., to store more than 1 bit in each memory cell (or floating-gate transistor) by programming the cell threshold voltage into one of several voltage windows, has been widely used to further improve effective storage density and hence reduce bit cost of NAND flash memory. Because of its obvious bit cost advantage, MLC NAND flash memory has been increasingly dominating global flash memory market. In current design practice, most MLC NAND flash memories store 2 bits per cell, while 3 and even 4 bits per cell NAND flash memories have been recently reported in the open literature. [1]–[3].
NAND flash memory must use error correction code (ECC) to ensure the system-level data storage integrity, where BCH codes with classical hard-decision decoding algorithms [4] are being widely used in current design practice. As the industry continues to push the technology scaling envelope and pursue aggressive use of multi-level per cell storage, raw storage reliability of NAND flash memory inevitably continues to degrade, which quickly makes current design practice inadequate and hence naturally demands more powerful ECCs. Because of their well-proven superior error correction capability with reasonably low decoding complexity, advanced ECCs, such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) code and Reed-Solomon
G. Dong and T. Zhang are with Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering Department at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), NY, USA (email: dongguiqiang@gmail.com; tzhang@ecse.rpi.edu).
Y. Zou is with Sunbelt Solutions, Phoenix, AZ, USA.

(RS) codes with soft-decision decoding algorithms, appear to be promising candidates. These advanced ECCs are softdecision in nature and hence demand NAND flash memory carry out finer-grained (i.e., soft-decision) sensing, and their error correction performance heavily depends on the precision of memory soft-decision sensing. Compared with current design practice, fine-grained soft-decision memory sensing clearly leads to a longer on-chip memory sensing latency and longer memory-to-controller data transfer latency. Such latency overhead can severely degrade the memory system speed performance, hence may prevent the practical use of soft-decision ECCs in many speed-critical applications.
This paper presents simple yet effective techniques that can reduce memory-to-controller data transfer latency overhead induced by soft-decision memory sensing. Recent work [5], [6] has well demonstrated the effectiveness of using non-uniform quantization to reduce the required sensing quantization levels. In addition, the latency can be reduced by using a straightforward progressive sensing/decoding strategy that progressively increases the precision of memory sensing (and hence ECC decoding) in a fail-and-retry manner. In this work, we propose two design techniques that complement with existing nonuniform quantization and progressive sensing design solutions to further reduce memory-to-controller data transfer latency. First, we propose to simply apply entropy coding, a family of classical data lossless compression schemes, to encode the non-uniform sensing results to be transferred. Second, we propose a zoned entropy coding scheme in the context of progressive memory sensing, which is motivated by a simple observation: In progressive sensing, previous sensing results already determines the possible region of memory cell threshold voltage, hence we only need to uniquely encode different sensing results within the same possible region, instead of uniquely encoding different sensing results within the entire memory cell threshold voltage operational window. This leads to the zoned entropy coding that aims to apply entropy coding within each possible region determined by previous sensing results, which can reduce the memory-tocontroller data transfer latency.
Using a hypothetical 2bits/cell NAND flash memory as a test vehicle, we carry out simulations to evaluate the effectiveness of the developed techniques. For the purpose of simplicity, we only consider two-step progressive sensing with the 1st-step 4-level uniform hard-decision sensing and 2ndstep 7-level non-uniform soft-decision sensing. Results show that, compared with the conventional fixed-length coding, the entropy coding can reduce the 2nd-step soft-decision sensing result transfer latency by 20.4%. Compared with the conven-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7024

2

tional fixed-length coding and complete entropy coding, this zoned entropy coding strategy can reduce the data transfer latency by 64.8% and 20.4%, respectively.

Start Read hard-decision data

II. BACKGROUND
Each NAND flash memory cell is a floating gate transistor whose threshold voltage can be programmed by injecting certain amount of charges into the floating gate, and before memory cells can be programmed, they must be erased (i.e., evicting all the charges from the floating gate). In order to ensure sufficient noise margin, NAND flash memory programming must achieve a tight memory cell threshold voltage control, which is realized by using incremental step pulse programming (ISPP) [7], [8]. Major memory cell storage distortion and noise sources are cell-to-cell interference [9]– [11] and program/erase (P/E) cycling effects that include random telegraph noise (RTN) [12], [13] and interface state trap recovery and electron detrapping [14], [15].
As technology continues to scale down, these memory cell storage distortion and noise sources become increasingly significant, leading to continuous degradation of NAND flash memory raw storage reliability. As a result, the industry has been very actively pursuing the transition of ECC from conventional BCH codes to more powerful soft-decision iterative coding solutions, in particular LDPC codes. Nevertheless, since NAND flash memory sensing latency is proportional to the number of sensing quantization levels and the sensing results must be transferred to the memory controller through standard chip-to-chip links, a straightforward use of softdecision ECC in NAND flash memory can result in significant memory read latency overhead. Very naively, we may reduce the latency overhead from two aspects:
1) Progressive soft-decision sensing: Fig. 1 illustrates the very intuitive progressive soft-decision NAND flash memory sensing strategy, which can reduce the average read latency overhead for two reasons: (i) NAND flash memory raw storage reliability gradually degrades with the P/E cycling, hence fine-grained sensing may only be necessary as flash memory approaches its end of lifetime, and low-overhead coarse-grained sensing (and even hard-decision sensing) could be sufficient most time, especially during memory early lifetime. (ii) Since ECC must ensure an extremely low page error rate (e.g., 10−12 and below), low-overhead coarse-grained sensing (and even hard-decision sensing) may achieve a reasonably low error rate (e.g., 10−2), which makes the progressive sensing strategy well justified.
2) Non-uniform quantization sensing: As well demonstrated in recent work [5], [6], compared with uniform quantization, non-uniform sensing quantization can noticeably reduce the required quantization granularity without loss of error correction capability. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the key is to concentrate the sensing quantization around the dominating overlap regions of adjacent storage levels.

LDPC decoding

Yes

Decoding

succeeds?

Read more softdecision data

No

Reach highest

No

sensing precision?

Yes, report decoding failure

End

Fig. 1. Illustration of operational flow of progressive soft-decision sensing.

Borders of a dominating overlap

One dominating overlap region

region

Threshold voltage
Fig. 2. Illustration of non-uniform sensing quantization for NAND flash memory.
III. USING DATA COMPRESSION TO REDUCE DATA TRANSFER LATENCY
As pointed out above, soft-decision sensing increases the latency of both on-chip memory sensing and memory-tocontroller data transfer. The existing progressive sensing and non-uniform quantization sensing schemes described in Section II can reduce the latency overhead from both aspects. In this work, we propose the following two techniques that can further reduce the memory-to-controller data transfer latency by using simple lossless data compression schemes.
A. Applying Entropy Coding to Memory Sensing Results In conventional design, a fixed-length binary representation
is straightforwardly used to encode the soft-decision sensing result of each memory cell, i.e., when we quantize the threshold voltage of each memory cell into n regions, we use an unique log2 n -bit number to represent each region. From the source coding point of view, such a straightforward fixed-length coding is optimal (i.e., the maximum entropy can be achieved) only if all the threshold voltage quantization regions have (almost) the same probability. As described in Section II, prior work [5], [6] have well demonstrated the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7025

3

effectiveness of using non-uniform sensing quantization to reduce the number of sensing quantization levels and hence reduce the on-chip memory sensing latency. Under such nonuniform sensing quantization, the straightforward fixed-length binary representation of sensing results is clearly sub-optimal, leading to a low-entropy (i.e., large-size) data stream to be transferred and hence a longer memory-to-controller data transfer latency.
The above discussion simply suggests that we should employ entropy coding to better match the non-uniform sensing quantization in order to improve the entropy (i.e., reduce the size) of the sensing results to be transferred. For example, let’s consider 2bits/cell NAND flash memory, and Fig. 3 illustrates the memory cell threshold voltage distribution. Suppose we apply a 7-level non-uniform sensing quantization with the corresponding probability of each region as shown in Fig. 3, the use of an entropy coding can reduce the number of bits for sensing results representation from 3 to 2.45, leading to about 18% reduction of memory-to-controller data transfer latency.

Probability Fixed-length coding
Entropy coding

0.238

0.224

0.223

0.23

0.0275

0.0283

0.0292

111

110 100 000 001 011 010

01 00000 10 00001 001 0001 11

Threshold voltage
Fig. 3. A simple example to illustrate the use of fixed-length coding and entropy coding to represent memory sensing results. The probabilities are obtained from the example in Section IV-B.

(i.e., the hard-decision sensing result) regarding the threshold voltage of each memory cell, and it is not necessary to transfer the complete soft-decision sensing results. For example, let us consider 2bits/cell NAND flash memory with two steps of progressive sensing as illustrated in Fig. 4. Suppose the 1ststep hard-decision sensing result of one memory cell is the region II, the possible sensing result can only be regions II, III, or IV in 2nd-step soft-decision sensing. Hence, in theory we only need at most 2-bit representation to transfer such extra information to the controller, which is further combined with the previous hard-decision sensing results to obtain the complete soft-decision sensing results. The same concept can be straightforwardly extended to all the following steps (e.g., 3rd-step and 4th-step soft-decision sensing) throughout the entire progressive sensing procedure.
Entropy coding can be further incorporated to further reduce the data transfer latency in the case of progressive sensing. The key is to exploit the un-equal probability of different sensing regions in soft-decision sensing. For example, consider the progressive sensing scenario as illustrated in Fig. 4. Suppose the possible 2nd-step soft-decision sensing result can only be regions II, III, or IV, clearly there is a much higher probability that the actual sensing result is the region III than the other two regions. Therefore, we can apply entropy coding as illustrated in Fig. 5. Given the 1st-step hard-decision sensing results, we must ensure all the consecutive sensing regions within each entropy coding zone, as illustrated in Fig. 5, must be uniquely coded, while sensing regions within different entropy coding zones can be represented with the same codeword. The above method is referred to as zoned entropy coding in this work.
Four entropy coding zones

B. Progressive Sensing with Zoned Entropy Coding

As pointed out above in Section II, we can exploit the NAND flash memory wear-out dynamics and graceful sens-

1

00 1 01 1 00 1

ing precision vs. error correction capability to employ a

straightforward progressive NAND flash memory sensing (as

illustrated in Fig. 1) to reduce the average latency overhead.

As illustrated in Fig. 4, NAND flash memory sensing is first

carried out with a hard-decision quantization, and if the hard-

decision ECC decoding fails, a higher-precision soft-decision

Threshold voltage

sensing is carried out in order to improve ECC decoding

performance.

Fig. 5. Illustration of zoned entropy coding.

1st step: 4-level hard-decision sensing
2nd step: 7-level soft-decision sensing

I

II

III

IV

I

II III IV V VI VII

Fig. 6 further illustrates the process of sensing result construction in the case of 2-step progressive sensing with zoned entropy coding. The overlap between the 1st-step harddecision sensing result and the 2nd-step zoned entropy coded soft-decision sensing result can uniquely determine the real soft-decision sensing result. Clearly, this process can be extended straightforwardly to progressive sensing with more than two steps.

Fig. 4. Illustration of progressive memory sensing with the 1st step of 4-level hard-decision sensing and 2nd step of 7-level soft-decision sensing.
Intuitively, even in the case of hard-decision ECC decoding failure, the memory controller already has certain knowledge

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
For the purpose of quantitative evaluation, we develop a quantitative NAND flash memory device model that can capture the major threshold voltage distortion sources. Based

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7026

4

Overlap: Real sensing result

2nd-step sensing result

1st-step sensing result

Threshold voltage
Fig. 6. Illustration of constructing real soft-decision sensing result in progressive sensing.

upon this model, we carry out simulations to evaluate the above simple design techniques.

A. NAND Flash Device Model
1) Erase and programming operation modeling: The threshold voltage of erased memory cells tends to have a wide Gaussian-like distribution [16], and we approximately model the threshold voltage distribution of erased state as

pe(x)

=

√1

e , −

(x−μe 2σe2

)2

σe 2π

(1)

where μe and σe are the mean and standard deviation of the erased state. Regarding memory programming, a tight threshold voltage control is typically realized by using incremental step pulse program (ISPP) [7], [8], i.e., memory cells on the same word-line are recursively programmed using a programand- verify approach with a stair case program wordline voltage.
At older technology nodes (e.g., 90nm node), the threshold voltage of programmed states tends to have a uniform distribution [13]. Nevertheless, in highly scaled technology nodes (e.g., 65nm and below), the electron injection statistical spread [17] has become significant and tends to make the threshold voltage of programmed states more like Gaussian distribution. Hence, in this work we approximately model the distribution of programmed state as

pp(x)

=

√1

e , −

(x−μp 2σp2

)2

σp 2π

(2)

where μp and σp are the mean and standard deviation of the programmed state right after programming.
2) Random telegraph noise (RTN): The fluctuation magnitude of RTN is subject to exponential decay. The probability density function pr(x) of RTN-induced threshold voltage fluctuation is modeled as a symmetric exponential function [13]:

pr (x)

=

1 2λr

e−

|x| λr

.

(3)

Since the significance of RTN is proportional to the interface

trap

density,

we

model

the

mean

of

RTN,

i.e.,

μRT N

=

1 λr

,

approximately follows

μRT N = ART N · N aIT .

(4)

3) Retention process: Since interface trap recovery and electron detrapping processes tend to follow Poisson statistics [18], we approximately model the induced threshold voltage reduction as a Gaussian distribution, i.e., pt(x) = N (μd, σd2). As demonstrated in relevant device studies (e.g., see [18], [19]), mean value of threshold voltage shift scales approximately with ln(1 + t) over the time. The mean value of retention shift is set to follow the mean of sum of interface traps and oxide traps:

μd = (At · N aIT + Bt · N aOT ) · ln(1 + t).

(5)

Moreover, the significance of threshold voltage reduction

induced by interface trap recovery and electron detrapping

is also proportional to the initial threshold voltage magni-

tude [20], i.e., the higher the initial threshold voltage is,

the faster the interface trap recovery and electron detrapping

occur and hence the larger threshold voltage reduction will

be. Hence we set the generated retention noise approximately

scale Ks(x − x0), where x is the initial threshold voltage before retention, and x0 and Ks are constants.
4) Cell-to-cell interference: To capture inevitable process

variability in cell-to-cell interference model, we set both the

vertical coupling ratio γy and diagonal coupling ratio γxy as

random variabl⎧es with truncated Gaussian distribution:

pc(x)

=

⎨ c√c ⎩0σ,c 2π

·

e , −

(x−μc 2σc2

)2

if |x − μc| ≤ wc , else

(6)

where μc and σc are the mean and standard deviation, and cc is chosen to ensure the integration of this bounded Gaussian
distribution equals to 1. According to [10], [21], we set the ratio between the means of γx, γy and γxy as 0.1:0.08:0.006.
5) Overall device model: Based upon (1) and (2), we can obtain the threshold voltage distribution function pp(x) right after programming operation. Then we have the threshold voltage distribution after incorporating RTN par(x) as

par(x) = pp(x) pr(x).

(7)

After we incorporate the cell-to-cell interference, we have the threshold voltage distribution pac. Let pt(x) denote the distribution of retention noise caused by interface state trap recovery and electron detrapping. The final threshold voltage distribution pf is obtained as

pf (x) = pac(x) pt(x).

(8)

B. Case Study Results
In this work, we use 2bits/cell NAND flash memory with the following device parameters as a test vehicle. We set the normalized σe and μe of the erased state as 0.35 and 1.4, respectively. For programmed state, we set the normalized program step voltage ΔVpp as 0.2, and its deviation as 0.05. According to [15], the exponents for interface and oxide traps generation are estimated as aIT = 0.62 and aOT = 0.3, respectively. For RTN, we set ART N = 2.72 × 10−4. The coupling strength factor is set as 1. As for retention shift, we set σd = 0.3|μd|, and At = 3.5 × 10−5, Bt = 2.35 × 10−4, which are chosen to match the 70%:30% ratio of interface trap

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7027

5

recovery and electron detrapping presented in [15]. Regarding the influence of the initial threshold voltage, we set x0 = 1.4 and Ks = 0.333. We set wc = 0.1μc and σc = 0.4μc.
For the purpose of simplicity, we only consider the 1ststep 4-level hard-decision sensing and 2nd-step 7-level softdecision non-uniform sensing as illustrated in Fig. 4. Table I shows the probabilities of the 7 levels in the 2nd-step nonuniform sensing. If we use the straightforward entropy coding to uniquely encode all the 7 levels according to their probabilities, we have the entropy codewords as listed in Table I. Compared with the conventional 3-bit fixed-length coding, such straightforward entropy coding can reduce the 2nd-step soft-decision sensing result transfer latency by 20.4%.

TABLE I PROBABILITIES AND CODEWORDS OF THE 2ND-STEP SOFT-DECISION
SENSING RESULTS.

Level index
I II III IV V VI VII

Probability Fixed-length coding

0.2397

111

0.0255

110

0.2255

100

0.0263

000

0.2245

001

0.027

011

0.2315

010

Entropy coding
01 00000 10 00001 001 0001 11

Zoned Entropy Coding 1 00 1 01 1 00 1

Table I lists the codeword of each level in the case of zoned entropy coding. As illustrated in Fig. 5, we apply entropy coding to four zones individually, which are formed by all the 7 sensing regions as {I, II}, {II, III, IV}, {IV, V, VI}, and {VI, VII} in the 2nd-step soft-decision sensing, respectively . These zoned entropy codewords will be decoded and combined with the hard-decision sensing results to construct the complete soft-decision sensing result. In this context, there is a relatively high probability that we only need to transfer one bit for each cell during the 2nd-step soft-decision sensing.
Compared with the conventional fixed-length coding scheme, this zoned entropy coding strategy can reduce the data transfer latency for 2nd-step soft-decision sensing by 64.8%, while complete entropy coding reduces by 20.4%.

V. CONCLUSION
This paper concerns the memory-to-controller data transfer latency overhead induced by the use of powerful soft-decision ECC in future NAND flash memory. Although ECCs such as LDPC codes can achieve excellent error correction capability, their soft-decision decoding nature directly results in significant latency overhead in terms of on-chip memory sensing and memory-to-controller data transfer. We propose two simple yet effective design techniques that can reduce data transfer latency. The first technique is to straightforwardly complement existing non-uniform memory sensing quantization scheme with entropy coding to reduce data transfer latency. The second technique to apply zoned entropy coding in the context of progressive memory sensing to reduce the data transfer latency. Based upon an approximate NAND flash memory device

model, we carried out simulations and the results clearly
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed design solutions.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Marotta et al., “A 3bit/cell 32gb nand flash memory at 34nm with 6mb/s program throughput and with dynamic 2b/cell blocks configuration mode for a program throughput increase up to 13mb/s,” in Proc. of IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, 2010, pp. 444–445.
[2] T. Futatsuyama et al., “A 113mm2 32Gb 3b/cell NAND flash memory,” in Proc. of IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, Feb. 2009, pp. 242–243.
[3] Y. Li et al., “A 16 Gb 3-bit per cell (X3) NAND flash memory on 56 nm technology with 8 MB/s write rate,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, pp. 195–207, Jan. 2009.
[4] R. E. Blahut, Algebraic Codes For Data Transmission, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[5] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in nand flash memory,” Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, 2011.
[6] J. Wang, T. A. Courtade, H. Shankar, and R. D. Wesel, “Soft information for LDPC decoding in flash: Mutual-information optimized quantization,” in Proc. of Globecom, 2011.
[7] K.-D. Suh et al., “A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND flash memory with incremental step pulse programming scheme,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1149–1156, Nov. 1995.
[8] R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti, “Introduction to Flash memory,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 91, pp. 489–502, April 2003.
[9] J.-D Lee, S.-H. Hur, and J.-D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron. Device Letters, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May. 2002.
[10] K. Prall, “Scaling non-volatile memory below 30nm,” in IEEE 2nd Non-Volatile Semiconductor Memory Workshop, Aug. 2007, pp. 5–10.
[11] H. Liu, S. Groothuis, C. Mouli, J. Li, K. Parat, and T. Krishnamohan, “3D simulation study of cell-cell interference in advanced NAND flash memory,” in Proc. of IEEE Workshop on Microelectronics and Electron Devices, April 2009.
[12] K. Fukuda, Y. Shimizu, K. Amemiya, M. Kamoshida, and C. Hu, “Random telegraph noise in flash memories model and technology scaling,” in IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting,, 2007, pp. 169–172.
[13] C.M. Compagnoni, M. Ghidotti, A.L. Lacaita, A.S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Random Telegraph Noise Effect on the Programmed ThresholdVoltage Distribution of Flash Memories,” IEEE electron device letters, vol. 30, no. 9, 2009.
[14] N. Mielke, H.P. Belgal, A. Fazio, Q. Meng, and N. Righos, “Recovery effects in the distributed cycling of flash memories,” in Proc. of IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium, 2006, pp. 29–35.
[15] H. Yang et al., “Reliability issues and models of sub-90nm NAND Flash memory cells,” in International conference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology, Oct. 2006, pp. 760–762.
[16] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and H. Nakamura, “A double-level-Vth select gate array architecture for multilevel NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 602–609, Apr. 1996.
[17] C.M. Compagnoni, A.S. Spinelli, R. Gusmeroli, A.L. Lacaita, S. Beltrami, A. Ghetti, and A. Visconti, “First evidence for injection statistics accuracy limitations in NAND Flash constant-current Fowler-Nordheim programming,” in IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting, 2007, pp. 165–168.
[18] N. Mielke, H. Belgal, I. Kalastirsky, P. Kalavade, A. Kurtz, Q. Meng, N. Righos, and J. Wu, “Flash EEPROM threshold instabilities due to charge trapping during program/erase cycling,” IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 335–344, 2004.
[19] C. M. Compagnoni, C. Miccoli, R. Mottadelli., S. Beltrami, M. Ghidotti., A. L. Lacaita, A. S. Spinelli, and A. Visconti, “Investigation of the Threshold Voltage Instability after Distributed Cycling in Nanoscale NAND Flash Memory Arrays,” in IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), 2010, pp. 604–610.
[20] J.D. Lee, J.H. Choi, D. Park, K. Kim, R.D. Center, S.E. Co, and S.K. Gyunggi-Do, “Effects of interface trap generation and annihilation on the data retention characteristics of flash memory cells,” IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 110–117, 2004.
[21] N. Shibata et al., “A 70 nm 16 Gb 16-level-cell NAND flash memory,” in IEEE Symposium on VLSI Circuits, 2007, pp. 190–191.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:58:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
7028

