2011 IEEE Symposium on Computers & Informatics

New QC-LDPC Codes Implementation on FPGA Platform in Rayleigh Fading Environment
Farid Ghani, Abid Yahya and Abdul Kader
School of Computer and Communication Engineering University Malaysia Perlis (UniMAP) 02000 Kuala Perlis, Perlis, MALAYSIA
faridghani@rediffmail.com, abidusm@gmail.com and kdr2k4@yahoo.com

Abstract—This paper presents performance of Quasi-Cyclic lowdensity parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes on a flat Rayleigh fading channels by employing DPSK modulation scheme. The BER curves show that large girth and diversity level robust the system performance. Moreover, Prototype architecture of the LDPC codes has been implemented by writing Hardware Description Language (VHDL) code and targeted to a Xilinx Spartan-3E XC3S500E FPGA chip. Simulation results show that the proposed QC-LDPC codes achieve a 0.1dB coding gain over randomly constructed codes and perform 1.3 dB from the Shannon-limit at a BER of 10-6 with a code rate of 0.89 for block length of 1332.
Keywords— Bit error rate; Communication channels; Encoding; FPGA; QC-LDPC, Rayleigh Fading
I. INTRODUCTION
Channel coding plays key role in providing a reliable communication method that can overcome signal degradation in practical channels. The breakthrough of convolutional codes [1] led off a new field of study into non-algebraic codes based on linear transformations using generator and paritycheck matrices. Convolutional codes are encoded using a finite-state process, which generates them a linear order encoding scheme. Afterward, convolutional codes led to the discovery of a class of codes called Turbo codes [2], which are the class of concatenated convolutional codes and randomize the order of some of the bits by using an interleaver.
Turbo codes are the first known capacity approaching error correction code, which provides a powerful error correction capability when decoded by an iterative decoding algorithm [2]. The rediscovery of low density parity check (LDPC) code, which was originally proposed by Gallager [3] and was later generalized as MacKay-Neal code [4] puts back Turbo coding as the forward error correction (FEC) technique. LDPC codes were neglected for a long time since their computational complexity for the hardware technology was high. LDPC codes have acquired considerable attention due to its nearcapacity error execution and powerful channel coding technique with an adequately long codeword length [5]. LDPC codes have several advantages over Turbo codes. In the decoding of Turbo code it is difficult to apply parallelism due to the sequential nature of the decoding algorithm, while in LDPC decoding can be accomplished with a high degree of parallelism to attain a very high decoding throughput. LDPC codes do not need a long interleaver, which usually causes a large delay in turbo codes. LDPC codes can be constructed directly for a desired code rate. In case of turbo codes, which are based on convolutional codes, require other methods such as puncturing to acquire the desired rate.
The codes are classified into two major categories, explicitly, block codes and convolutional codes. Hamming

codes, Bose- Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) codes; ReedSolomon codes [6-7] and newly rediscovered LDPC codes are the example of block codes. Block codes like Hamming, BCH and RS codes have structures but with limited code length. A bounded-distance decoding algorithm is usually employed in decoding block codes except LDPC codes, in general it is hard to use soft decision decoding for block codes.
Advances in error correcting codes have revealed that, using the message passing decoding algorithm, irregular LDPC codes can accomplish consistent communication at SNR very close to the Shannon limit on the AWGN channel, outperforming turbo codes of the same block size and code rate [8]. The numerical analysis method for calculating the threshold of the LDPC codes is examined by Hou et al..[9] for the AWGN channel; the proposed method is implemented to the uncorrelated flat Rayleigh fading channel. Additionally, using the nonlinear optimization technique of differential evolution, the degree distribution pairs are optimized for the uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel and observe that their threshold values are very close to the capacity of this channel for moderate block size with excellent performance. The two adaptive coded modulation schemes employing LDPC codes for Rayleigh fading channels are proposed by Zhang et al., [10]. It is shown that these proposed schemes have made good use of the time-varying nature of Rayleigh fading channel. It is also observed that the proposed schemes perform better by employing LDPC with large code length.
The performance of irregular LDPC codes is investigated in [11] with three BP based decoding algorithms, specifically the uniformly most powerful (UMP) BP-based algorithm, the normalized BP-based algorithm, and the offset BP-based algorithm on a fast Rayleigh fading channel by employing density evolution. It is observed from the study of proposed method that the performance and decoding complexity of irregular LDPC codes with the offset BP-based algorithm can be very close to that with the BP algorithm on the fast Rayleigh fading channel. After successful evolution of irregular LDPC codes, Ohhashi and Ohtsuki [11] then analyze the performance of regular LDPC codes with the normalized BP-based algorithms on the fast Rayleigh fading channel. Formulas for short and long regular LDPC codes are derived based on the probability density function (PDF) of the initial likelihood information and DE for the normalized BP-based algorithm on the fast Rayleigh fading channel. Performance of the long regular LDPC codes with the normalized BP-based algorithm in the proposed method outperforms the BP algorithm and the UMP BP-based algorithm on fast Rayleigh fading channel. In this paper new QC-LDPC codes [12] have been developed and implement the newly designed codes on FPGA platform. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed QC-LDPC codes achieve a 0.1dB coding gain over

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
978-1-61284-691-0/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE 206

randomly constructed codes and perform 1.3 dB from the Shannon-limit at a BER of 10−6 with a code rate of 0.89 for block length of 1332.

II. REPRESENTATIONS FOR LDPC CODES
Basically there are two different underlying theories to represent LDPC codes. Like all linear block codes, LDPC codes can be described using matrices. Alternatively, it can be described using a graphical representation.

(a) Matrix Representation

LDPC codes are in the category of linear codes. They cater near capacity performance on a large data transmission and storage channels. LDPC codes are rendered with probabilistic encoding and decoding algorithms. LDPC codes are designated by a parity check H matrix comprising largely 0’s and has a low density of 1’s. More precisely, LDPC codes have very few 1’s in each row and column with large minimum distance. In specific, a , , low-density code is a code of block length n and source block length . The

number of parity checks is delimitated as

. The

parity check matrix weight (number of ones in each column or

row) for LDPC codes can be either regular or irregular. LDPC

can be regular if the number of one’s is constant in each

column or row and gets irregular with a variable number of

ones in each column or row. A regular LDPC code is a linear

block code whose parity-check matrix constitutes exactly 1’s

in each column and exactly

⁄ 1’s in each row, with

the code rate 1

.

(b) Graphical Representation
Tanner considered LDPC codes and showed how they maybe represented effectively by a bipartite graph, now call a Tanner graph [13]. Tanner graphs provide a complete representation of the code and also help to explain the decoding algorithm.
In Tanner graphs the nodes of the graph are separated into two typical sets and edges are only connecting nodes of two different types. The two types of nodes in a Tanner graph are
called variable nodes ( v -nodes) and check nodes ( c -nodes).
The Tanner graph of a code is drawn according to the following rule: It consists of check nodes (the number of parity bits) and variable nodes (the number of bits in a codeword).Check node is connected to variable node if
the element of H is a 1.

III. QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES
Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes form a large class of codes with nice encoding and decoding, which have been comprehensively premeditated in the sense that their hardware is both cheap and easy to implement. Since both encoding and decoding require less memory, which have many gains for hardware and software implementations. This memory advantage is catered by being able to illustrate the matrices employing a series of short polynomials.
A code is pronounced to be quasi-cyclic (QC) if a cyclic shift of any codeword by p positions is still a codeword. Thus a cyclic code is a QC code with 1. The block length
of a QC code is a multiple of , As a result 1
Circulants, or cyclic matrices, are indispensable components in the generator matrix for a QC code.

A circulant matrix is defined as a square matrix, such that

each row is incurred by a cyclic shift of the preceding. The

parity-check matrix of a QC code is decomposed into

blocks of circulant matrices, with submatrix

dimensions

, where ν and are the circulants

number in row and column, respectively.

Let C be a

matrix. We say that C is circulant if its

rows are incurred by successive shifts. This means that a QC

code can be distinguished by a generator matrix of the form

[14-15]: , , , ,…,
Where , 0,1,2, … ,

2 1, are circulants of order

of the form:

3

We consider weight one and weight-2 circulants, in polynomial form, by referring the positions of the 1’s in the first row of the circulant. Circulant with weight-2 is denoting in the polynomial form:
4 Great care has to be taken while dealing with the values of and , since efficient decoding and removal of short cycles depend on these values.

IV. NEW ALGORITHM FOR QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

The proposed algorithm for the construction of the new QC-LDPC , , code is as described in the following steps:

1. The codeword can be encoded as follows;

2

0

5

where Η represents parity check matrix and C denotes

codeword.

2. For an efficient encoding the codeword’s rows are

splitted into sub rows with respect to group size.

,| , ,…,

6

where and represent the information and parity

check bits respectively.

3. The constraint of group’s number on row weight size

persists the row-column (RC) connections to generate

variety of codes.

7

where represents group size and stands for number of row. 4. In each sub row the number of 1-component is selected in order to maintain the concentrated degree of distribution which results in random selection. Otherwise non-concentrated degree of distribution will appear.

8

9

A

array is obtained from the aforesaid

equations, where is the permutation matrix with

the location vector of the field elements, cyclically

shifting codeword by one position. Therefore, each row

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
207

of is obtained from shifting the rows of the identity

matrix to the left. Hence

is

circulant

permutation matrix and is

array of

circulant permutation matrix.

Let , … ,

denote the rows of the parity check

matrix H. First we consider splitting each row of H

into the same number of sub rows. All the new sub

rows have the same length as the original row. The

weight (or “ones”) of the original row is distributed

among the sub rows. A regular row weight distribution

can be done as follows. Let be a positive integer, split each row of H into sub rows , , , , … , , .

The distribution of

“ones” of

into

, , , , … , , is carried out in a rotating manner. In

the first rotation, the first “1” of is put in , , the

second “1” of is put in , and so on. In the second

rotation, the

1 th “one” of is put in , , the

2 th “one” of is put in

and so on. This

rotating distribution of the “ones” of continues until

all the “ones” of have been distributed into the

sub rows.

The above row splitting results in a new parity

check matrix H with

rows which has the

following structural properties: (1) each row has

weight (2) every column has weight (3) any two

rows (or columns) have at most one 1-component in

common. Such a sparse parity-check matrix is said to be , regular and the code generated by it is called
, a regular code. The constraint on the rows and

columns of H given by property (3) is called the row-

column (RC) constraint. Therefore, the above row

splitting results in a new parity check matrix with

smaller density. Moreover, when the parity check

matrix is systematic, one can easily use it to extract the

density of the code.

The channel impulse response can be evinced as , .

Let the transmitted signal be set out by and the received

signal , at a position d is to be articulated as a

convolution between and , [16].

,

,

,

10

In case of a causal system the equation (10) turns into;

,

,

11

where d represents the position of the receiver at constant
velocity v is denotative as; 12
Substituting the value of d in equation (11)

,

,

13

Given that v may be assumed as constant over a short time interval, therefore equation (13) can be stated as;

,

14

The impulse response

, is a function of both t

and which entirely characterizes the channel .The time

variation and time delay of multipath channel is represented

by t and respectively.

Fading channel usually follows the Rayleigh fading

characteristics. This also happen when simulating the wireless

channel for mobile and macro cellular communications. If we

put on a mobile station with carrier frequency moving at a velocity v, then the Doppler shift brought in the nth incident

wave is set by;

,

cos

15

where

⁄

5. Select the rows (a) find the row with the least distance (b) Store shift values of the submatrices (c) UNION (‘rows’)
The shift values of the submatrices are stored in order to reduce the memory requirement by a factor 1⁄ , when circulant permutation matrices are employed. This lead us to a point that a location of 1 is fixed in the first row and we determine the location of other 1 uniquely therefore the required memory for storing the parity check matrix of the QC-LDPC code can be reduced by a factor 1⁄ .
V. RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNEL
In this section, a statistical model for flat Rayleigh fading channels is presented. This channel model is used here to assess the dependability and performance of the system.
An impulse response is a broadband channel characterization which is used in designing a communication system. An impulse response comprises all entropy, essential to simulate and examine the radio transmission system through a communication channel.
The impulse response is a useful characterization of the channel, since it may be used to forecast and evaluate the performance of different mobile communication systems as well as the transmission bandwidths for a specific mobile channel condition [16].

VI. IMPLEMENTATION AND DESIGN FLOW
There are many aspects which are associated with the performance of LDPC codes such as the code rate, the choice of the H matrix, and even the selection of the design. One of the noticeable trade-off in the LDPC encoder-decoder design deals with code length and the area accessible in a design platform. In general, codes with larger block lengths have better performance. Now the FPGA platform gives the opportunity that one can fit more basic building block elements, thus letting for larger design.
Prototype architecture of the LDPC codes has been implemented by writing Hardware Description Language (VHDL) code and targeted to a Xilinx Spartan-3E XC3S500E FPGA chip. The block diagram of the overall design flow is shown in Figure 1. The Spartan-3E family reduces system cost by providing the lowest cost-per-logic of any FPGA family, supporting the lowest-cost configuration solutions including commodity serial and parallel flash memories, and competently integrating the functions of many chips into a single FPGA.
An USB interface is employed between the Spartan-3E Board and the PC for testing and verification of the architecture by transferring generated data between the PC and the FPGA architecture. The FPGA is programmed and configured with VHDL and the Xilinx integrated software environment (ISE). If the design needs changes, the device

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
208

does not require being detached from the board just simply reprogrammed in-system.

Simulation results in Figure 4 portray that the proposed QCLDPC codes achieve a 0.1dB coding gain over randomly constructed codes and perform 1.3 dB from the Shannon-limit at a BER of 10−6 with a code rate of 0.89 for block length of 1332. Simulation results show that the code optimization and girth conditioning not only improves the performance but also lowers the error floor for QC-LDPC codes. On the other hand random codes correspond to a smaller sub matrix. The rigid weight constraints of the optimization process do not allow many variations in the random codes construction. The structure of random codes confines the construction of codes with both good cycle and girth properties and directs to error floor.

100

Iteration = 40, L=2

Iteration = 50, L=3

10-1

Iteration = 60, L=4

10-2

BER

10-3

Fig.1 Overall LDPC codes design flow
VII. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we simulated the performance of two girthtwelve QC-LDPC codes. The allowable maximum number of iterations for decoder is set to 40,50 and 60 respectively, for diversity levels L=2, L=3 and L=4 with 5 microseconds symbol period and 1.1 milliseconds coherence time on a flat Rayleigh fading channels by employing DPSK modulation scheme. In this part of simulation, the noise variance is assumed to be known at the receiver. It can be observed in Figure 2 as the number of QC-LDPC decoding iterations and diversity levels increases; the decoder caters more reliable log likely ratio (LLR) values that are associated with the estimated demodulation vector. A large value of LLR points that the estimated bit of the demodulated vector has high reliability, due to this reason the probability of error goes down. The BER curves show that large girth and diversity level robust the system performance.
Figure 3 shows the performance of QC-LDPC codes, compares with that of randomly constructed LDPC code in term of their BER and block error rate (BLER) at fractional bandwidth 0.1 . In each case, decoder runs for a 60 iterations to get the best possible performance. The performance of QC-LDPC codes is almost the same as that of random codes at low signal noise ratio (SNR), but the former is better than the later at high SNR.
Performance enhancement and comparison of the newly obtained codes is shown in Figure 4 employing different code rates. One way to accomplish the best and high rate LDPC code is the puncturing of low rate LDPC code and also some time puncturing columns. The drawback is that it reduces the block length and also effects in the performance. The proposed QC-LDPC codes take union of the rows in order to support the multiple coding rates as mentioned in point (5) of the proposed algorithm. It provides a simple overall architecture with a smaller chip area required to support all the needed rates.
Throughout the simulation BPSK modulation scheme has been employed with 50 maximum number iterations.

10-4

10-5

10-6

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

8

8.5

9

Eb/No (dB)

Fig.2 BER of two girth-twelve QC-LDPC codes for given value of Eb / No
on Rayleigh fading channels with code rate 0.87

Bit Error Rate / Block Error Rate

100

BER, Large Girth QC-LDPC Codes

10-1

BER,Random Codes BER, Large Girth QC-LDPC Codes

BLER,Random Codes

10-2

Uncoded BPSK

10-3

10-4

10-5

ρ .

10-6

10-7

10-8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

SNR (dB)

Fig.3 BER and BLER of the proposed codes and randomly constructed codes in partial band jamming environment 0.1

The method to calculate the Shannon’s limit is as follows;

log2 1

16

where, R represents the code rate and replace the signal

power S by and the noise power N by .

log2 1

17

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
209

is called the bandwidth efficiency in units of

bit/second/Hz. Substituting

with

and

rearranging;

2

1

18

100

Shannon Limit, Rate = 0.25

10-1

QC-LDPC Codes, Rate = 0.25 Random Codes, Rate = 0.25

Shannon Limit, Rate = 0.5

10-2

QC-LDPC Codes, Rate =0.5

Random Codes, Rate = 0.5

Shannon Limit, Rate = 0.87

10-3

QC-LDPC Codes, Rate = 0.89

Random Codes, Rate = 0.89

10-4

Bit Error Rate

10-5

10-6

10-7

10-8

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Eb / Nb(dB)

Fig.4 Shannon’s limit of proposed QC-LDPC codes and randomly constructed codes, for block length 1332
VIII. CONCLUSION
Channel coding plays key role in providing a reliable communication method that can overcome signal degradation in practical channels. In this paper new QC-LDPC codes have been developed and implement the newly designed codes on FPGA platform. Prototype architecture of the LDPC codes has been implemented by writing Hardware Description Language (VHDL) code and targeted to a Xilinx Spartan-3E XC3S500E FPGA chip. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed QC-LDPC codes achieve a 0.1dB coding gain over randomly constructed codes and perform 1.3 dB from the Shannon-limit at a BER of 10−6 with a code rate of 0.89 for block length of 1332.

REFERENCES
[1] H. L. Charles, Error-Control Convolutional Coding,1st edition, Artech House, Inc. Norwood, MA, USA, 1997.
[2] C. Berrou, A.Glavieux and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error correcting coding and decoding: turbo-codes,” IEEE ICC'93, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1064-1070, 1993.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Code. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[4] D. Mackay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Electronic Letters, vol. 32, no.18, pp. 1645-1646, 1996.
[5] D. J. Mackay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399-431, 1999.
[6] S. Lin and D. Costello, Error-Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, Prentice-Hall, 2nd edition, 2004.
[7] S.B. Wicker and S. Kim, Fundamentals of Codes, Graphs and Iterative Decoding. Kluver International Series in Engineering and Computer Science, 2003.
[8] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47(2), pp. 599-618,2001.
[9] G. Huo and S. Alouini, “Another Look at the BER Performance of FFH/BFSK with Product Combining Over Partial-Band Jammed Rayleigh-Fading Channels,” IEEE Transaction on Vehicular Technology, vol. 50(5),p p.1203-1215, 2001.
[10] H. Zhang and J. M. Moura, “The design of structured regular lpdc codes with large girth,” GLOBECOM, pp. 4022–4027, 2003.
[11] A. Ohhashi and T. Ohtsuki, Performance analysis of BP-based algorithms for irregular low-density parity-check codes on fast Rayleigh fading channel,” IEEE 60th Vehicular Technology Conference, 2004. VTC2004-Fall. vol. 4,pp.2530-2534, 2004.
[12] Y. Abid, S. Othman, M. F. M. Salleh, F. Ghani , “A New Quasi-Cyclic Low Density Parity Check Codes,”IEEE Symposium on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ISIEA 2009), October 4-6, 2009, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2009.
[13] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[14] Z. Chen, “Six New Binary Quasi Cyclic Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.Theory, vol. 40; 1666-1667, 1994.
[15] M. Rossi and M. Sala, On a class of quasi-cyclic codes, Technical Report 50, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland, 2005.
[16] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications - Principles and Practice. 2nd edition, by Prentice Hall,2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:12:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
210

