2790

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

A Multimode Shuffled Iterative Decoder Architecture for High-Rate RS-LDPC Codes
Yeong-Luh Ueng, Member, IEEE, Chung-Jay Yang, Kuan-Chieh Wang, and Chun-Jung Chen

Abstract—For an efficient multimode low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder, most hardware resources, such as permutators, should be shared among different modes. Although an LDPC code constructed based on a Reed–Solomon (RS) code with two information symbols is not quasi-cyclic, in this paper, we reveal that the structural properties inherent in its parity-check matrix can be adopted in the design of configurable permutators. A partially parallel architecture combined with the proposed permutators is used to mitigate the increase in implementation complexity for the multimode function. The high check-node degree of a high-rate RS-LDPC code leads to challenges in the efficient implementation of a high-throughput decoder. To overcome this difficulty, the variable nodes have been partitioned into several groups, and each group is processed sequentially in order to shorten the critical-path delay and hence increase the maximum operating frequency. In addition, shuffled message-passing decoding is adopted, since fewer iterations can be used to achieve the desired bit-error-rate performance. In order to demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed flexible-permutator-based architecture, one single-mode rate-0.84 decoder and two multimode decoders whose code rates range between 0.79 and 0.93 have been implemented. These decoders can achieve multigigabit-per-second throughput. Using the proposed architecture to support lower rate RS-LDPC codes, e.g., rate-0.568 code, is also investigated.
Index Terms—High rate, high throughput, low-density pa.rity-check (LDPC) codes, multimode, Reed–Solomon (RS)-LDPC codes, shuffled iterative decoding, structured codes
I. INTRODUCTION
R ESEARCH into low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] has attracted a tremendous amount of interest as a result of their near-capacity performance and their potential for highly parallel decoder implementation. LDPC codes for several applications, such as optical communications [3] and image transmission over wireless channels [4], have previously been discussed. Many recent communication standards, such as IEEE 802.3an [5] and 802.16e (WiMax) [6], have included
Manuscript received August 03, 2009; revised November 25, 2009 and February 05, 2010; accepted March 06, 2010. Date of publication May 17, 2010; date of current version October 08, 2010. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor V. Öwall.
Y.-L. Ueng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: ylueng@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
C.-J. Yang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: r91942083@ntu.eud.tw).
K.-C. Wang was with the College of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan. He is now with Macronix International Company, Ltd., Hsinchu 30078, Taiwan (e-mail: a9402001@mail.ntust.edu.tw).
C.-J. Chen was with the College of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan. He is now with MStar Semiconductor, Inc., Hsinchu 302, Taiwan (e-mail: g9664544@oz.nthu. edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2010.2046964

LDPC codes. The LDPC code adopted in the 802.3an standard is a regular code which is constructed based on a ReedSolomon (RS) code with two information symbols [7], [8]. Construction methods of LDPC codes based on shortened and extended RS codes were presented in [7] and [8], respectively. The minimum Hamming distance of an RS-LDPC code is guaranteed, and RS-LDPC codes with large minimum distances can be constructed [7], [8]. It was demonstrated in [9] that the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code adopted in the 802.3an standard has a low error floor. High-rate codes such as the (2048, 1723) code are often used for applications with relatively low noise channels, whereas many message bits as possible are required to be transmitted within a finite bandwidth. High-rate codes are usually used in wireline communications, such as the 802.3an standard, and in storage systems, such as hard-disk drives. For these applications, high data throughput ( Gbit/s) is usually required. Although only one RS-LDPC code is adopted in the 802.3an standard, in this paper, we present an efficient multimode decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC codes. This multimode decoder architecture can be adopted in the aforementioned applications if flexibility in code rate and correcting capability is required.
An LDPC code can be decoded by performing message-passing decoding (MPD) through its Tanner graph [10], which is a bipartite graph consisting of variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs). In [1] and [2], a decoding schedule called two-phase message passing (TPMP), which divides the decoding operations in one iteration into CN- and VN-operation phases, is used. Compared with the TPMP, layered MPD [11]–[14] and shuffled MPD [15]–[19] can be used to reduce the number of iterations required to achieve the same bit-error-rate (BER) performance.
To implement a high-throughput decoder, a fully parallel architecture can be adopted, but with complex interconnections [20]. In order to reduce the routing complexity, a bit-serial architecture [21], [22] or a stochastic decoder [23] can be used. The technique of wire partitioning can be used to shorten the critical-path delay and further increase the throughput [24]. The decoders presented in [20] and [22]–[24] are rate-1/2 LDPC decoders, where the CN degrees are low, e.g., six. Fully parallel decoders for a high-rate 2048-bit (6, 32)-regular LDPC code, where the VN and CN degrees are 6 and 32, respectively, were presented in [21], [25], and [26]. In [27], the authors showed that the high CN degree leads to greater complexities in hardware, interconnect, and timing, which are difficult to manage using a fully parallel architecture. Consequently, they proposed sliced message passing (SMP), which is a register-based partially parallel architecture, to design a high-throughput decoder for the (6, 32)-regular LDPC code. The complexity of the silicon area for a fully parallel LDPC decoder grows quickly as the code

1549-8328/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: MULTIMODE SHUFFLED ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURE

2791

length increases [27]. Consequently, decoders for long LDPC

codes with high CN degrees were designed using partially par-

allel architectures [29]–[31]. However, the high-throughput de-

coders presented in [20]–[27] and [29]–[31] are single mode.

A memory-shared partially parallel architecture is more suit-

able for a multimode decoder, since most hardware resources

can be shared among different modes. Many multimode

decoders for WiMAX LDPC codes are implemented using

memory-shared architectures based on a layered MPD, since

fewer iterations can be used to achieve the desired BER per-

formance [32]–[35]. To implement a multimode decoder for

quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes, such as those specified in

WiMAX, the permutators must be efficiently shared among dif-

ferent modes in order to reduce the implementation complexity.

In [36], the authors proposed a multimode decoder architecture

using flexible barrel shifters. In [37]–[40], several efficient flex-

ible permutator designs for multilength multirate QC-LDPC

decoders were presented. However, an efficient implementation

of a high-throughput multimode LDPC decoder is a challenging

task for memory-shared partially parallel architectures.

The work related to RS-LDPC codes presented in [21] and

[25]–[29] is single mode. For a single-mode RS-LDPC de-

coder using a partially parallel architecture, the shift-structured

properties presented in [29] and the multiplexer (MUX)-based

design adopted in [28] can reduce the permutation complexity

remarkably. However, for a multimode RS-LDPC decoder

architecture, we require an efficient design for the configurable

permutators, which is one of the most challenging aspects, since

the RS-LDPC codes are not QC codes. In this paper, we reveal

that the structural properties inherent in its parity-check matrix

(PCM) can be efficiently used in the design of configurable

permutators. A partially parallel architecture combined with

the proposed permutators is used to mitigate the increase in

implementation complexity of the multimode function. Using

this architecture, hardware resources can be efficiently shared

among different modes. The VNs are partitioned into several

groups, and each group is processed sequentially in order to

overcome the difficulties resultant from the high CN degrees.

Consequently, the critical-path delay can be shortened, and

hence, the throughput can be increased. In order to further

increase the throughput, the shuffled MPD presented in [19]

is adopted, since fewer iterations can be used to achieve the

desired BER performance. Multimode decoders for eight

RS-LDPC codes, whose lengths range between 1536 and 3968

bits and rates range between 0.79 and 0.93, have been imple-

mented. These decoders can achieve multigigabit-per-second

throughput.

Although flexible permutators are usually used for multimode

decoders, in this paper, we also reveal that the proposed flexible

permutator can be further simplified when using the proposed

decoder architecture to decode a single LDPC code constructed

based on an extended RS code. A length-2048 single-mode de-

coder with a core size of 6.14

has been implemented in a

90-nm CMOS process. The decoder can achieve a throughput

of 9.7 Gbit/s and operate at a clock frequency of 303 MHz.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In

Section II, we introduce the structural properties of the

parity-check matrices and propose the permutator architecture

for the RS-LDPC codes constructed based on either shortened

or extended RS codes. Section III presents the shuffled MPD and the associated BER results for the RS-LDPC codes. The proposed multi- and single-mode decoder architectures are presented in Section IV. In Section V, we describe the implementation results and compare our work with other related works. Finally, conclusions are made in Section VI.

II. PERMUTATOR ARCHITECTURE FOR RS-LDPC CODES

A. Review of LDPC Codes Based on Shortened RS Codes [7]

Consider the Galois field

, where is a prime and is

a positive integer. If we let be a primitive element of

,

with a positive integer , where

, we can construct

an RS code over

, whose generator polynomial is given

by

(1)

where

. The coefficients of

are nonzero.

If we shorten the RS code by deleting the first

infor-

mation symbols, then we obtain a shortened RS code with

two information symbols, whose generator matrix is given by

. The length of this short-

ened RS code is code symbols. The nonzero codewords of have two different weights, and . If we let and denote the first and the second row of , respectively, using and , we can construct a subcode of , which is given by

(2)

Suppose that the weight of

is . Thus, the nonzero

codewords of

have a weight of . Since the weight of

is ,

is not in and can be used to

construct a coset of according to

(3)

for

. There are codewords of in each set ,

.

Remember that

form all the elements in

. Let

be a binary -tuple, whose

components correspond to

. The

location vector of

denoted as

, respectively, are given

by

,

,

, and

.

By letting

be a codeword in and by

replacing each component of with its location vector ,

where

, we can obtain a binary weight- -tuple

, which is called the symbol

location vector of .

For

, we form a

matrix over

whose distinct rows are the distinct codewords in ,

respectively. The codewords ,

, in

can be written as

, and the all-zero codeword

in is denoted as . For

, the codewords

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2792

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

,

, in can be written as

and in can be written as . Consequently, the matrix can be written as

(4) ...

For

, we form a binary

matrix by re-

placing each codeword (row) in with its symbol location

vector

. All columns in have weight 1, and all rows in

have weight . If we let be a positive integer,

,

the null space of the

matrix

H Fig. 1.

matrix for the (3, 3)-regular RS-LDPC code constructed based

on the shortened RS code.

...

(5)

is an RS-LDPC code. Consequently, is a PCM of an

RS-LDPC code, where

and are code and informa-

tion (message) lengths, respectively. Since the PCM is not nec-

essarily full rank,

, where

is the number

of rows in the PCM. The code rate is . The RS-LDPC code

is a -regular LDPC code, since each row (column) of

has the same row (column) weight . The matrix can

be partitioned into block rows (columns) for which each
H block row (column) consists of rows (columns). In addition, Fig. 2. PCM
the matrix can be divided into submatrices, for which the

for a (3, 3)-regular RS-LDPC code.

dimensions of each submatrix are

. Each submatrix is a

permutation matrix, but is not necessarily a circulant matrix. can divide the

matrix into nine submatrices for which

the dimensions of each submatrix are 4 4. Since not all 4

B. Example for Demonstrating the Structural Properties of RS-LDPC Codes and Proposed Permutator Architecture

Consider the Galois field

with a primitive polyno-

mial

. The four elements of this field are 0,

,

, and

. Choosing , the generator polynomial of

the shortened RS code is

, and the generator ma-

4 submatrices of

are circulant matrices, the RS-LDPC

code is not a QC code. Consequently, the efficient permutator

designs proposed in [36]–[40] for QC-LDPC codes cannot be

directly used for the RS-LDPC codes.

As shown in Fig. 2, we can classify all the 4 4 submatrices

of

into three types. Type-I submatrices are obtained

by deleting the last submatrix of . Remember that

trix of the RS code is

. Consequently,

is obtained from the symbol location vectors of codewords

,

, and

. According to in . Since the first row of is the symbol location vector of the zero codeword, the first row of each Type-I

submatrix must be [1 0 0 0]. In addition, since the weight

(4), we have

,

, of each nonzero codeword in

is , which equals three

in this example, there is no zero field element in the first

block row of

except for the first row. Consequently,

the first column of each Type-I submatrix must be

,

and

. Write

, which where denotes the matrix transpose. Moreover, if we ignore

the first row and the first column of a Type-I submatrix, the

is shown in Fig. 1. After replacing each field element appearing remaining 3 3 submatrix is a weight-1 circulant matrix.

in

with the associated location vector, where the loca- This is due to the fact that

for

. To

tion vectors for 0, 1, , and , are given by

, realize the permutation defined by a Type-I submatrix, we

,

, and

, can use a barrel shifter plus one fixed interconnection.

respectively, we can obtain a matrix

, as shown in Fig. 2. Since the last elements of and

are 0 and 1, re-

The null space of

is a (3, 3)-regular LDPC code with a spectively, the last column of each block row of

must be

length of 12 bits and a rate of 1/3. The th block row of

is

, and hence, all Type-II submatrices are 4 4 iden-

, , 2, 3, where each block row consists of four rows. We tity matrices, as shown in Fig. 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: MULTIMODE SHUFFLED ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURE

2793

B B B Fig. 3. Procedure for obtaining (2; 1) from (0; 0). (a) Obtain (0; 1) from B B B (0; 0). (b) Obtain (2; 1) from (0; 1).
It can be seen that each submatrix in Fig. 1 corresponding to a Type-III submatrix in Fig. 2 can be written as

2 B 2 B Fig. 4. Proposed permutator design for Type-III submatrices. (a) Architecture
for the 4 4 (2; 1) matrix. (b) Architecture for the p p (i ; j ) matrix.

From (8) and (9), we have

. Similar to

a Type-I submatrix, we can use a barrel shifter plus one fixed

interconnection to realize the permutation defined by

.

Fig. 4(a) shows the proposed architecture for the permutation

defined by the

matrix, where we use a routing net-

(6) work with fixed interconnections to realize the permutation de-

fined by the base matrix. Similarly, we can obtain

and the associated architecture for the permuta-

where and are two integers which are determined from the tion defined by the

matrix, which is shown in Fig. 4(b).

corresponding coset leader. By substituting each element in the

matrix with its corresponding location vector, we can C. RS-LDPC Codes Supported by Proposed

obtain a Type-III submatrix

. For example, the Type-III Multimode Decoders

sector in Fig. 2 can be written as

The proposed multimode decoders can support several

(7)

RS-LDPC codes constructed using the Galois field

with a primitive polynomial

. In the following, we

From (7), it can be seen that the values associated with the th block row of the PCM can be obtained by increasing each
corresponding value associated with the th block row by one.

use a (6, 32)-regular RS-LDPC code to illustrate the construction procedure. The generator matrix of the shortened RS code

is

. Then, we can

Similarly, the values associated with the th block row of

the PCM can be obtained by decreasing each corresponding

value associated with the th block row by one. These properties

can be used to reduce the storage complexity when storing these

shift indices.

As shown in Fig. 3(a), we can obtain the

matrix from

, which is called the base matrix, by first fixing the first

row of the base matrix and then cyclically shifting the remaining

columns upward by one position. If we let be a matrix

which is obtained by first fixing the first row of the 4 4 iden-

tity matrix and then cyclically shifting the remaining columns

upward by position(s), then we have

obtain a matrix

, for which each row of

is a

codeword of the shortened RS code and the th block row of

consists of all the codewords in . After replacing

each field element appearing in

with the associated

location vector, we can obtain the PCM

of this

(6, 32)-regular RS-LDPC code. Fig. 5 shows the

matrix, where each dot represents a 1 in the matrix. This matrix

can be divided into

submatrices, where

the dimensions of each submatrix are

.

Similar to Fig. 2, the 192 submatrices of the

matrix

can be classified into three types. The first 31 submatrices in

the first block row are classified as Type I, where a block row

consists of 64 rows. For a Type-I submatrix, if we ignore the

first row and the first column, then the resultant 63 63 matrix (8) is a weight-1 circulant matrix. To implement the permutation

defined by a Type-I submatrix, we can use a barrel shifter plus

As shown in Fig. 3(b), we can obtain the

matrix from

by first fixing the first column of

and then cycli-

cally shifting the remaining rows right by two positions. If

we let be a matrix which is obtained by first fixing the first

column of the 4 4 identity matrix and then cyclically shifting

the remaining rows right by positions, then we have

one fixed interconnection. All the

submatrices in the

last block column are 64 64 identity matrices and are classi-

fied as Type II. The remaining 155 submatrices are classified

as Type III. A Type-III matrix can be constructed based on a

64 64 base matrix

for which the initial row is the

location vector of 1 and the th row is the location vector of

,

. A Type-III submatrix

can be obtained as follows. First, by fixing the first row of the

base matrix, we cyclically shift the remaining columns upward (9) by positions to obtain a temporary matrix. Then, by fixing

the first column of the temporary matrix, we cyclically shift

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

H Fig. 5. PCM

for the (6, 32)-regular RS-LDPC code.

GF N TABLE I
EIGHT RS-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED BASED ON

(2 ) (

= 8)

H Fig. 6.

matrix for a (3, 3)-regular RS-LDPC code constructed based on

the extended RS code.

flexible permutator architecture presented in Section II-B can

also be applied to the RS-LDPC codes constructed based on

the extended RS codes.

For example, we consider RS-LDPC codes constructed

based on the Galois field

with a primitive polynomial

,

, and

.

the remaining rows right by positions to obtain the

matrix. We can use the architecture shown in Fig. 4(b) to

realize the permutation defined by the

matrix, where

the routing network with fixed interconnections realizes the

permutation defined by the 64 64 base matrix.

Since the rank of

is 325, it is a PCM of a (6,

32)-regular LDPC code whose rate is

. Moreover, other seven RS-LDPC codes whose rates range

between 0.79 and 0.93 and lengths range between 1536 and

3968 bits were chosen for hardware implementation. The as-

sociated parameters are shown in Table I. The PCM of each

of these codes can be divided into submatrices, where the

dimensions of each submatrix are

. Sim-

ilar to the

matrix, the submatrices of each of these

parity-check matrices can be classified as Types I, II, and III.

Since all these codes are constructed based on

, the same

permutators can be used for different codes if appropriate shift

indices for barrel shifters are adopted.

Choosing

, we have

,

, and

according to (4).

Write

. Choosing the first, third, and fourth

columns of matrix

, we can obtain a matrix denoted

as

, which is shown in Fig. 6. After replacing each

field element appearing in

with the associated lo-

cation vector, we can obtain a PCM matrix

of an

RS-LDPC code. The Type-III sector in

can be written

as

. It can be seen that the Type-III sub-

D. RS-LDPC Codes Constructed Based on Extended RS Codes matrices belonging to the same block row of the PCM have the

The (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code adopted in the 802.3an same row shift indices . This property can be used to reduce

standard is constructed based on the (64, 2) extended RS the complexity of the permutators in the proposed single-mode

code [5], [29]. The following describes how to construct decoder to be presented in Section IV-D.

this kind of LDPC code based on the extended ( , 2) RS In [29], it was revealed that, except for the first row and the

code over

[8], [29]. Following the procedure given last column of the matrix, the remaining

in Section II-A, we can obtain the matrix,

, matrix is a circulant matrix for

as can be seen

and the matrix through

and from the example described in the last paragraph. In [29], the

, where the dimensions of authors applied this shift-structured property to a specific class

and are

and

, respectively. We can of RS-LDPC codes constructed based on extended RS codes

obtain a PCM of a length- RS-LDPC code by selecting in order to reduce the permutation complexity. Remember that

block columns from the matrix. The PCM of this kind of RS-LDPC codes can be constructed based on either shortened

RS-LDPC code can also be divided into submatrices for or extended RS codes. For a general RS-LDPC code, this shift-

which the dimensions of each submatrix are

. These structured property does not exist. For example, the RS-LDPC

submatrices can also be classified as Types I, II, and III. The code given in Section II-B does not have the shift-structured

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: MULTIMODE SHUFFLED ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURE

2795

property in the resultant matrix obtained by deleting the first row and the last column of the (or ) matrix.

III. RS-LDPC CODES USING SHUFFLED MPD

The PCM of an LDPC code can be represented by a Tanner graph [10]. If a 1 appears in the entry of , there is an edge connecting the th CN and the th VN in the Tanner graph. MPD can be performed based on this graph. Both the sum–product algorithm (SPA) [2] and the min-sum algorithm (MSA) [41], [42] can be used in the CN and VN operations. In [15], both bitwise and group-based shuffled MPD using SPA were proposed. A generic hardware architecture for an SPA-based shuffled MPD was presented in [17]. In [18], the authors proposed a shuffled MPD using a modified MSA [42] with reduced complexity. In [19], a shuffled MPD that can compensate for the performance loss encountered in [18] was proposed. In the following, we describe the group-based shuffled MPD proposed in [19], where the VNs (or, equivalently, the columns of the PCM) are divided into groups where the size of each group is VNs.

Fig. 7. Processing sequence for the (6, 32)-regular RS-LDPC code.

shows the processing order for the (6, 32)-regular LDPC code,

where one group consists of the columns in one block column,

i.e.,

. In the last iteration, i.e.,

, a hard decision

for each VN is made based on the sign of a posteriori proba-

bility (APP)

of VN , which is given by

A. Proposed Shuffled MPD

(14)

For each VN , the variable-to-check (V2C) message associ-

ated with CN , which is produced at the th iteration, is denoted

as

. Similarly, for each CN , the check-to-variable (C2V)

message associated with VN , which is produced at the th it-

eration, is denoted as

. At the th iteration, the operations

performed at the VNs and CNs for group are described as fol-

lows.

1) VN operations for group . For every VN in group ,

i.e.,

, compute

values

corresponding to each of its CN neighbors according to

It can be seen from (12) that many comparisons are needed

in order to obtain one value of

. Consequently, the

complexity of performing CN operations for LDPC codes

with large row weights, such as the high-rate codes given in

Table I, is high. To reduce the complexity of the comparison,

we can store an ordered set of ,

, for each row .

Let

be such an ordered set,

where

. In addition, we

also store the associated indices ,

.

Note that the values of

are produced during either the

(10) current or the previous iteration. With such an ordered set,

updating

is quite easy, since we only need to read

,

where is the channel (reliability) value of VN and

denotes the set of CNs connected to the VN .

2) CN operations for group . For every CN associated

with the VNs in group , i.e.,

,

, compute

values according to

, and to update . If

,

. If

,

. In order to calculate correctly, we

need to store the sign bit of each value. In addition, we

store

to reduce the complexity

in calculating . With and , we can calculate

according to (11). Hence, we do not need to store values.

We can reduce the storage space and comparison complexity

(11)

by only storing the first values of the ordered set, i.e.,

,

, since large values of contribute little

in the calculation of . This ordered set is denoted as ,

which is initialized with a large constant . The associated

index set

is denoted as . Initially,

(12) , where is the null set. The detailed decoding procedure is de-

scribed in Algorithm 1. After the first iteration, i.e., initial load,

the contents in are the absolute values of most unreliable

channel values associated with row . Then, we calculate

(13) values associated with the same group of columns at the CN-R

stage. Following that, values belonging to the same group

where is an offset constant and denotes the set of of columns are generated in the VN stage. Finally, the contents

VNs (bit nodes) connected to the CN .

of the ordered set and the index set are updated in the

CN and VN operations for group 0, group 1, , group

CN-S stage. The CN operations, specified by (11)–(13), are per-

are performed sequentially to complete one iteration. Fig. 7 formed in the CN-R and CN-S stages.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

Algorithm 1 Proposed shuffled MPD

1: Initialization:

2:

,

3:

,

4: for all

to do

5: for all

to

do

6:

7: if

then

8:

9: else

10:

{CN-R stage}

Fig. 8. BER of the (6, 32)-regular length-2048 RS-LDPC code in the additive

11:

Calculate

using

,

,,

,

N = p = 64 G =  = 32 white Gaussian noise channel using various decoding algorithms. For the shuf-

fled MPD,

and

are used.

and

,

12: end if

13: {VN stage}

14: Calculate

using (10),

15: if

then

16:

Make a hard decision based on the sign of

17: else

18:

{CN-S stage}

19:

20:

if

then

21:

Replace

in with

22:

Update by reordering the elements in

23:

else

! = 2 ! = 3 Fig. 9. Example showing the difference between

and

.

24: obtain
25: and

Compare and

with the elements in to

Discard the largest element in

to obtain

compared with using

. The reason is described as fol-

lows. It can be seen from (12) that the

value depends

on

V2C values. In addition, the contents of the ordered

set are continuously updated as the decoding progresses group

by group. Consequently, the contents of the ordered set are not

26:

end if

27:

Update

the same even within the same iteration. Although we only need

to read the first two minimum values of the ordered set, i.e., the

and

values, to calculate

as the TPMP using

28: end if 29: end for

MSA, these two minimum values are likely to be changed even

within the same iteration in the proposed shuffled MPD. In other

words, calculating

and

values, where VNs

30: end for

and belong to two distinct groups, respectively, is likely based

on distinct values of

and

. This is a remarkable dif-

B. BER Results

ference between the proposed shuffled MPD and the TPMP. The following example shows that using different values

From the description given in Section III-A, it can be seen that will result in different C2V values. Consider CN which con-

the value of determines the complexity of sorting (or compar- nects to VNs 1, 2, and 3. Suppose that, at the end of the

th

ison), memory access, and storage. Consequently, a small value iteration,

and

, as shown

of is desired. For example, the value adopted in [18] is two. in Fig. 9(a). Note that these two sets are ordered. In addition,

However, it can be seen from Fig. 8 that the shuffled MPD using suppose that group 1 involves only VN 1 and group 2 involves

results in a noticeable degradation in BER performance only VN 2. Following Algorithm 1, we can obtain

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: MULTIMODE SHUFFLED ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURE

2797

N = 64 (
; ) GF (2 ) 
 = 6 5 5 i = Fig. 10. Proposed decoder architecture using

for a

-regular RS-LDPC code constructed based on

and

. and ,

0; 1; . . . ; 5, denote permutators and inverse permutators, respectively. StoT will perform translation from sign-magnitude representation to two’s complement

representation. TtoS will perform the reverse translation.

at the CN-R stage of the th iteration for group 1. architecture is illustrated through the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC

Suppose that the magnitude of the V2C message obtained at the code constructed based on the (64, 2) extended RS code.

VN stage for VN 1 is 0.4, i.e.,

. Then, at the

CN-S stage, and become {0.2, 0.3, 0.4} and {2, 3, 1}, A. Decoder Architecture for a

-Regular RS-LDPC Code

respectively. At the CN-R stage of the th iteration for group 2, Fig. 10 shows the proposed decoder architecture using

we can obtain

. This procedure is also shown

for a

-regular RS-LDPC code constructed

in Fig. 9(a). The case of

is shown in Fig. 9(b). For the based on

and

, where the CN-R, VN, and CN-S

case of

, we obtain

, which is different stages shown in Algorithm 1 are performed in the C2V-mes-

to that obtained by using

. Consequently, using

sage calculator, VN processor (VNP), and V2C-message sorter,

will result in a different BER performance compared with using respectively. permutators

are inserted

.

between the C2V-message calculator and the VNP. Similarly,

It can also be seen that using

achieves almost the same inverse permutators

are inserted between

BER performance compared with using

. the VNP and the V2C-message sorter. The input size of each

Consequently, a good tradeoff between complexity and perfor- (inverse) permutator is

. The C2V-message calculator

mance is to use

. Also included in Fig. 8 are the BER re- consists of modules, each of which is responsible for the

sults when using TPMP together with an offset MSA [42]. The calculation of the C2V messages associated with one

shuffled MPD using

and a smaller number of iterations block row of the PCM of the RS-LDPC code and operate in

can achieve almost the same BER performance compared with parallel. Each module is followed by a size- permutator. The

the TPMP decoding. Also included in Table I are the BER re- VNP consists of VN units (VNUs), which can process a

sults for the eight RS-LDPC codes using the proposed shuffled group of columns (or VNs) in parallel. After the inverse

MPD with

,

, and

.

permutation, the ordered set and its associated index set

will be updated using the latest values. The ordered-

IV. SHUFFLED DECODER ARCHITECTURES FOR HIGH-RATE RS-LPDC CODES USING FLEXIBLE PERMUTATORS

and index-set registers in the V2C-message sorter are used to store the contents in the ordered and index sets, respectively. In the V2C-message sorter, a sign-bit memory and total-sign

Remember that RS-LPDC codes can be constructed based registers, which are not shown in Fig. 10, are used to store the

on either shortened or extended RS codes. In this section, we sign bits of the and the values, respectively.

present both multi- and single-mode decoder architectures In the decoder shown in Fig. 10, the decoding parallelism is

using the proposed permutators for high-rate RS-LDPC codes. 64, i.e.,

, since 64 VNUs are operated in parallel. To

The multimode decoder architecture is illustrated through double the decoding throughput, we can double the processing

the RS-LDPC codes given in Table I, which are constructed units in the VNP such that the VNP can process 128 columns

based on the shortened RS codes. The single-mode decoder (or the equivalent of two block columns) in parallel, i.e.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

. To meet the double-throughput requirement, the number of permutators and inverse permutators should also be doubled and the number of processing units in the C2V-message calculator and the V2C-message sorter should be increased accordingly. For the proposed architecture, the throughput in code bits can be calculated according to

(15)

where

and is the operating frequency. Ac-

cording to (15), the values for RS-LDPC codes are inde-

pendent of code length.

B. Multimode Functionality

It can be seen that the decoder architecture shown in Fig. 10 can be used as a multimode decoder if flexible size- permutators and flexible size- inverse permutators are used

N = 64 Fig. 11. Proposed early-termination architecture using

(
; ) GF (2 ) 
 = 6 -regular RS-LDPC code constructed based on

and

for a .

for

. As discussed in Section II, the sub-

matrices in the PCM of the

-regular RS-LDPC code can

be classified as Types I, II, and III. The permutator and

inverse permutator perform the permutations defined by

the Type-I and Type-II submatrices. We can use a single barrel

shifter plus one fixed interconnection to implement

.

The permutators ,

, and inverse permutators

,

, perform the permutations defined by the

Type-II and Type-III submatrices. Using the architecture shown

in Fig. 4(b), we need two barrel shifters for each of and ,

. In addition, we need

to control

each barrel shifter. Consequently, 22 barrel shifters with a total

of

control bits are used in the proposed decoder

shown in Fig. 10.

It is known that the Benes network [43] is an efficient

approach to realizing arbitrary permutations. Consequently,

we compare the proposed permutator design with the Benes

network. A Benes network consists of

switches, where the size of each is 2 2. A 1-bit signal is

needed to control each 2 2 switch. Consequently, a total

of

control bits must be computed. We

now investigate the complexity of using these two flexible

permutator designs in the proposed multimode decoder based

on a word length of 5 bits. For the design based on the Benes

network, 420 000 gates and 4224 control bits are required. For

the proposed design, 150 000 gates and 132 control bits are

needed. Consequently, the proposed permutator is an efficient

design for the proposed multimode decoder architecture.

A multimode decoder for the RS-LDPC codes specified in

Table I can be designed by using the architecture shown in

Fig. 10. We need to use the storage space such that the require-

ments for the (3968, 3643) code with

and

can be

met. Since these eight RS-LDPC codes are constructed based

on the same field

, the proposed permutator design

C. Early-Termination Architecture

Early termination can be used to avoid unnecessary decoding

processes and hence increase decoding throughput, since a ma-

jority of the codewords will become correct before the number

of iterations reaches the maximum. If all the checksum values

for all the parity-check equations of the PCM are zero for a

decoded codeword, then the decoded codeword is a valid code-

word. Consequently, we can terminate the decoding process if

this condition is satisfied. The checksum for the th parity-check

equation can be calculated by summing up [over

] all the

signs (hard decisions) of the APP values of the VNs connecting

to CN . Fig. 11 shows the proposed early-termination architec-

ture, which is compatible with the decoder architecture shown

in Fig. 10. In this architecture, 1-bit registers are used to store

the previously decoded codeword and 1-bit registers are used

to store the checksum values, where these registers are ini-

tialized with zeros. In addition, XOR gates are used to perform

the summation over

. The checksum values are contin-

uously updated as the decoding progresses group by group. In

other words, the checksum values are updated immediately after

obtaining the APP values during the VN stage. In order to up-

date the checksum values efficiently, the difference between the

hard decisions of the APP values produced during the current

and previous iterations is used. It can be seen from Fig. 11 that

the checksum values can be updated, only after the difference in

the hard decisions of these APP values are inversely permutated.

Consequently, we need six additional size-64 one-bit inverse

permutators, when

. A distinct feature of the proposed

method is that early termination does not necessarily occur at

the end of a complete iteration. The complexity of the proposed

early termination for the proposed multimode decoders using

and

are 33 000 gates and 49 000 gates,

respectively.

can be used if proper shift indices for the row and column barrel shifters are provided. Using the architecture shown in D. Architecture for a Single-Mode (2048, 1723) Decoder

Fig. 10 to decode a code where

, some circuits in the As described in Section II-D, the (6, 32)-regular (2048, 1723)

VNP, V2C-message sorter, and C2V-message calculator are RS-LDPC code adopted in the 802.3an standard is constructed

bypassed, and hence, additional MUXs are used to bypass these based on the (64, 2) extended RS code. We will now consider the

circuits.

use of the architecture shown in Fig. 10 to implement a single-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: MULTIMODE SHUFFLED ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURE
TABLE II COMPLEXITY WHEN USING DIFFERENT PERMUTATOR DESIGNS IN THE
PROPOSED SINGLE-MODE DECODER WITH 4-BIT WORD LENGTH

2799
TABLE III IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR DESIGNS A, B, AND C

mode decoder for this kind of RS-LDPC code when

.

Since the row shift indices of Type-III submatrices belonging

to the same block row are the same for this kind of RS-LDPC

code, the permutation defined by the

and matrices

can be integrated and implemented through one routing network

with fixed interconnections. Consequently, each permutator

and each inverse permutator in Fig. 10 can be implemented

by using one barrel shifter plus one routing network with fixed

interconnections. Consequently, 12 barrel shifters are used in

the single-mode decoder. In addition, the routing networks with

fixed interconnections for different permutators are generally

different.

Since a MUX-based permutator design is very efficient for the

horizontally scheduled decoder architecture presented in [28],

we will now consider the use of the MUX-based design in the

vertically scheduled decoder shown in Fig. 10. For the MUX-

based decoder using

, we can use 64 32-to-1 MUXs

and 64 1-to-32 demultiplexers to implement the permutator

and inverse permutator , respectively, for

.

The complexity of using the proposed permutator design and

the MUX-based design in the proposed single-mode decoder

based on a word length of 4 bits is given in Table II, where both

and

are considered. From this table, it can

be seen that the complexity of the proposed permutator design

Synthesis results. The number of equivalent NAND gates. The ordered- and index-set registers are included. z Postlayout estimation for the (6, 32)-regular LDPC code.

ever, the RS-LDPC code adopted in the 802.3an standard is con-

structed based on the (64, 2) extended RS code using discontin-

uous column selection [5], [29] and is used for high-throughput

applications. The authors in [29] mentioned that their -par-

allel,

, decoder architecture cannot be applied to this

kind of RS-LDPC code. In contrast, using the proposed per-

mutators with proper shift indices, the proposed shuffled itera-

tive decoder can be applied to this kind of RS-LDPC code, even

when

.

is lower than that of the MUX-based design in the proposed

vertically scheduled single-mode decoder when

.

V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

E. Comparison With a TPMP-Based Decoder

A. Implementation Results Based on the proposed architecture, we have implemented

In [29], the authors proposed a vertically scheduled TPMP- two multimode decoders, which are respectively called Design

based decoder for a special class of RS-LDPC codes constructed A

and Design B

, using a generic

based on the extended RS codes. The proposed shuffled iter- 90-nm CMOS process with nine metal layers and a core voltage

ative decoder can reduce the number of iterations required to of 1.0 V for the eight codes given in Table I. The decoders were

achieve the same BER performance compared with the TPMP- synthesized using Synopsys Design Compiler and placed and

based decoder presented in [29], although both decoders use routed using SOC Encounter. The power estimates are obtained

vertical scheduling. Since the RS-LDPC code adopted in [29] using the power analysis tool Synopsys PrimeTime PX. The

is constructed based on the extended RS code using continuous throughput values are estimated based on an

column selection, the complexity of permutation networks can and the worst case condition. Table III summarizes the imple-

be minimized by utilizing the shift-structured property inherent mentation results for both designs, where the number of quanti-

in this kind of RS-LDPC code, as described in Section II-D. zation bits, including one sign bit, used for the channel values,

Consequently, the decoder can achieve low complexity, which C2V messages, and V2C messages are the same and are equal

can be observed from the synthesis results given in [29]. How- to 5. Fig. 12 shows the layout plot of Design A.

ever, the decoder architecture presented in [29] cannot be ap- Fig. 13 shows the BER results for the proposed decoder using

plied to RS-LDPC codes, which do not have the shift-structured

for the (6, 32)-regular (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code,

property. Compared with the architecture presented in [29], the in which both fixed- and floating-point results are given. In order

proposed RS-LDPC decoder architecture is more general, since to increase the throughput, a pipeline architecture is adopted

the proposed decoder architecture can be applied to RS-LDPC in our hardware implementation. In addition, the processing of

codes constructed based on either shortened or extended RS consecutive groups is overlapped, and the processing of con-

codes, even without the shift-structured property.

secutive iterations is also overlapped in order to reduce pipeline

In order to achieve a high decoding throughput for the (2048, bubbles. Consequently, the throughput of Designs A and B can

1723) code, e.g., 10 Gbits/s, the four-parallel RS-LDPC decoder be calculated according to (15). For the fixed-point results, the

architecture presented in [29] should be used. The decoding par- cases of both considering the overlap-processing effect in our

allelism of the four-parallel decoder is

. How- hardware implementation and of not considering this effect are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010
TABLE IV RESULTS OF RS-LDPC DECODERS WITHOUT EARLY TERMINATION

Fig. 12. Layout plot for Design A. CN processor consists of a C2V-message calculator and a V2C-message sorter.

10 To achieve a BER of

based on fixed-point results.

The number of iterations used in BER evaluation is not specified.

N = 128 Fig. 13. BER of the (6, 32)-regular (2048, 1723) code using

and

N = 8. (FLO) Floating-point BER. (FIX) Fixed-point BER considering only

quantization effect. (FIX-HW) Fixed-point BER considering the effect of quan-

tization and overlap processing.

Based on the floating-point results, the loss of the split-16 and the split-2

BER = 10 decoders are 0.21 and 0.07 dB at

compared with TPMP.

For the (6, 32)-regular code.

Area (in square millimeters) scaled to the 90-nm process. For the decoders

using a 65-nm (130-nm) process, the areas scaled to a 90-nm process, i.e.,

investigated. Remember that, in the shuffled MPD, the V2C messages produced during the current iteration can be used to calculate the C2V message during the same iteration. Specifi-

scaled areas, are calculated by using a normalization factor of 2 (0.5).
The postprocessor is included and occupies 13.7% of the total area. x Postlayout estimation for the (6, 32)-regular LDPC code.

cally, according to (12), we can use the

values, where

, and

culate

, where

values, where

, to cal- B. Comparison With Other Single-Mode RS-LDPC Decoders , when pro-

cessing group . However, in hardware implementation, due Table IV compares this work (Design A) with the works pre-

to the overlap processing, some of the

values, where sented in [21] and [26]–[28]. Since a hard-decision decoding

, are not available, and we can only use

algorithm was adopted in [25] and the results of the BER, area,

values, where

, which are produced at the

th and power consumption are not given in [29], the results of the

iteration, to calculate

, where

. decoders presented in [25] and [29] are not included. In order to

Consequently, the overlap processing will result in a degrada- alleviate routing complexity for fully parallel LDPC decoders,

tion in the BER performance. It can be seen from Fig. 13 that the authors in [21] and [26] proposed a bit-serial architecture

the loss due to the quantization is about 0.05 dB and the addi- and a split-row architecture, respectively. Using the architecture

tional loss due to the overlap-processing effect is minor when presented in [26], the decoder utilization can be increased, but at

. We can avoid the additional BER loss if pipeline the cost of BER degradation. In [27], a register-based partially

bubbles instead of the overlap processing were used to resolve parallel decoding scheme, called SMP, was proposed. In [28],

the data-dependence problem. However, using pipeline bubbles a TPMP-based decoder, which is concatenated with a postpro-

will significantly lower the decoding throughput and, hence, is cessor to improve the error floor, was presented.

not considered in this paper. Similar conclusions can be made Since different algorithms are adopted in the RS-LDPC de-

for the decoder using

.

coders shown in Table IV, the number of iterations used in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: MULTIMODE SHUFFLED ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURE

2801

throughput calculation should be based on the same BER per-

formance instead of the same number of iterations. Since only

the authors in [27] reported the error-floor performance of their

decoder, the number of iterations used to evaluate the decoding

throughput for the decoders shown in Table IV is based on the

same BER performance of . Although the BER results are

given in [28], the authors did not specify the number of iterations

used in the BER evaluation. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that the

proposed shuffled MPD using

and

can achieve

almost the same BER compared with the TPMP decoding using

. Consequently, we use

and

in the

throughput calculation for the decoder in [28] and Design A, re-

spectively. The values of energy per bit and throughput-to-area

ratio (TAR) [44] are also included in Table IV, where the TAR

value is calculated according to TAR = Throughput in megabits

per second / Scaled area in square millimeters.

Compared with the high-throughput decoders presented

TABLE V COMPARISON OF DECODERS USING EARLY TERMINATION
Area (in square millimeters) scaled to the 90-nm process. For the rate-0.84 (6, 32)-regular RS-LDPC code. The decoders are operated
at E =N = 5:5 dB.
Early-termination circuits are included. TABLE VI
IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF MULTIMODE LDPC DECODERS

in [21], [25]–[29], the most distinct feature of the proposed decoder is the multimode ability. The proposed multimode decoder for high-rate RS-LDPC codes can be used for applica-

tions with relatively low noise channels if flexible rate selection and error-correcting capability are desired. Since only a single (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code constructed based on the extended

RS code using discontinuous column selection is adopted in the standard, we implemented a single-mode decoder, called Design C, for the code. Based on the architecture described

in Section IV-D, each (inverse) permutator in the single-mode decoder can be implemented via a barrel shifter. In order to meet the throughput requirements (6.67 Gb/s) of the IEEE

802.3an standard [5], [27], we adopted a decoding parallelism

of

. Following the high-throughput decoders pre-

sented in [21] and [28], 4-bit quantization is used in Design C

to mitigate the increase in the implementation complexity of a high-parallelism decoder. The error performance when using

4-bit quantization will have a loss of 0.1 dB at a BER of

compared with using 5-bit quantization. The implementation results of Design C are also included in Table III. This decoder achieves a throughput value near 10 Gb/s and has the smallest

Area (in square millimeters) scaled to the 90-nm process. x Postlayout estimation for the (6, 32)-regular LDPC code.

scaled area (6.14 ) compared with the single-mode decoders shown in Table IV. In order to achieve a better error floor, postprocessing techniques, such as the one proposed in [28], can be applied to Design C.
For some applications such as 802.3an applications, the decoder is usually operated in the high-SNR region. For this region, early termination is usually adopted in order to significantly increase throughput. We have integrated Design A instead of Design C with the early-termination technique presented in Section IV-C in order to achieve the desired throughput of 6.67 Gb/s with lower decoder complexity. Using this technique, the decoder area will be increased by about 5%. Table V compares Design A with the decoder presented in [28] at an SNR level of 5.5 dB when early termination is implemented in both decoders and the maximum number of iterations is eight. For the decoder given in [28], the average number of iterations is 2.5. For the proposed shuffled iterative decoder, the average number of iterations is 2.25, where the first iteration is used for initial load and the latency of the proposed early-termination scheme is minor. The comparison of the decoders presented in [21] and [26] when early termination is enabled is not included

in Table V, since the associated throughput results were not reported in [21] and [26]. It can be seen from Table V that the 4-bit single-mode decoder in [28] using a more advanced process and a larger scaled area can achieve a higher throughput of 47.7 Gb/s, while the proposed 5-bit multimode decoder (Design A) can meet the throughput requirements (6.67 Gb/s) of the IEEE 802.3an standard using a smaller scaled area.
If the SNR is higher, e.g., 6.5 dB, the rate-0.93 code supported by the proposed decoder (Design A) can be adopted. Using early termination, Design A in rate-0.93 mode can still achieve a throughput of 17.2 Gb/s. Compared with the rate-0.84 mode, the code rate can be increased by about 11% when using Design A to support the rate-0.93 code. This is one of the remarkable advantages of the proposed decoder when the channel SNR is high enough.
C. Comparison With Other Multimode Decoders
In the literature, there are many multimode LDPC decoders [32]–[35], [45], [46] for wireless applications such as DVB-S2, IEEE 802.16e, and IEEE 802.11n. Table VI shows the synthesis

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2010

results presented in [45] and the measurement results presented

in [46] for the LDPC codes specified in these standards. These

multimode decoders are based on memory-shared partially par-

allel architecture. Compared with the multimode decoders pre-

sented in [45] and [46], the proposed multimode decoder (De-

sign B) provides fewer modes but achieves a higher throughput.

It can be seen from Tables IV and VI that the register-based

fully parallel architecture achieves the highest throughput, but

does not provide multimode functionality. The memory-based

partially parallel architecture can provide many modes ( ),

but the throughput achieved is about 1 Gbit/s. Our partially par-

allel architecture using a combination of memory and registers

achieves both multimode and higher throughput ( Gbit/s)

requirements. Although the proposed design examples support

only high-rate codes, in fact, the proposed decoder architecture

shown in Fig. 10 can support RS-LDPC codes constructed using

and

(or

), as described in Section IV-B. In

order to accommodate channels with lower SNR such as wire-

less channels, a code with a lower rate is required. Based on this

condition, three RS-LDPC codes with

, (6, 14),

and (6, 20) and rates 0.568, 0.646, and 0.748, respectively, were

constructed. The code rates of these three codes are close to 0.5,

0.67, and 0.75, which are the rates adopted by the WiMAX stan-

dard.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented an efficient permutator design which can be used in both multi- and single-mode decoders for RS-LDPC codes constructed based on either shortened or extended RS codes. Using the proposed permutators and the improved shuffled MPD, we have presented a partially parallel decoder architecture and implemented two multimode decoders and a single-mode (2048, 1723) decoder in a 90-nm process based on this architecture. Implementation results from postlayout simulation show that the multimode decoders achieve multigigabit-per-second throughput. In addition, the single-mode decoder, which only occupies an area of 6.14 , can achieve a throughput value near 10 Gbits/s. An early-termination architecture for the proposed decoders has also been introduced in order to significantly increase the decoding throughput at high SNR levels.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] A. Selvarathinam, E. Kim, and G. Choi, “Low-density parity-check decoder architecture for high-throughput optical fiber channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Des., Oct. 2003, pp. 520–525.
[4] Y. Huo, Q. Peng, and H. Shao, “The application of high-rate LDPC codes in image transmission over wireless channel,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. Circuits Syst., Jun. 2006, vol. 1, pp. 62–65.
[5] 10 GBASE-T Task Force, IEEE P802.3an, 2006 [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/3/an
[6] IEEE 802.16e WiMAX Standard, IEEE P802.16e-2005, Oct. 2005. [7] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-
density parity-check codes constructed based on Reed–Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003. [8] G. Liva, S. Song, L. Lan, Y. Zhang, S. Lin, and W. E. Ryan, “Design of LDPC codes: A survey and new results,” J. Commun. Softw. Syst., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 191–211, Sep. 2006.

[9] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic´, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, “Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, Nov. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[10] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[11] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[12] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[13] M. Rovini, F. Rossi, P. Ciao, N. L’lnsalata, and L. Fanucci, “Layered decoding of non-layered LDPC codes,” in Proc. Euromicro Conf. Digit. Syst. Des., Aug. 2006, pp. 537–544.
[14] Y.-L. Ueng and C.-C. Cheng, “A fast-convergence decoding method and memory-efficient VLSI decoder architecture for irregular LDPC codes in the IEEE 802.16e standards,” in Proc. IEEE Semiannu. Veh. Technol. Conf., Oct. 2007, pp. 1255–1259.
[15] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[16] J. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Fossorier, and J. S. Yedidia, “Iterative decoding with replicas,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1644–1663, May 2007.
[17] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, J. Toush, and J. Danger, “Generic description and synthesis of LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2084–2091, Nov. 2007.
[18] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, and Q. Jia, “Efficient decoder design for high-throughput LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst., Dec. 2008, pp. 1640–1643.
[19] Y. L. Ueng, C. J. Yang, and C. J. Chen, “A shuffled message-passing decoding method for memory-based LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2009, pp. 892–895.
[20] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[21] A. Darabiha, A. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[22] T. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. C. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, S. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, P. Goud, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A scalable LDPC decoder ASIC architecture with bit-serial message exchange,” Integration, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 385–398, May 2008.
[23] S. S. Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Fully parallel stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5692–5703, Nov. 2008.
[24] N. Onizawa, T. Hanyu, and V. C. Gaudet, “Design of high-throughput fully parallel LDPC decoders based on wire partitioning,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 482–489, Mar. 2010.
[25] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Block-interlaced LDPC decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74–78, Jan. 2008.
[26] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “Multi-split-row threshold decoding implementations for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2009, pp. 2449–2452.
[27] L. Liu and C.-J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
[28] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic´, “A 47 Gb/s LDPC decoder with improved low error rate performance,” in Proc. IEEE VLSI Circuits Symp., Kyoto, Japan, Jun. 2009, pp. 286–287.
[29] J. Sha, J. Lin, Z. Wang, L. Li, and M. Gao, “Decoder design for RS-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 724–728, Sep. 2009.
[30] J. Sha, Z. Wang, M. Gao, and L. Li, “Multi-Gb/s LDPC code design and implementation,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 262–268, Feb. 2009.
[31] H. Zhong, W. Xu, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Area-efficient min-sum decoder design for high-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117–4122, Dec. 2007.
[32] K. K. Gunnam, G. S. Choi, M. B. Yeary, and M. Atiquzzaman, “VLSI architectures for layered decoding for irregular LDPC codes of WiMAX,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2007, pp. 4542–4547.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: MULTIMODE SHUFFLED ITERATIVE DECODER ARCHITECTURE

[33] T. Brack, M. Alles, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core

for WiMAX 802.16e LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Annu. Int.

Symp. PIMRC, Helsinki, Finland, Sep. 2006, pp. 1–5.

[34] M. Alles, T. Vogt, and N. Wehn, “FlexiChaP: A reconfigurable ASIP

for convolutional, turbo, and LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp.

Turbo Codes Related Topics, Sep. 2008, pp. 84–89.

[35] T. C. Kuo and A. N. Willson, “Enhanced delta-based layered decoding

of WiMAX QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2008, pp.

524–527.

[36] M. Karkooti, P. Radosavljevic, and J. R. Cavllaro, “Configurable, high

throughput, irregular LDPC decoder architecture: Tradeoff analysis

and implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Appl.-Specific Syst., Archit.

Process., Sep. 2006, pp. 360–367.

[37] J. Tang, T. Bhatt, V. Sundaramurthy, and K. K. Parhi, “Reconfigurable

shuffle network design in LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Appl.-Specific

Syst., Architect. Process., Sep. 2006, pp. 81–86.

[38] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Area efficient controller design of barrel

shifters for reconfigurable LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS,

May 2008, pp. 240–243.

[39] C. H. Liu, C. C. Lin, H. C. Chang, C. Y. Lee, and Y. Hsu, “Multi-mode

message passing switch networks applied for QC-LDPC decoder,” in

Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2008, pp. 752–755.

[40] J. Lin, Z. Wang, L. Li, J. Sha, and M. Gao, “Efficient shuffle network ar-

chitecture and application for WiMAX LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans.

Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 215–219, Mar. 2009.

[41] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity itera-

tive decoding of low-density parity-check codes based on belief propa-

gation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.

[42] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved

BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,

vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.

[43] V. E. Benes, “Optimal rearrangeable multistage connecting networks,”

Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1641–1656, Jul. 1964.

[44] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible

LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no.

6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.

[45] T. Brack, M. Alles, T. Lehnigk-Emden, N. E. L’Insalata, F. Rossi, and

M. Rovini, “Low complexity LDPC code decoders for next generation

mm standards,” in Proc. DATE, Apr. 2007, pp. 331–336.

[46] X. Y. Shih, C. Z. Zhan, C. H. Lin, and A. Y. Wu, “An 8.29

52

m mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile WiMAX system in
0.13  CMOS process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3,

pp. 672–683, Mar. 2008.

tems.

Yeong-Luh Ueng received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2001.
From 2001 to 2005, he was with a private communication technology company, where he focused on the design and development of various wireless chips. Since December 2005, he has been a member of the faculty of the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering. His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and communication ICs.

2803
Chung-Jay Yang received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan, in 2002 and the M.S. degree in communication engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2004. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
From 2004 to 2008, he was with Realtek Semiconductor Corporation. His research interests include VLSI designs for channel coding and storage sys-
Kuan-Chieh Wang received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2007 and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2009.
He is currently a Senior Engineer with Macronix International Company, Ltd., Hsinchu. His research interests include error control coding and related VLSI designs.
Chun-Jung Chen received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Chang Gung University, Guishan, Taiwan, in 2005 and the M.S. degree from the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2009.
He is currently a Senior Engineer with MStar Semiconductor, Inc. His research interests include error control coding and wireless communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:11:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

