A Novel Low Complexity LDPC Encoder Based On Optimized RU Algorithm With Backtracking

Xiangran Sun
Information Engineering School Communication University of China
Beijing, China sunxr@cuc.edu.cn

=hibin =eng, =hanxin <ang
Engineering Research Center of Digital Audio & Video, Ministry of Education
Communication University of China Beijing, China

Abstract—We present a low-complexity high-efficienc\ LDPC encoder, based on classic method of Richardson and Urbanke with a novel backtracking algorithm, which we propose to substitute greedy algorithm for approximate triangulation with sparse matrix of LDPC codes. For the LDPC code in CMMB, for example, the complexity of encoding is reduced effectively, and an implementation of LDPC encoder for two different code rate (1/2 and 3/4) on Altera Stratix II EP1S180F102014 can achieve encoding rate 3 Mbps and 6 Mbps.
Keywords-LDPC; encoder; backtracking; CMMB
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first presented by Gallager [1] in 1962. In 1996, D. MacKay and R. M. Neal [2] rediscovered their powerful performance as error correction coding Presently LDPC codes have been widely used on magnetic record, wireless communication and other zones. For instance, they were used as channel coding in DVBS2, IEEE 802.11n/16e, DMB-TH, DTTB, and CMMB [3], etc.
Although parity-check matrix H of LDPC codes is always very sparse, its corresponding generation matrix G is mostly dense, meaning quadratic complexity to code length with direct generation matrix encoding, which is nearly infeasible for hardware implementation. One of encoding methods with linear complexity was proposed by Richardson and Urbanke (named as RU algorithm or RU method) [4]. In [4], Richardson and Urbanke show that linear time encoding is achievable through careful linear manipulation of LDPC codes. They also present methods based on greedy algorithm to preprocess the parity-check matrix H and a set of matrix operations to perform the actual encoding. Another way is introduced by Neal [5], he used LU decomposition to free the encoding process of dense inverse operation, however, it is not easy to find a good sparse LU decomposition for arbitrary H matrices, and especially some matrices can not be decomposed. Other various encoding methods include MacKay’s lower triangular method [6], Haley’s iterative encoding method [7], quasi-cyclic method [8] are all aiming at LDPC codes with specific constructions, not adapted for arbitrary LDPC codes.
In this paper, based on RU method, we present a general optimized algorithm named backtracking algorithm to reduce encoding complexity and improve encoding efficiency. We

also implement a novel LDPC encoder based on our algorithm for CMMB as example. To reduce encoding complexity, we use backtracking algorithm instead of greedy algorithm to bring the given matrix into the approximate lower triangular (ALT) matrix. To improve encoding efficiency, we have designed the multi-staged pipeline architecture for the hardware encoder.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, we proposed our LDPC encoder based on optimized RU method for CMMB. Next, we describe our novel backtracking algorithm to preprocess the given matrix in section III. In section IV, we show our hardware encoder architecture. Last section presented remarks and conclusions.
II. LDPC ENCODER
A. General LDPC Encoder for CMMB LDPC code in CMMB is a kind of High-Structured (HS)
code, which is characterized by the parity-check matrix H which has the regular quasi-cyclic structure.
The principle of LDPC encoding with the matrix H is to
solve parity equations:

HcT = 0T

(1)

{ } Where c= c0, c1,"c9215 is encoded codeword, which is { } consisted of information bit vector s= s0, s1,"sK-1 and { } parity code vector p= p0, p1," p9215-K .
According to CMMB standard, information bits and parity bits are reordered by codeword bits mapping vector (named IDX table) in as follows:

cCOL_ORDER(i)

=

­ ® ¯

si+

pi
K -9216

0 ≤ i ≤ 9215 − K 9216 − K ≤ i ≤ 9215

(2)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a7d8e7d4o-n3/J1u0ne/$2246,2.00026©a2t 0031:013I:E57EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Here c represents outputting encoded codeword, COL_ORDER(i) is codeword bits mapping vector, K is LDPC code information sequence length. K =4608 bits for
1/2 code rate, 6912 bits for 3/4 code rate.
Because the outputting encoded codeword is not systematic, it is not suitable for encoder implementDWion.
Suppose that csys is the systematic form of encoded code,
[ ] meaning csys = p s , TIDX is the permutation matrix
corresponding to codeword bits mapping vector, and the weight of rows or the weight of columns are one, thus
c=csysTIDX .
Substituting it into (1) we can get

( ) HTIDXT

cT sys

=

0T

.

(3)

HTRI =Ln...L2L1HPR1R2...Rm

(6)

= LNHPRM

where LN =Ln...L2L1 denotes that the matrix HP is multiplied by n permutation matrices on its left which is equal to realign the rows. Similarly, RM =R1R2...Rm denotes that the matrix is multiplied by m permutation matrices on its right
which is equal to realign the columns.
Form (6) and (4), we have

L-N1

HTRI

R

-1 M

p

T

=-HS

sT

.

(7)

If define

pRT

=R

-1 M

p

T

and

HSL =LNHS , equation (7) is equal

to:

We define HIDX to be the systematic form of parity-check matrix H as HIDX =HTITDX . HIDX is divided into two parts,
HP and HS , respectively corresponding to parity bits p and information bits s . Then (3) became

HTRI pRT = − HSLsT .

(8)

HP pT +HSsT =0T .

(4)

We get the general encoding method as follow:

pT

=-H

H -1
PS

s

T

.

(5)

H and HIDX both are very sparse, so HP separated from

H IDX

is

still

sparse.

But

H

−1 P

is

a

dense

matrix.

It

shall

consume quite a number of storages and logical resources. In

order to improve encoding efficiency, we use optimized RU

method to implement LDPC encoder for CMMB.

B. LDPC Encoder Based on Optimized RU Method
In the classical RU encoding method, the preprocessing is
performed on the parity-check matrix H . However, in the
paper, we design optimized RU method for CMMB which only
processes the matrix HP corresponding to parity code and
brings it into an ALT form by performing row and column permutations in preprocessing. It can simplify the associated computational processes dramatically. We execute the preprocessing in software since it needs to be performed only once for the given matrix. So it does not cost the encoding time and resource of the actual hardware encoder.
Let HTRI be the ALT matrix which comes from HP by
performing row and column permutations, given by following

Figure 1. The matrix Hp in ALT form.
HTRI is in ALT form indicated in Figure 1, so we bring the
matrix in the form

HTRI

=

ªA «¬B

Tº C »¼

(9)

where A is (j - g) × g , B is g × g , C is g × (j - g) , and T is (j - g) × (j - g) , where g is the gap of the approximate
triangular matrix.
Further all the matrices are sparse. T is lower triangular
matrix with ones along the diagonal.

Substituting

(9),

pR =[p1 p2 ]

and

HSL

=

ªHS1 º

¬«HS2

» ¼

into

(8),

ª I 0º

multiplying ¬«-CT-1

I

» ¼

from

the

left and

right

of

(8),

we

get

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:13:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[ ] ª A T º
«¬-CT-1A+B 0¼»

p1

p2

T

=

−

ª

H S1

«¬ -CT-1HS1 +HS2

º » ¼

sT

(10)

where p1 and p2 combined denote the parity part, p1 has length g , and p2 has length ( j - g) .
Equation (11) and (12) is naturally driven by () namely,

( ) ( ) −CT-1A+B p1T = CT-1HS1 − HS2 sT . (11)

Ap1T +Tp2T = − HS1sT .

(12)

( ) Let ĭ = −CT-1A + B and M = ĭ−1 CT-1HS1 − HS2 ,
then from (11) we can draw that

p1T = MsT .

(13)

Substitute (13) into (12), we get

( ) p2T = − T-1 HS1sT +Ap1T .

(14)

Then p1 can be calculated by matrix-vector multiplication

and p2 by forward-substitution. Once they are obtained, we

[ ] can get pT =RM

p1

p2

T
.

Finally,

the

outputting

encoded

codeword c is determined by csys which consisted of p and s.

Figure 2. LDPC encoding software and hardware framework.
The basic framework of our encoder is shown in Figure 2. Our approach for LDPC encoding consists of two steps: preprocessing and hardware encoding. First, the original parity-
check matrix H is preprocessed with the optimized RU
method to generate the matrices needed by the hardware encoder. This preprocessing step is implemented in software
and needs to be performed once for the given matrix H . The
encoder itself is implemented in hardware to encode the message blocks and output the encoded codeword.

III. APPROXIMATE LOWER TRIANGULATION VIA BACKTRACKING ALGORITHM
The key of RU method is to produce an ALT matrix with as small a gap as possible. Richardson and Urbanke introduced greedy algorithm to perform row and column permutations with the given matrix. Greedy algorithms mostly (but not always) fail to find the globally optimal solution, because they usually do not operate exhaustively on all the data. They can make commitments to certain choices too early which prevent them from finding the best overall solution later. So we presents novel backtracking algorithm instead of greedy algorithm to implement triangulation. Furthermore our algorithm is general algorithm for regular and irregular LDPC codes except for LDPC code in CMMB. Simulation results for CMMB show that the gap of ALT matrix can be reduced greatly by applying the new algorithm.
We are now ready to state backtracking algorithm:
1) Find the rows of degree one in HP then select the rows to form the set θ . If θ is empty, remove the left most column of HP and repeat step 1 with the modified matrix HP .
2) Take each “1” in θ as node. For each node compute the
degree sum of all rows in the residual matrix by removing the
row and column corresponding to the node from θ .Then we
take the nodes corresponding to minimum sum as existencenodes, others as death-nodes. Select one of existence-nodes as start node which is also expansion-node, then remove the row and column corresponding to start node㧘the residual matrix is
HP '.
According to the above principle, choose new nodes of next
stage in HP ' , then take one of new existence-nodes as
expansion-node. If it is available that the current expansionnode can move to a new node, the new node will become existence-node and new expansion-node, and the old expansion-node is existence-node as before. If not, the current expansion-node will become death-node, then record the rank of the residual matrix.
While we resume the current residual matrix to the postremoved form and process other existence-node which last time be performed (backtracking), the existence-node become a new expansion-node. As all existence-nodes have been backtracked, the search process is finished. After all the ranks recorded above are compared, we get the solution corresponding to the minimum rank and note all the path nodes of the solution. Because a constraint condition is the minimum degree sum is selected, the number of existence-nodes is small every time. So backtracking time is tolerable.
3) According to the above path nodes performing row and column permutation, bring the matrix into ALT form.
4) Modify HP again by removing the triangular part. The
residual matrix is empty, the algorithm terminates. Otherwise,
remove a column of HP and go to step 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:13:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 3. 2YHUYLHZ of our hardware encoder architecture.

For 1/2 and 3/4 code rate, we triangulate the given matrices according to classic greedy algorithm and our backtracking algorithm. The gaps are listed in Table I. From Table I we can see that the new algorithm offers smaller gaps than greedy algorithm, so encoding complexity is reduced.

TABLE I.

TABLE TYPE STYLES

gap

rate

classic greedy algorithm

novel backtracking algorithm

1/2

302

182

3/4

60

42

IV. LDPC ENCODER DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

A. LDPC Encoder Architecture
The hardware encoder is to compute the parity-check bits
consisted of two parts p1 and p2 , according to equation (13)
and (14). The main operations performed in the encoder are matrix-vector multiplication (MVM), forward-substitution (FS), vector addition (VA) and codeword generation (CWG). Codeword generation implements the bit permutations according to the standard. An overview of our hardware encoder architecture is shown in Figure 3. The matrices required by the operations is accomplished in the preprocessing step and stored in the hardware. It is very considerate that the operations are divided into three stages which run in parallel and double buffering is used between the stages, in order to minimize the overall latency, idle times and memory requirement [9].
In stage 1, we simply write the message block into buffers. In stage 2, we perform the operations of equation (13) and (14), the results are also buffered before they are fed to the next stage. In stage 3, we perform forward-substitution and codeword generation.

B. Implementation results
Our LDPC encoder is programmed in Verilog HDL and implemented on Stratix II EP1S180F102014 device of Altera. The design takes 4% the logic resource and 60% the memory resource of the device.

Encoder maximum work frequency is 200.23 MHz, under this frequency, system pure encoding rate can achieve 34.12 Mbps (1/2 code rate) and 69.23 Mbps (3/4 code rate), which is sufficient for CMMB standard.
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented the software and hardware design of a LDPC encoder based on optimized RU method with backtracking algorithm, which has a low-complexity and highefficiency character. Whole design has been applied to the implementation of the LDPC encoder for CMMB. Ongoing and future work includes the optimization of software algorithm and the reduction of the hardware resource.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of lowdensity parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett, vol. 32, 1996, pp. 1645.
[3] Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting (P. R. China) Part 1: Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Broadcasting Channel
[4] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke. “Efficient encoding of low-density paritycheck codes. IEEE Trans,” on Inform. Theory, 2001, 47:638-656
[5] R. M. Neal, “Sparse matrix methods and probabilistic algorithm,” IMA Program On Codes, Systems, and Graphic Models, 1999.
[6] D. J. C. Mackay, S. T. Wilson, M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. on Communications, 1999, 47:1449-1454.
[7] D. Haley, A. Grant, J. Buetefer, “Iterative encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” in Australian Communication Theory Workshop, 2002, Feb.
[8] S. J. Johnson, S. R. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity,” IEEE Comm. Lett., Vol. 7, Feb. 2003, 79-81.
[9] Dong-U Lee, Wayne Luk, Connie Wang, Christopher Jones, Michael Smith, John Villasenor, "A Flexible Hardware Encoder for LowDensity Parity-Check Codes," Proceedings of the 12th Annual IEEE Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines, p.101-111, April 20-23, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 03:13:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

